{"id": "4531", "revid": "31737083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4531", "title": "Bipolar disorder", "text": "Bipolar disorder, previously known as manic depression, is a mental disorder characterized by periods of depression and periods of abnormally elevated mood that each last from days to weeks. If the elevated mood is severe or associated with psychosis, it is called \"mania\"; if it is less severe and does not significantly affect functioning, it is called \"hypomania\". During mania, an individual behaves or feels abnormally energetic, happy, or irritable, and they often make impulsive decisions with little regard for the consequences. There is usually, but not always, a reduced need for sleep during manic phases. During periods of depression, the individual may experience crying, have a negative outlook on life, and demonstrate poor eye contact with others. The risk of suicide is high. Over a period of 20 years, 6% of those with bipolar disorder died by suicide. 40-50% overall and 78% of adolescents engaged in self-harm. Other mental health issues, such as anxiety disorders and substance use disorders, are commonly associated with bipolar disorder. The global prevalence of bipolar disorder is estimated to be between 1\u20135% of the world's population.\nWhile the causes of this mood disorder are not clearly understood, both genetic and environmental factors are thought to play a role. Genetic factors may account for up to 70\u201390% of the risk of developing bipolar disorder. Many genes, each with small effects, may contribute to the development of the disorder. Environmental risk factors include a history of childhood abuse and long-term stress. The condition is classified as bipolar I disorder if there has been at least one manic episode, with or without depressive episodes, and as bipolar II disorder if there has been at least one hypomanic episode (but no full manic episodes) and one major depressive episode. It is classified as cyclothymia if there are hypomanic episodes with periods of depression that do not meet the criteria for major depressive episodes.\nIf these symptoms are due to drugs or medical problems, they are not diagnosed as bipolar disorder. Other conditions that have overlapping symptoms with bipolar disorder include attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, personality disorders, schizophrenia, and substance use disorder as well as many other medical conditions. Medical testing is not required for a diagnosis, though blood tests or medical imaging can rule out other problems.\nMood stabilizers, particularly lithium, and certain anticonvulsants, such as lamotrigine and valproate, as well as atypical antipsychotics, including quetiapine, olanzapine, and aripiprazole are the mainstay of long-term pharmacologic relapse prevention. Antipsychotics are additionally given during acute manic episodes as well as in cases where mood stabilizers are poorly tolerated or ineffective. In patients where compliance is of concern, long-acting injectable formulations are available. There is some evidence that psychotherapy improves the course of this disorder. The use of antidepressants in depressive episodes is controversial: they can be effective but certain classes of antidepressants increase the risk of mania. The treatment of depressive episodes, therefore, is often difficult. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is effective in acute manic and depressive episodes, especially with psychosis or catatonia. Admission to a psychiatric hospital may be required if a person is a risk to themselves or others; involuntary treatment is sometimes necessary if the affected person refuses treatment.\nBipolar disorder occurs in approximately 2% of the global population. In the United States, about 3% are estimated to be affected at some point in their life; rates appear to be similar in females and males. Symptoms most commonly begin between the ages of 20 and 25 years old; an earlier onset in life is associated with a worse prognosis. Interest in functioning in the assessment of patients with bipolar disorder is growing, with an emphasis on specific domains such as work, education, social life, family, and cognition. Around one-quarter to one-third of people with bipolar disorder have financial, social or work-related problems due to the illness. Bipolar disorder is among the top 20 causes of disability worldwide and leads to substantial costs for society. Due to lifestyle choices and the side effects of medications, the risk of death from natural causes such as coronary heart disease in people with bipolar disorder is twice that of the general population.\nSigns and symptoms.\nLate adolescence and early adulthood are peak years for the onset of bipolar disorder. The condition is characterized by intermittent episodes of mania, commonly (but not in every patient) alternating with bouts of depression, with an absence of symptoms in between. During these episodes, people with bipolar disorder exhibit disruptions in normal mood, psychomotor activity (the level of physical activity that is influenced by mood)\u2014e.g. constant fidgeting during mania or slowed movements during depression\u2014circadian rhythm and cognition. Mania can present with varying levels of mood disturbance, ranging from euphoria, which is associated with \"classic mania\", to dysphoria and irritability. Psychotic symptoms such as delusions or hallucinations may occur in both manic and depressive episodes; their content and nature are consistent with the person's prevailing mood. In some people with bipolar disorder, depressive symptoms predominate, and the episodes of mania are always the more subdued hypomania type.\nAccording to the DSM-5 criteria, mania is distinguished from hypomania by the duration: hypomania is present if elevated mood symptoms persist for at least four consecutive days, while mania is present if such symptoms persist for more than a week. Unlike mania, hypomania is not always associated with impaired functioning. The biological mechanisms responsible for switching from a manic or hypomanic episode to a depressive episode, or vice versa, remain poorly understood.\nManic episodes.\nAlso known as a manic episode, mania is a distinct period of at least one week of elevated or irritable mood, which can range from euphoria to delirium. The core symptom of mania involves an increase in energy of psychomotor activity. Mania can also present with increased self-esteem or grandiosity, racing thoughts, pressured speech that is difficult to interrupt, decreased need for sleep, disinhibited social behavior, increased goal-oriented activities and impaired judgement, which can lead to exhibition of behaviors characterized as impulsive or high-risk, such as hypersexuality or excessive spending. To fit the definition of a manic episode, these behaviors must impair the individual's ability to socialize or work. If untreated, a manic episode usually lasts three to six months.\nIn severe manic episodes, a person can experience psychotic symptoms, where thought content is affected along with mood. They may feel unstoppable, persecuted, or as if they have a special relationship with God, a great mission to accomplish, or other grandiose or delusional ideas. This may lead to violent behavior and, sometimes, hospitalization in an inpatient psychiatric hospital. The severity of manic symptoms can be measured by rating scales such as the Young Mania Rating Scale, though questions remain about the reliability of these scales.\nThe onset of a manic or depressive episode is often foreshadowed by sleep disturbance. Manic individuals often have a history of substance use disorder developed over years as a form of \"self-medication\".\nHypomanic episodes.\nHypomania is the milder form of mania, defined as at least four days of the same criteria as mania, but which does not cause a significant decrease in the individual's ability to socialize or work, lacks psychotic features such as delusions or hallucinations, and does not require psychiatric hospitalization. Overall functioning may actually increase during episodes of hypomania and is thought to serve as a defense mechanism against depression by some. Hypomanic episodes rarely progress to full-blown manic episodes. Some people who experience hypomania show increased creativity, while others are irritable or demonstrate poor judgment.\nHypomania may feel good to some individuals who experience it, though most people who experience hypomania state that the stress of the experience is very painful. People with bipolar disorder who experience hypomania tend to forget the effects of their actions on those around them. Even when family and friends recognize mood swings, the individual will often deny that anything is wrong. If not accompanied by depressive episodes, hypomanic episodes are often not deemed problematic unless the mood changes are uncontrollable or volatile. Most commonly, symptoms continue for time periods from a few weeks to a few months.\nDepressive episodes.\nSymptoms of the depressive phase of bipolar disorder include persistent feelings of sadness, irritability or anger, loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities, excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, sleeping too much or not enough, changes in appetite or weight, fatigue, problems concentrating, self-loathing or feelings of worthlessness, and thoughts of death or suicide. Although the DSM-5 criteria for diagnosing unipolar and bipolar episodes are the same, some clinical features are more common in the latter, including increased sleep, sudden onset and resolution of symptoms, significant weight gain or loss, and severe episodes after childbirth.\nThe earlier the age of onset, the more likely the first few episodes are to be depressive. For most people with bipolar types 1 and 2, the depressive episodes are much longer than the manic or hypomanic episodes. Since a diagnosis of bipolar disorder requires a manic or hypomanic episode, many affected individuals are initially misdiagnosed as having major depression and treated with prescribed antidepressants.\nMixed affective episodes.\nIn bipolar disorder, a mixed state is an episode during which symptoms of both mania and depression occur simultaneously. Individuals experiencing a mixed state may have manic symptoms such as grandiose thoughts while simultaneously experiencing depressive symptoms such as excessive guilt or feeling suicidal. They are considered to have a higher risk for suicidal behavior as depressive emotions such as hopelessness are often paired with mood swings or difficulties with impulse control. Anxiety disorders occur more frequently as a comorbidity in mixed bipolar episodes than in non-mixed bipolar depression or mania. Substance (including alcohol) use also follows this trend, thereby appearing to depict bipolar symptoms as no more than a consequence of substance use.\nComorbid conditions.\nPeople with bipolar disorder often have other co-existing psychiatric conditions such as anxiety (present in about 71% of people with bipolar disorder), substance abuse (56%), personality disorders (36%) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (10\u201320%) which can add to the burden of illness and worsen the prognosis. Certain medical conditions are also more common in people with bipolar disorder as compared to the general population. This includes increased rates of metabolic syndrome (present in 37% of people with bipolar disorder), migraine headaches (35%), obesity (21%) and type 2 diabetes (14%). This contributes to a risk of death that is two times higher in those with bipolar disorder as compared to the general population. Hypothyroidism is also common regardless of drug choice.\nSubstance use disorder is a common comorbidity in bipolar disorder; the subject has been widely reviewed.\nCauses.\nThe causes of bipolar disorder likely vary between individuals and the exact mechanism underlying the disorder remains unclear. Genetic influences are believed to account for 73\u201393% of the risk of developing the disorder indicating a strong hereditary component. The overall heritability of the bipolar spectrum has been estimated at 0.71. Twin studies have been limited by relatively small sample sizes but have indicated a substantial genetic contribution, as well as environmental influence. For bipolar I disorder, the rate at which identical twins (same genes) will both have bipolar I disorder (concordance) is around 40%, compared to about 5% in fraternal twins. A combination of bipolar I, II, and cyclothymia similarly produced rates of 42% and 11% (identical and fraternal twins, respectively). The rates of bipolar II combinations without bipolar I are lowerbipolar II at 23 and 17%, and bipolar II combining with cyclothymia at 33 and 14%which may reflect relatively higher genetic heterogeneity.\nThe cause of bipolar disorders overlaps with major depressive disorder. When defining concordance as the co-twins having either bipolar disorder or major depression, then the concordance rate rises to 67% in identical twins and 19% in fraternal twins. The relatively low concordance between fraternal twins brought up together suggests that shared family environmental effects are limited, although the ability to detect them has been limited by small sample sizes.\nGenetic.\nBehavioral genetic studies have suggested that many chromosomal regions and candidate genes are related to bipolar disorder susceptibility with each gene exerting a mild to moderate effect. The risk of bipolar disorder is nearly ten-fold higher in first-degree relatives of those with bipolar disorder than in the general population; similarly, the risk of major depressive disorder is three times higher in relatives of those with bipolar disorder than in the general population.\nAlthough the first genetic linkage finding for mania was in 1969, linkage studies have been inconsistent. Findings point strongly to heterogeneity, with different genes implicated in different families. Robust and replicable genome-wide significant associations showed several common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with bipolar disorder, including variants within the genes \"CACNA1C\", \"ODZ4\", and \"NCAN\". The largest and most recent genome-wide association study failed to find any locus that exerts a large effect, reinforcing the idea that no single gene is responsible for bipolar disorder in most cases. Polymorphisms in \"BDNF\", \"DRD4\", \"DAO\", and \"TPH1\" have been frequently associated with bipolar disorder and were initially associated in a meta-analysis, but this association disappeared after correction for multiple testing. On the other hand, two polymorphisms in \"TPH2\" were identified as being associated with bipolar disorder.\nDue to the inconsistent findings in a genome-wide association study, multiple studies have undertaken the approach of analyzing SNPs in biological pathways. Signaling pathways traditionally associated with bipolar disorder that have been supported by these studies include corticotropin-releasing hormone signaling, cardiac \u03b2-adrenergic signaling, phospholipase C signaling, glutamate receptor signaling, cardiac hypertrophy signaling, Wnt signaling, Notch signaling, and endothelin 1 signaling. Of the 16 genes identified in these pathways, three were found to be dysregulated in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex portion of the brain in post-mortem studies: \"CACNA1C\", \"GNG2\", and \"ITPR2\".\nBipolar disorder is associated with reduced expression of specific DNA repair enzymes and increased levels of oxidative DNA damages.\nEnvironmental.\nPsychosocial factors play a significant role in the development and course of bipolar disorder, and individual psychosocial variables may interact with genetic dispositions. Recent life events and interpersonal relationships likely contribute to the onset and recurrence of bipolar mood episodes, just as they do for unipolar depression. In surveys, 30\u201350% of adults diagnosed with bipolar disorder report traumatic/abusive experiences in childhood, which is associated with earlier onset, a higher rate of suicide attempts, and more co-occurring disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder. Subtypes of abuse, such as sexual and emotional abuse, also contribute to violent behaviors seen in patients with bipolar disorder. The number of reported stressful events in childhood is higher in those with an adult diagnosis of bipolar spectrum disorder than in those without, particularly events stemming from a harsh environment rather than from the child's own behavior. Acutely, mania can be induced by sleep deprivation in around 30% of people with bipolar disorder.\nNeurological.\nLess commonly, bipolar disorder or a bipolar-like disorder may occur as a result of or in association with a neurological condition or injury including stroke, traumatic brain injury, HIV infection, multiple sclerosis, porphyria, and rarely temporal lobe epilepsy.\nProposed mechanisms.\nThe precise mechanisms that cause bipolar disorder are not well understood. Bipolar disorder is thought to be associated with abnormalities in the structure and function of certain brain areas responsible for cognitive tasks and the processing of emotions. A neurologic model for bipolar disorder proposes that the emotional circuitry of the brain can be divided into two main parts. The ventral system (regulates emotional perception) includes brain structures such as the amygdala, insula, ventral striatum, ventral anterior cingulate cortex, and the prefrontal cortex. The dorsal system (responsible for emotional regulation) includes the hippocampus, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, and other parts of the prefrontal cortex. The model hypothesizes that bipolar disorder may occur when the ventral system is overactivated and the dorsal system is underactivated. Other models suggest the ability to regulate emotions is disrupted in people with bipolar disorder and that dysfunction of the ventricular prefrontal cortex is crucial to this disruption.\nMeta-analyses of structural MRI studies have shown that certain brain regions (e.g., the left rostral anterior cingulate cortex, fronto-insular cortex, ventral prefrontal cortex, and claustrum) are smaller in people with bipolar disorder, whereas other regions are larger (lateral ventricles, globus pallidus, subgenual anterior cingulate, and the amygdala). Additionally, these meta-analyses found that people with bipolar disorder have higher rates of deep white matter hyperintensities.\nFunctional MRI findings suggest that the ventricular prefrontal cortex regulates the limbic system, especially the amygdala. In people with bipolar disorder, decreased ventricular prefrontal cortex activity allows for the dysregulated activity of the amygdala, which likely contributes to labile mood and poor emotional regulation. Consistent with this, pharmacological treatment of mania returns ventricular prefrontal cortex activity to the levels in non-manic people, suggesting that ventricular prefrontal cortex activity is an indicator of mood state. However, while pharmacological treatment of mania reduces amygdala hyperactivity, it remains more active than the amygdala of those without bipolar disorder, suggesting amygdala activity may be a marker of the disorder rather than the current mood state. Manic and depressive episodes tend to be characterized by dysfunction in different regions of the ventricular prefrontal cortex. Manic episodes appear to be associated with decreased activation of the right ventricular prefrontal cortex whereas depressive episodes are associated with decreased activation of the left ventricular prefrontal cortex. These disruptions often occur during development linked with synaptic pruning dysfunction.\nPeople with bipolar disorder who are in a euthymic mood state show decreased activity in the lingual gyrus compared to people without bipolar disorder. In contrast, they demonstrate decreased activity in the inferior frontal cortex during manic episodes compared to people without the disorder. Similar studies examining the differences in brain activity between people with bipolar disorder and those without did not find a consistent area in the brain that was more or less active when comparing these two groups. People with bipolar have increased activation of left hemisphere ventral limbic areaswhich mediate emotional experiences and generation of emotional responsesand decreased activation of right hemisphere cortical structures related to cognitionstructures associated with the regulation of emotions. However, further research is needed to consolidate neuroimaging findings, which are often heterogeneous and not consistently reported according to a common standard.\nNeuroscientists have proposed additional models to try to explain the cause of bipolar disorder. One proposed model for bipolar disorder suggests that hypersensitivity of reward circuits consisting of frontostriatal circuits causes mania, and decreased sensitivity of these circuits causes depression. According to the \"kindling\" hypothesis, when people who are genetically predisposed toward bipolar disorder experience stressful events, the stress threshold at which mood changes occur becomes progressively lower, until the episodes eventually start (and recur) spontaneously. There is evidence supporting an association between early-life stress and dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis leading to its overactivation, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder. Other brain components that have been proposed to play a role in bipolar disorder are the mitochondria and a sodium ATPase pump. Circadian rhythms and regulation of the hormone melatonin also seem to be altered.\nDopamine, a neurotransmitter responsible for mood cycling, has increased transmission during the manic phase. The dopamine hypothesis states that the increase in dopamine results in secondary homeostatic downregulation of key system elements and receptors such as lower sensitivity of dopaminergic receptors. This results in decreased dopamine transmission characteristic of the depressive phase. The depressive phase ends with homeostatic upregulation potentially restarting the cycle over again. Glutamate is significantly increased within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during the manic phase of bipolar disorder, and returns to normal levels once the phase is over.\nMedications used to treat bipolar may exert their effect by modulating intracellular signaling, such as through depleting myo-inositol levels, inhibition of cAMP signaling, and through altering subunits of the dopamine-associated G-protein. Consistent with this, elevated levels of G\u03b1i, G\u03b1s, and G\u03b1q/11 have been reported in brain and blood samples, along with increased protein kinase A (PKA) expression and sensitivity; typically, PKA activates as part of the intracellular signalling cascade downstream from the detachment of G\u03b1s subunit from the G protein complex.\nDecreased levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, a byproduct of serotonin, are present in the cerebrospinal fluid of persons with bipolar disorder during both the depressed and manic phases. Increased dopaminergic activity has been hypothesized in manic states due to the ability of dopamine agonists to stimulate mania in people with bipolar disorder. Decreased sensitivity of regulatory \u03b12 adrenergic receptors as well as increased cell counts in the locus coeruleus indicated increased noradrenergic activity in manic people. Low plasma GABA levels on both sides of the mood spectrum have been found. One review found no difference in monoamine levels, but found abnormal norepinephrine turnover in people with bipolar disorder. Tyrosine depletion was found to reduce the effects of methamphetamine in people with bipolar disorder as well as symptoms of mania, implicating dopamine in mania. VMAT2 binding was found to be increased in one study of people with bipolar mania.\nDiagnosis.\nBipolar disorder is commonly diagnosed during adolescence or early adulthood, but onset can occur throughout life. Its diagnosis is based on the self-reported experiences of the individual, abnormal behavior reported by family members, friends or co-workers, observable signs of illness as assessed by a clinician, and ideally a medical work-up to rule out other causes. Caregiver-scored rating scales, specifically from the mother, have shown to be more accurate than teacher and youth-scored reports in identifying youths with bipolar disorder. Assessment is usually done on an outpatient basis; admission to an inpatient facility is considered if there is a risk to oneself or others.\nThe most widely used criteria for diagnosing bipolar disorder are from the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\", Fifth Edition (DSM-5) and the World Health Organization's (WHO) \"International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems\", 10th Edition (ICD-10). The ICD-10 criteria are used more often in clinical settings outside of the U.S. while the DSM criteria are used within the U.S. and are the prevailing criteria used internationally in research studies. The DSM-5, published in 2013, includes further and more accurate specifiers compared to its predecessor, the DSM-IV-TR. This work has influenced the eleventh revision of the ICD, which includes the various diagnoses within the bipolar spectrum of the DSM-V.\nSeveral rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, including the Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale, Mood Disorder Questionnaire, the General Behavior Inventory and the Hypomania Checklist. The use of evaluation scales cannot substitute a full clinical interview but they serve to systematize the recollection of symptoms. On the other hand, instruments for screening bipolar disorder tend to have lower sensitivity.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nBipolar disorder is classified by the International Classification of Diseases as a mental and behavioural disorder. Mental disorders that can have symptoms similar to those seen in bipolar disorder include schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and certain personality disorders, such as borderline personality disorder. A key difference between bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder is the nature of the mood swings; in contrast to the sustained changes to mood over days to weeks or longer, those of the latter condition (more accurately called emotional dysregulation) are sudden and often short-lived, and secondary to social stressors.\nAlthough there are no biological tests that are diagnostic of bipolar disorder, blood tests and/or imaging are carried out to investigate whether medical illnesses with clinical presentations similar to that of bipolar disorder are present before making a definitive diagnosis. Neurologic diseases such as multiple sclerosis, complex partial seizures, strokes, brain tumors, Wilson's disease, traumatic brain injury, Huntington's disease, and complex migraines can mimic features of bipolar disorder. An EEG may be used to exclude neurological disorders such as epilepsy, and a CT scan or MRI of the head may be used to exclude brain lesions. Additionally, disorders of the endocrine system such as hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, and Cushing's disease are in the differential as is the connective tissue disease systemic lupus erythematosus. Infectious causes of mania that may appear similar to bipolar mania include herpes encephalitis, HIV, influenza, or neurosyphilis. Certain vitamin deficiencies such as pellagra (niacin deficiency), vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency, and Wernicke\u2013Korsakoff syndrome (thiamine deficiency) can also lead to mania. Common medications that can cause manic symptoms include antidepressants, prednisone, Parkinson's disease medications, thyroid hormone, stimulants (including cocaine and methamphetamine), and certain antibiotics.\nBipolar spectrum.\nBipolar spectrum disorders include: bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder and cases where subthreshold symptoms are found to cause clinically significant impairment or distress. These disorders involve major depressive episodes that alternate with manic or hypomanic episodes, or with mixed episodes that feature symptoms of both mood states. The concept of the bipolar spectrum is similar to that of Emil Kraepelin's original concept of manic depressive illness. Bipolar II disorder was established as a diagnosis in 1994 within DSM IV; though debate continues over whether it is a distinct entity, part of a spectrum, or exists at all.\nCriteria and subtypes.\nThe DSM and the ICD characterize bipolar disorder as a spectrum of disorders occurring on a continuum. The DSM-5 and ICD-11 lists three specific subtypes:\nWhen relevant, specifiers for \"peripartum onset\" and \"with rapid cycling\" should be used with any subtype. Individuals who have subthreshold symptoms that cause clinically significant distress or impairment, but do not meet full criteria for one of the three subtypes may be diagnosed with other specified or unspecified bipolar disorder. Other specified bipolar disorder is used when a clinician chooses to explain why the full criteria were not met (e.g., hypomania without a prior major depressive episode). If the condition is thought to have a non-psychiatric medical cause, the diagnosis of \"bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition\" is made, while \"substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder\" is used if a medication is thought to have triggered the condition.\nRapid cycling.\nMost people who meet criteria for bipolar disorder experience a number of episodes, on average 0.4 to 0.7 per year, lasting three to six months. \"Rapid cycling\", however, is a course specifier that may be applied to any bipolar subtype. It is defined as having four or more mood disturbance episodes within a one-year span. Rapid cycling is usually temporary but is common amongst people with bipolar disorder and affects 25.8\u201345.3% of them at some point in their life. These episodes are separated from each other by a remission (partial or full) for at least two months or a switch in mood polarity (i.e., from a depressive episode to a manic episode or vice versa). The definition of rapid cycling most frequently cited in the literature (including the DSM-V and ICD-11) is that of Dunner and Fieve: at least four major depressive, manic, hypomanic or mixed episodes during a 12-month period. The literature examining the pharmacological treatment of rapid cycling is sparse and there is no clear consensus with respect to its optimal pharmacological management. \"Ultra rapid\" and \"ultradian\" have been applied to faster-cycling types of bipolar disorder. People with the rapid cycling or faster-cycling subtypes of bipolar disorder tend to be more difficult to treat and less responsive to medications than other people with bipolar disorder.\nCoexisting psychiatric conditions.\nThe diagnosis of bipolar disorder can be complicated by coexisting (comorbid) psychiatric conditions including obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, substance-use disorder, eating disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social phobia, premenstrual syndrome (including premenstrual dysphoric disorder), or panic disorder. A thorough longitudinal analysis of symptoms and episodes, assisted if possible by discussions with friends and family members, is crucial to establishing a treatment plan where these comorbidities exist. Children of parents with bipolar disorder more frequently have other mental health problems.\nChildren.\nIn the 1920s, Kraepelin noted that manic episodes are rare before puberty. In general, bipolar disorder in children was not recognized in the first half of the twentieth century. This issue diminished with an increased following of the DSM criteria in the last part of the twentieth century. The diagnosis of childhood bipolar disorder, while formerly controversial, has gained greater acceptance among childhood and adolescent psychiatrists. American children and adolescents diagnosed with bipolar disorder in community hospitals increased 4-fold reaching rates of up to 40% in 10 years around the beginning of the 21st century, while in outpatient clinics it doubled reaching 6%. Studies using DSM criteria show that up to 1% of youth may have bipolar disorder. The DSM-5 has established a diagnosis\u2014disruptive mood dysregulation disorder\u2014that covers children with long-term, persistent irritability that had at times been misdiagnosed as having bipolar disorder, distinct from irritability in bipolar disorder that is restricted to discrete mood episodes.\nAdults.\nBipolar on average, starts during adulthood. Bipolar 1, on average, starts at the age of 18 years old, and Bipolar 2 starts at age 22 years old on average. However, most delay seeking treatment for an average of 8 years after symptoms start. Bipolar is often misdiagnosed with other psychiatric disorders. There is no definitive association between race, ethnicity, or Socioeconomic status (SES). Adults with Bipolar report having a lower quality of life, even outside of a manic or depressive episode. Bipolar can put strain on marriage and other relationships, having a job, and everyday functioning. Bipolar is associated with having higher rates of unemployment. Most have trouble keeping a job, leading to trouble with healthcare access, leading to more decline in their mental health due to not receiving treatment such as medicine and therapy.\nElderly.\nBipolar disorder is uncommon in older patients, with a measured lifetime prevalence of 1% in over 60s and a 12-month prevalence of 0.10.5% in people over 65. Despite this, it is overrepresented in psychiatric admissions, making up 48% of inpatient admission to aged care psychiatry units, and the incidence of mood disorders is increasing overall with the aging population. Depressive episodes more commonly present with sleep disturbance, fatigue, hopelessness about the future, slowed thinking, and poor concentration and memory; the last three symptoms are seen in what is known as pseudodementia. Clinical features also differ between those with late-onset bipolar disorder and those who developed it early in life; the former group present with milder manic episodes, more prominent cognitive changes and have a background of worse psychosocial functioning, while the latter present more commonly with mixed affective episodes, and have a stronger family history of illness. Older people with bipolar disorder experience cognitive changes, particularly in executive functions such as abstract thinking and switching cognitive sets, as well as concentrating for long periods and decision-making.\nPrevention.\nAttempts at prevention of bipolar disorder have focused on stress (such as childhood adversity or highly conflictual families) which, although not a diagnostically specific causal agent for bipolar, does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more severe course of illness. Longitudinal studies have indicated that full-blown manic stages are often preceded by a variety of prodromal clinical features, providing support for the occurrence of an at-risk state of the disorder when an early intervention might prevent its further development and/or improve its outcome.\nManagement.\nThe aim of management is to treat acute episodes safely with medication and work with the patient in long-term maintenance to prevent further episodes and optimise function using a combination of pharmacological and psychotherapeutic techniques. Hospitalization may be required especially with the manic episodes present in bipolar I. This can be voluntary or (local legislation permitting) involuntary. Long-term inpatient stays are now less common due to deinstitutionalization, although these can still occur. Following (or in lieu of) a hospital admission, support services available can include drop-in centers, visits from members of a community mental health team or an Assertive Community Treatment team, supported employment, patient-led support groups, and intensive outpatient programs. These are sometimes referred to as partial-inpatient programs. Compared to the general population, people with bipolar disorder are less likely to frequently engage in physical exercise. Exercise may have physical and mental benefits for people with bipolar disorder, but there is a lack of research.\nPsychosocial.\nPsychotherapy aims to assist a person with bipolar disorder in accepting and understanding their diagnosis, coping with various types of stress, improving their interpersonal relationships, and recognizing prodromal symptoms before full-blown recurrence. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), family-focused therapy, and psychoeducation have the most evidence for efficacy in regard to relapse prevention, while interpersonal and social rhythm therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy appear the most effective in regard to residual depressive symptoms. Most studies have been based only on bipolar I, however, and treatment during the acute phase can be a particular challenge. Some clinicians emphasize the need to talk with individuals experiencing mania, to develop a therapeutic alliance in support of recovery.\nMedication.\nMedications are often prescribed to help improve symptoms of bipolar disorder. Medications approved for treating bipolar disorder including mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, and certain antidepressants. Sometimes a combination of medications may also be suggested. The choice of medications may differ depending on the bipolar disorder episode type or if the person is experiencing unipolar or bipolar depression. Other factors to consider when deciding on an appropriate treatment approach includes if the person has any comorbidities, their response to previous therapies, adverse effects, and the desire of the person to be treated.\nMood stabilizers.\nLithium and the anticonvulsants carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and valproic acid are classed as mood stabilizers due to their effect on the mood states in bipolar disorder. Lithium has the best overall evidence and is considered an effective treatment for acute manic episodes, preventing relapses, and bipolar depression. Lithium reduces the risk of suicide, self-harm, and death in people with bipolar disorder. Lithium is preferred for long-term mood stabilization. Lithium treatment is also associated with adverse effects and it has been shown to erode kidney and thyroid function over extended periods. Valproate has become a commonly prescribed treatment and effectively treats manic episodes. Carbamazepine is less effective in preventing relapse than lithium or valproate. Lamotrigine has some efficacy in treating depression, and this benefit is greatest in more severe depression. Lamotrigine may have a similar effectiveness to lithium for treating bipolar disorder, however, there is evidence to suggest that lamotrigine is less effective at preventing recurrent mania episodes. Lamotrigine treatment has been shown to be safer compared to lithium treatment, with less adverse effects. Valproate and carbamazepine are teratogenic and should be avoided as a treatment in women of childbearing age, but discontinuation of these medications during pregnancy is associated with a high risk of relapse. The effectiveness of topiramate is unknown. Carbamazepine effectively treats manic episodes, with some evidence it has greater benefit in rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, or those with more psychotic symptoms or more symptoms similar to that of schizoaffective disorder.\nMood stabilizers are used for long-term maintenance but have not demonstrated the ability to quickly treat acute bipolar depression.\nAntipsychotics.\nAntipsychotic medications are effective for short-term treatment of bipolar manic episodes and appear to be superior to lithium and anticonvulsants for this purpose. Atypical antipsychotics are also indicated for bipolar depression refractory to treatment with mood stabilizers. Olanzapine is effective in preventing relapses, although the supporting evidence is weaker than the evidence for lithium. A 2006 review found that haloperidol was an effective treatment for acute mania, limited data supported no difference in overall efficacy between haloperidol, olanzapine or risperidone, and that it could be less effective than aripiprazole.\nAntidepressants.\nAntidepressant monotherapy is not recommended in the treatment of bipolar disorder and does not provide any benefit over mood stabilizers. Atypical antipsychotic medications (e.g., aripiprazole) are preferred over antidepressants to augment the effects of mood stabilizers due to the lack of efficacy of antidepressants in bipolar disorder. Treatment of bipolar disorder using antidepressants may carry a risk of affective switches where a person switches from depression to manic or hypomanic phases or mixed states. There may also be a risk of accelerating cycling between phases when antidepressants are used in bipolar disorder. The risk of affective switches is higher in bipolar I depression; antidepressants are generally avoided in bipolar I disorder or only used with mood stabilizers when they are deemed necessary.\nWhether modern antidepressants cause mania or cycle acceleration in bipolar disorder is highly controversial, as is whether antidepressants provide any benefit over mood stabilizers alone.\nCombined treatment approaches.\nAntipsychotics and mood stabilizers used together are quicker and more effective at treating mania than either class of drug used alone. Some analyses indicate antipsychotics alone are also more effective at treating acute mania. A first-line treatment for depression in bipolar disorder is a combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine.\nOther drugs.\nShort courses of benzodiazepines are used in addition to other medications for calming effect until mood stabilizing become effective. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective form of treatment for acute mood disturbances in those with bipolar disorder, especially when psychotic or catatonic features are displayed. ECT is also recommended for use in pregnant women with bipolar disorder. It is unclear if ketamine (a common general dissociative anesthetic used in surgery) is useful in bipolar disorder. Gabapentin and pregabalin are not proven to be effective for treating bipolar disorder.\nChildren.\nTreating bipolar disorder in children involves medication and psychotherapy. The literature and research on the effects of psychosocial therapy on bipolar spectrum disorders are scarce, making it difficult to determine the efficacy of various therapies. Mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics are commonly prescribed. Among the former, lithium is the only compound approved by the FDA for children. Psychological treatment combines normally education on the disease, group therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy. Long-term medication is often needed.\nResistance to treatment.\nThe poor response from some bipolar patients to treatment has given evidence to the concept of treatment-resistant bipolar disorder. Guidelines to the definition of treatment-resistant bipolar disorder and evidence-based options for its management were reviewed in 2020.\nManagement of obesity.\nA large proportion (approximately 68%) of people who seek treatment for bipolar disorder are obese or overweight and managing obesity is important for reducing the risk of other health conditions that are associated with obesity. Management approaches include non-pharmacological, pharmacological, and surgical. Examples of non-pharmacological include dietary interventions, exercise, behavioral therapies, or combined approaches. Pharmacological approaches include weight-loss medications or changing medications already being prescribed. Some people with bipolar disorder who have obesity may also be eligible for bariatric surgery. The effectiveness of these various approaches to improving or managing obesity in people with bipolar disorder is not clear.\nPrognosis.\nA lifelong condition with periods of partial or full recovery in between recurrent episodes of relapse, bipolar disorder is considered to be a major health problem worldwide because of the increased rates of disability and premature mortality. It is also associated with co-occurring psychiatric and medical problems, higher rates of death from natural causes (e.g., cardiovascular disease), and high rates of initial under- or misdiagnosis, causing a delay in appropriate treatment and contributing to poorer prognoses. When compared to the general population, people with bipolar disorder also have higher rates of other serious medical comorbidities including diabetes mellitus, respiratory diseases, HIV, and hepatitis C virus infection. After a diagnosis is made, it remains difficult to achieve complete remission of all symptoms with the currently available psychiatric medications and symptoms often become progressively more severe over time.\nCompliance with medications is one of the most significant factors that can decrease the rate and severity of relapse and have a positive impact on overall prognosis. However, the types of medications used in treating BD commonly cause side effects and more than 75% of individuals with BD inconsistently take their medications for various reasons. Of the various types of the disorder, rapid cycling (four or more episodes in one year) is associated with the worst prognosis due to higher rates of self-harm and suicide. Individuals diagnosed with bipolar who have a family history of bipolar disorder are at a greater risk for more frequent manic/hypomanic episodes. Early onset and psychotic features are also associated with worse outcomes, as well as subtypes that are nonresponsive to lithium.\nEarly recognition and intervention also improve prognosis as the symptoms in earlier stages are less severe and more responsive to treatment. Onset after adolescence is connected to better prognoses for both genders, and being male is a protective factor against higher levels of depression. For women, better social functioning before developing bipolar disorder and being a parent are protective towards suicide attempts.\nFunctioning.\nChanges in cognitive processes and abilities are seen in mood disorders, with those of bipolar disorder being greater than those in major depressive disorder. These include reduced attentional and executive capabilities and impaired memory. People with bipolar disorder often experience a decline in cognitive functioning during (or possibly before) their first episode, after which a certain degree of cognitive dysfunction typically becomes permanent, with more severe impairment during acute phases and moderate impairment during periods of remission. As a result, two-thirds of people with BD continue to experience impaired psychosocial functioning in between episodes even when their mood symptoms are in full remission. A similar pattern is seen in both BD-I and BD-II, but people with BD-II experience a lesser degree of impairment.\nWhen bipolar disorder occurs in children, it severely and adversely affects their psychosocial development. Children and adolescents with bipolar disorder have higher rates of significant difficulties with substance use disorders, psychosis, academic difficulties, behavioral problems, social difficulties, and legal problems. Cognitive deficits typically increase over the course of the illness. Higher degrees of impairment correlate with the number of previous manic episodes and hospitalizations, and with the presence of psychotic symptoms. Early intervention can slow the progression of cognitive impairment, while treatment at later stages can help reduce distress and negative consequences related to cognitive dysfunction.\nDespite the overly ambitious goals that are frequently part of manic episodes, symptoms of mania undermine the ability to achieve these goals and often interfere with an individual's social and occupational functioning. One-third of people with BD remain unemployed for one year following a hospitalization for mania. Depressive symptoms during and between episodes, which occur much more frequently for most people than hypomanic or manic symptoms over the course of illness, are associated with lower functional recovery in between episodes, including unemployment or underemployment for both BD-I and BD-II. However, the course of illness (duration, age of onset, number of hospitalizations, and the presence or not of rapid cycling) and cognitive performance are the best predictors of employment outcomes in individuals with bipolar disorder, followed by symptoms of depression and years of education.\nRecovery and recurrence.\nA naturalistic study in 2003 by Tohen and coworkers from the first admission for mania or mixed episode (representing the hospitalized and therefore most severe cases) found that 50% achieved syndromal recovery (no longer meeting criteria for the diagnosis) within six weeks and 98% within two years. Within two years, 72% achieved symptomatic recovery (no symptoms at all) and 43% achieved functional recovery (regaining of prior occupational and residential status). However, 40% went on to experience a new episode of mania or depression within 2 years of syndromal recovery, and 19% switched phases without recovery.\nSymptoms preceding a relapse (prodromal), especially those related to mania, can be reliably identified by people with bipolar disorder. There have been intents to teach patients coping strategies when noticing such symptoms with encouraging results.\nSuicide.\nBipolar disorder can cause suicidal ideation that leads to suicide attempts. Individuals whose bipolar disorder begins with a depressive or mixed affective episode seem to have a poorer prognosis and an increased risk of suicide. One out of two people with bipolar disorder attempt suicide at least once during their lifetime and many attempts are successfully completed. The annual average suicide rate is 0.4%-1.4%, which is 30 to 60 times greater than that of the general population. The number of deaths from suicide in bipolar disorder is between 18 and 25 times higher than would be expected in similarly aged people without bipolar disorder. The lifetime risk of suicide is much higher in those with bipolar disorder, with an estimated 34% of people attempting suicide and 15\u201320% dying by suicide.\nRisk factors for suicide attempts and death from suicide in people with bipolar disorder include older age, prior suicide attempts, a depressive or mixed index episode (first episode), a manic index episode with psychotic symptoms, hopelessness or psychomotor agitation present during the episodes, co-existing anxiety disorder, a first degree relative with a mood disorder or suicide, interpersonal conflicts, occupational problems, bereavement or social isolation.\nEpidemiology.\nBipolar disorder is the sixth leading cause of disability worldwide and has a lifetime prevalence of about 1 to 3% in the general population. However, a reanalysis of data from the National Epidemiological Catchment Area survey in the United States suggested that 0.8% of the population experience a manic episode at least once (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar I) and a further 0.5% have a hypomanic episode (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar II or cyclothymia). Including sub-threshold diagnostic criteria, such as one or two symptoms over a short time-period, an additional 5.1% of the population, adding up to a total of 6.4%, were classified as having a bipolar spectrum disorder. A more recent analysis of data from a second US National Comorbidity Survey found that 1% met lifetime prevalence criteria for bipolar I, 1.1% for bipolar II, and 2.4% for subthreshold symptoms. Estimates vary about how many children and young adults have bipolar disorder. These estimates range from 0.6 to 15% depending on differing settings, methods, and referral settings, raising suspicions of overdiagnosis. One meta-analysis of bipolar disorder in young people worldwide estimated that about 1.8% of people between the ages of seven and 21 have bipolar disorder. Similar to adults, bipolar disorder in children and adolescents is thought to occur at a similar frequency in boys and girls.\nThere are conceptual and methodological limitations and variations in the findings. Prevalence studies of bipolar disorder are typically carried out by lay interviewers who follow fully structured/fixed interview schemes; responses to single items from such interviews may have limited validity. In addition, diagnoses (and therefore estimates of prevalence) vary depending on whether a categorical or spectrum approach is used. This consideration has led to concerns about the potential for both underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis.\nThe incidence of bipolar disorder is similar in men and women as well as across different cultures and ethnic groups. A 2000 study by the World Health Organization found that prevalence and incidence of bipolar disorder are very similar across the world. Age-standardized prevalence per 100,000 ranged from 421.0 in South Asia to 481.7 in Africa and Europe for men and from 450.3 in Africa and Europe to 491.6 in Oceania for women. However, severity may differ widely across the globe. Disability-adjusted life year rates, for example, appear to be higher in developing countries, where medical coverage may be poorer and medication less available. Within the United States, Asian Americans have significantly lower rates than their African American and European American counterparts. In 2017, the Global Burden of Disease Study estimated there were 4.5 million new cases and a total of 45.5 million cases globally.\nHistory.\nIn the early 1800s, French psychiatrist Jean-\u00c9tienne Dominique Esquirol's lypemania, one of his affective monomanias, was the first elaboration on what was to become modern depression. The basis of the current conceptualization of bipolar illness can be traced back to the 1850s. In 1850, Jean-Pierre Falret described \"circular insanity\" (', ); the lecture was summarized in 1851 in the ' (\"Hospital Gazette\"). Three years later, in 1854, Jules-Gabriel-Fran\u00e7ois Baillarger (1809\u20131890) described to the French Imperial Acad\u00e9mie Nationale de M\u00e9decine a biphasic mental illness causing recurrent oscillations between mania and melancholia, which he termed (, \"madness in double form\"). Baillarger's original paper, \"\", appeared in the medical journal \"Annales m\u00e9dico-psychologiques\" (\"Medico-psychological annals\") in 1854.\nThese concepts were developed by the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (1856\u20131926), who, using Kahlbaum's concept of cyclothymia, categorized and studied the natural course of untreated bipolar patients. He coined the term \"manic depressive psychosis\", after noting that periods of acute illness, manic or depressive, were generally punctuated by relatively symptom-free intervals where the patient was able to function normally.\nThe term \"manic\u2013depressive \"reaction\"\" appeared in the first version of the DSM in 1952, influenced by the legacy of Adolf Meyer. Subtyping into \"unipolar\" depressive disorders and bipolar disorders has its origin in Karl Kleist's concept \u2013 since 1911 \u2013 of unipolar and bipolar affective disorders, which was used by Karl Leonhard in 1957 to differentiate between unipolar and bipolar disorder in depression. These subtypes have been regarded as separate conditions since publication of the DSM-III. The subtypes bipolar II and rapid cycling have been included since the DSM-IV, based on work from the 1970s by David Dunner, Elliot Gershon, Frederick Goodwin, Ronald Fieve, and Joseph Fleiss.\nSociety and culture.\nCost.\nThe United States spent approximately $202.1 billion on people diagnosed with bipolar I disorder (excluding other subtypes of bipolar disorder and undiagnosed people) in 2015. One analysis estimated that the United Kingdom spent approximately \u00a35.2 billion on the disorder in 2007. In addition to the economic costs, bipolar disorder is a leading cause of disability and lost productivity worldwide. People with bipolar disorder are generally more disabled, have a lower level of functioning, longer duration of illness, and increased rates of work absenteeism and decreased productivity when compared to people experiencing other mental health disorders. The decrease in the productivity seen in those who care for people with bipolar disorder also significantly contributes to these costs.\nAdvocacy.\nThere are widespread issues with social stigma, stereotypes, and prejudice against individuals with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. In 2000, actress Carrie Fisher went public with her bipolar disorder diagnosis. She became one of the most well-recognized advocates for people with bipolar disorder in the public eye and fiercely advocated to eliminate the stigma surrounding mental illnesses, including bipolar disorder. Stephen Fried, who has written extensively on the topic, noted that Fisher helped to draw attention to the disorder's chronicity, relapsing nature, and that bipolar disorder relapses do not indicate a lack of discipline or moral shortcomings. Since being diagnosed at age 37, actor Stephen Fry has pushed to raise awareness of the condition, with his 2006 documentary \"\". In an effort to ease the social stigma associated with bipolar disorder, the orchestra conductor Ronald Braunstein cofounded the ME/2 Orchestra with his wife Caroline Whiddon in 2011. Braunstein was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 1985 and his concerts with the ME/2 Orchestra were conceived in order to create a welcoming performance environment for his musical colleagues, while also raising public awareness about mental illness.\nNotable cases.\nNumerous authors have written about bipolar disorder and many successful people have openly discussed their experience with it. Kay Redfield Jamison, a clinical psychologist and professor of psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, profiled her own bipolar disorder in her memoir \"An Unquiet Mind\" (1995). It is likely that Grigory Potemkin, Russian statesman and alleged husband of Catherine the Great, suffered from some kind of bipolar disorder. Several celebrities have also publicly shared that they have bipolar disorder; in addition to Carrie Fisher and Stephen Fry these include Catherine Zeta-Jones, Mariah Carey, Kanye West, Jane Pauley, Demi Lovato, Selena Gomez, and Russell Brand.\nMedia portrayals.\nSeveral dramatic works have portrayed characters with traits suggestive of the diagnosis which have been the subject of discussion by psychiatrists and film experts alike.\nIn \"Mr. Jones\" (1993), (Richard Gere) swings from a manic episode into a depressive phase and back again, spending time in a psychiatric hospital and displaying many of the features of the syndrome. In \"The Mosquito Coast\" (1986), Allie Fox (Harrison Ford) displays some features including recklessness, grandiosity, increased goal-directed activity and mood lability, as well as some paranoia. Psychiatrists have suggested that Willy Loman, the main character in Arthur Miller's classic play \"Death of a Salesman\", has bipolar disorder.\nThe 2009 drama \"90210\" featured a character, Silver, who was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Stacey Slater, a character from the BBC soap \"EastEnders\", has been diagnosed with the disorder. The storyline was developed as part of the BBC's Headroom campaign. The Channel 4 soap \"Brookside\" had earlier featured a story about bipolar disorder when the character Jimmy Corkhill was diagnosed with the condition. 2011 Showtime's political thriller drama \"Homeland\" protagonist Carrie Mathison has bipolar disorder, which she has kept secret since her school days. The 2014 ABC medical drama, \"Black Box\", featured a world-renowned neuroscientist with bipolar disorder.\nIn the TV series \"Dave\", the eponymous main character, played by Lil Dicky as a fictionalized version of himself, is an aspiring rapper. Lil Dicky's real-life hype man GaTa also plays himself. In one episode, after being off his medication and having an episode, GaTa tearfully confesses to having bipolar disorder. GaTa has bipolar disorder in real life but, like his character in the show, he is able to manage it with medication.\nCreativity.\nA link between mental illness and professional success or creativity has been suggested, including in accounts by Socrates, Seneca the Younger, and Cesare Lombroso. Despite prominence in popular culture, the link between creativity and bipolar has not been rigorously studied. This area of study also is likely affected by confirmation bias. Some evidence suggests that some heritable component of bipolar disorder overlaps with heritable components of creativity. Probands of people with bipolar disorder are more likely to be professionally successful, as well as to demonstrate temperamental traits similar to bipolar disorder. Furthermore, while studies of the frequency of bipolar disorder in creative population samples have been conflicting, full-blown bipolar disorder in creative samples is rare.\nResearch.\nResearch directions for bipolar disorder in children include optimizing treatments, increasing the knowledge of the genetic and neurobiological basis of the pediatric disorder and improving diagnostic criteria. Some treatment research suggests that psychosocial interventions that involve the family, psychoeducation, and skills building (through therapies such as CBT, DBT, and IPSRT) can benefit in addition to pharmacotherapy."}
{"id": "4536", "revid": "1879095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4536", "title": "Blitz", "text": "Blitz, German for \"lightning\", may refer to:"}
{"id": "4537", "revid": "1273150181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4537", "title": "Burt Lancaster", "text": "Burton Stephen Lancaster (November 2, 1913 \u2013 October 20, 1994) was an American actor. Initially known for playing tough guys with a tender heart, he went on to achieve success with more complex and challenging roles over a 45-year career in films and television series. He was a four-time nominee for the Academy Award for Best Actor (winning once), and he also won two BAFTA Awards and one Golden Globe Award for Best Lead Actor. The American Film Institute ranks Lancaster as of the greatest male stars of classic Hollywood cinema.\nLancaster performed as a circus acrobat in the 1930s. At the age of 32, and after serving in World War II, he landed a role in a Broadway play and drew the attention of a Hollywood agent. His breakthrough role was in the film noir \"The Killers\" in 1946 alongside Ava Gardner. A critical success, it launched both of their careers. In 1948 Lancaster starred alongside Barbara Stanwyck in the commercially and critically acclaimed film \"Sorry, Wrong Number\", where he portrayed the husband to her bedridden invalid character. In 1953 Lancaster played the illicit lover of Deborah Kerr in the military drama \"From Here to Eternity\". A box office smash, it won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and landed a Best Actor nomination for Lancaster.\nLater in the 1950s, he starred in \"The Rainmaker\" (1956), with Katharine Hepburn, earning a Best Actor Golden Globe nomination, and in 1957 he starred in \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957) with frequent co-star Kirk Douglas. During the 1950s, his production company, Hecht-Hill-Lancaster, was highly successful, with Lancaster acting in films such as: \"Trapeze\" (1956), a box office smash in which he used his acrobatic skills and for which he won the Silver Bear for Best Actor; \"Sweet Smell of Success\" (1957), a dark drama today considered a classic; \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (1958), a WWII submarine drama with Clark Gable; and \"Separate Tables\" (1958), a hotel-set drama which received seven Oscar nominations.\nIn the early 1960s, Lancaster starred in a string of critically successful films, each in very disparate roles. Playing a charismatic biblical con-man in \"Elmer Gantry\" in 1960 won him the Academy Award and the Golden Globe for Best Actor. He played a Nazi war criminal in 1961 in the all-star, war-crime-trial film, \"Judgment at Nuremberg\". Playing a bird expert prisoner in \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" in 1962, he earned the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor and his third Oscar nomination. In 1963, Lancaster traveled to Italy to star as an Italian prince in Visconti's epic period drama \"The Leopard\". In 1964, he played a US Air Force General who, opposed by a Colonel played by Douglas, tries to overthrow the President in \"Seven Days in May\". Then, in 1966, he played an explosives expert in the western \"The Professionals\". Although the reception of his 1968 film \"The Swimmer\" was initially lackluster upon release, in the years after it has grown in stature critically and attained a cult following.\nIn 1970, Lancaster starred in the box-office hit, air-disaster drama \"Airport\". In 1974 he again starred in a Visconti film, \"Conversation Piece\". He experienced a career resurgence in 1980 with the crime-romance \"Atlantic City\", winning the BAFTA for Best Actor and landing his fourth Oscar nomination. Starting in the late 1970s, he also appeared in television mini-series, including the award-winning \"Separate but Equal\" with Sidney Poitier. He continued acting into his late 70s, until a stroke in 1990 forced him to retire; four years later he died from a heart attack. His final film role was in the Oscar-nominated \"Field of Dreams\".\nEarly life.\nLancaster was born on November 2, 1913, in New York City, at his parents' home at 209 East 106th Street, the son of Elizabeth (\"n\u00e9e\" Roberts) and mailman James Lancaster. Both of his parents were Protestants of working-class origin. All four of his grandparents were emigrants from the province of Ulster, Ireland. His maternal side was from Belfast, the descendants of English dissenters who had colonized Ireland as part of the Plantation of Ulster.\nLancaster grew up in East Harlem, New York City. He developed a great interest and skill in gymnastics while attending DeWitt Clinton High School, where he was a basketball star. Before he graduated from DeWitt Clinton, his mother died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Lancaster was accepted by New York University with an athletic scholarship, but dropped out.\nCircus career.\nAt the age of 9, Lancaster met Nick Cravat with whom he developed a lifelong partnership. Together, they learned to act in local theatre productions and circus arts at Union Settlement, one of the city's oldest settlement houses. In the 1930s, they formed the acrobat duo \"Lang and Cravat\" and soon joined the Kay Brothers circus. However, in 1939, an injury forced Lancaster to give up the profession, with great regret. He then found temporary work, first as a salesman for Marshall Fields and then as a singing waiter in various restaurants.\nWorld War II service.\nAfter the United States entered World War II, Lancaster joined the United States Army in January 1943 and performed with the Army's 21st Special Services Division, one of the military groups organized to follow the troops on the ground and provide USO entertainment to keep up morale. He served in the Fifth Army in Italy under General Mark Clark from 1943 to 1945. He was discharged October 1945 and was an entertainment specialist with the rank of technician fifth grade.\nActing career.\nBroadway.\nLancaster returned to New York after his Army service. Although initially unenthusiastic about acting, Lancaster was encouraged to audition for a Broadway play by a producer who saw him in an elevator while he was visiting his then-girlfriend at work. The audition was successful and Lancaster was cast in Harry Brown's \"A Sound of Hunting\" (1945). The show only ran three weeks, but his performance attracted the interest of a Hollywood agent, Harold Hecht. Lancaster had other offers but Hecht promised him the opportunity to produce their own movies within five years of hitting Hollywood.\nThrough Hecht, Lancaster was brought to the attention of producer Hal B. Wallis. Lancaster left New York and moved to Los Angeles. Wallis signed him to a non-exclusive eight-movie contract.\nHal Wallis.\nLancaster's first filmed movie was \"Desert Fury\" for Wallis in 1947, where Lancaster was billed after John Hodiak and Lizabeth Scott. It was directed by Lewis Allen.\nThen producer Mark Hellinger approached him to star in 1946's \"The Killers\", which was completed and released prior to \"Desert Fury\". Directed by Robert Siodmak, it was a great commercial and critical success and launched Lancaster and his co-star Ava Gardner to stardom. It has since come to be regarded as a classic.\nHellinger used Lancaster again on \"Brute Force\" in 1947, a prison drama written by Richard Brooks and directed by Jules Dassin. It was also well received. Wallis released his films through Paramount, and so Lancaster and other Wallis contractees made cameos in \"Variety Girl\" in 1947.\nLancaster's next film was a thriller for Wallis in 1947, \"I Walk Alone\", co-starring Lizabeth Scott and a young Kirk Douglas, who was also under contract to Wallis. \"Variety\" listed it as one of the top grossers of the year, taking in more than $2 million.\nIn 1948, Lancaster had a change of pace with the film adaptation of Arthur Miller's \"All My Sons\", made at Universal Pictures with Edward G. Robinson. His third film for Wallis was an adaptation of \"Sorry, Wrong Number\" in 1948, with Barbara Stanwyck.\nNorma Productions.\nHecht kept to his promise to Lancaster to turn producer. The two of them formed a company, Norma Productions, and did a deal with Universal to make a thriller about a disturbed G.I. in London, \"Kiss the Blood Off My Hands\" in 1948, with Joan Fontaine and directed by Norman Foster. It made a profit of only $50,000, but was critically acclaimed.\nBack in Hollywood, Lancaster made another film noir with Siodmak, \"Criss Cross\", in 1949. It was originally going to be produced by Hellinger and when Hellinger died, another took over. Tony Curtis made an early appearance.\nLancaster appeared in a fourth picture for Wallis, \"Rope of Sand\", in 1949.\nNorma Productions signed a three-picture deal with Warner Bros. The first was 1950's \"The Flame and the Arrow\", a swashbuckler movie, in which Lancaster drew on his circus skills. Nick Cravat had a supporting role and the film was a huge commercial success, making $6 million. It was Warners' most popular film of the year and established an entirely new image for Lancaster.\nLancaster was borrowed by 20th Century Fox for \"Mister 880\" in 1950, a comedy crime romance film with Edmund Gwenn. MGM put him in a popular Western, \"Vengeance Valley\" in 1951, then he went to Warners to play the title role in the biopic \"Jim Thorpe \u2013 All-American\", also in 1951.\nHalburt.\nNorma signed a deal with Columbia Pictures to make two films through a Norma subsidiary, Halburt. The first film was 1951's \"Ten Tall Men\", where Lancaster was a member of the French Foreign Legion. Robert Aldrich worked on the movie as a production manager.\nThe second was 1952's \"The First Time\", a comedy which was the directorial debut of Frank Tashlin. It was meant to star Lancaster but he wound up not appearing in the filmthe first of their productions in which he did not act.\nHecht-Lancaster Productions.\nIn 1951, the actor/producer duo changed the company's name to Hecht-Lancaster Productions. The first film under the new name was another swashbuckler: 1952's \"The Crimson Pirate\", directed by Siodmak. Again, co-starring Nick Cravat, it was extremely popular. Taking the premise of The Flame and the Arrow a step further, it allowed the pair to, not only emphasise the absurdity of the story with more spectacle and comical situations but to demonstrate they were able to perform their own circus skills-based stunts without relying on stuntmen quite as much a most Hollywood stars. As if to down play this, Lancaster himself speaks to the audience in the opening scene over footage of Lancaster performing a dangerous rope swing from one of his pirate ship\u2019s masts to the other. \u201c\u2026in a pirate world, believe only what you see.\u201d The footage is then reversed to show a near impossible backwards swing to the first mast again, from which he proclaims \u201cNo, believe HALF of what you see.\u201d\nLancaster changed pace once more by doing a straight dramatic part in 1952's \"Come Back, Little Sheba\", based on a Broadway hit, with Shirley Booth, produced by Wallis and directed by Daniel Mann.\nAlternating with adventure films, he went into \"South Sea Woman\" in 1952 at Warners. Part of the Norma-Warners contract was that Lancaster had to appear in some non-Norma films, of which this was one.\nIn 1954, for his own company, Lancaster produced and starred in \"His Majesty O'Keefe\", a South Sea island tale shot in Fiji. It was co-written by James Hill, who would soon become a part of the Hecht-Lancaster partnership.\nUnited Artists.\nHecht and Lancaster left Warners for United Artists, for what began as a two-picture deal, the first of which was to be 1954's \"Apache\", starring Lancaster as a Native American.\nThey followed it with another Western in 1954, \"Vera Cruz\", co-starring Gary Cooper and produced by Hill. Both films were directed by Robert Aldrich and were hugely popular.\nUnited Artists signed Hecht-Lancaster to a multi-picture contract, to make seven films over two years. These included films in which Lancaster did not act. Their first was \"Marty\" in 1955, based on Paddy Chayefsky's TV play starring Ernest Borgnine and directed by Delbert Mann. It won both the Best Picture Oscar and the Palme d'Or award at Cannes and Borgnine an Best Actor Oscar. It also earned $2 million on a budget of $350,000. \"Vera Cruz\" had been a huge success, but \"Marty\" secured Hecht-Lancaster as one of the most successful independent production companies in Hollywood at the time. \"Marty\" star Borgnine was under contract to Hecht-Lancaster and was unhappy about his lack of upcoming roles, especially after only receiving some seven lines in 1957's \"Sweet Smell of Success\" and half of his normal pay for \"Marty\". He eventually sued for breach of contract to gain back some of this money in 1957.\nWithout Hill, Hecht and Lancaster produced \"The Kentuckian\" in 1955. It was directed by Lancaster in his directorial debut, and he also played a lead role. Lancaster disliked directing and only did it once more, on 1974's \"The Midnight Man\".\nLancaster still had commitments with Wallis, and made \"The Rose Tattoo\" for him in 1955, starring with Anna Magnani and Daniel Mann directing. It was very popular at the box office and critically acclaimed, winning Magnani an Oscar.\nHecht-Hill-Lancaster.\nIn 1955, Hill was made an equal partner in Hecht-Lancaster, with his name added to the production company. Hecht-Hill-Lancaster (HHL) released their first film \"Trapeze\" in 1956, with Lancaster performing many of his own stunts. The film, co-starring Tony Curtis and Gina Lollobrigida, went on to become the production company's top box office success, and United Artists expanded its deal with HHL.\nIn 1956, Lancaster and Hecht partnered with Loring Buzzell and entered the music industry with the music publishing companies Leigh Music, Hecht-Lancaster &amp; Buzzell Music, Calyork Music and Colby Music and the record labels Calyork Records and Maine Records.\nThe HHL team impressed Hollywood with its success; as \"Life\" wrote in 1957, \"[a]fter the independent production of a baker's dozen of pictures, it has yet to have its first flop ... (They were also good pictures.).\" In late 1957, they announced they would make ten films worth $14 million in 1958.\nLancaster made two films for Wallis to complete his eight-film commitment for that contract: \"The Rainmaker\" (1956) with Katharine Hepburn, which earned Lancaster a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor; and \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957) with Kirk Douglas, which was a huge commercial hit directed by John Sturges.\nLancaster re-teamed with Tony Curtis in 1957 for \"Sweet Smell of Success\", a co-production between Hecht-Hill-Lancaster and Curtis' own company with wife Janet Leigh, Curtleigh Productions. The movie, directed by Alexander Mackendrick, was a critical success but a commercial disappointment. Over the years it has come to be regarded as one of Lancaster's greatest films.\nHHL produced seven additional films in the late 1950s. Four starred Lancaster: \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (1958), a Robert Wise directed war film with Clark Gable, which was mildly popular; \"Separate Tables\" (1958) a hotel-set drama with Kerr and Rita Hayworth (who married James Hill), which received an Oscar nomination for Best Picture and Oscar awards for lead actor David Niven and supporting actress Wendy Hiller, and was both a critical and commercial success; \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1959), with Douglas and Laurence Olivier, which lost money (and saw Lancaster fire Mackendrick during shooting); and the Western \"The Unforgiven\" (1960), with Audrey Hepburn, which was a critical and commercial disappointment.\nThree were made without Lancaster, all of which lost money: \"The Bachelor Party\" (1957), from another TV play by Chayefsky, and directed by Delbert Mann; \"Take a Giant Step\" (1959), about a black student; and \"Summer of the Seventeenth Doll\" (1960), from an Australian play, shot on location in Australia and Britain.\nHHL served as the production company for the 1960\u201361 TV series \"Whiplash\".\nThe Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions company dissolved in 1960 after Hill ruptured his relationship with both Hecht and Lancaster. Hill went on to produce a single additional film, \"The Happy Thieves\", in a new production company, Hillworth Productions, co-owned with his wife Rita Hayworth.\nHecht and Lancaster.\nLancaster played the title role in \"Elmer Gantry\" (1960), written and directed by Richard Brooks for United Artists. The film received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture and Best Actor. Lancaster won the 1960 Academy Award for Best Actor, a Golden Globe Award, and the New York Film Critics Award for his performance.\nHecht and Lancaster worked together on \"The Young Savages\" (1961), directed by John Frankenheimer and produced by Hecht. Sydney Pollack worked as a dialogue coach.\nLancaster starred in \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" (1961) for Stanley Kramer, alongside Spencer Tracy, Richard Widmark and a number of other stars. The film was both a commercial and critical success, receiving eleven Oscar nominations, including Best Picture.\nHe then did another film with Hecht and Frankenheimer (replacing Charles Crichton), \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962), a largely fictionalized biography. In it he plays Robert Stroud, a federal prisoner incarcerated for life for two murders, who begins to collect birds and over time becomes an expert in bird diseases, even publishing a book. The film shows Stroud transferred to the maximum security Alcatraz prison where he is not allowed to keep birds and as he ages he gets married, markets bird remedies, helps stop a prison rebellion, and writes a book on the history of the U.S. penal system, but never gets paroled.\nThe sympathetic performance earned Lancaster a Best Actor Oscar nomination, a BAFTA Award for Best Actor, and a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor in a Dramatic Role. Hecht went on to produce five films without Lancaster's assistance, through his company Harold Hecht Films Productions between 1961 and 1967, including another Academy Award winner, \"Cat Ballou\", starring Lee Marvin and Jane Fonda.\nCollaborations with younger filmmakers.\nLancaster made \"A Child Is Waiting\" (1963) with Judy Garland. It was produced by Kramer and directed by John Cassavetes.\nHe went to Italy to star in \"The Leopard\" (1963) for Luchino Visconti, co-starring Alain Delon and Claudia Cardinale. It was one of Lancaster's favorite films and was a big hit in France but failed in the US (though the version released was much truncated).\nHe had a small role in \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (1963) for producer/star Kirk Douglas, and then did two for Frankenheimer: \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), a political thriller with Douglas, and \"The Train\" (1964), a World War Two action film (Lancaster had Frankenheimer replace Arthur Penn several days into filming).\nLancaster starred in \"The Hallelujah Trail\" (1965), a comic Western produced and directed by John Sturges which failed to recoup its large cost.\nHe had a big hit with \"The Professionals\" (1966), a Western directed by Brooks and also starring Lee Marvin.\nIn 1966, at the age of 52, Lancaster appeared nude in director Frank Perry's film \"The Swimmer\" (1968), in what the critic Roger Ebert called \"his finest performance\". Prior to working on \"The Swimmer\", Lancaster was terrified of the water because he did not know how to swim. In preparation for the film, he took swimming lessons from UCLA swim coach Bob Horn. Filming was difficult and clashes between Lancaster and Perry led to Sydney Pollack coming in to do some filming. The film was not released until 1968, when it proved to be a commercial failure, though Lancaster remained proud of the movie and his performance.\nNorlan Productions.\nIn 1967, Lancaster formed a new partnership with Roland Kibbee, who had already worked as a writer on five Lancaster projects: \"Ten Tall Men\", \"The Crimson Pirate\", \"Three Sailors and a Girl\" (in which Lancaster made a cameo appearance), \"Vera Cruz\", and \"The Devil's Disciple\".\nThrough Norlan Productions, Lancaster and Kibbee produced \"The Scalphunters\" in 1968, directed by Sydney Pollack.\nLancaster followed it with another film from Pollack, \"Castle Keep\" in 1969, which was a big flop. So was \"The Gypsy Moths\", for Frankenheimer, also in 1969.\n1970s.\nLancaster had one of the biggest successes of his career with \"Airport\" in 1970, starring alongside Dean Martin, George Kennedy, Van Heflin, Helen Hayes, Maureen Stapleton, Barbara Hale, Jean Seberg, and Jacqueline Bisset. The Ross Hunter film received nine Academy Award nominations, including one for Best Picture. It became one of the biggest box-office hits of 1970 and, at that time, reportedly the highest-grossing film in the history of Universal Pictures.\nHe then went into a series of Westerns: \"Lawman\" in 1971, directed by Michael Winner; \"Valdez Is Coming\" in 1971, for Norlan; and \"Ulzana's Raid\" in 1972, directed by Aldrich and produced by himself and Hecht. None were particularly popular but \"Ulzana's Raid\" has become a cult film.\nLancaster did two thrillers, both 1973: \"Scorpio\" with Winner and \"Executive Action\".\nLancaster returned to directing in 1974 with \"The Midnight Man\", which he also wrote and produced with Kibee.\nHe made a second film with Visconti, \"Conversation Piece\" in 1974 and played the title role in the TV series \"Moses the Lawgiver\", also in 1974.\nLancaster was one of many names in 1975's \"1900\", directed by Bernardo Bertolucci, and he had a cameo in 1976's \"Buffalo Bill and the Indians, or Sitting Bull's History Lesson\" for Robert Altman.\nHe played Shimon Peres in the TV movie \"Victory at Entebbe\" in 1977 and had a supporting role in \"The Cassandra Crossing\" in 1976. He made a fourth and final film with Aldrich, \"Twilight's Last Gleaming\" in 1977, and had the title role in 1977's \"The Island of Dr. Moreau\".\nLancaster was top-billed in \"Go Tell the Spartans\" in 1978, a Vietnam War film; Lancaster admired the script so much that he took a reduced fee and donated money to help the movie to be completed. He was in \"Zulu Dawn\" in 1979.\n1980s.\nLancaster began the 1980s with a highly acclaimed performance alongside Susan Sarandon in \"Atlantic City\" in 1980, directed by Louis Malle. The film received five Oscar nominations, including Best Picture and a Best Actor nomination for Lancaster.\nHe had key roles in \"Cattle Annie and Little Britches\" in 1981, \"The Skin\" in 1982 with Cardinale, \"Marco Polo\", also in 1982, and \"Local Hero\" in 1983.\nBy now, Lancaster was mostly a character actor in features, as in \"The Osterman Weekend\" in 1983, but he was the lead in the TV movie \"Scandal Sheet\" in 1985.\nHe was in \"Little Treasure\" in 1985, directed by Alan Sharp, who had written \"Ulzana's Raid\"; \"On Wings of Eagles\" for TV in 1986, as Bull Simons; 1986's made for TV \"Barnum\" starred him in the title role; \"Tough Guys\" reunited him on the big screen with Kirk Douglas in 1986; \"\" (in German V\u00e4ter und S\u00f6hne \u2013 Eine deutsche Trag\u00f6die) in 1986 for German TV; 1987's \"Control\" made in Italy; \"Rocket Gibraltar\" in 1988, and \"The Jeweller's Shop\" in 1989.\nHis first critical success in a while was \"Field of Dreams\" in 1989, in which he played a supporting role as Moonlight Graham. He was also in the miniseries \"The Betrothed\" in 1989.\nLater career.\nLancaster's final performances included TV miniseries \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1990); \"\" (1990) as Leon Klinghoffer based on the 1985 hijacking incident; and \"Separate But Equal\" (1991) with Sidney Poitier.\nFrequent collaborators.\nLancaster appeared in a total of seventeen films produced by his agent, Harold Hecht. Eight of these were co-produced by James Hill. He also appeared in eight films produced by Hal B. Wallis and two with producer Mark Hellinger. Although Lancaster's work alongside Kirk Douglas was known as that of a successful pair of actors, Douglas, in fact, produced four films for the pair, through his production companies Bryna Productions and Joel Productions. Roland Kibbee also produced three Lancaster films, and Lancaster was also cast in two Stanley Kramer productions.\nKirk Douglas.\nKirk Douglas starred in seven films across the decades with Burt Lancaster: \"I Walk Alone\" (1948), \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" (1957), \"The Devil's Disciple\" (1959), \"The List of Adrian Messenger\" (1963), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), \"Victory at Entebbe\" (1976) and \"Tough Guys\" (1986), which fixed the notion of the pair as something of a team in the public imagination. Douglas was always billed under Lancaster in these movies but, with the exception of \"I Walk Alone\", in which Douglas played a villain, their roles were usually more or less the same size. Both actors arrived in Hollywood at about the same time, and first appeared together in the fourth film for each, albeit with Douglas in a supporting role. They both became actor-producers who sought out independent Hollywood careers.\nJohn Frankenheimer.\nJohn Frankenheimer directed five films with Lancaster: \"The Young Savages\" (1961), \"Birdman of Alcatraz\" (1962), \"Seven Days in May\" (1964), \"The Train\" (1964), and \"The Gypsy Moths\" (1969).\nOther repeat collaborators.\nHe was directed four times by Robert Aldrich, three times each by Robert Siodmak and Sydney Pollack, and twice each by Byron Haskin, Daniel Mann, John Sturges, John Huston, Richard Brooks, Alexander Mackendrick, Luchino Visconti, and Michael Winner.\nRoland Kibbee wrote for seven Lancaster films. Lancaster used makeup veteran Robert Schiffer in twenty credited films, hiring Schiffer on nearly all of the films he produced.\nPolitical activism.\nLancaster was a vocal supporter of progressive and liberal political causes. He frequently spoke out in support of racial and other minorities. As a result, he was often a target of FBI investigations. He was named in President Richard Nixon's 1973 \"Enemies List\".\nA vocal opponent of the Vietnam War, he helped pay for the successful defense of a soldier accused of \"fragging\" (i.e., murdering) another soldier during war-time. In 1968, Lancaster actively supported the presidential candidacy of anti-war Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, and frequently spoke on his behalf during the Democratic primaries.\nLancaster was also active in anti-death penalty activism. He campaigned heavily for George McGovern in the 1972 United States presidential election.\nIn 1985, Lancaster joined the fight against AIDS after fellow movie star Rock Hudson contracted the disease. Lancaster delivered Hudson's last words at the Commitment to Life fundraiser at a time when the stigma surrounding AIDS was at its height.\nOf his political opinions, frequent co-star Tony Curtis said: \"Here's this great big aggressive guy that looks like a ding-dong athlete playing these big tough guys and he has the soul of\u2014who were those first philosophers of equality?\u2014Socrates, Plato. He was a Greek philosopher with a sense that everybody was equal.\"\nActor and SAG president Ed Asner said he showed everybody in Hollywood \"how to be a liberal with balls\".\nHollywood Ten.\nIn 1947, Lancaster reportedly signed a statement release by the National Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions (NCASP) asking Congress to abolish the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). He was also a member of the short-lived Committee for the First Amendment, formed in support of the Hollywood Ten. He was one of 26 movie stars who flew to Washington in October 1947 to protest against the HUAC hearings. The committee's \"Hollywood Fights Back\" broadcasts on ABC Radio Network were two 30-minute programs that took place on October 27 and November 2, 1947, during which committee members voiced their opposition to the HUAC hearings. Many members faced blacklisting and backlash due to their involvement in the committee. Lancaster was listed in anti-communist literature as a fellow traveler.\nCivil rights movement.\nHe and his second wife, Norma, hosted a fundraiser for Martin Luther King Jr. and the Student Diversity Leadership Conference (SDLC) ahead of the historic March on Washington in 1963. He attended the march, where he was one of the speakers. He flew in from France for the event, where he was shooting \"The Train\", and flew back again the next day, despite a reported fear of flying.\nOn August 28, 1963, at the March on Washington Lancaster \"read the speech that James Baldwin was supposed to make,\" because (as Malcolm X said in a speech delivered in Detroit at the King Solomon Baptist Church in late 1963) \"they wouldn't let Baldwin get up there because they know Baldwin is liable to say anything.\"\nACLU.\nIn 1968, Lancaster was elected to serve as chairman of the Roger Baldwin Foundation, a newly formed fund-raising arm of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California. His co-chairs were Frank Sinatra and Irving L. Lichtenstein. In October 1968, he hosted a party at his home to raise money for the ACLU to use for the defense of the more than four hundred people arrested at the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Throughout the years, he remained an ardent supporter and a fundraiser for the organization.\nWhile serving as a member of the five-person ACLU Foundation executive committee, he cast the key vote to retain Ramona Ripston as executive director of the Southern California affiliate, a position she would build into a powerful advocacy force in Los Angeles politics. Ripston later recalled: \"There was a feeling that a woman couldn't run the ACLU foundation, nor have access to the books. The vote finally came down to two 'yes' and two 'no.' Who had the deciding vote? Burt. He had a scotch or two and finally he said, 'I think she should be executive director.' I always loved him for that.\"\nWhen President George H. W. Bush derided Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis as a \"card-carrying member of the ACLU\", Lancaster was one of the supporters featured in the organization's first television advertising campaign stating: \"I'm a card-carrying member of the ACLU\" and \"No one agrees with every single thing they've done. But no one can disagree with the guiding principle\u2014with liberty and justice for all.'\" He also campaigned for Michael Dukakis in the 1988 United States presidential election.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and relationships.\nLancaster guarded his personal life and attempted to keep it private despite his stardom. He was married three times and had five children.\nHis first marriage was to June Ernst, a trapeze acrobat. Ernst was the daughter of a renowned female aerialist and an accomplished acrobat herself. After they were married, he performed with her family and her until their separation in the late 1930s. When they divorced is unclear. Contemporary reports listed 1940, but subsequent biographers have suggested dates as late as 1946, delaying his marriage to his second wife.\nHe met second wife Norma Anderson (1917\u20131988) when the stenographer substituted for an ill actress in a USO production for the troops in Italy. Reportedly, on seeing Lancaster in the crowd on her way to town from the airport, she turned to an officer and asked, \"Who is that good-looking officer and is he married?\" The officer set up a blind date between the two for that evening. They married in 1946. Norma was active in political causes with an entire room in their Bel Air home devoted to her major interest, the League of Woman Voters, crammed with printing presses and all the necessary supplies for mass mailings.\nShe was a life-long member of the NAACP. The couple held a fundraiser for Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference ahead of the 1963 March on Washington. All five of his children were with Anderson: Bill (who became an actor and screenwriter), James, Susan, Joanna (who worked as a film producer), and Sighle (pronounced \"Sheila\"). It was a troubled marriage. The pair separated in 1966, and divorced in 1969.\nIn 1966, Lancaster began a long-term relationship with hairdresser Jackie Bone, who worked on \"The Professionals\". The relationship was tempestuous, with Bone once smashing a wine bottle over Lancaster's head at a dinner with Sydney Pollack and Peter Falk. Reportedly, they eventually split up after her religious conversion, which Lancaster believed he could not share with her.\nHis third marriage, to Susan Martin, lasted from September 1990 until his death in 1994.\nAccording to biographer Kate Buford in \"\", Lancaster was devotedly loyal to his friends and family. Old friends from his childhood remained his friends for life.\nPossible affairs.\nSome media outlets and authors have written that Lancaster was bisexual, and had relationships with both men and women. Friends said he claimed he was romantically involved with Deborah Kerr during the filming of \"From Here to Eternity\" in 1953. However, Kerr stated that while there was a spark of attraction, nothing ever happened. He reportedly had an affair with Joan Blondell.\nIn her 1980 autobiography, Shelley Winters claimed to have had a two-year affair with him, during which time he was considering separation from his wife. In his Hollywood memoirs, friend Farley Granger recalled an incident when Lancaster and he had to come to Winters' rescue one evening when she had inadvertently overdosed on alcohol and sleeping pills. She broke up with him for \"cheating on her with his wife\" after she heard reports of his wife's third or fourth pregnancy.\nReligion.\nDespite his Protestant background and upbringing, Lancaster identified as an atheist later in life.\nLatter years.\nAs Lancaster reached his 60s, he began to be affected by cardiovascular disease. In January 1980, he had complications from a routine gall bladder operation (that he barely survived). In 1983, following two minor heart attacks, he underwent an emergency quadruple coronary bypass. He continued to act, however, and to engage in public activism. In 1988, he attended a congressional hearing in Washington, DC, with former colleagues who included James Stewart and Ginger Rogers to protest against media magnate Ted Turner's plan to colorize various black-and-white films from the 1930s and 1940s. On November 30, 1990, when he was 77, a stroke left him partially paralyzed and largely unable to speak, ending his acting career.\nDeath.\nLancaster died at his apartment in Century City, Los Angeles, after having a third heart attack at 4:50 am on October 20, 1994. His body was cremated, and his ashes were scattered under a large oak tree in Westwood Memorial Park, which is located in Westwood Village, California. A small, square ground plaque amid several others, inscribed \"Burt Lancaster 1913\u20131994\", marks the location. As he had requested, no memorial or funeral service was held for him.\nLegacy.\nThe centennial of Lancaster's birth was honored at New York City's Film Society of Lincoln Center in May 2013 with the screening of 12 of the actor's best-known films, from \"The Killers\" to \"Atlantic City\".\nLancaster has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard.\nFilmography and awards.\nLancaster was nominated for the Oscar for Best Actor in a Leading Role in 1954 for \"From Here to Eternity\", in 1961 for \"Elmer Gantry\", in 1964 for \"Birdman of Alcatraz\", and in 1982 for \"Atlantic City\". He won the Oscar in 1961. Lancaster's leading role in Luchino Visconti's 1963 canonical \"The Leopard\" began a series of roles with important European art film directors that included roles in Bernardo Bertolucci's \"1900\" and Louis Malle's \"Atlantic City\" as well as Visconti's \"Conversation Piece\".\nBox office ranking.\nFor a number of years exhibitors voted Lancaster among the most popular stars:\nIn other media.\nSpanish music group Hombres G released an album named \"La cagaste, Burt Lancaster\" (\"You messed up, Burt Lancaster\") in 1986.\nThomas Hart Benton painted a scene from \"The Kentuckian\" as part of the film's marketing. Lancaster posed for the painting, also known as \"The Kentuckian\"."}
{"id": "4540", "revid": "19992876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4540", "title": "Balts", "text": "The Balts or Baltic peoples (, ) are a group of peoples inhabiting the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea who speak Baltic languages. Among the Baltic peoples are modern-day Lithuanians (including Samogitians) and Latvians (including Latgalians) \u2014 all East Balts \u2014 as well as the Old Prussians, Curonians, Sudovians, Skalvians, Yotvingians and Galindians \u2014 the West Balts \u2014 whose languages and cultures are now extinct, but made a large influence on the living branches, especially on literary Lithuanian language.\nThe Balts are descended from a group of Proto-Indo-European tribes who settled the area between the lower Vistula and southeast shore of the Baltic Sea and upper Daugava and Dnieper rivers, and which over time became differentiated into West and East Balts. In the fifth century CE, parts of the eastern Baltic coast began to be settled by the ancestors of the Western Balts, whereas the East Balts lived in modern-day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia. In the first millennium CE, large migrations of the Balts occurred. By the 13th and 14th centuries, the East Balts shrank to the general area that the present-day Balts and Belarusians inhabit.\nBaltic languages belong to the Balto-Slavic branch of the Indo-European languages. One of the features of Baltic languages is the number of conservative or archaic features retained.\nEtymology.\nMedieval German chronicler Adam of Bremen in the latter part of the 11th century AD was the first writer to use the term \"Baltic\" in reference to the sea of that name. Before him various ancient places names, such as Balcia, were used in reference to a supposed island in the Baltic Sea.\nIn Germanic languages there was some form of the toponym East Sea until after about the year 1600, when maps in English began to label it as the Baltic Sea. By 1840, German nobles of the Governorate of Livonia adopted the term \"Balts\" to distinguish themselves from Germans of Germany. They spoke an exclusive dialect, Baltic German, which was regarded by many as the language of the Balts until 1919.\nIn 1845, Georg Heinrich Ferdinand Nesselmann proposed a distinct language group for Latvian, Lithuanian, and Old Prussian, which he termed Baltic. The term became prevalent after Latvia and Lithuania gained independence in 1918. Up until the early 20th century, either \"Latvian\" or \"Lithuanian\" could be used to mean the entire language family.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Balts or Baltic peoples, defined as speakers of one of the Baltic languages, a branch of the Indo-European language family, are descended from a group of Indo-European tribes who settled the area between the lower Vistula and southeast shore of the Baltic Sea and upper Daugava and Dnieper rivers. The Baltic languages, especially Lithuanian, retain a number of conservative or archaic features, perhaps because the areas in which they are spoken are geographically consolidated and have low rates of immigration.\nSome of the major authorities on Balts, such as Kazimieras B\u016bga, Max Vasmer, Vladimir Toporov and Oleg Trubachyov, in conducting etymological studies of eastern European river names, were able to identify in certain regions names of specifically Baltic provenance, which most likely indicate where the Balts lived in prehistoric times. According to Vladimir Toporov and Oleg Trubachyov, the eastern boundary of the Balts in the prehistoric times were the upper reaches of the Volga, Moskva, and Oka rivers, while the southern border was the Seym river. This information is summarized and synthesized by Marija Gimbutas in \"The Balts\" (1963) to obtain a likely proto-Baltic homeland. Its borders are approximately: from a line on the Pomeranian coast eastward to include or nearly include the present-day sites of Berlin, Warsaw, Kyiv, and Kursk, northward through Moscow to the River Berzha, westward in an irregular line to the coast of the Gulf of Riga, north of Riga. \nHowever, other scholars such as Endre Bojt (1999) reject the presumption that there ever was such a thing as a clear, single \"Baltic \"Urheimat\"\": 'The references to the Balts at various \"Urheimat\" locations across the centuries are often of doubtful authenticity, those concerning the Balts furthest to the West are the more trustworthy among them. (...) It is wise to group the particulars of Baltic history according to the interests that moved the pens of the authors of our sources.'\nProto-history.\nThe area of Baltic habitation shrank due to assimilation by other groups, and invasions. According to one of the theories which has gained considerable traction over the years, one of the western Baltic tribes, the Galindians, Galindae, or Goliad, migrated to the area around modern-day Moscow, Russia around the fourth century AD.\nOver time the Balts became differentiated into West and East Balts. In the fifth century AD parts of the eastern Baltic coast began to be settled by the ancestors of the Western Balts: Brus/Pr\u016bsa (\"Old Prussians\"), Sudovians/Jotvingians, Scalvians, Nadruvians, and Curonians. The East Balts, including the hypothesised Dniepr Balts, were living in modern-day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia.\nGermanic peoples lived to the west of the Baltic homelands; by the first century AD, the Goths had stabilized their kingdom from the mouth of the Vistula, south to Dacia. As Roman domination collapsed in the first half of the first millennium CE in Northern and Eastern Europe, large migrations of the Balts occurred \u2014 first, the Galindae or Galindians towards the east, and later, East Balts towards the west. In the eighth century, Slavic tribes from the Volga regions appeared. By the 13th and 14th centuries, they reached the general area that the present-day Balts and Belarusians inhabit. Many other Eastern and Southern Balts either assimilated with other Balts, or Slavs in the fourth\u2013seventh centuries and were gradually slavicized.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the 12th and 13th centuries, internal struggles and invasions by Ruthenians and Poles, and later the expansion of the Teutonic Order, resulted in an almost complete annihilation of the Galindians, Curonians, and Yotvingians. Gradually, Old Prussians became Germanized or Lithuanized between the 15th and 17th centuries, especially after the Reformation in Prussia. The cultures of the Lithuanians and Latgalians/Latvians survived and became the ancestors of the populations of the modern-day countries of Latvia and Lithuania.\nOld Prussian was closely related to the other extinct Western Baltic languages, Curonian, Galindian and Sudovian. It is more distantly related to the surviving Eastern Baltic languages, Lithuanian and Latvian. Compare the Prussian word \"seme\" (\"zem\u0113\"), Latvian \"zeme\", the Lithuanian \"\u017eem\u0117\" (\"land\" in English).\nCulture.\nThe Balts originally practiced Baltic religion. They were gradually Christianized as a result of the Northern Crusades of the Middle Ages. Baltic peoples such as the Latvians, Lithuanians and Old Prussians had their distinct mythologies. The Lithuanians have close historic ties to Poland, and many of them are Roman Catholic. The Latvians have close historic ties to Northern Germany and Scandinavia, and many of them are irreligious. In recent times, the Baltic religion has been revived in Baltic neopaganism.\nGenetics.\nThe Balts are included in the \"North European\" gene cluster together with the Germanic peoples, some Slavic groups (the Poles and Northern Russians) and Baltic Finnic peoples.\nSaag et a. (2017) detected that the eastern Baltic in the Mesolithic was inhabited primarily by Western Hunter-Gatherers (WHGs). Their paternal haplogroups were mostly types of I2a and R1b, while their maternal haplogroups were mostly types of U5, U4 and U2. These people carried a high frequency of the derived HERC2 allele which codes for light eye color and possess an increased frequency of the derived alleles for SLC45A2 and SLC24A5, coding for lighter skin color.\nBaltic hunter-gatherers still displayed a slightly larger amount of WHG ancestry than Scandinavian Hunter-Gatherers (SHGs). WHG ancestry in the Baltic was particularly high among hunter-gatherers in Latvia and Lithuania. Unlike other parts of Europe, the hunter-gatherers of the eastern Baltic do not appear to have mixed much with Early European Farmers (EEFs) arriving from Anatolia.\nDuring the Neolithic, increasing admixture from Eastern Hunter-Gatherers (EHGs) is detected. The paternal haplogroups of EHGs was mostly types of R1a, while their maternal haplogroups appears to have been almost exclusively types of U5, U4, and U2.\nThe rise of the Corded Ware culture in the eastern Baltic in the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age is accompanied by a significant infusion of steppe ancestry and EEF ancestry into the eastern Baltic gene pool. In the aftermath of the Corded Ware expansion, local hunter-gatherer ancestry experienced a resurgence.\nHaplogroup N reached the eastern Baltic only in the Late Bronze Age, probably with the speakers of the Uralic languages.\nModern-day Balts have a lower amount of EEF ancestry, and a higher amount of WHG ancestry, than any other population in Europe.\nList of Baltic peoples.\nModern-day Baltic peoples"}
{"id": "4541", "revid": "17618788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4541", "title": "Burnt-in timecode", "text": "Burnt-in timecode (often abbreviated to BITC by analogy to VITC) is a human-readable on-screen version of the timecode information for a piece of material superimposed on a video image. BITC is sometimes used in conjunction with \"real\" machine-readable timecode but more often used in copies of original material onto a nonbroadcast format such as VHS so that the VHS copies can be traced back to their master tape and the original timecodes easily located. \nMany professional VTRs can \"burn\" (overlay) the tape timecode onto one of their outputs. This output (which usually also displays the setup menu or on-screen display) is known as the \"super out\" or \"monitor out\". The \"character\" switch or menu item turns this behaviour on or off. The \"character\" function also displays the timecode on the preview monitors in linear editing suites.\nVideotapes that are recorded with timecode numbers overlaid on the video are referred to as \"window dubs\", named after the \"window\" that displays the burnt-in timecode on-screen.\nWhen editing was done using magnetic tapes that were subject to damage from excessive wear, it was common to use a window dub as a working copy for the majority of the editing process. Editing decisions would be made using a window dub, and no specialized equipment was needed to write down an edit decision list, which would then be replicated from the high-quality masters.\nTimecode can also be superimposed on video using a dedicated overlay device, often called a \"window dub inserter\". This inputs a video signal and its separate timecode audio signal, reads the timecode, superimposes the timecode display over the video, and outputs the combined display (usually via composite), all in real time. Stand-alone timecode generators/readers often have the window dub function built in. \nSome consumer cameras, in particular DV cameras, can \"burn\" (overlay) the tape timecode onto the composite output. This output is typically semitransparent and may include other tape information. It is usually activated by turning on the \"display\" info in one of the camera's submenus. While not as \"professional\" as an overlay created by a professional VCR, it is a cheap alternative that is just as accurate.\nTimecode is stored in the metadata areas of captured DV AVI files, and some software is able to \"burn\" (overlay) this into the video frames. For example, DVMP Pro is able to \"burn\" timecode or other items of DV metadata (such as date and time, iris, shutter speed, gain, white balance mode, etc.) into DV AVI files.\nOCR techniques can be used to read BITC in situations where other forms of timecode are not available."}
{"id": "4542", "revid": "46295480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4542", "title": "Bra\u2013ket notation", "text": "Bra\u2013ket notation, also called Dirac notation, is a notation for linear algebra and linear operators on complex vector spaces together with their dual space both in the finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional case. It is specifically designed to ease the types of calculations that frequently come up in quantum mechanics. Its use in quantum mechanics is quite widespread.\nBra\u2013ket notation was created by Paul Dirac in his 1939 publication \"A New Notation for Quantum Mechanics\". The notation was introduced as an easier way to write quantum mechanical expressions. The name comes from the English word \"bracket\".\nQuantum mechanics.\nIn quantum mechanics, bra\u2013ket notation is used ubiquitously to denote quantum states. The notation uses angle brackets, and , and a vertical bar , to construct \"bras\" and \"kets\".\nA ket is of the form formula_1. Mathematically it denotes a vector, formula_2, in an abstract (complex) vector space formula_3, and physically it represents a state of some quantum system.\nA bra is of the form formula_4. Mathematically it denotes a linear form formula_5, i.e. a linear map that maps each vector in formula_3 to a number in the complex plane formula_7. Letting the linear functional formula_8 act on a vector formula_9 is written as formula_10.\nAssume that on formula_3 there exists an inner product formula_12 with antilinear first argument, which makes formula_3 an inner product space. Then with this inner product each vector formula_14 can be identified with a corresponding linear form, by placing the vector in the anti-linear first slot of the inner product: formula_15. The correspondence between these notations is then formula_16. The linear form formula_17 is a covector to formula_18, and the set of all covectors forms a subspace of the dual vector space formula_19, to the initial vector space formula_3. The purpose of this linear form formula_17 can now be understood in terms of making projections onto the state formula_22 to find how linearly dependent two states are, etc.\nFor the vector space formula_23, kets can be identified with column vectors, and bras with row vectors. Combinations of bras, kets, and linear operators are interpreted using matrix multiplication. If formula_23 has the standard Hermitian inner product formula_25, under this identification, the identification of kets and bras and vice versa provided by the inner product is taking the Hermitian conjugate (denoted formula_26).\nIt is common to suppress the vector or linear form from the bra\u2013ket notation and only use a label inside the typography for the bra or ket. For example, the spin operator formula_27 on a two-dimensional space formula_28 of spinors has eigenvalues formula_29 with eigenspinors formula_30. In bra\u2013ket notation, this is typically denoted as formula_31, and formula_32. As above, kets and bras with the same label are interpreted as kets and bras corresponding to each other using the inner product. In particular, when also identified with row and column vectors, kets and bras with the same label are identified with Hermitian conjugate column and row vectors.\nBra\u2013ket notation was effectively established in 1939 by Paul Dirac; it is thus also known as Dirac notation, despite the notation having a precursor in Hermann Grassmann's use of formula_33 for inner products nearly 100 years earlier.\nVector spaces.\nVectors vs kets.\nIn mathematics, the term \"vector\" is used for an element of any vector space. In physics, however, the term \"vector\" tends to refer almost exclusively to quantities like displacement or velocity, which have components that relate directly to the three dimensions of space, or relativistically, to the four of spacetime. Such vectors are typically denoted with over arrows (formula_34), boldface (formula_35) or indices (formula_36).\nIn quantum mechanics, a quantum state is typically represented as an element of a complex Hilbert space, for example, the infinite-dimensional vector space of all possible wavefunctions (square integrable functions mapping each point of 3D space to a complex number) or some more abstract Hilbert space constructed more algebraically. To distinguish this type of vector from those described above, it is common and useful in physics to denote an element formula_37 of an abstract complex vector space as a ket formula_18, to refer to it as a \"ket\" rather than as a vector, and to pronounce it \"ket-formula_37\" or \"ket-A\" for .\nSymbols, letters, numbers, or even words\u2014whatever serves as a convenient label\u2014can be used as the label inside a ket, with the formula_40 making clear that the label indicates a vector in vector space. In other words, the symbol \" has a recognizable mathematical meaning as to the kind of variable being represented, while just the \" by itself does not. For example, is not necessarily equal to . Nevertheless, for convenience, there is usually some logical scheme behind the labels inside kets, such as the common practice of labeling energy eigenkets in quantum mechanics through a listing of their quantum numbers. At its simplest, the label inside the ket is the eigenvalue of a physical operator, such as formula_41, formula_42, formula_43, etc.\nNotation.\nSince kets are just vectors in a Hermitian vector space, they can be manipulated using the usual rules of linear algebra. For example:\nNote how the last line above involves infinitely many different kets, one for each real number .\nSince the ket is an element of a vector space, a bra formula_45 is an element of its dual space, i.e. a bra is a linear functional which is a linear map from the vector space to the complex numbers. Thus, it is useful to think of kets and bras as being elements of different vector spaces (see below however) with both being different useful concepts.\nA bra formula_17 and a ket formula_47 (i.e. a functional and a vector), can be combined to an operator formula_48 of rank one with outer product\nInner product and bra\u2013ket identification on Hilbert space.\nThe bra\u2013ket notation is particularly useful in Hilbert spaces which have an inner product that allows Hermitian conjugation and identifying a vector with a continuous linear functional, i.e. a ket with a bra, and vice versa (see Riesz representation theorem). The inner product on Hilbert space formula_50 (with the first argument anti linear as preferred by physicists) is fully equivalent to an (anti-linear) identification between the space of kets and that of bras in the bra ket notation: for a vector ket formula_51 define a functional (i.e. bra) formula_52 by\nBras and kets as row and column vectors.\nIn the simple case where we consider the vector space formula_23, a ket can be identified with a column vector, and a bra as a row vector. If, moreover, we use the standard Hermitian inner product on formula_23, the bra corresponding to a ket, in particular a bra and a ket with the same label are conjugate transpose. Moreover, conventions are set up in such a way that writing bras, kets, and linear operators next to each other simply imply matrix multiplication. In particular the outer product formula_56 of a column and a row vector ket and bra can be identified with matrix multiplication (column vector times row vector equals matrix).\nFor a finite-dimensional vector space, using a fixed orthonormal basis, the inner product can be written as a matrix multiplication of a row vector with a column vector:\nformula_57\nBased on this, the bras and kets can be defined as:\nformula_58\nand then it is understood that a bra next to a ket implies matrix multiplication.\nThe conjugate transpose (also called \"Hermitian conjugate\") of a bra is the corresponding ket and vice versa:\nformula_59\nbecause if one starts with the bra\nformula_60\nthen performs a complex conjugation, and then a matrix transpose, one ends up with the ket\nformula_61\nWriting elements of a finite dimensional (or mutatis mutandis, countably infinite) vector space as a column vector of numbers requires picking a basis. Picking a basis is not always helpful because quantum mechanics calculations involve frequently switching between different bases (e.g. position basis, momentum basis, energy eigenbasis), and one can write something like \" without committing to any particular basis. In situations involving two different important basis vectors, the basis vectors can be taken in the notation explicitly and here will be referred simply as \" and \"\".\nNon-normalizable states and non-Hilbert spaces.\nBra\u2013ket notation can be used even if the vector space is not a Hilbert space.\nIn quantum mechanics, it is common practice to write down kets which have infinite norm, i.e. non-normalizable wavefunctions. Examples include states whose wavefunctions are Dirac delta functions or infinite plane waves. These do not, technically, belong to the Hilbert space itself. However, the definition of \"Hilbert space\" can be broadened to accommodate these states (see the Gelfand\u2013Naimark\u2013Segal construction or rigged Hilbert spaces). The bra\u2013ket notation continues to work in an analogous way in this broader context.\nBanach spaces are a different generalization of Hilbert spaces. In a Banach space , the vectors may be notated by kets and the continuous linear functionals by bras. Over any vector space without topology, we may also notate the vectors by kets and the linear functionals by bras. In these more general contexts, the bracket does not have the meaning of an inner product, because the Riesz representation theorem does not apply.\nUsage in quantum mechanics.\nThe mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is based in large part on linear algebra:\nSince virtually every calculation in quantum mechanics involves vectors and linear operators, it can involve, and often does involve, bra\u2013ket notation. A few examples follow:\nSpinless position\u2013space wave function.\nThe Hilbert space of a spin-0 point particle is spanned by a \"position basis\" , where the label extends over the set of all points in position space. This label is the eigenvalue of the position operator acting on such a basis state, formula_62. Since there are an uncountably infinite number of vector components in the basis, this is an uncountably infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The dimensions of the Hilbert space (usually infinite) and position space (usually 1, 2 or 3) are not to be conflated.\nStarting from any ket in this Hilbert space, one may \"define\" a complex scalar function of , known as a wavefunction,\nformula_63\nOn the left-hand side, is a function mapping any point in space to a complex number; on the right-hand side,\nformula_64 \nis a ket consisting of a superposition of kets with relative coefficients specified by that function.\nIt is then customary to define linear operators acting on wavefunctions in terms of linear operators acting on kets, by\nformula_65\nFor instance, the momentum operator formula_66 has the following coordinate representation,\nformula_67\nOne occasionally even encounters an expression such as formula_68, though this is something of an abuse of notation. The differential operator must be understood to be an abstract operator, acting on kets, that has the effect of differentiating wavefunctions once the expression is projected onto the position basis, formula_69\neven though, in the momentum basis, this operator amounts to a mere multiplication operator (by ). That is, to say,\nformula_70\nor\nformula_71\nOverlap of states.\nIn quantum mechanics the expression is typically interpreted as the probability amplitude for the state to collapse into the state . Mathematically, this means the coefficient for the projection of onto . It is also described as the projection of state onto state .\nChanging basis for a spin-1/2 particle.\nA stationary spin- particle has a two-dimensional Hilbert space. One orthonormal basis is:\nformula_72\nwhere is the state with a definite value of the spin operator equal to + and is the state with a definite value of the spin operator equal to \u2212.\nSince these are a basis, \"any\" quantum state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination (i.e., quantum superposition) of these two states:\nformula_73\nwhere and are complex numbers.\nA \"different\" basis for the same Hilbert space is:\nformula_74\ndefined in terms of rather than .\nAgain, \"any\" state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination of these two:\nformula_75\nIn vector form, you might write\nformula_76\ndepending on which basis you are using. In other words, the \"coordinates\" of a vector depend on the basis used.\nThere is a mathematical relationship between formula_77, formula_78, formula_79 and formula_80; see change of basis.\nPitfalls and ambiguous uses.\nThere are some conventions and uses of notation that may be confusing or ambiguous for the non-initiated or early student.\nSeparation of inner product and vectors.\nA cause for confusion is that the notation does not separate the inner-product operation from the notation for a (bra) vector. If a (dual space) bra-vector is constructed as a linear combination of other bra-vectors (for instance when expressing it in some basis) the notation creates some ambiguity and hides mathematical details. We can compare bra\u2013ket notation to using bold for vectors, such as formula_81, and formula_12 for the inner product. Consider the following dual space bra-vector in the basis formula_83:\nformula_84\nIt has to be determined by convention if the complex numbers formula_85 are inside or outside of the inner product, and each convention gives different results.\nformula_86\nformula_87\nReuse of symbols.\nIt is common to use the same symbol for \"labels\" and \"constants\". For example, formula_88, where the symbol formula_89 is used simultaneously as the \"name of the operator\" formula_90, its \"eigenvector\" formula_91 and the associated \"eigenvalue\" formula_89. Sometimes the \"hat\" is also dropped for operators, and one can see notation such as formula_93.\nHermitian conjugate of kets.\nIt is common to see the usage formula_94, where the dagger (formula_95) corresponds to the Hermitian conjugate. This is however not correct in a technical sense, since the ket, formula_96, represents a vector in a complex Hilbert-space formula_97, and the bra, formula_98, is a linear functional on vectors in formula_97. In other words, formula_96 is just a vector, while formula_98 is the combination of a vector and an inner product.\nOperations inside bras and kets.\nThis is done for a fast notation of scaling vectors. For instance, if the vector formula_102 is scaled by formula_103, it may be denoted formula_104. This can be ambiguous since formula_89 is simply a label for a state, and not a mathematical object on which operations can be performed. This usage is more common when denoting vectors as tensor products, where part of the labels are moved outside the designed slot, e.g. formula_106.\nLinear operators.\nLinear operators acting on kets.\nA linear operator is a map that inputs a ket and outputs a ket. (In order to be called \"linear\", it is required to have certain properties.) In other words, if formula_107 is a linear operator and formula_96 is a ket-vector, then formula_109 is another ket-vector.\nIn an formula_110-dimensional Hilbert space, we can impose a basis on the space and represent formula_96 in terms of its coordinates as a formula_112 column vector. Using the same basis for formula_107, it is represented by an formula_114 complex matrix. The ket-vector formula_109 can now be computed by matrix multiplication.\nLinear operators are ubiquitous in the theory of quantum mechanics. For example, observable physical quantities are represented by self-adjoint operators, such as energy or momentum, whereas transformative processes are represented by unitary linear operators such as rotation or the progression of time.\nLinear operators acting on bras.\nOperators can also be viewed as acting on bras \"from the right hand side\". Specifically, if is a linear operator and is a bra, then is another bra defined by the rule\nformula_116\nformula_117\nIn an -dimensional Hilbert space, can be written as a row vector, and (as in the previous section) is an matrix. Then the bra can be computed by normal matrix multiplication.\nIf the same state vector appears on both bra and ket side,\nformula_118\nthen this expression gives the expectation value, or mean or average value, of the observable represented by operator for the physical system in the state .\nOuter products.\nA convenient way to define linear operators on a Hilbert space is given by the outer product: if is a bra and is a ket, the outer product\nformula_119\ndenotes the rank-one operator with the rule \nformula_120\nFor a finite-dimensional vector space, the outer product can be understood as simple matrix multiplication:\nformula_121\nThe outer product is an matrix, as expected for a linear operator.\nOne of the uses of the outer product is to construct projection operators. Given a ket of norm 1, the orthogonal projection onto the subspace spanned by is\nformula_122\nThis is an idempotent in the algebra of observables that acts on the Hilbert space.\nHermitian conjugate operator.\nJust as kets and bras can be transformed into each other (making into ), the element from the dual space corresponding to is , where denotes the Hermitian conjugate (or adjoint) of the operator . In other words,\nformula_123\nIf is expressed as an matrix, then is its conjugate transpose.\nProperties.\nBra\u2013ket notation was designed to facilitate the formal manipulation of linear-algebraic expressions. Some of the properties that allow this manipulation are listed herein. In what follows, and denote arbitrary complex numbers, denotes the complex conjugate of , and denote arbitrary linear operators, and these properties are to hold for any choice of bras and kets.\nAssociativity.\nGiven any expression involving complex numbers, bras, kets, inner products, outer products, and/or linear operators (but not addition), written in bra\u2013ket notation, the parenthetical groupings do not matter (i.e., the associative property holds). For example:\nand so forth. The expressions on the right (with no parentheses whatsoever) are allowed to be written unambiguously \"because\" of the equalities on the left. Note that the associative property does \"not\" hold for expressions that include nonlinear operators, such as the antilinear time reversal operator in physics.\nHermitian conjugation.\nBra\u2013ket notation makes it particularly easy to compute the Hermitian conjugate (also called \"dagger\", and denoted ) of expressions. The formal rules are:\nThese rules are sufficient to formally write the Hermitian conjugate of any such expression; some examples are as follows:\nComposite bras and kets.\nTwo Hilbert spaces and may form a third space by a tensor product. In quantum mechanics, this is used for describing composite systems. If a system is composed of two subsystems described in and respectively, then the Hilbert space of the entire system is the tensor product of the two spaces. (The exception to this is if the subsystems are actually identical particles. In that case, the situation is a little more complicated.)\nIf is a ket in and is a ket in , the tensor product of the two kets is a ket in . This is written in various notations:\nSee quantum entanglement and the EPR paradox for applications of this product.\nThe unit operator.\nConsider a complete orthonormal system (\"basis\"),\nformula_134\nfor a Hilbert space , with respect to the norm from an inner product .\nFrom basic functional analysis, it is known that any ket formula_135 can also be written as\nformula_136\nwith the inner product on the Hilbert space.\nFrom the commutativity of kets with (complex) scalars, it follows that\nformula_137\nmust be the \"identity operator\", which sends each vector to itself.\nThis, then, can be inserted in any expression without affecting its value; for example\nformula_138\nwhere, in the last line, the Einstein summation convention has been used to avoid clutter.\nIn quantum mechanics, it often occurs that little or no information about the inner product of two arbitrary (state) kets is present, while it is still possible to say something about the expansion coefficients and of those vectors with respect to a specific (orthonormalized) basis. In this case, it is particularly useful to insert the unit operator into the bracket one time or more.\nFor more information, see Resolution of the identity,\nformula_139 where formula_140\nSince , plane waves follow, formula_141\nIn his book (1958), Ch. III.20, Dirac defines the \"standard ket\" which, up to a normalization, is the translationally invariant momentum eigenstate formula_142 in the momentum representation, i.e., formula_143. Consequently, the corresponding wavefunction is a constant, formula_144, and \nformula_145 as well as formula_146\nTypically, when all matrix elements of an operator such as formula_147 are available, this resolution serves to reconstitute the full operator,\nformula_148\nNotation used by mathematicians.\nThe object physicists are considering when using bra\u2013ket notation is a Hilbert space (a complete inner product space).\nLet formula_149 be a Hilbert space and a vector in . What physicists would denote by is the vector itself. That is,\nformula_150\nLet be the dual space of . This is the space of linear functionals on . The embedding formula_151 is defined by formula_152, where for every the linear functional formula_153 satisfies for every the functional equation formula_154.\nNotational confusion arises when identifying and with and respectively. This is because of literal symbolic substitutions. Let formula_155 and let . This gives\nformula_156\nOne ignores the parentheses and removes the double bars.\nMoreover, mathematicians usually write the dual entity not at the first place, as the physicists do, but at the second one, and they usually use not an asterisk but an overline (which the physicists reserve for averages and the Dirac spinor adjoint) to denote complex conjugate numbers; i.e., for scalar products mathematicians usually write\nformula_157\nwhereas physicists would write for the same quantity\nformula_158"}
{"id": "4543", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4543", "title": "Blue", "text": "Blue is one of the three primary colours in the RYB colour model (traditional colour theory), as well as in the RGB (additive) colour model. It lies between violet and cyan on the spectrum of visible light. The term \"blue\" generally describes colours perceived by humans observing light with a dominant wavelength that's between approximately 450 and 495\u00a0nanometres. Most blues contain a slight mixture of other colours; azure contains some green, while ultramarine contains some violet. The clear daytime sky and the deep sea appear blue because of an optical effect known as Rayleigh scattering. An optical effect called the Tyndall effect explains blue eyes. Distant objects appear more blue because of another optical effect called aerial perspective.\nBlue has been an important colour in art and decoration since ancient times. The semi-precious stone lapis lazuli was used in ancient Egypt for jewellery and ornament and later, in the Renaissance, to make the pigment ultramarine, the most expensive of all pigments. In the eighth century Chinese artists used cobalt blue to colour fine blue and white porcelain. In the Middle Ages, European artists used it in the windows of cathedrals. Europeans wore clothing coloured with the vegetable dye woad until it was replaced by the finer indigo from America. In the 19th century, synthetic blue dyes and pigments gradually replaced organic dyes and mineral pigments. Dark blue became a common colour for military uniforms and later, in the late 20th century, for business suits. Because blue has commonly been associated with harmony, it was chosen as the colour of the flags of the United Nations and the European Union.\nIn the United States and Europe, blue is the colour that both men and women are most likely to choose as their favourite, with at least one recent survey showing the same across several other countries, including China, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Past surveys in the US and Europe have found that blue is the colour most commonly associated with harmony, confidence, masculinity, knowledge, intelligence, calmness, distance, infinity, the imagination, cold, and sadness.\nEtymology and linguistics.\nThe modern English word \"blue\" comes from Middle English or , from the Old French , a word of Germanic origin, related to the Old High German word (meaning 'shimmering, lustrous'). In heraldry, the word \"azure\" is used for \"blue\".\nIn Russian, Spanish, Mongolian, Irish, and some other languages, there is no single word for blue, but rather different words for light blue (, ; ) and dark blue (, ; ) (see Colour term).\nSeveral languages, including Japanese and Lakota Sioux, use the same word to describe blue and green. For example, in Vietnamese, the colour of both tree leaves and the sky is . In Japanese, the word for blue (, ) is often used for colours that English speakers would refer to as green, such as the colour of a traffic signal meaning \"go\". In Lakota, the word is used for both blue and green, the two colours not being distinguished in older Lakota (for more on this subject, see Blue\u2013green distinction in language).\nLinguistic research indicates that languages do not begin by having a word for the colour blue. Colour names often developed individually in natural languages, typically beginning with black and white (or dark and light), and then adding red, and only much later \u2013 usually as the last main category of colour accepted in a language \u2013 adding the colour blue, probably when blue pigments could be manufactured reliably in the culture using that language.\nOptics and colour theory.\nThe term \"blue\" generally describes colours perceived by humans observing light with a dominant wavelength between approximately 450 and 495\u00a0nanometres. Blues with a higher frequency and thus a shorter wavelength gradually look more violet, while those with a lower frequency and a longer wavelength gradually appear more green. Purer blues are in the middle of this range, e.g., around 470\u00a0nanometres.\nIsaac Newton included blue as one of the seven colours in his first description of the visible spectrum. He chose seven colours because that was the number of notes in the musical scale, which he believed was related to the optical spectrum. He included indigo, the hue between blue and violet, as one of the separate colours, though today it is usually considered a hue of blue.\nIn painting and traditional colour theory, blue is one of the three primary colours of pigments (red, yellow, blue), which can be mixed to form a wide gamut of colours. Red and blue mixed together form violet, blue and yellow together form green. Mixing all three primary colours together produces a dark brown. From the Renaissance onward, painters used this system to create their colours (see RYB colour model).\nThe RYB model was used for colour printing by Jacob Christoph Le Blon as early as 1725. Later, printers discovered that more accurate colours could be created by using combinations of cyan, magenta, yellow, and black ink, put onto separate inked plates and then overlaid one at a time onto paper. This method could produce almost all the colours in the spectrum with reasonable accuracy.\nOn the HSV colour wheel, the complement of blue is yellow; that is, a colour corresponding to an equal mixture of red and green light. On a colour wheel based on traditional colour theory (RYB) where blue was considered a primary colour, its complementary colour is considered to be orange (based on the Munsell colour wheel).\nLED.\nIn 1993, high-brightness blue LEDs were demonstrated by Shuji Nakamura of Nichia Corporation. In parallel, Isamu Akasaki and Hiroshi Amano of Nagoya University were working on a new development which revolutionized LED lighting.\nNakamura was awarded the 2006 Millennium Technology Prize for his invention.\nNakamura, Hiroshi Amano and Isamu Akasaki were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2014 for the invention of an efficient blue LED.\nLasers.\nLasers emitting in the blue region of the spectrum became widely available to the public in 2010 with the release of inexpensive high-powered 445\u2013447\u00a0nm laser diode technology. Previously the blue wavelengths were accessible only through DPSS which are comparatively expensive and inefficient, but still widely used by scientists for applications including optogenetics, Raman spectroscopy, and particle image velocimetry, due to their superior beam quality. Blue gas lasers are also still commonly used for holography, DNA sequencing, optical pumping, among other scientific and medical applications.\nShades and variations.\nBlue is the colour of light between violet and cyan on the visible spectrum. Hues of blue include indigo and ultramarine, closer to violet; pure blue, without any mixture of other colours; Azure, which is a lighter shade of blue, similar to the colour of the sky; Cyan, which is midway in the spectrum between blue and green, and the other blue-greens such as turquoise, teal, and aquamarine.\nBlue also varies in shade or tint; darker shades of blue contain black or grey, while lighter tints contain white. Darker shades of blue include ultramarine, cobalt blue, navy blue, and Prussian blue; while lighter tints include sky blue, azure, and Egyptian blue (for a more complete list see the List of colours).\nAs a structural colour.\nIn nature, many blue phenomena arise from structural colouration, the result of interference between reflections from two or more surfaces of thin films, combined with refraction as light enters and exits such films. The geometry then determines that at certain angles, the light reflected from both surfaces interferes constructively, while at other angles, the light interferes destructively. Diverse colours therefore appear despite the absence of colourants.\nColourants.\nArtificial blues.\nEgyptian blue, the first artificial pigment, was produced in the third millennium BC in Ancient Egypt. It is produced by heating pulverized sand, copper, and natron. It was used in tomb paintings and funereal objects to protect the dead in their afterlife. Prior to the 1700s, blue colourants for artwork were mainly based on lapis lazuli and the related mineral ultramarine. A breakthrough occurred in 1709 when German druggist and pigment maker Johann Jacob Diesbach discovered Prussian blue. The new blue arose from experiments involving heating dried blood with iron sulphides and was initially called Berliner Blau. By 1710 it was being used by the French painter Antoine Watteau, and later his successor Nicolas Lancret. It became immensely popular for the manufacture of wallpaper, and in the 19th century was widely used by French impressionist painters. Beginning in the 1820s, Prussian blue was imported into Japan through the port of Nagasaki. It was called \"bero-ai\", or Berlin blue, and it became popular because it did not fade like traditional Japanese blue pigment, \"ai-gami\", made from the dayflower. Prussian blue was used by both Hokusai, in his wave paintings, and Hiroshige.\nIn 1799 a French chemist, Louis Jacques Th\u00e9nard, made a synthetic cobalt blue pigment which became immensely popular with painters.\nIn 1824 the Societ\u00e9 pour l'Encouragement d'Industrie in France offered a prize for the invention of an artificial ultramarine which could rival the natural colour made from lapis lazuli. The prize was won in 1826 by a chemist named Jean Baptiste Guimet, but he refused to reveal the formula of his colour. In 1828, another scientist, Christian Gmelin then a professor of chemistry in T\u00fcbingen, found the process and published his formula. This was the beginning of new industry to manufacture artificial ultramarine, which eventually almost completely replaced the natural product.\nIn 1878 German chemists synthesized indigo. This product rapidly replaced natural indigo, wiping out vast farms growing indigo. It is now the blue of blue jeans. As the pace of organic chemistry accelerated, a succession of synthetic blue dyes were discovered including Indanthrone blue, which had even greater resistance to fading during washing or in the sun, and copper phthalocyanine.\nDyes for textiles and food.\n Woad and true indigo were once used but since the early 1900s, all indigo is synthetic. Produced on an industrial scale, indigo is the blue of blue jeans. Blue dyes are organic compounds, both synthetic and natural.\nFor food, the triarylmethane dye Brilliant blue FCF is used for candies. The search continues for stable, natural blue dyes suitable for the food industry.\nVarious raspberry-flavoured foods are dyed blue. This was done to distinguish strawberry, watermelon and raspberry-flavoured foods. The company ICEE used Blue No. 1 for their blue raspberry ICEEs. \nPigments for painting and glass.\nBlue pigments were once produced from minerals, especially lapis lazuli and its close relative ultramarine. These minerals were crushed, ground into powder, and then mixed with a quick-drying binding agent, such as egg yolk (tempera painting); or with a slow-drying oil, such as linseed oil, for oil painting. Two inorganic but synthetic blue pigments are cerulean blue (primarily cobalt(II) stanate: ) and Prussian blue (milori blue: primarily ). The chromophore in blue glass and glazes is cobalt(II). Diverse cobalt(II) salts such as cobalt carbonate or cobalt(II) aluminate are mixed with the silica prior to firing. The cobalt occupies sites otherwise filled with silicon.\nInks.\nMethyl blue is the dominant blue pigment in inks used in pens. Blueprinting involves the production of Prussian blue in situ.\nInorganic compounds.\nCertain metal ions characteristically form blue solutions or blue salts. Of some practical importance, cobalt is used to make the deep blue glazes and glasses. It substitutes for silicon or aluminum ions in these materials. Cobalt is the blue chromophore in stained glass windows, such as those in Gothic cathedrals and in Chinese porcelain beginning in the Tang dynasty. Copper(II) (Cu2+) also produces many blue compounds, including the commercial algicide copper(II) sulfate (CuSO4.5H2O). Similarly, vanadyl salts and solutions are often blue, e.g. vanadyl sulfate.\nIn nature.\nSky and sea.\nWhen sunlight passes through the atmosphere, the blue wavelengths are scattered more widely by the oxygen and nitrogen molecules, and more blue comes to our eyes. This effect is called Rayleigh scattering, after Lord Rayleigh and confirmed by Albert Einstein in 1911.\nThe sea is seen as blue for largely the same reason: the water absorbs the longer wavelengths of red and reflects and scatters the blue, which comes to the eye of the viewer. The deeper the observer goes, the darker the blue becomes. In the open sea, only about 1% of light penetrates to a depth of 200\u00a0metres (see underwater and euphotic depth).\nThe colour of the sea is also affected by the colour of the sky, reflected by particles in the water; and by algae and plant life in the water, which can make it look green; or by sediment, which can make it look brown.\nThe farther away an object is, the more blue it often appears to the eye. For example, mountains in the distance often appear blue. This is the effect of atmospheric perspective; the farther an object is away from the viewer, the less contrast there is between the object and its background colour, which is usually blue. In a painting where different parts of the composition are blue, green and red, the blue will appear to be more distant, and the red closer to the viewer. The cooler a colour is, the more distant it seems. Blue light is scattered more than other wavelengths by the gases in the atmosphere, hence our \"blue planet\".\nMinerals.\nSome of the most desirable gems are blue, including sapphire and tanzanite. Compounds of copper(II) are characteristically blue and so are many copper-containing minerals.\nAzurite (, with a deep blue colour, was once employed in medieval years, but it is unstable pigment, losing its colour especially under dry conditions. Lapis lazuli, mined in Afghanistan for more than three thousand years, was used for jewelry and ornaments, and later was crushed and powdered and used as a pigment. The more it was ground, the lighter the blue colour became. Natural ultramarine, made by grinding lapis lazuli into a fine powder, was the finest available blue pigment in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It was extremely expensive, and in Italian Renaissance art, it was often reserved for the robes of the Virgin Mary.\nPlants and fungi.\nIntense efforts have focused on blue flowers and the possibility that natural blue colourants could be used as food dyes. Commonly, blue colours in plants are anthocyanins: \"the largest group of water-soluble pigments found widespread in the plant kingdom\". In the few plants that exploit structural colouration, brilliant colours are produced by structures within cells. The most brilliant blue colouration known in any living tissue is found in the marble berries of \"Pollia condensata\", where a spiral structure of cellulose fibrils scattering blue light. The fruit of quandong (\"Santalum acuminatum\") can appear blue owing to the same effect.\nAnimals.\nBlue-pigmented animals are relatively rare. Examples of which include butterflies of the genus \"Nessaea\", where blue is created by pterobilin. Other blue pigments of animal origin include phorcabilin, used by other butterflies in \"Graphium\" and \"Papilio\" (specifically \"P. phorcas\" and \"P. weiskei\"), and sarpedobilin, which is used by \"Graphium sarpedon\". Blue-pigmented organelles, known as \"cyanosomes\", exist in the chromatophores of at least two fish species, the mandarin fish and the picturesque dragonet. More commonly, blueness in animals is a structural colouration; an optical interference effect induced by organized nanometre-sized scales or fibres. Examples include the plumage of several birds like the blue jay and indigo bunting, the scales of butterflies like the morpho butterfly, collagen fibres in the skin of some species of monkey and opossum, and the iridophore cells in some fish and frogs.\nEyes.\nBlue eyes do not actually contain any blue pigment. Eye colour is determined by two factors: the pigmentation of the eye's iris and the scattering of light by the turbid medium in the stroma of the iris. In humans, the pigmentation of the iris varies from light brown to black. The appearance of blue, green, and hazel eyes results from the Tyndall scattering of light in the stroma, an optical effect similar to what accounts for the blueness of the sky. The irises of the eyes of people with blue eyes contain less dark melanin than those of people with brown eyes, which means that they absorb less short-wavelength blue light, which is instead reflected out to the viewer. Eye colour also varies depending on the lighting conditions, especially for lighter-coloured eyes.\nBlue eyes are most common in Ireland, the Baltic Sea area and Northern Europe, and are also found in Eastern, Central, and Southern Europe. Blue eyes are also found in parts of Western Asia, most notably in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, and Iran. In Estonia, 99% of people have blue eyes. In Denmark in 1978, only 8% of the population had brown eyes, though through immigration, today that number is about 11%. In Germany, about 75% have blue eyes.\nIn the United States, as of 2006, 1 out of every 6 people, or 16.6% of the total population, and 22.3% of the white population, have blue eyes, compared with about half of Americans born in 1900, and a third of Americans born in 1950. Blue eyes are becoming less common among American children. In the US, males are 3\u20135% more likely to have blue eyes than females.\nHistory.\nIn the ancient world.\nAs early as the 7th millennium BC, lapis lazuli was mined in the Sar-i Sang mines, in Shortugai, and in other mines in Badakhshan province in northeast Afghanistan.\nLapis lazuli artifacts, dated to 7570 BC, have been found at Bhirrana, which is the oldest site of Indus Valley civilisation. Lapis was highly valued by the Indus Valley Civilisation (7570\u20131900 BC). Lapis beads have been found at Neolithic burials in Mehrgarh, the Caucasus, and as far away as Mauritania. It was used in the funeral mask of Tutankhamun (1341\u20131323 BC).\nA term for Blue was relatively rare in many forms of ancient art and decoration, and even in ancient literature. The Ancient Greek poets described the sea as green, brown or \"the colour of wine\". The colour is mentioned several times in the Hebrew Bible as 'tekhelet'. Reds, blacks, browns, and ochres are found in cave paintings from the Upper Paleolithic period, but not blue. Blue was also not used for dyeing fabric until long after red, ochre, pink, and purple. This is probably due to the perennial difficulty of making blue dyes and pigments. On the other hand, the rarity of blue pigment made it even more valuable.\nThe earliest known blue dyes were made from plants \u2013 woad in Europe, indigo in Asia and Africa, while blue pigments were made from minerals, usually either lapis lazuli or azurite, and required more. Blue glazes posed still another challenge since the early blue dyes and pigments were not thermally robust. In , the blue glaze Egyptian blue was introduced for ceramics, as well as many other objects. The Greeks imported indigo dye from India, calling it indikon, and they painted with Egyptian blue. Blue was not one of the four primary colours for Greek painting described by Pliny the Elder (red, yellow, black, and white). For the Romans, blue was the colour of mourning, as well as the colour of barbarians. The Celts and Germans reportedly dyed their faces blue to frighten their enemies, and tinted their hair blue when they grew old. The Romans made extensive use of indigo and Egyptian blue pigment, as evidenced, in part, by frescos in Pompeii.\nThe Romans had many words for varieties of blue, including , , , , , , , and , but two words, both of foreign origin, became the most enduring; , from the Germanic word \"blau\", which eventually became \"bleu\" or blue; and , from the Arabic word , which became azure.\nBlue was widely used in the decoration of churches in the Byzantine Empire. By contrast, in the Islamic world, blue was of secondary to green, believed to be the favourite colour of the Prophet Mohammed. At certain times in Moorish Spain and other parts of the Islamic world, blue was the colour worn by Christians and Jews, because only Muslims were allowed to wear white and green.\nIn the Middle Ages.\nIn the art and life of Europe during the early Middle Ages, blue played a minor role. This changed dramatically between 1130 and 1140 in Paris, when the Abbe Suger rebuilt the Saint Denis Basilica. Suger considered that light was the visible manifestation of the Holy Spirit. He installed stained glass windows coloured with cobalt, which, combined with the light from the red glass, filled the church with a bluish violet light. The church became the marvel of the Christian world, and the colour became known as the . In the years that followed even more elegant blue stained glass windows were installed in other churches, including at Chartres Cathedral and Sainte-Chapelle in Paris.\nIn the 12th century the Roman Catholic Church dictated that painters in Italy (and the rest of Europe consequently) to paint the Virgin Mary with blue, which became associated with holiness, humility and virtue. In medieval paintings, blue was used to attract the attention of the viewer to the Virgin Mary. Paintings of the mythical King Arthur began to show him dressed in blue. The coat of arms of the kings of France became an azure or light blue shield, sprinkled with golden fleur-de-lis or lilies. Blue had come from obscurity to become the royal colour.\nRenaissance through 18th century.\nBlue came into wider use beginning in the Renaissance, when artists began to paint the world with perspective, depth, shadows, and light from a single source. In Renaissance paintings, artists tried to create harmonies between blue and red, lightening the blue with lead white paint and adding shadows and highlights. Raphael was a master of this technique, carefully balancing the reds and the blues so no one colour dominated the picture.\nUltramarine was the most prestigious blue of the Renaissance, being more expensive than gold. Wealthy art patrons commissioned works with the most expensive blues possible. In 1616 Richard Sackville commissioned a portrait of himself by Isaac Oliver with three different blues, including ultramarine pigment for his stockings.\nAn industry for the manufacture of fine blue and white pottery began in the 14th century in Jingdezhen, China, using white Chinese porcelain decorated with patterns of cobalt blue, imported from Persia. It was first made for the family of the Emperor of China, then was exported around the world, with designs for export adapted to European subjects and tastes. The Chinese blue style was also adapted by Dutch craftsmen in Delft and English craftsmen in Staffordshire in the 17th-18th centuries. in the 18th century, blue and white porcelains were produced by Josiah Wedgwood and other British craftsmen.\n19th-20th century.\nThe early 19th century saw the ancestor of the modern blue business suit, created by Beau Brummel (1776\u20131840), who set fashion at the London Court. It also saw the invention of blue jeans, a highly popular form of workers's costume, invented in 1853 by Jacob W. Davis who used metal rivets to strengthen blue denim work clothing in the California gold fields. The invention was funded by San Francisco entrepreneur Levi Strauss, and spread around the world.\nRecognizing the emotional power of blue, many artists made it the central element of paintings in the 19th and 20th centuries. They included Pablo Picasso, Pavel Kuznetsov and the Blue Rose art group, and Kandinsky and Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) school. Henri Matisse expressed deep emotions with blue, \"A certain blue penetrates your soul.\" In the second half of the 20th century, painters of the abstract expressionist movement use blues to inspire ideas and emotions. Painter Mark Rothko observed that colour was \"only an instrument;\" his interest was \"in expressing human emotions tragedy, ecstasy, doom, and so on\".\nIn society and culture.\nUniforms.\nIn the 17th century. The Prince-Elector of Brandenburg, Frederick William I of Prussia, chose Prussian blue as the new colour of Prussian military uniforms, because it was made with Woad, a local crop, rather than Indigo, which was produced by the colonies of Brandenburg's rival, England. It was worn by the German army until World War I, with the exception of the soldiers of Bavaria, who wore sky-blue.\nIn 1748, the Royal Navy adopted a dark shade of blue for the uniform of officers. It was first known as marine blue, now known as navy blue. The militia organized by George Washington selected blue and buff, the colours of the British Whig Party. Blue continued to be the colour of the field uniform of the US Army until 1902, and is still the colour of the dress uniform.\nIn the 19th century, police in the United Kingdom, including the Metropolitan Police and the City of London Police also adopted a navy blue uniform. Similar traditions were embraced in France and Austria. It was also adopted at about the same time for the uniforms of the officers of the New York City Police Department.\nGender.\nBlue is used to represent males. Beginning as a trend the mid-19th century and applying primarily to clothing, gendered associations with blue became more widespread from the 1950s. The colour became associated with males after the second world war.\nSports.\nIn sports, blue is widely represented in uniforms in part because the majority of national teams wear the colours of their national flag. For example, the national men's football team of France are known as \"Les Bleus\" (the Blues). Similarly, Argentina, Italy, and Uruguay wear blue shirts. The Asian Football Confederation and the Oceania Football Confederation use blue text on their logos. Blue is well represented in baseball (Blue Jays), basketball, and American football, and Ice hockey. The Indian national cricket team wears blue uniform during One day international matches, as such the team is also referred to as \"Men in Blue\".\nPolitics.\nUnlike red or green, blue was not strongly associated with any particular country, religion or political movement. As the colour of harmony, it was chosen as the colour for the flags of the United Nations, the European Union, and NATO. In politics, blue is often used as the colour of conservative parties, contrasting with the red associated with left-wing parties. Some conservative parties that use the colour blue include the Conservative Party (UK), Conservative Party of Canada, Liberal Party of Australia, Liberal Party of Brazil, and Likud of Israel. However, in some countries, blue is not associated main conservative party. In the United States, the liberal Democratic Party is associated with blue, while the conservative Republican Party with red. US states which have been won by the Democratic Party in four consecutive presidential elections are termed \"blue states\", while those that have been won by the Republican Party are termed \"red states\". South Korea also uses this colour model, with the Democratic Party on the left using blue and the People Power Party on the right using red."}
{"id": "4544", "revid": "33886680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4544", "title": "Blind Willie McTell", "text": "Blind Willie McTell (born William Samuel McTier; May 5, 1898 \u2013 August 19, 1959) was an American Piedmont blues and ragtime singer, songwriter and guitarist. He played in a fluid, syncopated finger picking guitar style common among many East Coast, Piedmont blues players. Like his Atlanta contemporaries, he came to use twelve-string guitars exclusively. McTell was also adept at slide guitar, unusual among ragtime bluesmen. He sang in a smooth and often laid-back tenor which differed greatly from the harsher voices of many Delta bluesmen such as Charley Patton. He performed in various musical styles including blues, ragtime, religious music, and hokum and recorded more than 120 titles during fourteen recording sessions.\nHe was born William Samuel McTier in the Happy Valley community outside Thomson, Georgia. In his recordings of \"Lay Some Flowers on My Grave\", \"Lord, Send Me an Angel\" and \"Statesboro Blues\", he pronounces his surname \"MacTell\" with the stress on the first syllable. He learned to play the guitar in his early teens from his mother and from relatives and neighbors in Statesboro where his family had moved. He was a popular performer on the streets of several Georgia cities, including Augusta and Atlanta where he made his first recordings, eight songs, for Victor Records in 1927 including \"Statesboro Blues.\" . He never had a major hit record but he had a prolific recording career with different labels and under different names in the 1920s and '30s. McTell was active in the 1940s and '50s playing at house rent parties, on street corners, at fish fries, on the medicine and tent show circuit, playing on the streets of Atlanta, often with his longtime friend, Curley Weaver as well as hoboing through the South and East. He made his last recordings in 1956 at an impromptu session recorded by an Atlanta record store owner. He died three years later, having lived for years with diabetes and alcoholism. Despite his lack of commercial success, he was one of the few blues musicians of his generation who continued to actively play and record during the 1940s and '50s. He did not live to see the American folk music revival when many other bluesmen were rediscovered.\nBiography.\nMost sources give the date of his birth as 1898 but researchers Bob Eagle and Eric LeBlanc suggest 1903 on the basis of his entry in the 1910 census. McTell was born blind in one eye and lost his remaining vision by late childhood. He attended schools for the blind in Georgia, New York and Michigan and showed proficiency in music from an early age, learning to read and write music in braille, first playing the harmonica and accordion and turning to the six-string guitar in his early teens. His family was rich in music; both of his parents and an uncle played the guitar and he and bluesman and gospel pioneer Thomas A. Dorsey were cousins. \nMcTell's father left the family when Willie was young. After his mother died, in the 1920s, he left his hometown and became an itinerant songster. Like Lead Belly, another songster who began his career on the streets, McTell favored the twelve-string guitar whose greater volume made it suitable for outdoor playing. In the years before World War II, McTell traveled and performed widely, recording for several labels under different names: Blind Willie McTell for Victorand Decca, Blind Sammie for Columbia, Georgia Bill for Okeh, Hot Shot Willie for Victor, Blind Willie for Vocalion and Bluebird, Barrelhouse Sammie for Atlantic, and Pig &amp; Whistle Red for Regal Records. The name \"Pig &amp; Whistle\" was a reference to a chain of barbecue restaurants in Atlanta; McTell often played for tips in the parking lot of a Pig 'n Whistle restaurant. He also played behind a nearby building that later became Ray Lee's Blue Lantern Lounge. \nMcTell married Ruth Kate Williams, now better known as Kate McTell, in 1934. She accompanied him on stage and on several recordings before becoming a nurse in 1939. For most of their marriage, from 1942 until his death, they lived apart, she in Fort Gordon, near Augusta, and he working around Atlanta.\nIn 1940, John Lomax, a Classics professor at the University of Texas at Austin and his wife, Ruby Terrill Lomax, interviewed and recorded McTell for the Archive of American Folk Song of the Library of Congress in a two-hour session held in their hotel room in Atlanta. These recordings captured McTell's distinctive musical style which bridges the gap between the country blues of the early part of the 20th century and the more conventionally melodious, ragtime-influenced East Coast, Piedmont blues sound. The Lomaxes also elicited from him traditional songs (such as \"The Boll Weevil\" and \"John Henry\") and spirituals (such as \"Amazing Grace\"), which were not part of his usual repertoire. In the interview, John Lomax is heard asking if McTell knows any \"complaining\" songs (an earlier term for protest songs), to which he replies somewhat uncomfortably and evasively that he does not. The Library of Congress paid McTell $10, the equivalent of $154.56 in 2011, for this two-hour session. The material from this 1940 session was issued in 1960 as an LP and later as a CD under the somewhat misleading title \"The Complete Library of Congress Recordings\" notwithstanding the fact that it omitted some of Lomax's interactions showing kindness to him and entirely omitting the contributions of Ruby Terrill Lomax.\nAhmet Ertegun visited Atlanta in 1949 in search of blues artists for this new Atlantic Records label and after finding McTell playing on the street, arranged a recording session. Some of the songs were released on 78 rpm discs but sold poorly. The complete session was released in 1972 as \"Atlanta Twelve-String\". McTell recorded for Regal Records in 1949 but these recordings also met with less commercial success than his previous works. He continued to perform around Atlanta but his career was cut short by ill health, mostly due to diabetes and alcoholism. In 1956, an Atlanta record store owner, Edward Rhodes, discovered McTell playing in the street for quarters and enticed him into his store with a bottle of bourbon where he captured 13 songs on a tape recorder which Prestige Records/Bluesville Records posthumously released as his \"Last Session\". From 1957 to 1959, McTell was a preacher at Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Atlanta.\nBlind Willie McTell died of a stroke in Milledgeville, Georgia, in 1959, at the age of 61. He was buried at Jones Grove Church, near Thomson, Georgia, his birthplace. Author David Fulmer, who in 1992 was working on \"Blind Willie's Blues\", a documentary about McTell, arranged to have a blue marble gravestone erected on his resting place. McTell was inducted into the Blues Foundation's Blues Hall of Fame in 1981 and the Georgia Music Hall of Fame in 1990.\nInfluence.\n McTell's influence extended over a wide variety of artists. His most famous song, \"Statesboro Blues\" was adapted by Taj Mahal with Jesse Ed Davis on slide guitar, then covered and frequently performed by the Allman Brothers Band. It also shows up on Canned Heat's \"Goin' Up the Country\" album. A short list of some of the artists who have performed the song includes David Bromberg, Dave Van Ronk, The Devil Makes Three, Chris Smither and Ralph McTell, who changed his name because he liked the song. Ry Cooder covered McTell's \"Married Man's a Fool\" on his 1973 album, \"Paradise and Lunch\". Jack White, of the White Stripes, considers McTell an influence; the White Stripes album \"De Stijl\" (2000) is dedicated to him and features a cover of his song \"Southern Can Is Mine\". The White Stripes also covered McTell's \"Lord, Send Me an Angel\", releasing it as a single in 2000. In 2013, Jack White's Third Man Records teamed up with Document Records to issue \"The Complete Recorded Works in Chronological Order of Charley Patton, Blind Willie McTell and the Mississippi Sheiks\".\nBob Dylan paid tribute to McTell on at least four occasions. In his 1965 song \"Highway 61 Revisited\", the second verse begins, \"Georgia Sam, he had a bloody nose\", an allusion to one of McTell's many recording names (Note: there is no evidence that he used this name on any recordings). Dylan's song \"Blind Willie McTell\" was recorded in 1983 and released in 1991 on \"The Bootleg Series Volumes 1-3\". Dylan also recorded covers of McTell's \"Broke Down Engine\" and \"Delia\" on his 1993 album, \"World Gone Wrong\"; Dylan's song \"Po' Boy\", on the album \"Love and Theft\" (2001), contains the lyric \"had to go to Florida dodging them Georgia laws\", which comes from McTell's \"Kill It Kid\".\nThe Bath-based band Kill It Kid is named after the song of the same title.\nA billiards bar and concert venue in Statesboro, Georgia, was named Blind Willie's in the 1990s. The venue is now closed but remains a fond memory for Georgia Southern University students at the time.\nAnother Blind Willie's bar in the Virginia-Highlands neighborhood of Atlanta named after McTell that features blues musicians and bands. The Blind Willie McTell Blues Festival is held annually in Thomson, Georgia.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n 3. In 1996, novelist and former music journalist David Fulmer released \"Blind Willie's Blues\", a 53-minute documentary about McTell\u2019s life, times, and music, with interviews with African-American history professor Daphne Duval Harrison, blues legend Taj Mahal, guitar master Stefan Grossman, Atlantic Records founder Ahmet Ertegun, McTell's former brother-in-law Rev. A.J. Williams, and Edward Rhodes, who produced McTell's \"Last Session\" recording. In late 2023, the film was remastered by the Southeastern Folklife Collection at Valdosta State University and is currently streaming on YouTube."}
{"id": "4545", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4545", "title": "BDSM", "text": "BDSM is a variety of often erotic practices or roleplaying involving bondage, discipline, dominance and submission, sadomasochism, and other related interpersonal dynamics. Given the wide range of practices, some of which may be engaged in by people who do not consider themselves to be practising BDSM, inclusion in the BDSM community or subculture often is said to depend on self-identification and shared experience.\nThe initialism \"BDSM\" is first recorded in a Usenet post from 1991, and is interpreted as a combination of the abbreviations B/D (Bondage and Discipline), D/s (Dominance and submission), and S/M (Sadism and Masochism). \"BDSM\" is now used as a catch-all phrase covering a wide range of activities, forms of interpersonal relationships, and distinct subcultures. BDSM communities generally welcome anyone with a non-normative streak who identifies with the community; this may include cross-dressers, body modification enthusiasts, animal roleplayers, rubber fetishists, and others.\nActivities and relationships in BDSM are often characterized by the participants' taking on roles that are complementary and involve inequality of power; thus, the idea of informed consent of both the partners is essential. The terms \"submissive\" and \"dominant\" are often used to distinguish these roles: the dominant partner (\"dom\") takes psychological control over the submissive (\"sub\"). The terms \"top\" and \"bottom\" are also used; the top is the instigator of an action while the bottom is the receiver of the action. The two sets of terms are subtly different: for example, someone may choose to act as bottom to another person, for example, by being whipped, purely recreationally, without any implication of being psychologically dominated, and submissives may be ordered to massage their dominant partners. Although the bottom carries out the action and the top receives it, they have not necessarily switched roles.\nThe abbreviations \"sub\" and \"dom\" are frequently used instead of \"submissive\" and \"dominant\". Sometimes the female-specific terms \"mistress\", \"domme\", and \"dominatrix\" are used to describe a dominant woman, instead of the sometimes gender-neutral term \"dom\". Individuals who change between top/dominant and bottom/submissive roles\u2014whether from relationship to relationship or within a given relationship\u2014are called \"switches\". The precise definition of roles and self-identification is a common subject of debate among BDSM participants.\nFundamentals.\n\"BDSM\" is an umbrella term for certain kinds of erotic behaviour between consenting adults, encompassing various subcultures. Terms for roles vary widely among the subcultures. \"Top\" and \"dominant\" are widely used for those partner(s) in the relationship or activity who are, respectively, the physically active or controlling participants. \"Bottom\" and \"submissive\" are widely used for those partner(s) in the relationship or activity who are, respectively, the physically receptive or controlled participants. The interaction between tops and bottoms\u2014where physical or mental control of the bottom is surrendered to the top\u2014is sometimes known as \"power exchange\", whether in the context of an encounter or a relationship.\nBDSM actions can often take place during a specific period of time agreed to by both parties, referred to as \"play\", a \"scene\", or a \"session\". Participants usually derive pleasure from this, even though many of the practices\u2014such as inflicting pain or humiliation or being restrained\u2014would be unpleasant under other circumstances. Explicit sexual activity, such as sexual penetration, may occur within a session, but is not essential. For legal reasons, such explicit sexual interaction is seen only rarely in public play spaces and is sometimes banned by the rules of a party or playspace. Whether it is a public \"playspace\"\u2014ranging from a party at an established community dungeon to a hosted play \"zone\" at a nightclub or social event\u2014the parameters of allowance can vary. Some have a policy of panties/nipple sticker for women (underwear for men) and some allow full nudity with explicit sexual acts.\nThe fundamental principles for the exercise of BDSM require that it be performed with the informed consent of all parties. Since the 1980s, many practitioners and organizations have adopted the motto (originally from the statement of purpose of GMSMA\u2014a gay SM activist organization) \"safe, sane and consensual\" (\"SSC\"), which means that everything is based on safe activities, that all participants are of sufficiently sound mind to consent, and that all participants do consent. Mutual consent makes a clear legal and ethical distinction between BDSM and such crimes as sexual assault and domestic violence.\nSome BDSM practitioners prefer a code of behaviour that differs from SSC. Described as \"risk-aware consensual kink\" (RACK), this code shows a preference for a style in which the \"individual\" responsibility of the involved parties is emphasized more strongly, with each participant being responsible for their own well-being. Advocates of RACK argue that SSC can hamper discussion of risk because no activity is truly \"safe\", and that discussion of even low-risk possibilities is necessary for truly informed consent. They further argue that setting a discrete line between \"safe\" and \"not-safe\" activities ideologically denies consenting adults the right to evaluate risks versus rewards for themselves; that some adults will be drawn to certain activities regardless of the risk; and that BDSM play\u2014particularly higher-risk play or edgeplay\u2014should be treated with the same regard as extreme sports, with both respect and the demand that practitioners educate themselves and practice the higher-risk activities to decrease risk. RACK may be seen as focusing primarily upon awareness and informed consent, rather than accepted safe practices.\nConsent is the most important criterion. The consent and compliance for a sadomasochistic situation can be granted only by people who can judge the potential results. For their consent, they must have relevant information (the extent to which the scene will go, potential risks, if a safeword will be used, what that is, and so on) at hand and the necessary mental capacity to judge. The resulting consent and understanding is occasionally summarized in a written \"contract\", which is an agreement of what can and cannot take place.\nBDSM play is usually structured such that it is possible for the consenting partner to withdraw their consent at any point during a scene; for example, by using a safeword that was agreed on in advance. Use of the agreed safeword (or occasionally a \"safe symbol\" such as dropping a ball or ringing a bell, especially when speech is restricted) is seen by some as an explicit withdrawal of consent. Failure to honor a safeword is considered serious misconduct and could constitute a crime, depending on the relevant law, since the bottom or top has explicitly revoked their consent to any actions that follow the use of the safeword. For other scenes, particularly in established relationships, a safeword may be agreed to signify a warning (\"this is getting too intense\") rather than explicit withdrawal of consent; and a few choose not to use a safeword at all.\nTerminology and subtypes.\nThe initialism \"BDSM\" stands for:\nThese terms replaced \"sadomasochism\", as they more broadly cover BDSM activities and focus on the submissive roles instead of psychological pain. The model is only an attempt at phenomenological differentiation. Individual tastes and preferences in the area of human sexuality may overlap among these areas.\nUnder the initialism BDSM, these psychological and physiological facets are also included:\nThe term \"bondage\" describes the practice of physical restraint. Bondage is usually, but not always, a sexual practice. While bondage is a very popular variation within the larger field of BDSM, it is nevertheless sometimes differentiated from the rest of this field. A 2015 study of over 1,000 Canadians showed that about half of all men held fantasies of bondage, and almost half of all women did as well. In a strict sense, bondage means binding the partner by tying their appendages together; for example, by the use of handcuffs or ropes, or by lashing their arms to an object. Bondage can also be achieved by spreading the appendages and fastening them with chains or ropes to a St. Andrew's cross or spreader bars.\nThe term \"discipline\" describes the use of rules and punishment to control overt behaviour. Punishment can be pain caused physically (such as caning), humiliation caused psychologically (such as a public flagellation) or loss of freedom caused physically (for example, chaining the submissive partner to the foot of a bed). Another aspect is the structured training of the bottom.\nDominance and submission (also known as \"D&amp;s\", \"Ds\" or \"D/s\") is a set of behaviours, customs and rituals relating to the giving and accepting of control of one individual over another in an erotic or lifestyle context. It explores the more mental aspect of BDSM. This is also the case in many relationships not considering themselves as sadomasochistic; it is considered to be a part of BDSM if it is practiced purposefully. The range of its individual characteristics is thereby wide.\nOften, BDSM contracts are set out in writing to record the formal consent of the parties to the power exchange, stating their common vision of the relationship dynamic. The purpose of this kind of agreement is primarily to encourage discussion and negotiation in advance and then to document that understanding for the benefit of all parties. Such documents have not been recognized as being legally binding, nor are they intended to be. These agreements are binding in the sense that the parties have the expectation that the negotiated rules will be followed. Often other friends and community members may witness the signing of such a document in a ceremony, and so parties violating their agreement can result in loss of face, respect or status with their friends in the community.\nIn general, as compared to conventional relationships, BDSM participants go to greater lengths to negotiate the important aspects of their relationships in advance, and to contribute significant effort toward learning about and following safe practices.\nIn D/s, the dominant is the top and the submissive is the bottom. In S/M, the sadist is usually the top and the masochist the bottom, but these roles are frequently more complicated or jumbled (as in the case of being dominant, masochists who may arrange for their submissive to carry out S/M activities on them). As in B/D, the declaration of the top/bottom may be required, though sadomasochists may also play without any power exchange at all, with both partners equally in control of the play.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"sadomasochism\" is derived from the words \"sadism\" and \"masochism\". These terms differ somewhat from the same terms used in psychology since those require that the sadism or masochism cause significant distress or involve non-consenting partners. \"Sadomasochism\" refers to the aspects of BDSM surrounding the exchange of physical or emotional pain. Sadism describes sexual pleasure derived by inflicting pain, degradation, humiliation on another person or causing another person to suffer. On the other hand, the masochist enjoys being hurt, humiliated, or suffering within the consensual scenario. Sadomasochistic scenes sometimes reach a level that appears more extreme or cruel than other forms of BDSM\u2014for example, when a masochist is brought to tears or is severely bruised\u2014and is occasionally unwelcome at BDSM events or parties. Sadomasochism does not imply enjoyment through causing or receiving pain in other situations (for example, accidental injury, medical procedures).\nThe terms \"sadism\" and \"masochism\" are derived from the names of the Marquis de Sade and Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, based on the content of the authors' works. Although the names of de Sade and Sacher-Masoch are attached to the terms sadism and masochism respectively, the scenes described in de Sade's works do not meet modern BDSM standards of informed consent. BDSM is solely based on consensual activities, and based on its system and laws. The concepts presented by de Sade are not in accordance with the BDSM culture, even though they are sadistic in nature. In 1843, the Ruthenian physician Heinrich Kaan published ' (\"Psychopathy of Sex\"), a writing in which he converts the sin conceptions of Christianity into medical diagnoses. With his work, the originally theological terms \"perversion\", \"aberration\" and \"deviation\" became part of the scientific terminology for the first time. The German psychiatrist Richard von Krafft-Ebing introduced the terms \"sadism\" and \"masochism\" to the medical community in his work ' (\"New research in the area of Psychopathy of Sex\") in 1890.\nIn 1905, Sigmund Freud described sadism and masochism in his \"Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality\" as diseases developing from an incorrect development of the child psyche and laid the groundwork for the scientific perspective on the subject in the following decades. This led to the first time use of the compound term \"sado-masochism\" (German \") by the Viennese psychoanalytic Isidor Isaak Sadger in their work, \" (\"Regarding the sadomasochistic complex\") in 1913.\nIn the later 20th century, BDSM activists have protested against these conceptual models, as they were derived from the philosophies of two singular historical figures. Both Freud and Krafft-Ebing were psychiatrists; their observations on sadism and masochism were dependent on psychiatric patients, and their models were built on the assumption of psychopathology. BDSM activists argue that it is illogical to attribute human behavioural phenomena as complex as sadism and masochism to the \"inventions\" of two historic individuals. Advocates of BDSM have sought to distinguish themselves from widely held notions of antiquated psychiatric theory by the adoption of the term \"BDSM\" as a distinction from the now common usage of those psychological terms, abbreviated as \"S&amp;M\".\nBehavioural and physiological aspects.\nBDSM is commonly mistaken as being \"all about pain\". Freud was confounded by the complexity and counterintuitiveness of practitioners' doing things that are self-destructive and painful. Rather than pain, BDSM practitioners are primarily concerned with power, humiliation, and pleasure. The aspects of D/s and B/D may not include physical suffering at all, but include the sensations experienced by different emotions of the mind.\nOf the three categories of BDSM, only sadomasochism specifically requires pain, but this is typically a means to an end, as a vehicle for feelings of humiliation, dominance, etc. In psychology, this aspect becomes a deviant behaviour once the act of inflicting or experiencing pain becomes a substitute for or the main source of sexual pleasure. In its most extreme, the preoccupation on this kind of pleasure can lead participants to view humans as insensate means of sexual gratification.\nDominance and submission of power are an entirely different experience, and are not always psychologically associated with physical pain. Many BDSM activities involve no pain or humiliation, but just the exchange of power and control. During the activities, the participants may feel endorphin effects comparable to \"runner's high\" and to the afterglow of orgasm. The corresponding trance-like mental state is also called \"subspace\", for the submissive, and \"domspace\", for the dominant. Some use \"body stress\" to describe this physiological sensation. The experience of algolagnia is important, but is not the only motivation for many BDSM practitioners. The philosopher Edmund Burke called the sensation of pleasure derived from pain \"sublime\". Couples engaging in consensual BDSM tend to show hormonal changes that indicate decreases in stress and increases in emotional bonding.\nThere is an array of BDSM practitioners who take part in sessions in which they do not receive any personal gratification. They enter such situations solely with the intention to allow their partners to indulge their own needs or fetishes. Professional dominants do this in exchange for money, but non-professionals do it for the sake of their partners.\nIn some BDSM sessions, the top exposes the bottom to a range of sensual experiences, such as pinching; biting; scratching with fingernails; erotic spanking; erotic electrostimulation; and the use of crops, whips, liquid wax, ice cubes, and Wartenberg wheels. Fixation by handcuffs, ropes, or chains may occur. The repertoire of possible \"toys\" is limited only by the imagination of both partners. To some extent, everyday items, such as clothespins, wooden spoons, and plastic wrap, are used in sex play. It is commonly considered that a pleasurable BDSM experience during a session depends strongly on the top's competence and experience and the bottom's physical and mental state. Trust and sexual arousal help the partners enter a shared mindset.\nTypes of play.\nFollowing are some of the types of BDSM play:\nSafety.\nBesides safe sex, BDSM sessions often require a wider array of safety precautions than vanilla sex (sexual behaviour without BDSM elements). To ensure consent related to BDSM activity, pre-play negotiations are commonplace, especially among partners who do not know each other very well. In practice, pick-up scenes at clubs or parties may sometimes be low in negotiation (much as pick-up sex from singles bars may not involve much negotiation or disclosure). These negotiations concern the interests and fantasies of each partner and establish a framework of both acceptable and unacceptable activities. This kind of discussion is a typical \"unique selling proposition\" of BDSM sessions and quite commonplace. Additionally, safewords are often arranged to provide for an immediate stop of any activity if any participant should so desire.\nSafewords are words or phrases that are called out when things are either not going as planned or have crossed a threshold one cannot handle. They are something both parties can remember and recognize and are, by definition, not words commonly used playfully during any kind of scene. Words such as \"no\", \"stop\", and \"don't\", are often inappropriate as a safeword if the roleplaying aspect includes the illusion of non-consent.\n\"The traffic light system\" (TLS) is the most commonly used set of safewords.\nAt most clubs and group-organized BDSM parties and events, dungeon monitors (DMs) provide an additional safety net for the people playing there, ensuring that house rules are followed and safewords respected.\nBDSM participants are expected to understand practical safety aspects, such as the potential for harm to body parts. Contusion or scarring of the skin can be a concern. Using crops, whips, or floggers, the top's fine motor skills and anatomical knowledge can make the difference between a satisfying session for the bottom and a highly unpleasant experience that may even entail severe physical harm. The very broad range of BDSM \"toys\" and physical and psychological control techniques often requires a far-reaching knowledge of details related to the requirements of the individual session, such as anatomy, physics, and psychology. Despite these risks, BDSM activities usually result in far less severe injuries than sports like boxing and football, and BDSM practitioners do not visit emergency rooms any more often than the general population.\nIt is necessary to be able to identify each person's psychological \"squicks\" or triggers in advance to avoid them. Such losses of emotional balance due to sensory or emotional overload are a fairly commonly discussed issue. It is important to follow participants' reactions empathetically and continue or stop accordingly. For some players, sparking \"freakouts\" or deliberately using triggers may be the desired outcome. Safewords are one way for BDSM practices to protect both parties. However, partners should be aware of each other's psychological states and behaviours to prevent instances where the \"freakouts\" prevent the use of safewords.\nAfter any BDSM activities, it is important that the participants go through sexual aftercare, to process and calm down from the activity. After the sessions, participants can need aftercare because their bodies have experienced trauma and they need to mentally come out of the role play.\nSocial aspects.\nTypes of relationships.\nA 2003 study, the first to look at these relationships, fully demonstrated that \"quality long-term functioning relationships\" exist among practitioners of BDSM, with either sex being the top or bottom (the study was based on 17 heterosexual couples). Respondents in the study expressed their BDSM orientation to be built into who they are, but considered exploring their BDSM interests an ongoing task, and showed flexibility and adaptability in order to match their interests with their partners. The \"perfect match\" where both in the relationship shared the same tastes and desires was rare, and most relationships required both partners to take up or put away some of their desires. The BDSM activities that the couples partook in varied in sexual to nonsexual significance for the partners who reported doing certain BDSM activities for \"couple bonding, stress release, and spiritual quests\". The most reported issue amongst respondents was not finding enough time to be in role with most adopting a lifestyle wherein both partners maintain their dominant or submissive role throughout the day.\nAmongst the respondents, it was typically the bottoms who wanted to play harder, and be more restricted into their roles when there was a difference in desire to play in the relationship. The author of the study, Bert Cutler, speculated that tops may be less often in the mood to play due to the increased demand for responsibility on their part: being aware of the safety of the situation and prepared to remove the bottom from a dangerous scenario, being conscious of the desires and limits of the bottom, and so on. The author of the study stressed that successful long-term BDSM relationships came after \"early and thorough disclosure\" from both parties of their BDSM interests.\nMany of those engaged in long-term BDSM relationships learned their skills from larger BDSM organizations and communities. There was a lot of discussion by the respondents on the amount of control the top possessed in the relationships but \"no discussion of being better, or smarter, or of more value\" than the bottom. Couples were generally of the same mind of whether or not they were in an ongoing relationship, but in such cases, the bottom was not locked up constantly, but that their role in the context of the relationship was always present, even when the top was doing non-dominant activities such as household chores, or the bottom being in a more dominant position. In its conclusion the study states:\nThe study further goes on to list three aspects that made the successful relationships work: early disclosure of interests and continued transparency, a commitment to personal growth, and the use of the dominant/submissive roles as a tool to maintain the relationship. In closing remarks, the author of the study theorizes that due to the serious potential for harm, couples in BDSM relationships develop increased communication that may be higher than in mainstream relationships.\nA professional dominatrix or professional dominant, often referred to within the culture as a \"pro-dom(me)\", offers services encompassing the range of bondage, discipline, and dominance in exchange for money. The term \"dominatrix\" is little-used within the non-professional BDSM scene. A non-professional dominant woman is more commonly referred to simply as a \"domme\", \"dominant\", or \"femdom\" (short for female dominance). Professional submissives (\"pro-subs\"), although far more rare, do exist.\nScenes.\nIn BDSM, a \"scene\" is the stage or setting where BDSM activity takes place, as well as the activity itself. The physical place where a BDSM activity takes place is usually called a dungeon, though some prefer less dramatic terms, including \"playspace\" or \"club\". A BDSM activity can, but need not, involve sexual activity or sexual roleplay. A characteristic of many BDSM relationships is the power exchange from the bottom to the dominant partner, and bondage features prominently in BDSM scenes and sexual roleplay.\n\"The Scene\" (including use of the definite article \"the\") is also used in the BDSM community to refer to the BDSM community as a whole. Thus someone who is on \"the Scene\", and prepared to play in public, might take part in \"a scene\" at a public play party.\nA scene can take place in private between two or more people and can involve a domestic arrangement, such as servitude or a casual or committed lifestyle master/slave relationship. BDSM elements may involve settings of slave training or punishment for breaches of instructions.\nA scene can also take place in a club, where the play can be viewed by others. When a scene takes place in a public setting, it may be because the participants enjoy being watched by others, or because of the equipment available, or because having third parties present adds safety for play partners who have only recently met.\nEtiquette.\nMost standard social etiquette rules still apply when at a BDSM event, such as not intimately touching someone you do not know, not touching someone else's belongings (including toys), and abiding by dress codes. Many events open to the public also have rules addressing alcohol consumption, recreational drugs, cell phones, and photography.\nA specific scene takes place within the general conventions and etiquette of BDSM, such as requirements for mutual consent and agreement as to the limits of any BDSM activity. This agreement can be incorporated into a formal contract. In addition, most clubs have additional rules which regulate how onlookers may interact with the actual participants in a scene. As is common in BDSM, these are founded on the catchphrase \"safe, sane, and consensual\".\nParties and clubs.\nBDSM play parties are events in which BDSM practitioners and other similarly interested people meet in order to communicate, share experiences and knowledge, and to \"play\" in an erotic atmosphere. BDSM parties show similarities to ones in the dark culture, being based on a more or less strictly enforced dress code; often clothing made of latex, leather or vinyl/PVC, lycra and so on, emphasizing the body's shape and the primary and secondary sexual characteristics. The requirement for such dress codes differ. While some events have none, others have a policy in order to create a more coherent atmosphere and to prevent outsiders from taking part.\nAt these parties, BDSM can be publicly performed on a stage, or more privately in separate \"dungeons\". A reason for the relatively fast spread of this kind of event is the opportunity to use a wide range of \"playing equipment\", which in most apartments or houses is unavailable. Slings, St. Andrew's crosses (or similar restraining constructs), spanking benches, and punishing supports or cages are often made available. The problem of noise disturbance is also lessened at these events, while in the home setting many BDSM activities can be limited by this factor. In addition, such parties offer both exhibitionists and voyeurs a forum to indulge their inclinations without social criticism. Sexual intercourse is not permitted within most public BDSM play spaces or not often seen in others, because it is not the emphasis of this kind of play. In order to ensure the maximum safety and comfort for the participants, certain standards of behaviour have evolved; these include aspects of courtesy, privacy, respect and safewords. Today BDSM parties are taking place in most of the larger cities in the Western world.\nThis scene appears particularly on the Internet, in publications, and in meetings such as at fetish clubs (like Torture Garden), SM parties, gatherings called munches, and erotic fairs like Venus Berlin. The annual Folsom Street Fair held in San Francisco is the world's largest BDSM event. It has its roots in the gay leather movement. The weekend-long festivities include a wide range of sadomasochistic erotica in a public clothing optional space between 8th and 13th streets with nightly parties associated with the organization.\nThere are also conventions such as Living in Leather and Black Rose.\nPsychology.\nResearch indicates that there is no evidence that a preference for BDSM is a consequence of childhood abuse. Some reports suggest that people abused as children may have more BDSM injuries and have difficulty with safe words being recognized as meaning stop the previously consensual behaviour; thus, it is possible that people choosing BDSM as part of their lifestyle, who also were previously abused, may have had more police or hospital reports of injuries. In one study of three online surveys, many transgender adults remarked that BDSM influenced their individual experience of gender.\nJoseph Merlino, author and psychiatry adviser to the \"New York Daily News\", said in an interview that a sadomasochistic relationship, as long as it is consensual, is not a psychological problem:\nSome psychologists agree that experiences during early sexual development can have a profound effect on the character of sexuality later in life. Sadomasochistic desires, however, seem to form at a variety of ages. Some individuals report having had them before puberty, while others do not discover them until well into adulthood. According to one study, the majority of male sadomasochists (53%) developed their interest before the age of 15, while the majority of females (78%) developed their interest afterward (Breslow, Evans, and Langley 1985). The prevalence of sadomasochism within the general population is unknown. Despite female sadists being less visible than males, some surveys have resulted in comparable amounts of sadistic fantasies between females and males. The results of such studies demonstrate that one's sex does not determine preference for sadism.\nFollowing a phenomenological study of nine individuals involved in sexual masochistic sessions who regarded pain as central to their experience, sexual masochism was described as an addiction-like tendency, with several features resembling that of drug addiction: craving, intoxication, tolerance and withdrawal. It was also demonstrated how the first masochistic experience is placed on a pedestal, with subsequent use aiming at retrieving this lost sensation, much as described in the descriptive literature on addiction.\nPrevalence.\nBDSM occurs among people of all genders and sexual orientations, and in varied occurrences and intensities. The spectrum ranges from couples with no connections to the subculture outside of their bedrooms or homes, without any awareness of the concept of BDSM, playing \"tie-me-up-games\", to public scenes on St. Andrew's crosses at large events such as the Folsom Street Fair in San Francisco. Estimation on the overall percentage of BDSM-related sexual behaviour varies.\nAlfred Kinsey stated in his 1953 nonfiction book \"Sexual Behavior in the Human Female\" that 12% of females and 22% of males reported having an erotic response to a sadomasochistic story. In that book erotic responses to being bitten were given as:\nA non-representative survey on the sexual behaviour of American students published in 1997 and based on questionnaires had a response rate of about 8\u20139%. Its results showed 15% of homosexual and bisexual males, 21% of lesbian and female bisexual students, 11% of heterosexual males and 9% of female heterosexual students committed to BDSM related fantasies. In all groups the level of practical BDSM experiences were around 6%. Within the group of openly lesbian and bisexual females, the quote was significantly higher, at 21%. Independent of their sexual orientation, about 12% of all questioned students, 16% of lesbians and female bisexuals and 8% of heterosexual males articulated an interest in spanking. Experience with this sexual behaviour was indicated by 30% of male heterosexuals, 33% of female bisexuals and lesbians, and 24% of the male gay and bisexual men and female heterosexual women. Even though this study was not considered representative, other surveys indicate similar dimensions in differing target groups.\nA representative study done from 2001 to 2002 in Australia found that 1.8% of sexually active people (2.2% men, 1.3% women but no significant sex difference) had engaged in BDSM activity in the previous year. Of the entire sample, 1.8% of men and 1.3% of women had been involved in BDSM. BDSM activity was significantly more likely among bisexuals and homosexuals of both sexes. But among men in general, there was no relationship effect of age, education, language spoken at home or relationship status. Among women, in this study, activity was most common for those between 16 and 19 years of age and least likely for females over 50 years. Activity was also significantly more likely for women who had a regular partner they did not live with, but was not significantly related with speaking a language other than English or education.\nAnother representative study, published in 1999 by the German Institut f\u00fcr rationale Psychologie, found that about 2/3 of the interviewed women stated a desire to be at the mercy of their sexual partners from time to time. 69% admitted to fantasies dealing with sexual submissiveness, 42% stated interest in explicit BDSM techniques, 25% in bondage. A 1976 study in the general US population suggests three per cent have had positive experiences with Bondage or master-slave roleplaying. Overall 12% of the interviewed females and 18% of the males were willing to try it. A 1990 Kinsey Institute report stated that 5% to 10% of Americans occasionally engage in sexual activities related to BDSM, 11% of men and 17% of women reported trying bondage. Some elements of BDSM have been popularized through increased media coverage since the middle 1990s. Thus both black leather clothing, sexual jewelry such as chains and dominance roleplay appear increasingly outside of BDSM contexts.\nAccording to yet another survey of 317,000 people in 41 countries, about 20% of the surveyed have at least used masks, blindfolds or other bondage utilities once, and 5% explicitly connected themselves with BDSM. In 2004, 19% mentioned spanking as one of their practices and 22% confirmed the use of blindfolds or handcuffs.\nA 1985 study found 52 out of 182 female respondents (28%) were involved in sadomasochistic activities.\nA 2009 study on two separate samples of male undergraduate students in Canada found that 62 to 65%, depending on the sample, had entertained sadistic fantasies, and 22 to 39% engaged in sadistic behaviours during sex. The figures were 62 and 52% for bondage fantasies, and 14 to 23% for bondage behaviours. A 2014 study involving a mixed sample of Canadian college students and online volunteers, both male and female, reported that 19% of male samples and 10% of female samples rated the sadistic scenarios described in a questionnaire as being at least \"slightly arousing\" on a scale that ranged from \"very repulsive\" to \"very arousing\"; the difference was statistically significant. The corresponding figures for the masochistic scenarios were 15% for male students and 17% for female students, a non-significant difference. In a 2011 study on 367 middle-aged and elderly men recruited from the broader community in Berlin, 21.8% of the men self-reported sadistic fantasies and 15.5% sadistic behaviors; 24.8% self-reported any such fantasy and/or behavior. The corresponding figures for self-reported masochism were 15.8% for fantasy, 12.3% for behaviour, and 18.5% for fantasy and/or behaviour. In a 2008 study on gay men in Puerto Rico, 14.8% of the over 425 community volunteers reported any sadistic fantasy, desire or behaviour in their lifetime; the corresponding figure for masochism was 15.7%. A 2017 cross-sectional representative survey among the general Belgian population demonstrated a substantial prevalence of BDSM fantasies and activities; 12.5% of the population performed one of more BDSM-practices on a regular basis.\nRecent surveys on the spread of BDSM fantasies and practices show strong variations in the range of their results. Researchers believe that 5 to 25 per cent of the population practices sexual behaviour related to pain or dominance and submission. The population with related fantasies is believed to be even larger.\nMedical categorization.\nReflecting changes in social norms, modern medical opinion is now moving away from regarding BDSM activities as medical disorders, unless they are nonconsensual or involve significant distress or harm.\nIn 1995, Denmark became the first European Union country to have completely removed sadomasochism from its national classification of diseases. This was followed by Sweden in 2009, Norway in 2010, Finland in 2011, and Iceland in 2015.\nDSM.\nIn the past, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), the American Psychiatric Association's manual, defined some BDSM activities as sexual disorders. Following campaigns from advocacy organizations including the National Coalition for Sexual Freedom, the current version of the DSM, DSM-5, excludes consensual BDSM from diagnosis when the sexual interests cause no harm or distress.\nICD.\nThe World Health Organization's International Classification of Diseases (ICD) has changed in regard to BDSM in recent years.\nIn Europe, an organization called worked to remove sadomasochism from the ICD.\nOn 18 June 2018, the WHO (World Health Organization) published ICD-11, in which sadomasochism, together with fetishism and fetishistic transvestism (cross-dressing for sexual pleasure) are now removed as psychiatric diagnoses. Moreover, discrimination against fetish-having and BDSM individuals is considered inconsistent with human rights principles endorsed by the United Nations and The World Health Organization.\nThe classifications of sexual disorders reflect contemporary sexual norms and have moved from a model of pathologization or criminalization of non-reproductive sexual behaviors to a model that reflects sexual well-being and pathologizes the absence or limitation of consent in sexual relations.\nComing out.\nSome people who are interested in or curious about BDSM decide to come out of the closet, although many sadomasochists remain closeted. Depending upon a survey's participants, about 5 to 25 per cent of the US population show affinity to the subject. Other than a few artists and writers, practically no celebrities are publicly known as sadomasochists.\nPublic knowledge of one's BDSM lifestyle can have detrimental vocational and social effects for sadomasochists. Many face severe professional consequences or social rejection if they are exposed, either voluntarily or involuntarily, as sadomasochists.\nWithin feminist circles, the discussion is split roughly into two camps: some who see BDSM as an aspect or reflection of oppression (for example, Alice Schwarzer) and, on the other side, pro-BDSM feminists, often grouped under the banner of sex-positive feminism (see Samois); both of them can be traced back to the 1970s. Some feminists have criticized BDSM for eroticizing power and violence and reinforcing misogyny. They argue that women who engage in BDSM are making a choice that is ultimately bad for women. Feminist defenders of BDSM argue that consensual BDSM activities are enjoyed by many women and validate the sexual inclinations of these women. They argue that there is no connection between consensual kinky activities and sex crimes, and that feminists should not attack other women's sexual desires as being \"anti-feminist\". They also state that the main point of feminism is to give an individual woman free choices in her life; which includes her sexual desire. While some feminists suggest connections between consensual BDSM scenes and non-consensual rape and sexual assault, other sex-positive ones find the notion insulting to women.\nRoles are not fixed to gender, but personal preferences. The dominant partner in a heterosexual relationship may be the woman rather than the man, or BDSM may be part of male/male or female/female sexual relationships. Finally, some people switch, taking either a dominant or submissive role on different occasions. Several studies investigating the possibility of a correlation between BDSM pornography and the violence against women also indicate a lack of correlation. In 1991, a lateral survey came to the conclusion that between 1964 and 1984, despite the increase in amount and availability of sadomasochistic pornography in the U.S., Germany, Denmark and Sweden, there is no correlation with the national number of rapes to be found.\nOperation Spanner in the U.K. proves that BDSM practitioners still run the risk of being stigmatized as criminals. In 2003, the media coverage of Jack McGeorge showed that simply participating and working in BDSM support groups poses risks to one's job, even in countries where no law restricts it. Here a clear difference can be seen to the situation of homosexuality. The psychological strain appearing in some individual cases is normally neither articulated nor acknowledged in public. Nevertheless, it leads to a difficult psychological situation in which the person concerned can be exposed to high levels of emotional stress.\nIn the stages of \"self-awareness\", he or she realizes their desires related to BDSM scenarios or decides to be open for such. Some authors call this \"internal coming-out\". Two separate surveys on this topic independently came to the conclusion that 58 per cent and 67 per cent of the sample respectively, had realized their disposition before their 19th birthday. Other surveys on this topic show comparable results. Independent of age, coming-out can potentially result in a difficult life crisis, sometimes leading to thoughts or acts of suicide. While homosexuals have created support networks in the last decades, sadomasochistic support networks are just starting to develop in most countries. In German-speaking countries they are only moderately more developed. The Internet is the prime contact point for support groups today, allowing for local and international networking. In the U.S., Kink Aware Professionals (KAP) a privately funded, non-profit service provides the community with referrals to psychotherapeutic, medical, and legal professionals who are knowledgeable about and sensitive to the BDSM, fetish, and leather community. In the U.S. and the U.K., the Woodhull Freedom Foundation &amp; Federation, National Coalition for Sexual Freedom (NCSF) and Sexual Freedom Coalition (SFC) have emerged to represent the interests of sadomasochists. The German Bundesvereinigung Sadomasochismus is committed to the same aim of providing information and driving press relations. In 1996, the website and mailing list Datenschlag went online in German and English providing the largest bibliography, as well as one of the most extensive historical collections of sources related to BDSM.\nSocial (non-medical) research.\nRichters et al. (2008) found that people who engaged in BDSM were more likely to have experienced a wider range of sexual practices (e.g., oral or anal sex, more than one partner, group sex, phone sex, viewed pornography, used a sex toy, fisting, etc.). They were, however, not any more likely to have been coerced, unhappy, anxious, or experiencing sexual difficulties. On the contrary, men who had engaged in BDSM scored lower on a psychological distress scale than men who did not.\nThere have been few studies on the psychological aspects of BDSM using modern scientific standards. Psychotherapist Charles Moser has said there is no evidence for the theory that BDSM has common symptoms or any common psychopathology, emphasizing that there is no evidence that BDSM practitioners have any special psychiatric other problems based on their sexual preferences.\nProblems sometimes occur with self-classification. During the phase of the \"coming-out\", self-questioning related to one's own \"normality\" is common. According to Moser, the discovery of BDSM preferences \"can\" result in fear of the current non-BDSM relationship's destruction. This, combined with the fear of discrimination in everyday life, leads in some cases to a double life which can be highly burdensome. At the same time, the denial of BDSM preferences can induce stress and dissatisfaction with one's own \"vanilla\"-lifestyle, feeding the apprehension of finding no partner. Moser states that BDSM practitioners having problems finding BDSM partners would probably have problems in finding a non-BDSM partner as well. The wish to remove BDSM preferences is another possible reason for psychological problems since it is not possible in most cases. Finally, the scientist states that BDSM practitioners seldom commit violent crimes. From his point of view, crimes of BDSM practitioners usually have no connection with the BDSM components existing in their life. Moser's study comes to the conclusion that there is no scientific evidence, which could give reason to refuse members of this group work- or safety certificates, adoption possibilities, custody or other social rights or privileges. The Swiss psychoanalyst Fritz Morgenthaler shares a similar perspective in his book, \"Homosexuality, Heterosexuality, Perversion\" (1988). He states that possible problems result not necessarily from the non-normative behavior, but in most cases primarily from the real or feared reactions of the social environment towards their own preferences. In 1940 psychoanalyst Theodor Reik reached implicitly the same conclusion in his standard work \"Aus Leiden Freuden. Masochismus und Gesellschaft\".\nMoser's results are further supported by a 2008 Australian study by Richters \"et al.\" on the demographic and psychosocial features of BDSM participants. The study found that BDSM practitioners were no more likely to have experienced sexual assault than the control group, and were not more likely to feel unhappy or anxious. The BDSM males reported higher levels of psychological well-being than the controls. It was concluded that \"BDSM is simply a sexual interest or subculture attractive to a minority, not a pathological symptom of past abuse or difficulty with 'normal' sex.\"\nGender differences in research.\nSeveral recent studies have been conducted on the gender differences and personality traits of BDSM practitioners. Wismeijer and van Assen (2013) found that \"the association of BDSM role and gender was strong and significant\" with only 8% of women in the study being dominant compared to 75% being submissive.; H\u00e9bert and Weaver (2014) found that 9% of women in their study were dominant compared to 88% submissive; Weierstall1 and Giebel (2017) likewise found a significant difference, with 19% of women in the study as dominant compared to 74% as submissive, and a study from Andrea Duarte Silva (2015) indicated that 61.7% of females who are active in BDSM expressed a preference for a submissive role, 25.7% consider themselves a switch, while 12.6% prefer the dominant role. In contrast, 46.6% of men prefer the submissive role, 24% consider themselves to be switches and 29.5% prefer the dominant role. They concluded that \"men more often display an engagement in dominant practices, whereas females take on the submissive part. This result is inline with a recent study about mate preferences that has shown that women have a generally higher preference for a dominant partner than men do (Giebel, Moran, Schawohl, &amp; Weierstall, 2015). Women also prefer dominant men, and even men who are aggressive, for a short-term relationship and for the purpose of sexual intercourse (Giebel, Weierstall, Schauer, &amp; Elbert, 2013)\". Similarly, studies on sexual fantasy differences between men and women show the latter prefer submissive and passive fantasies over dominant and active ones, with rape and force being common.\nGender differences in masochistic scripts.\nOne common belief of BDSM and kink is that women are more likely to take on masochistic roles than men. Roy Baumeister (2010) had more male masochists in his study than female, and fewer male dominants than female. The lack of statistical significance in these gender differences suggests that no assumptions should be made regarding gender and masochistic roles in BDSM. One explanation why we might think otherwise lies in our social and cultural ideals about femininity; masochism may emphasize certain stereotypically feminine elements through activities like feminization of men and ultra-feminine clothing for women. But such tendencies of the submissive masochistic role should not be interpreted as a connection between it and the stereotypical female role\u2014many masochistic scripts do not include any of these tendencies.\nBaumeister found that masochistic males experienced greater: severity of pain, frequency of humiliation (status-loss, degrading, oral), partner infidelity, active participation by other persons, and cross-dressing. Trends also suggested that male masochism included more bondage and oral sex than female (though the data was not significant). Female masochists, on the other hand, experienced greater: frequency in pain, pain as punishment for 'misdeeds' in the relationship context, display humiliation, genital intercourse, and presence of non-participating audiences. The exclusiveness of dominant males in a heterosexual relationship happens because, historically, men in power preferred multiple partners. Finally, Baumeister observes a contrast between the 'intense sensation' focus of male masochism to a more 'meaning and emotion' centred female masochistic script.\nPrior argues that although some of these women may appear to be engaging in traditional subordinate or submissive roles, BDSM allows women in both dominant and submissive roles to express and experience personal power through their sexual identities. In a study that she conducted in 2013, she found that the majority of the women she interviewed identified as bottom, submissive, captive, or slave/sex slave. In turn, Prior was able to answer whether or not these women found an incongruity between their sexual identities and feminist identity. Her research found that these women saw little to no incongruity, and in fact felt that their feminist identity supported identities of submissive and slave. For them, these are sexually and emotionally fulfilling roles and identities that, in some cases, feed other aspects of their lives. Prior contends that third wave feminism provides a space for women in BDSM communities to express their sexual identities fully, even when those identities seem counter-intuitive to the ideals of feminism. Furthermore, women who do identify as submissive, sexually or otherwise, find a space within BDSM where they can fully express themselves as integrated, well-balanced, and powerful women.\nWomen in S/M culture.\nLevitt, Moser, and Jamison's 1994 study provides a general, if outdated, description of characteristics of women in the sadomasochistic (S/M) subculture. They state that women in S/M tend to have higher education, become more aware of their desires as young adults, are less likely to be married than the general population. The researchers found the majority of females identified as heterosexual and submissive, a substantial minority were versatile\u2014able to switch between dominant and submissive roles\u2014and a smaller minority identified with the dominant role exclusively. Oral sex, bondage and master-slave script were among the most popular activities, while feces/watersports were the least popular.\nOrientation observances in research.\nBDSM is considered by some of its practitioners to be a sexual orientation. The BDSM and kink scene is more often seen as a diverse pansexual community. Often this is a non-judgmental community where gender, sexuality, orientation, preferences are accepted as is or worked at to become something a person can be happy with. In research, studies have focused on bisexuality and its parallels with BDSM, as well as gay-straight differences between practitioners.\nAsexuality.\nIt has been suggested that some asexual people have found a language for navigating relationships through BDSM.\nBisexuality.\nIn Steve Lenius' original 2001 paper, he explored the acceptance of bisexuality in a supposedly pansexual BDSM community. The reasoning behind this is that 'coming-out' had become primarily the territory of the gay and lesbian, with bisexuals feeling the push to be one or the other (and being right only half the time either way). What he found in 2001, was that people in BDSM were open to discussion about the topic of bisexuality and pansexuality and all controversies they bring to the table, but personal biases and issues stood in the way of actively using such labels. A decade later, Lenius (2011) looks back on his study and considers if anything has changed. He concluded that the standing of bisexuals in the BDSM and kink community was unchanged, and believed that positive shifts in attitude were moderated by society's changing views towards different sexualities and orientations. But Lenius (2011) does emphasize that the pansexual promoting BDSM community helped advance greater acceptance of alternative sexualities.\nBrandy Lin Simula (2012), on the other hand, argues that BDSM actively resists gender-conforming and identified three different types of BDSM bisexuality: gender-switching, gender-based styles (taking on a different gendered style depending on the gender of partner when playing), and rejection of gender (resisting the idea that gender matters in their play partners). Simula (2012) explains that practitioners of BDSM routinely challenge our concepts of sexuality by pushing the limits on pre-existing ideas of sexual orientation and gender norms. For some, BDSM and kink provides a platform in creating identities that are fluid, ever-changing.\nComparison between gay and straight men in S/M.\nDemographically, Nordling et al.'s (2006) study found no differences in age, but 43% of gay male respondents compared to 29% of straight males had university-level education. The gay men also had higher incomes than the general population and tended to work in white-collar jobs while straight men tended toward blue-collar ones. Because there were not enough female respondents (22), no conclusions could be drawn from them.\nSexually speaking, the same 2006 study by Nordling et al. found that gay males were aware of their S/M preferences and took part in them at an earlier age, preferring leather, anal sex, rimming, dildos and special equipment or uniform scenes. In contrast, straight men preferred verbal humiliation, mask and blindfolds, gags, rubber/latex outfits, caning, vaginal sex, straitjackets, and cross-dressing among other activities. From the questionnaire, researchers were able to identify four separate sexual themes: hyper-masculinity, giving and receiving pain, physical restriction (i.e. bondage), and psychological humiliation. Gay men preferred activities that tended towards hyper-masculinity while straight men showed greater preference for humiliation, significantly higher master/madame-slave role play at \u224884%. Though there were not enough female respondents to draw a similar conclusion with, the fact that there is a difference in gay and straight men suggests strongly that S/M (and BDSM in general) can not be considered a homogenous phenomenon. As Nordling et al. (2006) puts it, \"People who identify as sadomasochists mean different things by these identifications.\" (54)\nHistory of psychotherapy and current recommendations.\nPsychiatry has an insensitive history in the area of BDSM. There have been many involvements by institutions of political power to marginalize subgroups and sexual minorities. Mental health professionals have a long history of holding negative assumptions and stereotypes about the BDSM community. Beginning with the DSM-II, Sexual Sadism and Sexual Masochism were listed as sexually deviant behaviours. Sadism and masochism were also found in the personality disorder section. This negative assumption has not changed significantly which is evident in the continued inclusion of Sexual Sadism and Sexual Masochism as paraphilias in the DSM-IV-TR. The DSM-V, however, has depathologized the language around paraphilias in a way that signifies \"the APA\u2019s intent to not demand treatment for healthy consenting adult sexual expression\". Still, biases and misinformation can result in pathologizing and unintentional harm to clients who identify as sadists and/or masochists and medical professionals who have been trained under older editions of the DSM can be slow to change in their ways of clinical practice.\nAccording to Kolmes et al. (2006), major themes of biased and inadequate care to BDSM clients are:\nThese same researchers suggested that therapists should be open to learning more about BDSM, to show comfort in talking about BDSM issues, and to understand and promote \"safe, sane, consensual\" BDSM.\nThere has also been research which suggests BDSM can be a beneficial way for victims of sexual assault to deal with their trauma, most notably by Corie Hammers, but this work is limited in scope and, to date, has not undergone empirical testing as a treatment.\nClinical issues.\nNichols (2006) compiled some common clinical issues: countertransference, non-disclosure, coming out, partner/families, and bleed-through.\nCountertransference is a common problem in clinical settings. Despite having no evidence, therapists may find themselves believing that their client's pathology is \"self-evident\". Therapists may feel intense disgust and aversive reactions. Feelings of countertransference can interfere with therapy. Another common problem is when clients conceal their sexual preferences from their therapists. This can compromise any therapy. To avoid non-disclosure, therapists are encouraged to communicate their openness in indirect ways with literature and artworks in the waiting room. Therapists can also deliberately bring up BDSM topics during the course of therapy. With less informed therapists, sometimes they over-focus on clients' sexuality which detracts from original issues such as family relationships, depression, etc. A special subgroup that needs counselling is the \"newbie\". Individuals just coming out might have internalized shame, fear, and self-hatred about their sexual preferences. Therapists need to provide acceptance, care, and model positive attitude; providing reassurance, psychoeducation, and bibliotherapy for these clients is crucial. The average age when BDSM individuals realize their sexual preference is around 26 years. Many people hide their sexuality until they can no longer contain their desires. However, they may have married or had children by this point.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nPractices of BDSM survive from some of the oldest textual records in the world, associated with rituals to the goddess Inanna (Ishtar in Akkadian). Cuneiform texts dedicated to Inanna which incorporate domination rituals. In particular, she points to ancient writings such as Inanna and Ebih (in which the goddess dominates Ebih), and Hymn to Inanna describing cross-dressing transformations and rituals \"imbued with pain and ecstasy, bringing about initiation and journeys of altered states of consciousness; punishment, moaning, ecstasy, lament and song, participants exhausting themselves in weeping and grief.\"\nDuring the 9th century BC, ritual flagellations were performed in Artemis Orthia, one of the most important religious areas of ancient Sparta, where the Cult of Orthia, a pre-Olympic religion, was practiced. Here, ritual flagellation called \"diamastigosis\" took place, in which young adolescent men were whipped in a ceremony overseen by the priestess. These are referred to by a number of ancient authors, including Pausanius (III, 16: 10\u201311).\nOne of the oldest graphical proofs of sadomasochistic activities is found in the Etruscan Tomb of the Whipping near Tarquinia, which dates to the 5th century BC. Inside the tomb, there is a fresco which portrays two men who flagellate a woman with a cane and a hand during an erotic situation. Another reference related to flagellation is to be found in the sixth book of the \"Satires\" of the ancient Roman Poet Juvenal (1st\u20132nd century A.D.), further reference can be found in Petronius's \"Satyricon\" where a delinquent is whipped for sexual arousal. Anecdotal narratives related to humans who have had themselves voluntary bound, flagellated or whipped as a substitute for sex or as part of foreplay reach back to the 3rd and 4th century BC.\nIn Pompeii, a whip-mistress figure with wings is depicted on the wall of the Villa of Mysteries, as part of an initiation of a young woman into the Mysteries. The whip-mistress role drove the sacred initiation of ceremonial death and rebirth. The archaic Greek Aphrodite may too once have been armed with an implement, with archaeological evidence of armed Aphrodites known from a number of locations in Cythera, Acrocorinth and Sparta, and which may have been a whip.\nThe \"Kama Sutra\" of India describes four different kinds of hitting during lovemaking, the allowed regions of the human body to target and different kinds of joyful \"cries of pain\" practiced by bottoms. The collection of historic texts related to sensuous experiences explicitly emphasizes that impact play, biting and pinching during sexual activities should only be performed consensually since only some women consider such behavior to be joyful. From this perspective, the Kama Sutra can be considered one of the first written resources dealing with sadomasochistic activities and safety rules. Further texts with sadomasochistic connotation appear worldwide during the following centuries on a regular basis.\nThere are anecdotal reports of people willingly being bound or whipped, as a prelude to or substitute for sex, during the 14th century. The medieval phenomenon of courtly love in all of its slavish devotion and ambivalence has been suggested by some writers to be a precursor of BDSM. Some sources claim that BDSM as a distinct form of sexual behavior originated at the beginning of the 18th century when Western civilization began medically and legally categorizing sexual behavior (see Etymology).\nFlagellation practiced within an erotic setting has been recorded from at least the 1590s evidenced by a John Davies epigram, and references to \"flogging schools\" in Thomas Shadwell's \"The Virtuoso\" (1676) and Tim Tell-Troth's \"Knavery of Astrology\" (1680). Visual evidence such as mezzotints and print media is also identified revealing scenes of flagellation, such as \"The Cully Flaug'd\" from the British Museum collection.\nJohn Cleland's novel \"Fanny Hill\", published in 1749, incorporates a flagellation scene between the character's protagonist Fanny Hill and Mr Barville. A large number of flagellation publications followed, including \"\" (), promoting the names of women offering the service in a lecture room with rods and cat o' nine tails.\nOther sources give a broader definition, citing BDSM-like behavior in earlier times and other cultures, such as the medieval flagellates and the physical ordeal rituals of some Native American societies.\nBDSM ideas and imagery have existed on the fringes of Western culture throughout the 20th century. Robert Bienvenu attributes the origins of modern BDSM to three sources, which he names as \"European Fetish\" (from 1928), \"American Fetish\" (from 1934), and \"Gay Leather\" (from 1950). Another source are the sexual games played in brothels, which go back to the 19th century, if not earlier. Charles Guyette was the first American to produce and distribute fetish related material (costumes, footwear, photography, props and accessories) in the U.S. His successor, Irving Klaw, produced commercial sexploitation film and photography with a BDSM theme (most notably with Bettie Page) and issued fetish comics (known then as \"chapter serials\") by the now-iconic artists John Willie, Gene Bilbrew, and Eric Stanton.\nStanton's model Bettie Page became at the same time one of the first successful models in the area of fetish photography and one of the most famous pin-up girls of American mainstream culture. Italian author and designer Guido Crepax was deeply influenced by him, coining the style and development of European adult comics in the second half of the 20th century. The artists Helmut Newton and Robert Mapplethorpe are the most prominent examples of the increasing use of BDSM-related motives in modern photography and the public discussions still resulting from this.\nAlfred Binet first coined the term \"erotic fetishism\" in his 1887 book, \"Du f\u00e9tichisme dans l'amour\" Richard von Krafft-Ebing saw BDSM interests as the end of a continuum.\nLeather movement.\nLeather has been a predominantly gay male term to refer to one fetish, but it can stand for many more. Members of the gay male leather community may wear leathers such as motorcycle leathers, or may be attracted to men wearing leather. Leather and BDSM are seen as two parts of one whole. Much of the BDSM culture can be traced back to the gay male leather culture, which formalized itself out of the group of men who were soldiers returning home after World War II (1939\u20131945). World War II was the setting where countless homosexual men and women tasted the life among homosexual peers. Post-war, homosexual individuals congregated in larger cities such as New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. They formed leather clubs and bike clubs; some were fraternal services. The establishment of Mr. Leather Contest and Mr. Drummer Contest were made around this time. This was the genesis of the gay male leather community. Many of the members were attracted to extreme forms of sexuality, for which peak expression was in the pre-AIDS 1970s. This subculture is epitomized by the \"Leatherman's Handbook\" by Larry Townsend, published in 1972, which describes in detail the practices and culture of gay male sadomasochists in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nIn the early 1980s, lesbians also joined the leathermen as a recognizable element of the gay leather community. They also formed leather clubs, but there were some gender differences, such as the absence of leatherwomen's bars. In 1981, the publication of \"Coming to Power\" by lesbian-feminist group Samois led to a greater knowledge and acceptance of BDSM in the lesbian community. By the 1990s, the gay men's and women's leather communities were no longer underground and played an important role in the kink community.\nToday, the leather movement is generally seen as a part of the BDSM-culture instead of as a development deriving from gay subculture, even if a huge part of the BDSM-subculture was gay in the past. In the 1990s, the so-called New Guard leather subculture evolved. This new orientation started to integrate psychological aspects into their play.\nThe Leather Archives and Museum (LA&amp;M) in Chicago was founded in 1991 by Chuck Renslow and Tony DeBlase as a \u201ccommunity archives, library, and museum of leather, kink, fetish, and BDSM history and culture.\u201d The LA&amp;M has an extensive collection of leather- and BDSM-related artifacts, including one of three original leather pride flags.\nThe San Francisco South of Market Leather History Alley consists of four works of art along Ringold Alley honoring leather culture; it opened in 2017. One of the works of art is metal bootprints along the curb which honor 28 people (including Steve McEachern, owner of the Catacombs, a gay and lesbian S/M fisting club, and Cynthia Slater, a founder of the Society of Janus, the second oldest BDSM organization in the United States) who were an important part of the leather communities of San Francisco.\nInternet.\nIn the late 1980s, the Internet provided a way of finding people with specialized interests around the world as well as on a local level, and communicating with them anonymously. This brought about an explosion of interest and knowledge of BDSM, particularly on the usenet group alt.sex.bondage. When that group became too cluttered with spam, the focus moved to soc.subculture.bondage-bdsm. With an increased focus on forms of social media, FetLife was formed, which advertises itself as \"a social network for the BDSM and fetish community\". It operates similarly to other social media sites, with the ability to make friends with other users, events, and pages of shared interests.\nIn addition to traditional sex shops, which sell sex paraphernalia, there has also been an explosive growth of online adult toy companies that specialize in leather/latex gear and BDSM toys. Once a very niche market, there are now very few sex toy companies that do not offer some sort of BDSM or fetish gear in their catalog. Kinky elements seem to have worked their way into \"vanilla\" markets. The former niche expanded to an important pillar of the business with adult accessories. Today practically all suppliers of sex toys do offer items which originally found usage in the BDSM subculture. Padded handcuffs, latex and leather garments, as well as more exotic items like soft whips for fondling and TENS for erotic electro stimulation, can be found in catalogs aiming at classical vanilla target groups, indicating that former boundaries increasingly seem to shift.\nDuring the last years, the Internet also provides a central platform for networking among individuals who are interested in the subject. Besides countless private and commercial choices, there is an increasing number of local networks and support groups emerging. These groups often offer comprehensive background and health-related information for people who have been unwillingly outed as well as contact lists with information on psychologists, physicians and lawyers who are familiar with BDSM-related topics.\nLegal status.\nAustria.\nSection 90 of the Austrian criminal code declares bodily injury (Sections 83\u201384) or the endangerment of physical security (Section 89) to not be subject to penalty in cases in which the victim has consented and the injury or endangerment does not offend moral sensibilities. Case law from the Austrian Supreme Court has consistently shown that bodily injury is only offensive to moral sensibilities, thus it is only punishable when a \"serious injury\" (damage to health or an employment disability lasting more than 24 days) or the death of the \"victim\" results. A \"light injury\" is generally considered \"permissible\" when the \"victim\" has consented to it. In cases of threats to bodily well-being, the standard depends on the probability that an injury will occur. If serious injury or even death would be a likely result of a threat being carried out, then even the threat itself is considered punishable.\nCanada.\nIn 2004, a judge in Canada ruled that videos seized by the police featuring BDSM activities were not obscene and did not constitute violence, but a \"normal and acceptable\" sexual activity between two consenting adults.\nIn 2011, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in \"R. v. J.A.\" that a person must have an active mind during the specific sexual activity in order to legally consent. The Court ruled that it is a criminal offence to perform a sexual act on an unconscious person\u2014whether or not that person consented in advance.\nGermany.\nAccording to Section 194 of the German criminal code, the charge of insult (slander) can only be prosecuted if the defamed person chooses to press charges. False imprisonment can be charged if the victim\u2014when applying an objective view\u2014can be considered to be impaired in their rights of free movement. According to Section 228, a person inflicting a bodily injury on another person with that person's permission violates the law only in cases where the act can be considered to have violated good morals in spite of permission having been given. On 26 May 2004, the Criminal Panel No. 2 of the Bundesgerichtshof (German Federal Court) ruled that sado-masochistically motivated physical injuries are not per se indecent and thus subject to Section 228.\nFollowing cases in which sado-masochistic practices had been repeatedly used as pressure tactics against former partners in custody cases, the Appeals Court of Hamm ruled in February 2006 that sexual inclinations toward sado-masochism are no indication of a lack of capabilities for successful child-raising.\nItaly.\nIn Italian law, BDSM is right on the border between crime and legality, and everything lies in the interpretation of the legal code by the judge. This concept is that anyone willingly causing \"injury\" to another person is to be punished. In this context, though, \"injury\" is legally defined as \"anything causing a condition of illness\", and \"illness\" is ill-defined itself in two different legal ways. The first is \"any anatomical or functional alteration of the organism\" (thus technically including little scratches and bruises too); the second is \"a significant worsening of a previous condition relevant to organic and relational processes, requiring any kind of therapy\". This could make it somewhat risky to play with someone, as later the \"victim\" may call foul play citing even an insignificant mark as evidence against the partner. Also, any injury requiring over 20 days of medical care must be denounced by the professional medic who discovers it, leading to automatic indictment of the person who caused it.\nNordic countries.\nIn September 2010, a Swedish court acquitted a 32-year-old man of assault for engaging in consensual BDSM play with a 16-year-old girl (the age of consent in Sweden is 15). Norway's legal system has likewise taken a similar position, that safe and consensual BDSM play should not be subject to criminal prosecution. This parallels the stance of the mental health professions in the Nordic countries which have removed sadomasochism from their respective lists of psychiatric illnesses.\nSwitzerland.\nThe age of consent in Switzerland is 16 years, which also applies to BDSM play. Minors (i.e., those under 16) are not subject to punishment for BDSM play as long as the age difference between them is less than three years. Certain practices, however, require granting consent for light injuries, with only those over 18 permitted to give consent. On 1 April 2002, Articles 135 and 197 of the Swiss Criminal Code were tightened to make ownership of \"objects or demonstrations [...] which depict sexual acts with violent content\" a punishable offense. This law amounts to a general criminalization of sado-masochism since nearly every sado-masochist will have some kind of media that fulfills this criterion. Critics also object to the wording of the law which puts sado-masochists in the same category as pedophiles and pederasts.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn British law, consent is an absolute defense to common assault, but not necessarily to actual bodily harm, where courts may decide that consent is not valid, as occurred in the case of \"R v Brown\". Accordingly, consensual activities in the U.K. may not constitute \"assault occasioning actual or grievous bodily harm\" in law. The Spanner Trust states that this is defined as activities which have caused injury \"of a lasting nature\" but that only a slight duration or injury might be considered \"lasting\" in law. The decision contrasts with the later case of \"R v Wilson\" in which conviction for non-sexual consensual branding within a marriage was overturned, the appeal court ruling that \"R v Brown\" was not an authority in all cases of consensual injury and criticizing the decision to prosecute.\nFollowing Operation Spanner, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in January 1999 in \"Laskey, Jaggard and Brown v. United Kingdom\" that no violation of Article 8 occurred because the amount of physical or psychological harm that the law allows between any two people, even consenting adults, is to be determined by the jurisdiction the individuals live in, as it is the State's responsibility to balance the concerns of public health and well-being with the amount of control a State should be allowed to exercise over its citizens. In the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill 2007, the British Government cited the Spanner case as justification for criminalizing images of consensual acts, as part of its proposed criminalization of possession of \"extreme pornography\". Another contrasting case was that of Stephen Lock in 2013, who was cleared of actual bodily harm on the grounds that the woman consented. In this case, the act was deemed to be sexual.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Federal law does not list a specific criminal determination for consensual BDSM acts. Many BDSM practitioners cite the legal decision of \"People v. Jovanovic\", 95 N.Y.2d 846 (2000), or the \"Cybersex Torture Case\", which was the first U.S. appellate decision to hold (in effect) that one does not commit assault if the victim consents. However, many individual states do criminalize specific BDSM actions within their state borders. Some states specifically address the idea of \"consent to BDSM acts\" within their assault laws, such as the state of New Jersey, which defines \"simple assault\" to be \"a disorderly persons offense unless committed in a fight or scuffle \"entered into by mutual consent\", in which case it is a petty disorderly persons offense\".\nOregon Ballot Measure 9 was a ballot measure in the U.S. state of Oregon in 1992, concerning sadism, masochism, gay rights, pedophilia, and public education, that drew widespread national attention. It would have added the following text to the Oregon Constitution:\nIt was defeated in the 3 November 1992 general election with 638,527 votes in favor, 828,290 votes against.\nThe National Coalition for Sexual Freedom collects reports about punishment for sexual activities engaged in by consenting adults, and about its use in child custody cases.\nCultural aspects.\nToday, the BDSM culture exists in most Western countries. This offers BDSM practitioners the opportunity to discuss BDSM relevant topics and problems with like-minded people. This culture is often viewed as a subculture, mainly because BDSM is often still regarded as \"unusual\" by some of the public. Many people hide their leaning from society since they are afraid of the incomprehension and of social exclusion.\nIn contrast to frameworks seeking to explain sadomasochism through psychological, psychoanalytic, medical or forensic approaches, which seek to categorize behaviour and desires and find a root \"cause\", Romana Byrne suggests that such practices can be seen as examples of \"aesthetic sexuality\", in which a founding physiological or psychological impulse is irrelevant. Rather, sadism and masochism may be practiced through choice and deliberation, driven by certain aesthetic goals tied to style, pleasure, and identity. These practices, in certain circumstances and contexts, can be compared with the creation of art.\nSymbols.\nOne of the most commonly used symbols of the BDSM community is a derivation of a triskelion shape within a circle. Various forms of triskele have had many uses and many meanings in many cultures; its BDSM usage derives from the \"Ring of O\" in the classic book \"Story of O\". The BDSM Emblem Project claims copyright over one particular specified form of the triskelion symbol; other variants of the triskelion are free from such copyright claims.\nThe triskelion as a BDSM symbol can easily be perceived as the three separate parts of the acronym BDSM; which are BD, DS, and SM (Bondage &amp; Discipline, Dominance &amp; Submission, Sadism &amp; Masochism). They are three separate items, that are normally associated together.\nThe leather pride flag, shown to the right, is a symbol for the leather subculture and also widely used within BDSM. In continental Europe, the \"Ring of O\" is widespread among BDSM practitioners.\nThe BDSM rights flag, shown to the right, was designed by Tanos, a Master from the United Kingdom. It is partially loosely based on the design of the leather pride flag, and also includes a version of the BDSM Emblem (but not similar enough to fall within Steve Quagmyr's specific copyright claims for the Emblem). The BDSM rights flag is intended to represent the belief that people whose sexuality or relationship preferences include BDSM practices deserve the same human rights as everyone else, and should not be discriminated against for pursuing BDSM with consenting adults.\nThe flag is inspired by the leather pride flag and BDSM emblem but is specifically intended to represent the concept of BDSM rights and to be without the other symbols' restrictions against commercial use. It is designed to be recognizable by people familiar with either the leather pride flag or BDSM triskelion (or triskele) as \"something to do with BDSM\"; and to be distinctive whether reproduced in full colour, or in black and white (or another pair of colours).\nBDSM and fetish items and styles have been spread widely in Western societies' everyday life by different factors, such as avant-garde fashion, heavy metal, goth subculture, and science fiction TV series, and are often not consciously connected with their BDSM roots by many people. While it was mainly confined to the punk and BDSM subcultures in the 1990s, it has since spread into wider parts of Western societies.\nTheater.\nAlthough it would be possible to establish certain elements related to BDSM in classical theater, not until the emergence of contemporary theater would some plays have BDSM as the main theme. Exemplifying this are two works: one Austrian, one German, in which BDSM is not only incorporated but integral to the storyline of the play.\nLiterature.\nAlthough examples of literature catering to BDSM and fetishistic tastes were created in earlier periods, BDSM literature as it exists today cannot be found much earlier than World War II.\nThe word \"sadism\" originates from the works of Donatien Alphonse Fran\u00e7ois, Marquis de Sade, and the word \"masochism\" originates from Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, the author of \"Venus in Furs\". However, it is worth noting that the Marquis de Sade describes non-consensual abuse in his works, such as in \"Justine\". \"Venus in Furs\" describes a consensual dom-sub relationship.\nA central work in modern BDSM literature is undoubtedly \"Story of O\" (1954) by Anne Desclos under the pseudonym Pauline R\u00e9age.\nOther notable works include \"9\u00bd Weeks\" (1978) by Elizabeth McNeill, some works of the writer Anne Rice (\"Exit to Eden\", and her \"Claiming of Sleeping Beauty\" series of books), Jeanne de Berg (\"L'Image\" (1956) dedicated to Pauline R\u00e9age), the Gor series by John Norman, and naturally all the works of Patrick Califia, Gloria Brame, the group Samois and many of the writer Georges Bataille (\"Histoire de l'oeil-Story of the Eye\", Madame Edwarda, 1937), as well as those of Bob Flanagan (\"Slave Sonnets\" (1986), \"Fuck Journal\" (1987), \"A Taste of Honey\" (1990)). A common part of many of the poems of Pablo Neruda is a reflection on feelings and sensations arising from the relations of EPE or erotic exchange of power. The \"Fifty Shades\" trilogy is a series of very popular erotic romance novels by E. L. James which involves BDSM; however, the novels have been criticized for their inaccurate and harmful depiction of BDSM.\nIn the 21st century, a number of prestigious university presses, such as Duke University, Indiana University and University of Chicago, have published books on BDSM written by professors, thereby lending academic legitimacy to this once taboo topic."}
{"id": "4547", "revid": "41373646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4547", "title": "Bash (Unix shell)", "text": "In computing, Bash (short for \"\"Bourne Again SHell\",\") is an interactive command interpreter and command programming language developed for UNIX-like operating systems. Created in 1989 by Brian Fox for the GNU Project, it is supported by the Free Software Foundation and designed as a 100% free alternative for the Bourne shell (codice_1) and other proprietary Unix shells.\nSince its inception, Bash has gained widespread adoption and is commonly used as the default login shell for numerous Linux distributions. It holds historical significance as one of the earliest programs ported to Linux by Linus Torvalds, alongside the GNU Compiler (GCC). It is available on nearly all modern operating systems, making it a versatile tool in various computing environments.\nAs a command-line interface (CLI), Bash operates within a text window where users input commands to execute various tasks. It also supports the execution of commands from files, known as shell scripts, facilitating automation. In keeping with Unix shell conventions, Bash incorporates a rich set of features. The keywords, syntax, dynamically scoped variables, and other basic features of the language are all copied from the Bourne shell, codice_1. Other features, e.g., history, are copied from the C shell, codice_3, and the Korn Shell, codice_4. It is a POSIX-compliant shell with extensions.\nHistory.\nWhile Bash was developed for UNIX and UNIX-like operating systems, such as GNU/Linux, it is also available on Android, macOS, Windows, and numerous other current and historical operating systems. \"Although there have been attempts to create specialized shells, the Bourne shell derivatives continue to be the primary shells in use.\"&lt;ref name=\"IBM, 2011\"&gt;"}
{"id": "4548", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4548", "title": "Blizzard", "text": "A blizzard is a severe snowstorm characterized by strong sustained winds and low visibility, lasting for a prolonged period of time\u2014typically at least three or four hours. A ground blizzard is a weather condition where snow that has already fallen is being blown by wind. Blizzards can have an immense size and usually stretch to hundreds or thousands of kilometres.\nDefinition and etymology.\nIn the United States, the National Weather Service defines a blizzard as a severe snow storm characterized by strong winds causing blowing snow that results in low visibilities. The difference between a blizzard and a snowstorm is the strength of the wind, not the amount of snow. To be a blizzard, a snow storm must have sustained winds or frequent gusts that are greater than or equal to with blowing or drifting snow which reduces visibility to or less and must last for a prolonged period of time\u2014typically three hours or more.\nEnvironment Canada defines a blizzard as a storm with wind speeds exceeding accompanied by visibility of or less, resulting from snowfall, blowing snow, or a combination of the two. These conditions must persist for a period of at least four hours for the storm to be classified as a blizzard, except north of the arctic tree line, where that threshold is raised to six hours.\nThe Australia Bureau of Meteorology describes a blizzard as, \"Violent and very cold wind which is laden with snow, some part, at least, of which has been raised from snow covered ground.\"\nWhile severe cold and large amounts of drifting snow may accompany blizzards, they are not required. Blizzards can bring whiteout conditions, and can paralyze regions for days at a time, particularly where snowfall is unusual or rare.\nA severe blizzard has winds over , near zero visibility, and temperatures of or lower. In Antarctica, blizzards are associated with winds spilling over the edge of the ice plateau at an average velocity of .\nGround blizzard refers to a weather condition where loose snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds. The primary difference between a ground blizzard as opposed to a regular blizzard is that in a ground blizzard no precipitation is produced at the time, but rather all the precipitation is already present in the form of snow or ice at the surface.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" concludes the term \"blizzard\" is likely onomatopoeic, derived from the same sense as \"blow, blast, blister, and bluster\"; the first recorded use of it for weather dates to 1829, when it was defined as a \"violent blow\". It achieved its modern definition by 1859, when it was in use in the western United States. The term became common in the press during the harsh winter of 1880\u201381.\nUnited States storm systems.\nIn the United States, storm systems powerful enough to cause blizzards usually form when the jet stream dips far to the south, allowing cold, dry polar air from the north to clash with warm, humid air moving up from the south.\nWhen cold, moist air from the Pacific Ocean moves eastward to the Rocky Mountains and the Great Plains, and warmer, moist air moves north from the Gulf of Mexico, all that is needed is a movement of cold polar air moving south to form potential blizzard conditions that may extend from the Texas Panhandle to the Great Lakes and Midwest. A blizzard also may be formed when a cold front and warm front mix together and a blizzard forms at the border line.\nAnother storm system occurs when a cold core low over the Hudson Bay area in Canada is displaced southward over southeastern Canada, the Great Lakes, and New England. When the rapidly moving cold front collides with warmer air coming north from the Gulf of Mexico, strong surface winds, significant cold air advection, and extensive wintry precipitation occur.\nLow pressure systems moving out of the Rocky Mountains onto the Great Plains, a broad expanse of flat land, much of it covered in prairie, steppe and grassland, can cause thunderstorms and rain to the south and heavy snows and strong winds to the north. With few trees or other obstructions to reduce wind and blowing, this part of the country is particularly vulnerable to blizzards with very low temperatures and whiteout conditions. In a true whiteout, there is no visible horizon. People can become lost in their own front yards, when the door is only away, and they would have to feel their way back. Motorists have to stop their cars where they are, as the road is impossible to see.\nNor'easter blizzards.\nA nor'easter is a macro-scale storm that occurs off the New England and Atlantic Canada coastlines. It gets its name from the direction the wind is coming from. The usage of the term in North America comes from the wind associated with many different types of storms, some of which can form in the North Atlantic Ocean and some of which form as far south as the Gulf of Mexico. The term is most often used in the coastal areas of New England and Atlantic Canada. This type of storm has characteristics similar to a hurricane. More specifically, it describes a low-pressure area whose center of rotation is just off the coast and whose leading winds in the left-forward quadrant rotate onto land from the northeast. High storm waves may sink ships at sea and cause coastal flooding and beach erosion. Notable nor'easters include The Great Blizzard of 1888, one of the worst blizzards in U.S. history. It dropped of snow and had sustained winds of more than that produced snowdrifts in excess of . Railroads were shut down and people were confined to their houses for up to a week. It killed 400 people, mostly in New York.\nHistoric events.\n1972 Iran blizzard.\nThe 1972 Iran blizzard, which caused 4,000 reported deaths, was the deadliest blizzard in recorded history. Dropping as much as of snow, it completely covered 200 villages. After a snowfall lasting nearly a week, an area the size of Wisconsin was entirely buried in snow.\n2008 Afghanistan blizzard.\nThe 2008 Afghanistan blizzard, was a fierce blizzard that struck Afghanistan on 10 January 2008. Temperatures fell to a low of , with up to of snow in the more mountainous regions, killing at least 926 people. It was the third deadliest blizzard in history. The weather also claimed more than 100,000 sheep and goats, and nearly 315,000 cattle died.\nThe Snow Winter of 1880\u20131881.\nThe winter of 1880\u20131881 is widely considered the most severe winter ever known in many parts of the United States. \nThe initial blizzard in October 1880 brought snowfalls so deep that two-story homes experienced \"accumulations\", as opposed to drifts, up to their second-floor windows. No one was prepared for deep snow so early in the winter. Farmers from North Dakota to Virginia were caught flat with fields unharvested, what grain that had been harvested unmilled, and their suddenly all-important winter stocks of wood fuel only partially collected. By January train service was almost entirely suspended from the region. Railroads hired scores of men to dig out the tracks but as soon as they had finished shoveling a stretch of line a new storm arrived, burying it again.\nThere were no winter thaws and on February 2, 1881, a second massive blizzard struck that lasted for nine days. In towns the streets were filled with solid drifts to the tops of the buildings and tunneling was necessary to move about. Homes and barns were completely covered, compelling farmers to construct fragile tunnels in order to feed their stock.\nWhen the snow finally melted in late spring of 1881, huge sections of the plains experienced flooding. Massive ice jams clogged the Missouri River, and when they broke the downstream areas were inundated. Most of the town of Yankton, in what is now South Dakota, was washed away when the river overflowed its banks after the thaw.\nNovelization.\nMany children\u2014and their parents\u2014learned of \"The Snow Winter\" through the children's book \"The Long Winter\" by Laura Ingalls Wilder, in which the author tells of her family's efforts to survive. The snow arrived in October 1880 and blizzard followed blizzard throughout the winter and into March 1881, leaving many areas snowbound throughout the winter. Accurate details in Wilder's novel include the blizzards' frequency and the deep cold, the Chicago and North Western Railway stopping trains until the spring thaw because the snow made the tracks impassable, the near-starvation of the townspeople, and the courage of her future husband Almanzo and another man, Cap Garland, who ventured out on the open prairie in search of a cache of wheat that no one was even sure existed.\nThe Storm of the Century.\nThe Storm of the Century, also known as the Great Blizzard of 1993, was a large cyclonic storm that formed over the Gulf of Mexico on March 12, 1993, and dissipated in the North Atlantic Ocean on March 15. It is unique for its intensity, massive size and wide-reaching effect. At its height, the storm stretched from Canada towards Central America, but its main impact was on the United States and Cuba. The cyclone moved through the Gulf of Mexico, and then through the Eastern United States before moving into Canada. Areas as far south as northern Alabama and Georgia received a dusting of snow and areas such as Birmingham, Alabama, received up to with hurricane-force wind gusts and record low barometric pressures. Between Louisiana and Cuba, hurricane-force winds produced high storm surges across northwestern Florida, which along with scattered tornadoes killed dozens of people. In the United States, the storm was responsible for the loss of electric power to over 10\u00a0million customers. It is purported to have been directly experienced by nearly 40\u00a0percent of the country's population at that time. A total of 310 people, including 10 from Cuba, perished during this storm. The storm cost $6 to $10 billion in damages."}
{"id": "4550", "revid": "1271606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4550", "title": "Bikini", "text": "A bikini is a two-piece swimsuit primarily worn by women that features one piece on top that covers the breasts, and a second piece on the bottom: the front covering the pelvis but usually exposing the navel, and the back generally covering the intergluteal cleft and some or all of the buttocks. The size of the top and bottom can vary, from bikinis that offer full coverage of the breasts, pelvis, and buttocks, to more revealing designs with a thong or G-string bottom that covers only the mons pubis, but exposes the buttocks, and a top that covers only the areolae. Bikini bottoms covering about half the buttocks may be described as \"Brazilian-cut\".\nThe modern bikini swimsuit was introduced by French clothing designer Louis R\u00e9ard in July 1946, and was named after the Bikini Atoll, where the first public test of a nuclear bomb had taken place four days before.\nDue to its revealing design, the bikini was once considered controversial, facing opposition from a number of groups and being accepted only very slowly by the general public. In many countries, the design was banned from beaches and other public places: in 1949, France banned the bikini from being worn on its coastlines; Germany banned the bikini from public swimming pools until the 1970s, and some communist groups condemned the bikini as a \"capitalist decadence\". The bikini also faced criticism from some feminists, who reviled it as a garment designed to suit men's tastes, and not those of women. Despite this backlash, however, the bikini still sold well throughout the mid to late 20th century.\nThe bikini gained increased exposure and acceptance as film stars like Brigitte Bardot, Raquel Welch, and Ursula Andress wore it and were photographed on public beaches and seen in film. The minimalist bikini design became common in most Western countries by the mid-1960s as both swimwear and underwear. By the late 20th century, it was widely used as sportswear in beach volleyball and bodybuilding. There are a number of modern stylistic variations of the design used for marketing purposes and as industry classifications, including monokini, microkini, tankini, trikini, pubikini, skirtini, thong, and g-string. A man's single piece brief swimsuit may also be called a bikini or \"bikini brief\", particularly if it has slimmer sides. Similarly, a variety of men's and women's underwear types are described as bikini underwear. The bikini has gradually gained wide acceptance in Western society. By the early 2000s, bikinis had become a US$811\u00a0million business annually, and boosted spin off services such as bikini waxing and sun tanning.\nEtymology and terminology.\nWhile the two-piece swimsuit as a design existed in classical antiquity, the modern design first attracted public notice in Paris on July 5, 1946. \nIn May 1946, Parisian fashion designer Jacques Heim released a two-piece swimsuit design that he named the ('Atom') and advertised as \"the smallest swimsuit in the world\". Like swimsuits of the era, it covered the wearer's belly button, and it failed to attract much attention. French automotive engineer Louis R\u00e9ard introduced a design he named the \"Bikini\", adopting the name from the Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean, which was the colonial name the Germans gave to the atoll, borrowed from the Marshallese name for the island, . Four days earlier, on 1 July 1946, the United States had initiated its first peacetime nuclear weapons test at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads. Unlike the prior Trinity test, or most subsequent nuclear test series, the United States allowed both international observers and the global press to observe Crossroads, creating an intense international interest in the new weapon and its testing. R\u00e9ard never explained why he chose the name \"Bikini\" for the swimsuit. Various motivations have been attributed to his choosing of the name, including the idea that he hoped it would create \"explosive commercial and cultural reaction\" similar to the explosion at Bikini Atoll, that it was meant to be associated with the \"exotic allure of the tropical Pacific\", from the \"comparison of the effects of a scantily clad woman to the atomic bomb,\" and the idea that Reard's design had out-done Heim's design and \"split the \"atome\"\". R\u00e9ard's advertising slogan was that the Bikini was \"smaller than the smallest bathing suit in the world.\" The swimsuit's name was typically capitalized for several years after its coining.\nIt has been frequently cited as a major example of a \"psychological link between atomic destruction and sexuality\" in popular culture, which includes the stenciling of Rita Hayworth onto one of the bombs detonated at Crossroads, and its persistence in language has been argued as having \"trivialized and downplayed the reality of nuclear testing,\" given the contamination done by especially later US thermonuclear tests at Bikini and other Marshallese atolls.\nBy making an analogy with words like \"bilingual\" and \"bilateral\" containing the Latin prefix \"bi-\" (meaning \"two\" in Latin), the word \"bikini\" was first back-derived as consisting of two parts, [\"bi\" + \"kini\"] by Rudi Gernreich, who introduced the monokini in 1964. Later swimsuit designs like the tankini and trikini further cemented this derivation. Over time the \"\"\u2013kini\" family\" (as dubbed by author William Safire), including the \"\"\u2013ini\" sisters\" (as dubbed by designer Anne Cole), expanded into a variety of swimwear including the monokini (also known as a numokini or unikini), seekini, tankini, camikini, (also hipkini), minikini, face-kini, burkini, and microkini. The \"Language Report\", compiled by lexicographer Susie Dent and published by the Oxford University Press (OUP) in 2003, considers lexicographic inventions like bandeaukini and camkini, two variants of the tankini, important to observe. Although \"bikini\" was originally a registered trademark of R\u00e9ard, it has since become genericized.\nVariations of the term are used to describe stylistic variations for promotional purposes and industry classifications, including monokini, microkini, tankini, trikini, pubikini, bandeaukini and skirtini. A man's brief swimsuit may also be referred to as a bikini. Similarly, a variety of men's and women's underwear types are described as bikini underwear.\nHistory.\nIn antiquity.\nAccording to archaeologist James Mellaart, a mural from the Chalcolithic era (around 5600\u00a0BC) in \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck, Anatolia depicts a mother goddess astride two leopards wearing a costume somewhat like a bikini. The two-piece swimsuit can be traced back to the Greco-Roman world, where bikini-like garments worn by women athletes are depicted on urns and paintings dating back to 1400\u00a0BC.\nIn \"Coronation of the Winner,\" a mosaic in the floor of a Roman villa in Sicily that dates from the Diocletian period (286\u2013305\u00a0AD), young women participate in weightlifting, discus throwing, and running ball games dressed in bikini-like garments (technically bandeaukinis in modern lexicon). The mosaic, found in the Sicilian Villa Romana del Casale, features ten maidens who have been anachronistically dubbed the \"Bikini Girls\". Other Roman archaeological finds depict the goddess Venus in a similar garment. In Pompeii, depictions of Venus wearing a bikini were discovered in the Casa della Venere, in the \"tablinum\" of the House of Julia Felix, and in an atrium garden of Via Dell'Abbondanza.\nPrecursors in the West.\nSwimming or bathing outdoors was discouraged in the Christian West, so there was little demand or need for swimming or bathing costumes until the 18th century. The bathing gown of the 18th century was a loose ankle-length full-sleeve chemise-type gown made of wool or flannel that retained coverage and modesty.\nIn 1907, Australian swimmer and performer Annette Kellermann was arrested on a Boston beach for wearing form-fitting sleeveless one-piece knitted swimming tights that covered her from neck to toe, a costume she adopted from England, although it became accepted swimsuit attire for women in parts of Europe by 1910. In 1913, designer Carl Jantzen made the first functional two-piece swimwear. Inspired by the introduction of females into Olympic swimming he designed a close-fitting costume with shorts for the bottom and short sleeves for the top.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, people began to shift from \"taking in the water\" to \"taking in the sun\", at bathhouses and spas, and swimsuit designs shifted from functional considerations to incorporate more decorative features. Rayon was used in the 1920s in the manufacture of tight-fitting swimsuits, but durability issues, especially when wet, proved problematic. Jersey and silk were also sometimes used. By the 1930s, manufacturers had lowered necklines in the back, removed sleeves, and tightened the sides. With the development of new clothing materials, particularly latex and nylon, swimsuits gradually began hugging the body through the 1930s, with shoulder straps that could be lowered for tanning.\nWomen's swimwear of the 1930s and 1940s incorporated increasing degrees of midriff exposure. The 1932 Hollywood film \"Three on a Match\" featured a midriff-baring two-piece bathing suit. Actress Dolores del R\u00edo was the first major star to wear a two-piece women's bathing suit onscreen in \"Flying Down to Rio\" (1933).\nTeen magazines of late 1940s and 1950s featured similar designs of midriff-baring suits and tops. However, midriff fashion was stated as only for beaches and informal events and considered indecent to be worn in public. Hollywood endorsed the new glamor in films like 1949's \"Neptune's Daughter\" in which Esther Williams wore provocatively named costumes such as \"Double Entendre\" and \"Honey Child\".\nWartime production during World War II required vast amounts of cotton, silk, nylon, wool, leather, and rubber. In 1942, the United States War Production Board issued Regulation L-85, cutting the use of natural fibers in clothing and mandating a 10% reduction in the amount of fabric in women's beachwear. To comply with the regulations, swimsuit manufacturers removed skirt panels and other attachments, while increasing production of the two-piece swimsuit with bare midriffs. At the same time, demand for all swimwear declined as there was not much interest in going to the beach, especially in Europe.\nModern bikini.\nIn the summer of 1946, Western Europeans enjoyed their first war-free summer in many years. French designers sought to deliver fashions that matched the liberated mood of the people. Fabric was still in short supply, and in an endeavor to resurrect swimwear sales, two French designers\u00a0\u2013 Jacques Heim and Louis R\u00e9ard\u00a0\u2013 almost simultaneously launched new two-piece swimsuit designs in 1946. Heim launched a two-piece swimsuit design in Paris that he called the \"atome\", after the smallest known particle of matter. He announced that it was the \"world's smallest bathing suit.\" Although briefer than the two-piece swimsuits of the 1930s, the bottom of Heim's new two-piece beach costume still covered the wearer's navel.\nSoon after, Louis R\u00e9ard created a competing two-piece swimsuit design, which he called the \"bikini\". He noticed that women at the beach rolled up the edges of their swimsuit bottoms and tops to improve their tan. On 5 July, R\u00e9ard introduced his design at a swimsuit review held at a popular Paris public pool, Piscine Molitor, four days after the first test of a US nuclear weapon at the Bikini Atoll. The newspapers were full of news about it and R\u00e9ard hoped for the same with his design. R\u00e9ard's \"bikini\" undercut Heim's \"atome\" in its brevity. His design consisted of two side-by-side triangles of fabric forming a bra, and two front-and-back triangular pieces of fabric covering the mons pubis and the buttocks, respectively, connected by string. When he was unable to find a fashion model willing to showcase his revealing design, R\u00e9ard hired Micheline Bernardini, an 18-year old nude dancer from the Casino de Paris. He announced that his swimsuit, was \"smaller than the world's smallest bathing suit\". R\u00e9ard said that \"like the [atom] bomb, the bikini is small and devastating\". Fashion writer Diana Vreeland described the bikini as the \"atom bomb of fashion\". Bernardini received 50,000 fan letters, many of them from men.\nPhotographs of Bernardini and articles about the event were widely carried by the press. The \"International Herald Tribune\" alone ran nine stories on the event. French newspaper \"Le Figaro\" wrote, \"People were craving the simple pleasures of the sea and the sun. For women, wearing a bikini signaled a kind of second liberation. There was really nothing sexual about this. It was instead a celebration of freedom and a return to the joys in life.\"\nHeim's \"atome\" was more in keeping with the sense of propriety of the 1940s, but R\u00e9ard's design won the public's attention. Although Heim's design was the first worn on the beach and initially sold more swimsuits, it was R\u00e9ard's description of the two-piece swimsuit as a \"bikini\" that stuck. As competing designs emerged, he declared in advertisements that a swimsuit could not be a genuine bikini \"unless it could be pulled through a wedding ring.\" Modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey.\nSocial resistance.\nDespite the garment's initial success in France, women worldwide continued to wear traditional one-piece swimsuits. When his sales stalled, R\u00e9ard went back to designing and selling orthodox knickers. In 1950, American swimsuit mogul Fred Cole, owner of mass market swimwear firm Cole of California, told \"Time\" that he had \"little but scorn for France's famed Bikinis.\" R\u00e9ard himself would later describe it as a \"two-piece bathing suit which reveals everything about a girl except for her mother's maiden name.\" Fashion magazine \"Modern Girl Magazine\" in 1957 stated that \"it is hardly necessary to waste words over the so-called bikini since it is inconceivable that any girl with tact and decency would ever wear such a thing\".\nIn 1951, Eric Morley organized the \"Festival Bikini Contest\", a beauty contest and swimwear advertising opportunity at that year's Festival of Britain. The press, welcoming the spectacle, referred to it as \"Miss World\", a name Morley registered as a trademark. The winner was Kiki H\u00e5kansson of Sweden, who was crowned in a bikini. After the crowning, H\u00e5kansson was condemned by Pope Pius XII, while Spain and Ireland threatened to withdraw from the pageant. In 1952, bikinis were banned from the pageant and replaced by evening gowns. As a result of the controversy, the bikini was explicitly banned from many other beauty pageants worldwide. Although some regarded the bikini and beauty contests as bringing freedom to women, they were opposed by some feminists as well as religious and cultural groups who objected to the degree of exposure of the female body.\nPaula Stafford was an Australian fashion designer credited with introducing the bikini to Australia; in a famous incident in 1952, model Ann Ferguson was asked to leave a beach in Surfers Paradise because her Paula Stafford bikini was too revealing. The bikini was banned in Australia, on the French Atlantic coastline, in Spain, in Italy, and in Portugal, and was prohibited or discouraged in a number of US states. The United States Motion Picture Production Code, also known as the Hays Code, enforced from 1934, allowed two-piece gowns but prohibited the display of navels in Hollywood films. The National Legion of Decency, a Roman Catholic body overseeing American media content, also pressured Hollywood and foreign film producers to keep bikinis from being featured in Hollywood movies. As late as 1959 one of the United States' largest swimsuit designers, Anne Cole of the Anne Cole brand, said, \"It's nothing more than a G-string. It's at the razor's edge of decency.\" The Hays Code was abandoned by the mid-1960s, and with it the prohibition of female navel exposure, as well as other restrictions. The influence of the National Legion of Decency also waned by the 1960s.\nRise to popularity.\nIncreasingly common glamour shots of popular actresses and models on either side of the Atlantic played a large part in bringing the bikini into the mainstream. During the 1950s, Hollywood stars such as Ava Gardner, Rita Hayworth, Lana Turner, Elizabeth Taylor, Tina Louise, Marilyn Monroe, Esther Williams, and Betty Grable took advantage of the risqu\u00e9 publicity associated with the bikini by posing for photographs wearing them\u2014pin-ups of Hayworth and Williams in costume were especially widely distributed in the United States. In 1950, Elvira Pag\u00e3 walked at the Rio Carnival, Brazil in a golden bikini, starting the bikini tradition of the carnival.\nIn Europe, 17-year-old Brigitte Bardot wore scanty bikinis (by contemporary standards) in the French film \"Manina, la fille sans voiles\" (\"Manina, the girl unveiled\"). The promotion for the film, released in France in March 1953, drew more attention to Bardot's bikinis than to the film itself. By the time the film was released in the United States in 1958, it was re-titled \"Manina, the Girl in the Bikini\". Bardot was also photographed wearing a bikini on the beach during the 1957 Cannes Film Festival. Working with her husband and agent Roger Vadim, she garnered significant attention with photographs of her wearing a bikini on every beach in the south of France.\nSimilar photographs were taken of Anita Ekberg and Sophia Loren, among others. According to \"The Guardian\", Bardot's photographs in particular turned Saint-Tropez into the beachwear capital of the world, with Bardot identified as the original Cannes bathing beauty. Bardot's photography helped to enhance the public profile of the festival, and Cannes in turn played a crucial role in her career.\nBrian Hyland's novelty-song hit \"Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini\" became a \"Billboard\" No. 1 hit during the summer of 1960: the song tells a story about a young girl who is too shy to wear her new bikini on the beach, thinking it too risqu\u00e9. \"Playboy\" first featured a bikini on its cover in 1962; the \"Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue\" debut two years later featured Babette March in a white bikini on the cover. This has been credited with making the bikini a legitimate piece of clothing.\nUrsula Andress, appearing as Honey Ryder in the 1962 British James Bond film, \"Dr. No\", wore a white bikini, which became known as the \"Dr. No bikini\". It became one of the most famous bikinis of all time and an iconic moment in cinematic and fashion history. Andress said that she owed her career to that white bikini, remarking, \"This bikini made me into a success. As a result of starring in \"Dr. No\" as the first Bond girl, I was given the freedom to take my pick of future roles and to become financially independent.\"\nThe bikini finally caught on, and in 1963, the movie \"Beach Party\", starring Annette Funicello and Frankie Avalon, led a wave of films that made the bikini a pop-culture symbol, though Funicello was barred from wearing R\u00e9ard's bikini unlike the other young females in the films. In 1965, a woman told \"Time\" that it was \"almost square\" not to wear a bikini; the magazine wrote two years later that \"65% of the young set had already gone over\".\nRaquel Welch's fur bikini in \"One Million Years B.C.\" (1966) gave the world the most iconic bikini shot of all time and the poster image became an iconic moment in cinema history. Her deer skin bikini in \"One Million Years B.C.\", advertised as \"mankind's first bikini\", (1966) was later described as a \"definitive look of the 1960s\". Her role wearing the leather bikini made Welch a fashion icon and the photo of her in the bikini became a best-selling pinup poster.\nStretch nylon bikini briefs and bras complemented the adolescent boutique fashions of the 1960s, allowing those to be minimal. DuPont introduced lycra (DuPont's name for spandex) in the same decade. Spandex expanded the range of novelty fabrics available to designers which meant suits could be made to fit like a second skin without heavy linings. \"The advent of Lycra allowed more women to wear a bikini,\" wrote Kelly Killoren Bensimon, a former model and author of \"The Bikini Book\", \"It didn't sag, it didn't bag, and it concealed and revealed. It wasn't so much like lingerie anymore.\" Increased reliance on stretch fabric led to simplified construction. This fabric allowed designers to create the string bikini, and allowed Rudi Gernreich to create the topless monokini. Alternative swimwear fabrics such as velvet, leather, and crocheted squares surfaced in the early '70s.\nMass acceptance.\nR\u00e9ard's company folded in 1988, four years after his death. Meanwhile, the bikini had become the most popular beachwear around the globe. According to French fashion historian Olivier Saillard, this was due to \"the power of women, and not the power of fashion\". By 1988 the bikini made up nearly 20% of swimsuit sales, more than any other model in the US, though one-piece suits made a comeback during the 1980s and early 1990s. In 1997, Miss Maryland Jamie Fox became the first contestant in 50 years to compete in a two-piece swimsuit at the Miss America Pageant. Actresses in action films like \"Blue Crush\" (2002) and \"\" (2003) made the two-piece \"the millennial equivalent of the power suit\", according to Gina Bellafonte of \"The New York Times.\"According to Beth Dincuff Charleston, research associate at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, \"The bikini represents a social leap involving body consciousness, moral concerns, and sexual attitudes.\" By the early 2000s, bikinis had become a $811\u00a0million business annually, according to the NPD Group, a consumer and retail information company, and had boosted spin-off services like bikini waxing and the sun tanning industries. The first bikini museum in the world is being built in Bad Rappenau in Germany. The development of swimwear from 1880 to the present is presented on 2,000 square metres of exhibition space.\nBy 2017, the global swimwear market was valued at US$18,5 billion with a compound annual growth rate of 6.2%. Part of the increased consumption of bikinis and swimwears can be attributed to influencers who promote and endorse various brands around the year. Soccer player and best selling author Mo Isom describes it as, \"We're flooded with Instagram bikini pics.\" It was estimated in 2016 that in 2019 the USA would be the largest swimwear market (US$10 billion), followed by Europe (US$5 billion), Asia\u2013Pacific (US$4 billion) and Middle East and Africa (about 1 billion).\nOutside the Western world.\nThe 1967 Bollywood film \"An Evening in Paris\" is mostly remembered because it featured actress Sharmila Tagore as the first Indian actress to wear a bikini on film. She also posed in a bikini for the glossy \"Filmfare\" magazine. The costume shocked a conservative Indian audience, but it also set in motion a trend carried forward by Zeenat Aman in \"Heera Panna\" (1973) and \"Qurbani\" (1980), Dimple Kapadia in \"Bobby\" (1973), and Parveen Babi in \"Yeh Nazdeekiyan\" (1982). Indonesian actress Nurnaningsih's bikini clad photos were widely distributed in early 1950s, though she was banned in Kalimantan.\nIndian women generally wear bikinis when they vacation abroad or in Goa without the family. But, despite the conservative ideas prevalent in India, bikinis also become more popular in summer when women, from Bollywood stars to the middle class, take up swimming, often in a public space. A lot of tankinis, shorts and single-piece swimsuits are sold in the summer, along with real bikinis and bandeaukinis. The maximum sales for bikinis happen in the winter, the honeymoon season. For more coverage, designers Shivan Bhatiya and Narresh Kukreja invented the bikini-saree popularised by TV anchor Mandira Bedi.\nBy the end of the first decade of the 21st century, the Chinese bikini industry became a serious international threat for the Brazilian bikini industry. Huludao, Liaoning, China set the world record for the largest bikini parade in 2012, with 1,085 participants and a photo shoot involving 3,090 women. \"Beijing bikini\" refers to the Chinese urban practice of men rolling up their shirts to expose their midriff to cool off in public in the summer. In Japan, wearing a bikini is common on the beach and at baths or pools. But, according to a 2013 study, 94% women are not body confident enough to wear a bikini in public without resorting to sarongs, zip-up sweatshirts, T-shirts, or shorts. Japanese women also often wear a \"facekini\" to protect their face from sunburns.\nIn most parts of the Middle East, bikinis are either banned or are highly controversial. On March 18, 1973, when Lebanese magazine \"Ash-Shabaka\" printed a bikini-clad woman on the cover, they had to make a second version with only the face of the model. In 2011, when Huda Naccache (Miss Earth 2011) posed for the cover of \"Lilac\" (based in Israel), she became the first bikini-clad Arab model on the cover of an Arabic magazine. Lebanese-Australian fashion designer Aheda Zanetti created the \"burkini\" as a modest option to the bikini, which has become very popular among Muslims. Rehab Shaaban, an Egyptian designer, tried an even more abaya-like design, but her design was banned due to safety reasons.\nVariants.\nWhile the name \"bikini\" was at first applied only to beachwear that revealed the wearer's navel, today the fashion industry considers any two-piece swimsuit a bikini. Modern bikini fashions are characterized by a simple, brief design: two triangles of fabric that form a bra and cover the woman's breasts and a third that forms a panty cut below the navel that covers the groin and the intergluteal cleft.\nBikinis can and have been made out of almost every possible clothing material, and the fabrics and other materials used to make bikinis are an essential element of their design. Modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey, but in the 1960s, Lycra became the common material. Alternative swimwear fabrics such as velvet, leather, and crocheted squares surfaced in the early 1970s.\nIn a single fashion show in 1985, there were two-piece suits with cropped tank tops instead of the usual skimpy bandeaux, suits that resembled bikinis from the front and one-pieces from the back, suspender straps, ruffles, and deep navel-baring cutouts. Metal and stone jewelry pieces are now often used to dress up look and style according to tastes. To meet the fast pace of demands, some manufacturers now offer made-to-order bikinis ready in as few as seven minutes. The world's most expensive bikini was designed in February 2006 by Susan Rosen; containing of diamond, it was valued at \u00a320\u00a0million.\nMajor styles.\nThere is a range of distinct bikini styles available \u2014 string/tie-side bikinis, monokinis (topless or top and bottom connected), trikinis (three pieces instead of two), tankinis (tank top, bikini bottom), camikinis (camisole top, bikini bottom), bandeaukinis (bandeau top, bikini bottom), skirtinis (bikini top, skirt bottom), microkinis, sling bikinis (or suspender bikinis), thong and g-string bikinis, and teardrop bikinis.\nIn sport.\nBikinis have become a major component of marketing various women's sports. It is an official uniform for beach volleyball and is widely worn in athletics and other sports. Sports bikinis have gained popularity since the 1990s. However, the trend has raised significant criticism in recent years among people who view it as an attempt to sell sex. Female swimmers do not commonly wear bikinis in competitive swimming. The International Swimming Federation (FINA) voted to prohibit female swimmers from racing in bikinis in its meeting at Rome in 1960.\nBeach volleyball.\nIn 1994, the bikini became the official uniform of women's Olympic beach volleyball. In 1999, the International Volleyball Federation (FIVB) standardized beach volleyball uniforms, with the bikini becoming the required uniform for women. That regulation bottom is called a \"bun-hugger\", and players names are often written on the back of the bottom.\nThe uniform made its Olympic debut at Bondi Beach, Sydney during the 2000 Summer Olympics amid some criticism. It was the fifth largest television audience of all the sports at the 2000 Games. Much of the interest was because of the sex appeal of bikini-clad players along with their athletic ability. Bikini-clad dancers and cheerleaders entertain the audience during match breaks in many beach volleyball tournaments, including the Olympics. Even indoor volleyball costumes followed suit to become smaller and tighter.\nHowever, the FIVB's mandating of the bikini ran into problems. Some sports officials consider it exploitative and impractical in colder weather. It also drew the ire of some athletes. At the 2006 Asian Games at Doha, Qatar, only one Muslim country\u00a0\u2013 Iraq\u00a0\u2013 fielded a team in the beach volleyball competition because of concerns that the uniform was inappropriate. They refused to wear bikinis. The weather during the evening games in 2012 London Olympics was so cold that the players sometimes had to wear shirts and leggings. Earlier in 2012, FIVB had announced it would allow shorts (maximum length above the knee) and sleeved tops at the games. Richard Baker, the federation spokesperson, said that \"many of these countries have religious and cultural requirements so the uniform needed to be more flexible\".\nThe bikini remains preferred by most players and corporate sponsors. US women's team has cited several advantages of bikini uniforms, such as comfort while playing on sand during hot weather. Competitors Natalie Cook and Holly McPeak support the bikini as a practical uniform for a sport played on sand during the heat of summer. Olympic gold medal winner Kerry Walsh said, \"I love our uniforms.\" According to fellow gold medalist Misty May-Treanor and Walsh it does not restrict movement.\nOne feminist viewpoint sees the bikini uniform as objectification of women athletes. US beach volleyball player Gabrielle Reece described the bikini bottoms as uncomfortable with constant \"yanking and fiddling.\" Many female beach volleyball players have sustained injuries by over-training the abdominal muscles while many others have gone through augmentation mammoplasty to look appealing in their uniforms. Australian competitor Nicole Sanderson said about match break entertainment that \"it's kind of disrespectful to the female players. I'm sure the male spectators love it, but I find it a little bit offensive.\"\nSports journalism expert Kimberly Bissell conducted a study on the camera angles used during the 2004 Summer Olympics beach volleyball games. Bissell found that 20% of the camera angles were focused on the women's chests, and 17% on their buttocks. Bissell theorized that the appearance of the players draws fans attention more than their actual athleticism.\nSports commentator Jeanne Moos commented, \"Beach volleyball has now joined go-go girl dancing as perhaps the only two professions where a bikini is the required uniform.\" British Olympian Denise Johns argues that the regulation uniform is intended to be \"sexy\" and to attract attention. Rub\u00e9n Acosta, president of the FIVB, says that it makes the game more appealing to spectators.\nBodybuilding.\nFrom the 1950s to mid-1970s, men's bodybuilding contest formats were often supplemented with women's beauty contests or bikini shows. The winners earned titles like Miss Body Beautiful, Miss Physical Fitness and Miss Americana, and also presented trophies to the winners of the men's contest. In the 1980s, the Ms Olympia competition started in the US and in the UK the NABBA (National Amateur Body Building Association) renamed Miss Bikini International to Ms Universe. In 1986, the Ms Universe competition was divided into two sections\u00a0\u2013 \"physique\" (for a more muscular physique) and \"figure\" (traditional feminine presentation in high heels). In November 2010 the IFBBF (International Federation of BodyBuilding &amp; Fitness) introduced a women's bikini contest for women who do not wish to build their muscles to figure competition levels.\nCostumes are regulation \"posing trunks\" (bikini briefs) for both men and women. Female bodybuilders in America are prohibited from wearing thongs or T-back swimsuits in contests filmed for television, though they are allowed to do so by certain fitness organizations in closed events. For men, the dress code specifies \"swim trunks only (no shorts, cut-off pants, or Speedos).\"\nOther sports.\nWomen in athletics often wear bikinis of similar size as those worn in beach volleyball. Amy Acuff, a US high-jumper, wore a black leather bikini instead of a track suit at the 2000 Summer Olympics. Runner Florence Griffith-Joyner mixed bikini bottoms with one-legged tights at the 1988 Summer Olympics, earning her more attention than her record-breaking performance in the women's 200 meters event. In the 2007 South Pacific Games, the rules were adjusted to allow players to wear less revealing shorts and cropped sports tops instead of bikinis. At the 2006 Asian Games, organizers banned bikini-bottoms for female athletes and asked them to wear long shorts.\nString bikinis and other revealing clothes are common in surfing, though most surfing bikinis are more robust with more coverage than sunning bikinis. \"Surfing Magazine\" printed a pictorial of Kymberly Herrin, \"Playboy\" Playmate March 1981, surfing in a revealing bikini, and eventually started an annual bikini issue. The Association of Surfing Professionals often pairs female surf meets with bikini contests, an issue that divides the female pro-surfing community into two parts. It has often been more profitable to win the bikini contest than the female surfing event.\nIn 2021, the Norway women's national beach handball team was fined \u20ac1500 for being improperly dressed after the women wore bike shorts instead of bikini bottoms at a European championship match in Bulgaria. Critics derided the fine and the underlying rule. Norway's minister for culture and sport Abid Raja described the fine as being \"completely ridiculous\". Former tennis champion Billie Jean King supported the team tweeting \"The sexualisation of women athletes must stop\". Although the Norwegian Handball Federation announced they would pay the fines, pop singer Pink offered to pay for them. Later, in November 2021, the International Handball Federation changed their dress rules to allow female players to wear some kinds of shorts, specifying \"Female athletes must wear short tight pants with a close fit\".\nBody ideals.\nIn 1950, American swimsuit mogul Fred Cole, owner of Cole of California, told \"Time\" that bikinis were designed for \"diminutive Gallic women\", as because \"French girls have short legs... swimsuits have to be hiked up at the sides to make their legs look longer.\" In 1961, \"The New York Times\" reported the opinion that the bikini is permissible for people who are not \"too fat or too thin\". In the 1960s etiquette writer Emily Post decreed that \"[A bikini] is for perfect figures only, and for the very young.\" In \"The Bikini Book\" by Kelly Killoren Bensimon, swimwear designer Norma Kamali says, \"Anyone with a tummy\" should not wear a bikini. Since then, a number of bikini designers including Malia Mills have encouraged women of all ages and body types to take up the style. The 1970s saw the rise of the lean ideal of female body and figures like Cheryl Tiegs. Her figure remained in vogue in the 21st century.\nThe fitness boom of the 1980s led to one of the biggest leaps in the evolution of the bikini. According to Mills, \"The leg line became superhigh, the front was superlow, and the straps were superthin.\" Women's magazines used terms like \"Bikini Belly\", and workout programs were launched to develop a \"bikini-worthy body\". The tiny \"fitness-bikinis\" made of lycra were launched to cater to this hardbodied ideal. Movies like \"Blue Crush\" and TV reality shows like \"Surf Girls\" merged the concepts of bikini models and athletes together, further accentuating the toned body ideal. Motivated by yearly Spring Break festivities that mark the start of the bikini season in North America, many women diet in an attempt to achieve the ideal bikini body; some take this to extremes including self-starvation, leading to eating disorders.\nIn 1993, Suzy Menkes, then Fashion Editor of the \"International Herald Tribune\", suggested that women had begun to \"revolt\" against the \"body ideal\" and bikini \"exposure.\" She wrote, \"Significantly, on the beaches as on the streets, some of the youngest and prettiest women (who were once the only ones who dared to bare) seem to have decided that exposure is over.\" Nevertheless, former professional beach volleyball player Gabrielle Reece, who competed in a bikini, claimed that \"confidence\" alone can make a bikini sexy. One survey commissioned by Diet Chef, a UK home delivery service, reported by \"The Today Show\" and ridiculed by \"More\" magazine, showed that women should stop wearing bikinis by the age of 47.\nBikini underwear.\nCertain types of underwear are described as bikini underwear and are designed for men and women. For women, bikini or bikini-style underwear is underwear that is similar in size and form to a regular bikini. It can refer to virtually any undergarment that provides less coverage to the midriff than lingerie, panties or knickers, especially suited to clothing such as crop tops. For men, bikini briefs are underpants that resemble women's bikini bottoms, being smaller and more revealing than men's classic briefs. Men's bikini briefs can be low- or high-side that are usually lower than the true waist, often at hips, and usually have no access pouch or flap, nor leg bands at tops of thighs. String bikini briefs have front and rear sections that meet in the crotch but not at the waistband, with no fabric on the side of the legs.\nSwimwear and underwear have similar design considerations, both being form-fitting garments. The main difference is that, unlike underwear, swimwear is open to public view. The swimsuit was, and is, following underwear styles, and at about the same time that attitudes towards the bikini began to change, underwear underwent a redesign towards a minimal, unboned design that emphasized comfort first.\nHistory.\nAs the swimsuit was evolving, underwear also started to change. Between 1900 and 1940, swimsuit lengths followed the changes in underwear designs. In the 1920s women started discarding the corset, while the Cadole company of Paris started developing something they called the \"breast girdle\". During the Great Depression, panties and bras became softly constructed and were made of various elasticized yarns making underwear fit like a second skin. By the 1930s underwear styles for both women and men were influenced by the new brief models of swimwear from Europe. Although the waistband was still above the navel, the leg openings of the panty brief were cut in an arc to rise from the crotch to the hip joint. The brief served as a template for most variations of panties for the rest of the century. Warner standardized the concept of Cup size in 1935. The first underwire bra was developed in 1938. Beginning in the late thirties, , a type of men's briefs, were introduced, featuring very high-cut leg openings and a lower rise to the waistband. Howard Hughes designed a push-up bra to be worn by Jane Russell in \"The Outlaw\" in 1943, although Russell stated in interviews that she never wore the 'contraption'. In 1950 Maidenform introduced the first official bust enhancing bra.\nBy the 1960s, the bikini swimsuit influenced panty styles and coincided with the cut of the new lower rise jeans and pants. In the seventies, with the emergence of skintight jeans, thong versions of the panty became mainstream, since the open, stringed back eliminated any tell-tale panty lines across the rear and hips. By the 1980s the design of the French-cut panty pushed the waistband back up to the natural waistline and the rise of the leg openings was nearly as high (French Cut panties come up to the waist, has a high cut leg, and usually are full in the rear). As with the bra and other type of lingerie, manufacturers of the last quarter of the century marketed panty styles that were designed primarily for their sexual allure. From this decade sexualization and eroticization of the male body was on the rise. The male body was celebrated through advertising campaigns for brands such as Calvin Klein, particularly by photographers Bruce Weber and Herb Ritts. Male bodies and men's undergarments were commodified and packaged for mass consumption, and swimwear and sportswear were influenced by sports photography and fitness. Over time, swimwear evolved from weighty wool to high-tech skin-tight garments, eventually cross-breeding with sportswear, underwear and exercise wear, resulting in the interchangeable fashions of the 1990s.\nMen's bikini.\nThe term \"men's bikini\" is sometimes used to describe swim briefs. Men's bikinis can have high or low side panels, and string sides or tie sides. Most lack a button or flap front. Unlike swim briefs, bikinis are not designed for drag reduction and generally lack a visible waistband. Suits less than 1.5 inches wide at the hips are less common for sporting purposes and are most often worn for recreation, fashion, and sun tanning. The posing brief standard to bodybuilding competitions is an example of this style. Male punk rock musicians have performed on stage wearing bikini briefs. The 2000 Bollywood film \"Hera Pheri\" shows men sunbathing in bikinis, who were mistakenly believed to be women from a distance.\nMale bikini tops also exist and are often used as visual gags. A \"mankini\" is a type of sling swimsuit worn by men. The term is inspired by the word bikini. It was popularized by English comedian Sacha Baron Cohen when he donned one for comic effect in the film \"Borat\".\nBikini waxing.\nBikini waxing is the epilation of pubic hair beyond the bikini line by use of waxing. The bikini line delineates the part of a woman's pubic area to be covered by the bottom part of a bikini, which means any pubic hair visible beyond the boundaries of a swimsuit. Visible pubic hair is widely culturally disapproved, considered to be embarrassing, and often removed.\nAs popularity of bikinis grew, the acceptability of pubic hair diminished. But, with certain styles of women's swimwear, pubic hair may become visible around the crotch area of a swimsuit. With the reduction in the size of swimsuits, especially since the advent of the bikini after 1945, the practice of bikini waxing has also become popular. The Brazilian style which became popular with the rise of thong bottoms.\nDepending on the style of bikini-bottom and the amount of skin visible outside the bikini, pubic hair may be styled into several styles: American waxing (removal of pubic hair from the sides, top of the thighs, and under the navel), French waxing (leaving only a vertical strip in front), or Brazilian waxing (removal of all hair in the pelvic area, particularly suitable for thong bottoms).\nBikini tan.\nThe tan lines created by the wearing of a bikini while tanning are known as a bikini tan. These tan lines separate pale breasts, crotch, and buttocks from otherwise tanned skin. Prominent bikini tan lines were popular in the 1990s, and a spa in Brazil started offering perfect bikini tan lines using masking tapes in 2016.\nAs bikini-style swimsuits leave most of the body exposed to potentially dangerous UV radiation, overexposure can cause sunburn, skin cancer, as well as other acute and chronic health effects on the skin, eyes, and immune system. As a result, medical organizations recommend that bikini wearers protect themselves from UV radiation by using broad-spectrum sunscreen, which has been shown to protect against sunburn, skin cancer, wrinkling and sagging skin.\nA 1969 innovation of tan-through swimwear uses fabric which is perforated with thousands of micro holes that are nearly invisible to the naked eye, but which let enough sunlight through to produce a line-free tan."}
{"id": "4551", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4551", "title": "Babur", "text": "Babur (; 14 February 148326 December 1530; born Zah\u012br ud-D\u012bn Muhammad) was the founder of the Mughal Empire in the Indian subcontinent. He was a descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan through his father and mother respectively. He was also given the posthumous name of \"Firdaws Makani\" ('Dwelling in Paradise').\nBorn in Andijan in the Fergana Valley (now in Uzbekistan), Babur was the eldest son of Umar Shaikh Mirza II (1456\u20131494, governor of Fergana from 1469 to 1494) and a great-great-great-grandson of Timur (1336\u20131405). Babur ascended the throne of Fergana in its capital Akhsikath in 1494 at the age of twelve and faced rebellion. He conquered Samarkand two years later, only to lose Fergana soon after. In his attempt to reconquer Fergana, he lost control of Samarkand. In 1501, his attempt to recapture both the regions failed when the Uzbek prince Muhammad Shaybani defeated him and founded the Khanate of Bukhara.\nIn 1504, he conquered Kabul, which was under the putative rule of Abdur Razaq Mirza, the infant heir of Ulugh Beg II. Babur formed a partnership with the Safavid emperor Ismail I and reconquered parts of Turkestan, including Samarkand, only to again lose it and the other newly conquered lands to the Shaybanids.\nAfter losing Samarkand for the third time, Babur turned his attention to India and employed aid from the neighbouring Safavid and Ottoman empires. He defeated Ibrahim Lodi, the Sultan of Delhi, at the First Battle of Panipat in 1526 and founded the Mughal Empire. Before the defeat of Lodi at Delhi, the Sultanate of Delhi had been a spent force, long in a state of decline.\nThe rival adjacent Kingdom of Mewar under the rule of Rana Sanga had become one of the most powerful states in North India. Sanga unified several Rajput clans for the first time after Prithviraj Chauhan and advanced on Babur with a grand coalition of 80,000-100,000 Rajputs, engaging Babur in the Battle of Khanwa. Babur arrived at Khanwa with 40,000-50,000 soldiers. Nonetheless, Sanga suffered a major defeat due to Babur's skillful troop positioning and use of gunpowder, specifically matchlocks and small cannons.\nThe Battle of Khanwa was one of the most decisive battles in Indian history, more so than the First Battle of Panipat, as the defeat of Rana Sanga was a watershed event in the Mughal conquest of North India.\nReligiously, Babur started his life as a staunch Sunni Muslim, but he underwent significant evolution. Babur became more tolerant as he conquered new territories and grew older, allowing other religions to peacefully coexist in his empire and at his court. He also displayed a certain attraction to theology, poetry, geography, history, and biology\u2014disciplines he promoted at his court\u2014earning him a frequent association with representatives of the Timurid Renaissance. His religious and philosophical stances are characterized as humanistic.\nBabur married several times. Notable among his children are Humayun, Kamran Mirza, Hindal Mirza, Masuma Sultan Begum, and the author Gulbadan Begum.\nBabur died in 1530 in Agra and Humayun succeeded him. Babur was first buried in Agra but, as per his wishes, his remains were moved to Kabul and reburied. He ranks as a national hero in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. Many of his poems have become popular folk songs. He wrote the \"Baburnama\" in Chaghatai Turkic; it was translated into Persian during the reign (1556\u20131605) of his grandson, the emperor Akbar.\nName.\n\"\u1e92ah\u012br-ud-D\u012bn\" is Arabic for \"Defender of the Faith\" (of Islam), and \"Muhammad\" honours the Islamic prophet. The name was chosen for Babur by the Sufi saint Khwaja Ahrar, who was the spiritual master of his father. The difficulty of pronouncing the name for his Central Asian Turco-Mongol army may have been responsible for the greater popularity of his nickname Babur, also variously spelled Baber, Babar, and B\u0101bor. The name is generally taken in reference to the Persian word \"babur\" (), meaning \"tiger\" or \"panther\". The word repeatedly appears in Ferdowsi's \"Shahnameh\" and was borrowed into the Turkic languages of Central Asia.\nBackground.\nBabur's memoirs form the main source for details of his life. They are known as the \"Baburnama\" and were written in Chagatai, his first language, though, according to Dale, \"his Turkic prose is highly Persianized in its sentence structure, morphology or word formation and vocabulary.\" \"Baburnama\" was translated into Persian during the rule of Babur's grandson Akbar.\nBabur was born on 14 February 1483 in the city of Andijan, Fergana Valley, contemporary Uzbekistan. He was the eldest son of Umar Shaikh Mirza II, ruler of the Fergana Valley, the son of Ab\u016b Sa\u02bf\u012bd Mirza (and grandson of Miran Shah, who was himself son of Timur) and his wife Qutlugh Nigar Khanum, daughter of Yunus Khan, the ruler of Moghulistan (a descendant of Genghis Khan).\nBabur hailed from the Turkic Barlas tribe, which was of Mongol origin and had embraced the Turco-Persian tradition They had also converted to Islam centuries earlier and resided in Turkestan and Khorasan.\nAside from the Chaghatai Turkic, Babur was equally fluent in Classical Persian, the lingua franca of the Timurid elite.\nSome of Babur's relatives, such as his uncles Mahmud Khan (Moghul Khan) and Ahmad Khan, continued to identify as Mongols, and allowed him to use their Mongol troops to help recover his fortunes in the turbulent years that followed.\nHence, Babur, though nominally a Mongol (or \"Moghul\" in Persian language), drew much of his support from the local Turkic and Iranian people of Central Asia, and his army was diverse in its ethnic makeup. It included Sarts, Tajiks, ethnic Afghans, Arabs, as well as Barlas and Chaghatayid Turko-Mongols from Central Asia.\nRuler of Central Asia.\nAs ruler of Fergana.\nIn 1494, eleven-year-old Babur became the ruler of Fergana, in present-day Uzbekistan, after Umar Sheikh Mirza died \"while tending pigeons in an ill-constructed dovecote that toppled into the ravine below the palace\". During this time, two of his uncles from the neighbouring kingdoms, who were hostile to his father, and a group of nobles who wanted his younger brother Jahangir to be the ruler, threatened his succession to the throne. His uncles were relentless in their attempts to dislodge him from this position as well as from many of his other territorial possessions to come. Babur was able to secure his throne mainly because of help from his maternal grandmother, Aisan Daulat Begum, although there was also some luck involved.\nMost territories around his kingdom were ruled by his relatives, who were descendants of either Timur or Genghis Khan, and were constantly in conflict. At that time, rival princes were fighting over the city of Samarkand to the west, which was ruled by his paternal cousin. Babur had a great ambition to capture the city. In 1497, he besieged Samarkand for seven months before eventually gaining control over it. He was fifteen years old and for him the campaign was a huge achievement. Babur was able to hold the city despite desertions in his army, but he later fell seriously ill. Meanwhile, a rebellion back home, approximately away, amongst nobles who favoured his brother, robbed him of Fergana. As he was marching to recover it, he lost Samarkand to a rival prince, leaving him with neither. He had held Samarkand for 100 days, and he considered this defeat as his biggest loss, obsessing over it even later in his life after his conquests in India.\nFor three years, Babur concentrated on building a strong army, recruiting widely amongst the Tajiks of Badakhshan in particular. In 1500\u20131501, he again laid siege to Samarkand, and indeed he took the city briefly, but he was in turn besieged by his most formidable rival, Muhammad Shaybani, Khan of the Uzbeks. The situation became such that Babar was compelled to give his sister, Khanzada, to Shaybani in marriage as part of the peace settlement. Only after this were Babur and his troops allowed to depart the city in safety. Samarkand, his lifelong obsession, was thus lost again. He then tried to reclaim Fergana, but lost the battle there also and, escaping with a small band of followers, he wandered the mountains of central Asia and took refuge with hill tribes. By 1502, he had resigned all hopes of recovering Fergana; he was left with nothing and was forced to try his luck elsewhere. He finally went to Tashkent, which was ruled by his maternal uncle, but he found himself less than welcome there. Babur wrote, \"During my stay in Tashkent, I endured much poverty and humiliation. No country, or hope of one!\" Thus, during the ten years since becoming the ruler of Fergana, Babur suffered many short-lived victories and was without shelter and in exile, aided by friends and peasants.\nAt Kabul.\nKabul was ruled by Babur's paternal uncle Ulugh Beg II, who died leaving only an infant as heir. The city was then claimed by Mukin Begh, who was considered to be a usurper and was opposed by the local populace. In 1504, Babur was able to cross the snowy Hindu Kush mountains and capture Kabul from the remaining Arghunids, who were forced to retreat to Kandahar. With this move, he gained a new kingdom, re-established his fortunes and would remain its ruler until 1526. In 1505, because of the low revenue generated by his new mountain kingdom, Babur began his first expedition to India; in his memoirs, he wrote, \"My desire for Hindustan had been constant. It was in the month of Shaban, the Sun being in Aquarius, that we rode out of Kabul for Hindustan\". It was a brief raid across the Khyber Pass.\nIn the same year, Babur united with Sultan Husayn Mirza Bayqarah of Herat, a fellow Timurid and distant relative, against their common enemy, the Uzbek Shaybani. However, this venture did not take place because Husayn Mirza died in 1506 and his two sons were reluctant to go to war. Babur instead stayed at Herat after being invited by the two Mirza brothers. It was then the cultural capital of the eastern Muslim world. Though he was disgusted by the vices and luxuries of the city, he marvelled at the intellectual abundance there, which he stated was \"filled with learned and matched men\". He became acquainted with the work of the Chagatai poet Mir Ali Shir Nava'i, who encouraged the use of Chagatai as a literary language. Nava'i's proficiency with the language, which he is credited with founding, may have influenced Babur in his decision to use it for his memoirs. He spent two months there before being forced to leave because of diminishing resources; it later was overrun by Shaybani and the Mirzas fled.\nBabur became the only reigning ruler of the Timurid dynasty after the loss of Herat, and many princes sought refuge with him at Kabul because of Shaybani's invasion in the west. He thus assumed the title of \"Padshah\" (emperor) among the Timurids\u2014though this title was insignificant since most of his ancestral lands were taken, Kabul itself was in danger and Shaybani continued to be a threat. Babur prevailed during a potential rebellion in Kabul, but two years later a revolt among some of his leading generals drove him out of Kabul. Escaping with very few companions, Babur soon returned to the city, capturing Kabul again and regaining the allegiance of the rebels. Meanwhile, Shaybani was defeated and killed by Ismail I, Shah of Shia Safavid Persia, in 1510.\nBabur and the remaining Timurids used this opportunity to reconquer their ancestral territories. Over the following few years, Babur and Shah Ismail formed a partnership in an attempt to take over parts of Central Asia. In return for Ismail's assistance, Babur permitted the Safavids to act as a suzerain over him and his followers. Thus, in 1513, after leaving his brother Nasir Mirza to rule Kabul, he managed to take Samarkand for the third time; he also took Bokhara but lost both again to the Uzbeks. Shah Ismail reunited Babur with his sister Kh\u0101nz\u0101da, who had been imprisoned by and forced to marry the recently deceased Shaybani. Babur returned to Kabul after three years in 1514. The following 11 years of his rule mainly involved dealing with relatively insignificant rebellions from Afghan tribes, his nobles and relatives, in addition to conducting raids across the eastern mountains. Babur began to modernise and train his army despite it being, for him, relatively peaceful times.\nForeign relations.\nDetermined to conquer the Uzbeks and recapture his ancestral homeland, Babur was wary of their allies the Ottomans, and made no attempt to establish formal diplomatic relations with them. He did, however, employ the matchlock commander Mustafa Rumi and several other Ottomans. From them, he adopted the tactic of using matchlocks and cannons in the field (rather than only in sieges), which gave him an important advantage in India.\nFormation of the Mughal Empire.\nBabur still wanted to escape from the Uzbeks, and he chose India as a refuge instead of Badakhshan, which was to the north of Kabul. He wrote, \"In the presence of such power and potency, we had to think of some place for ourselves and, at this crisis and in the crack of time there was, put a wider space between us and the strong foeman.\" After his third loss of Samarkand, Babur gave full attention to the conquest of North India, launching a campaign; he reached the Chenab River, now in Pakistan, in 1519. Until 1524, his aim was to only expand his rule to Punjab, mainly to fulfill the legacy of his ancestor Timur, since it used to be part of his empire. At the time parts of North India were part of the Delhi Sultanate, ruled by Ibrahim Lodi of the Lodi dynasty, but the sultanate was crumbling and there were many defectors. Babur received invitations from Daulat Khan Lodi, Governor of Punjab and Ala-ud-Din, uncle of Ibrahim. He sent an ambassador to Ibrahim, claiming himself the rightful heir to the throne, but the ambassador was detained at Lahore, Punjab, and released months later.\nBabur started for Lahore in 1524 but found that Daulat Khan Lodi had been driven out by forces sent by Ibrahim Lodi. When Babur arrived at Lahore, the Lodi army marched out and his army was routed. In response, Babur burned Lahore for two days, then marched to Dibalpur, placing Alam Khan, another rebel uncle of Lodi, as governor. Alam Khan was quickly overthrown and fled to Kabul. In response, Babur supplied Alam Khan with troops who later joined up with Daulat Khan Lodi, and together with about 30,000 troops, they besieged Ibrahim Lodi at Delhi. The sultan easily defeated and drove off Alam's army, and Babur realised that he would not allow him to occupy the Punjab.\nFirst Battle of Panipat.\nIn November 1525 Babur got news at Peshawar that Daulat Khan Lodi had switched sides, and Babur drove out Ala-ud-Din. Babur then marched onto Lahore to confront Daulat Khan Lodi, only to see Daulat's army melt away at their approach. Daulat surrendered and was pardoned. Thus within three weeks of crossing the Indus River Babur had become the master of Punjab.\nBabur marched on to Delhi via Sirhind. He reached Panipat on 20 April 1526 and there met Ibrahim Lodi's numerically superior army of about 100,000 soldiers and 100 elephants. In the battle that began on the following day, Babur used the tactic of \"Tulugma\", encircling Ibrahim Lodi's army and forcing it to face artillery fire directly, as well as frightening its war elephants. Ibrahim Lodi died during the battle, thus ending the Lodi dynasty.\nBabur wrote in his memoirs about his victory:\nAfter the battle, Babur occupied Delhi and Agra, took the throne of Lodi, and laid the foundation for the eventual rise of Mughal rule in India. However, before he became North India's ruler, he had to fend off challengers, such as Rana Sanga.\nMany of Babur's men allegedly wanted to leave India due to its warm climate, but Babur motivated them to stay and expand his empire.\nBattle of Khanwa.\nThe Battle of Khanwa was fought between Babur and the Rajput ruler of Mewar, Rana Sanga on 16 March 1527. Rana Sanga wanted to overthrow Babur, whom he considered to be a foreigner ruling in India, and also to extend the Rajput territories by annexing Delhi and Agra. He was supported by Afghan chiefs who felt Babur had been deceptive by refusing to fulfil promises made to them. Upon receiving news of Rana Sangha's advance towards Agra, Babur took a defensive position at Khanwa (currently in the Indian state of Rajasthan), from where he hoped to launch a counterattack later. According to K.V. Krishna Rao, Babur won the battle because of his \"superior generalship\" and modern tactics; the battle was one of the first in India that featured cannons and muskets. Rao also notes that Rana Sanga faced \"treachery\" when the Hindu chief Silhadi joined Babur's army with a garrison of 6,000 soldiers.\nBabur recognised Sanga's skill in leadership, calling him one of the two greatest non-Muslim Indian kings of the time, the other being Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara.\nBattle of Chanderi.\nThe Battle of Chanderi took place the year after the Battle of Khanwa. On receiving news that Rana Sanga had made preparations to renew the conflict with him, Babur decided to isolate the Rana by defeating one of his staunchest allies, Medini Rai, who was the ruler of Malwa.\nUpon reaching Chanderi, on 20 January 1528, Babur offered Shamsabad to Medini Rao in exchange for Chanderi as a peace overture, but the offer was rejected. The outer fortress of Chanderi was taken by Babur's army at night, and the next morning the upper fort was captured. Babur himself expressed surprise that the upper fort had fallen within an hour of the final assault. Seeing no hope of victory, Medini Rai organized a \"jauhar\", during which women and children within the fortress immolated themselves. A small number of soldiers also collected in Medini Rao's house and killed each other in collective suicide. This sacrifice does not seem to have impressed Babur, who did not express a word of admiration for the enemy in his autobiography.\nReligious policy.\nBabur defeated and killed Ibrahim Lodi, the last Sultan of the Lodi dynasty, in 1526. Babur ruled for 4 years and was succeeded by his son Humayun whose reign was temporarily usurped by the Suri dynasty. During their 30-year rule, religious violence continued in India. Records of the violence and trauma, from Sikh-Muslim perspective, include those recorded in Sikh literature of the 16th century. The violence of Babur in the 1520s was witnessed by Guru Nanak, who commented upon it in four hymns. Historians suggest the early Mughal period of religious violence contributed to introspection and then the transformation in Sikhism from pacifism to militancy for self-defense. According to Babur's autobiography, \"Baburnama\", his campaign in northwest India targeted Hindus and Sikhs as well as apostates (non-Sunni sects of Islam), and an immense number were killed, with Muslim camps building \"towers of skulls of the infidels\" on hillocks. In Babur's secret will, in the year 935AH, 1529 AD, to Humayun, Babur adivses Humayun to administer justice according to the ways of every religion, avoid sacrifice of the cow, not to ruin the temples and shrines of any law obeying community, overlook the dissensions of the Shias and the Sunnis.\nPersonal life and relationships.\nThere are no descriptions about Babur's physical appearance, except from the paintings in the translation of the \"Baburnama\" prepared during the reign of Akbar. In his autobiography, Babur claimed to be strong and physically fit, and that he had swum across every major river he encountered, including twice across the Ganges River in North India.\nBabur did not initially know Old Hindi; however, his Turkic poetry indicates that he picked up some of its vocabulary later in life.\nUnlike his father, he had ascetic tendencies and did not have any great interest in women. In his first marriage, he was \"bashful\" towards Aisha Sultan Begum, later losing his affection for her. Babur showed similar shyness in his interactions with Baburi, a boy in his camp with whom he had an infatuation around this time, recounting that: \nHowever, Babur acquired several more wives and concubines over the years, and as required for a prince, he was able to ensure the continuity of his line.\nBabur's first wife, Aisha Sultan Begum, was his paternal cousin, the daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza, his father's brother. She was an infant when betrothed to Babur, who was himself five years old. They married eleven years later, . The couple had one daughter, Fakhr-un-Nissa, who died within a year in 1500. Three years later, after Babur's first defeat at Fergana, Aisha left him and returned to her father's household. In 1504, Babur married Zaynab Sultan Begum, who died childless within two years. In the period 1506\u201308, Babur married four women, Maham Begum (in 1506), Masuma Sultan Begum, Gulrukh Begum and Dildar Begum. Babur had four children by Maham Begum, of whom only one survived infancy. This was his eldest son and heir, Humayun. Masuma Sultan Begum died during childbirth; the year of her death is disputed (either 1508 or 1519). Gulrukh bore Babur two sons, Kamran and Askari, and Dildar Begum was the mother of Babur's youngest son, Hindal. Babur later married Mubaraka Yusufzai, a Pashtun woman of the Yusufzai tribe. Gulnar Aghacha and Nargul Aghacha were two Circassian slaves given to Babur as gifts by Tahmasp Shah Safavi, the Shah of Persia. They became \"recognized ladies of the royal household.\"\nDuring his rule in Kabul, when there was a time of relative peace, Babur pursued his interests in literature, art, music and gardening. Previously, he never drank alcohol and avoided it when he was in Herat. In Kabul, he first tasted it at the age of thirty. He then began to drink regularly, host wine parties and consume preparations made from opium. Though religion had a central place in his life, Babur also approvingly quoted a line of poetry by one of his contemporaries: \"I am drunk, officer. Punish me when I am sober\". He quit drinking for health reasons before the Battle of Khanwa, just two years before his death, and demanded that his court do the same. But he did not stop chewing narcotic preparations, and did not lose his sense of irony. He wrote, \"Everyone regrets drinking and swears an oath (of abstinence); I swore the oath and regret that.\"\nBabur was opposed to the blind obedience towards the Chinggisid laws and customs that were influential in Turco-Mongol society:\"Previously our ancestors had shown unusual respect for the Chingizid code (). They did not violate this code sitting and rising at councils and court, at feasts and dinners. [However] Chingez Khan's code is not a \"nass qati\" (categorical text) that a person must follow. Whenever one leaves a good custom, it should be followed. If ancestors leave a bad custom, however it is necessary to substitute a good one.\"Making clear that to him, the categorical text (i.e. the Quran) had displaced Genghis Khan's \"Yassa\" in moral and legal matters.\nPoetry.\nBabur was an acclaimed writer, who had a profound love for literature. His library was one of his most beloved possessions that he always carried around with him, and books were one of the treasures he searched for in new conquered lands. In his memoirs, when he listed sovereigns and nobles of a conquered land, he also mentioned poets, musicians and other educated people.\nDuring his 47-year life, Babur left a rich literary and scientific heritage. He authored his famous memoir the B\u0101burn\u0101ma, as well as beautiful lyrical works or \"ghazals\", treatises on Muslim jurisprudence (Mubayyin), poetics (Aruz risolasi), music, and a special calligraphy, known as \"khatt-i Baburi\".\nBabur's B\u0101burn\u0101ma is a collection of memoirs, written in the Chagatai language and later translated into Persian, the usual literary language of the Mughal court, during the rule of emperor Akbar. However, Babur's Turkic prose in B\u0101burn\u0101ma is already highly Persianized in its sentence structure, vocabulary, and morphology, and also consists of several phrases and minor poems in Persian.\nBabur wrote most of his poems in Chagatai Turkic, known to him as \"T\u00fcrki\", but he also composed in Persian. However, he was mostly praised for his literary works written in Turkic, which drew comparison with the poetry of Ali-Shir Nava'i.\nThe following ruba'i is an example of Babur's poetry written in Turkic, composed in the aftermath of his famous victory in North India to celebrate his ghazi status.\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI am become a desert wanderer for Islam,\nHaving joined battle with infidels and Hindus\nI readied myself to become a martyr,\nGod be thanked I am become a ghazi.&lt;/poem&gt;\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nThe identity of the mother of one of Babur's daughters, Gulrukh Begum is disputed. Gulrukh's mother may have been the daughter of Sultan Mahmud Mirza by his wife Pasha Begum who is referred to as Saliha Sultan Begum in certain secondary sources, however this name is not mentioned in the Baburnama or the works of Gulbadan Begum, which casts doubt on her existence. This woman may never have existed at all or she may even be the same woman as Dildar Begum.\nIssue.\nThe sons of Babur were:\nThe daughters of Babur were:\nDeath and legacy.\nBabur died in Agra at the age of 47 on and was succeeded by his eldest son, Humayun. He was first buried in Chauburji, Agra. Later as per his wishes, his mortal remains were moved to Kabul and reburied in Bagh-e Babur in Kabul sometime between 1539 and 1544.\nIt is generally agreed that, as a Timurid, Babur was not only significantly influenced by the Persian culture, but also that his empire gave rise to the expansion of the Persianate ethos in the Indian subcontinent. He emerged in his own telling as a Timurid Renaissance inheritor, leaving signs of Islamic, artistic literary, and social aspects in India.\nFor example, F. Lehmann states in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Iranica\":\nAlthough all applications of modern Central Asian ethnicities to people of Babur's time are anachronistic, Soviet and Uzbek sources regard Babur as an ethnic Uzbek. At the same time, during the Soviet Union Uzbek scholars were censored for idealising and praising Babur and other historical figures such as Ali-Shir Nava'i.\nBabur is considered a national hero in Uzbekistan. On 14 February 2008, stamps in his name were issued in the country to commemorate his 525th birth anniversary. Many of Babur's poems have become popular Uzbek folk songs, especially by Sherali Jo\u02bbrayev. Some sources claim that Babur is a national hero in Kyrgyzstan too. In October 2005, Pakistan developed the Babur Cruise Missile, named in his honour.\n\"Shahenshah Babar\", an Indian film about the emperor directed by Wajahat Mirza was released in 1944. The 1960 Indian biographical film \"Babar\" by Hemen Gupta covered the emperor's life with Gajanan Jagirdar in the lead role.\nOne of the enduring features of Babur's life was that he left behind the lively and well-written autobiography known as \"Baburnama\". Quoting Henry Beveridge, Stanley Lane-Poole writes:\nIn his own words, \"The cream of my testimony is this, do nothing against your brothers even though they may deserve it.\" Also, \"The new year, the spring, the wine and the beloved are joyful. Babur make merry, for the world will not be there for you a second time.\"\nBabri Masjid.\nThe Babri Masjid (\"Babur's Mosque\") in Ayodhya, was constructed by Mir Baqi (commander of the Babur), according to the mosque's inscriptions, in 1528\u201329 (935 AH). On 6 December 1992, Babri Masjid was demolished by a large group of activists of the Vishva Hindu Parishad and allied organisations.\nIn 2003 the Allahabad High Court ordered the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) to conduct a more in-depth study and an excavation to ascertain the type of structure beneath the mosque. The excavation was conducted from 12 March 2003 to 7 August 2003, resulting in 1360 discoveries.\nThe summary of the ASI report indicated the presence of a 10th-century temple under the mosque. The ASI team said that, human activity at the site dates back to the 13th century BCE. The next few layers date back to the Shunga period (second-first century BCE) and the Kushan period. During the early medieval period (11\u201312th century CE), a huge but short-lived structure of nearly 50 metres north\u2013south orientation was constructed. On the remains of this structure, another massive structure was constructed: this structure had at least three structural phases and three successive floors attached with it. The report concluded that it was over the top of this construction that the disputed structure was constructed during the early 16th century. Archaeologist KK Muhammed, the only Muslim member in the team of people surveying the excavation, also confirmed individually that there existed a temple like structure before the Babri Masjid was constructed over it.\nSeveral archaeologists disputed ASI findings. According to archaeologist Supriya Verma and Jaya Menon, who observed the excavations on behalf of the Sunni Waqf Board, \"the ASI was operating with a preconceived notion of discovering the remains of a temple beneath the demolished mosque, even selectively altering the evidence to suit its hypothesis.\" this allegation particularly focused on the \"pillar bases\" central to the claim of a temple, which Verma and Menon alleged were irregularly shaped, irregularly spaced and largely the result of selective excavation, rather than representing genuine evidence of pillars.\nThe Supreme Court judgement of 2019 granted the entire disputed land to the Hindus for construction of a temple, stating that Hindus continue to worship at the site and continued to hold the land outside the yard. It also held that there is nothing to prove that the structure, which was present before the construction of the mosque, was demolished for the purpose of building mosque or was already in ruins."}
{"id": "4552", "revid": "48550243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4552", "title": "Bernard of Clairvaux", "text": "Bernard of Clairvaux, O.Cist. (; 109020 August 1153), venerated as Saint Bernard, was an abbot, mystic, co-founder of the Knights Templar, and a major leader in the reform of the Benedictines through the nascent Cistercian Order.\nHe was sent to found Clairvaux Abbey only a few years after becoming a monk at C\u00eeteaux. In the year 1128, Bernard attended the Council of Troyes, at which he traced the outlines of the Rule of the Knights Templar, which soon became an ideal of Christian nobility.\nOn the death of Pope Honorius II in 1130, a schism arose in the church. Bernard was a major proponent of Pope Innocent II, arguing effectively for his legitimacy over the Antipope Anacletus II.\nThe eloquent abbot advocated crusades in general and convinced many to participate in the unsuccessful Second Crusade, notably through a famous sermon at V\u00e9zelay (1146).\nBernard was canonized just 21 years after his death by Pope Alexander III. In 1830 Pope Pius VIII declared him a Doctor of the Church.\nEarly life (1090\u20131113).\nBernard's parents were Tescelin de Fontaine, lord of Fontaine-l\u00e8s-Dijon, and Al\u00e8the de Montbard, both members of the highest nobility of Burgundy. Bernard was the third of seven children, six of whom were sons. Aged nine, he was sent to a school at Ch\u00e2tillon-sur-Seine run by the secular canons of Saint-Vorles. Bernard had an interest in literature and rhetoric. \nBernard's mother died when he was a youth. During his education with priests, he often thought of becoming one. In 1098, a group led by Robert of Molesme had founded C\u00eeteaux Abbey, near Dijon, with the purpose of living according to a literal interpretation of the Rule of St. Benedict. They established new administrative structures among their monasteries, effectively creating a new order, known, after the first abbey, as the Order of Cistercians. After his mother died, Bernard decided to go to C\u00eeteaux. In 1113 he and thirty other young noblemen of Burgundy, many of whom were his relatives, sought and gained admission to the new monastery. Bernard's example was so convincing that scores (among them his own father) followed him into the monastic life. As a result, he is considered the patron of religious vocations.\nAbbot of Clairvaux.\nThe little community of reformed Benedictines at C\u00eeteaux grew rapidly. Three years after entering, Bernard was sent with a group of twelve monks to found a new house at Vall\u00e9e d'Absinthe, in the Diocese of Langres. This Bernard named \"Claire Vall\u00e9e\", or \"Clairvaux\", on 25 June 1115, and the names of Bernard and Clairvaux soon became inseparable. Bernard was made abbot by William of Champeaux, Bishop of Ch\u00e2lons-sur-Marne. From then on a strong friendship grew between the abbot and the bishop, who was professor of theology at Notre Dame of Paris and the founder of St. Victor Abbey in Paris.\nThe beginnings of Clairvaux Abbey were austere and Bernard even more so. He had often been ill since his noviciate, due to extreme fasting. Nonetheless, candidates for the monastic life flocked to him in great numbers. Clairvaux soon started founding new communities. In 1118 Trois-Fontaines Abbey was founded in the diocese of Ch\u00e2lons; in 1119 Fontenay Abbey in the Diocese of Autun; and in 1121 Foigny Abbey near Vervins. In Bernard's lifetime, more than sixty abbeys followed, though some were not new foundations but transferals to the Cistercians. \nBernard spent extended time outside of the abbey as a preacher and a diplomat in the service of the pope. Described by Jean-Baptiste Chautard as \"the most contemplative and yet at the same time the most active man of his age,\" Bernard described the disparate parts of his personality when he called himself the \"chimera of his age.\"\nIn addition to successes, Bernard also had his trials. Once, when he was absent from Clairvaux, the prior of the rival Abbey of Cluny went to Clairvaux and convinced Bernard's cousin, Robert of Ch\u00e2tillon, to become a Benedictine. This was the occasion of the longest and most emotional of Bernard's letters. When his brother Gerard died, Bernard was devastated, and his deep mourning was the inspiration for one of his most moving sermons.\nThe Cluny Benedictines were unhappy to see C\u00eeteaux gain such prominence so quickly, particularly since many Benedictines were becoming Cistercians. They criticized the Cistercian way of life. At the solicitation of William of St.-Thierry, Bernard defended the Cistercians with his \"Apology\". Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny, answered Bernard and assured him of his admiration and friendship. In the meantime, Cluny launched a reform and Bernard befriended Abbot Suger.\nDoctor of the Church.\nAlthough acknowledged as \"a difficult saint,\" Bernard has remained influential in the centuries since his death and was named a Doctor of the Church in 1830. In 1953, on the 800th anniversary of his death, Pope Pius XII devoted the encyclical \"Doctor Mellifluus\" to him. He labeled the abbot \"the last of the Fathers.\" \nIn opposition to the rational approach to understanding God used by the scholastics, Bernard preached in a poetic manner, using appeals to affect and conversion to nurture a more immediate faith experience. He is considered to be a master of Christian rhetoric: \"His use of language remains perhaps his most universal legacy.\" He contributed lyrics to the Cistercian Hymnal.\nAs a mariologist, Bernard insisted on Mary's central role in Christian theology and preached effectively on Marian devotions. He developed the theology of her role as Co-Redemptrix and mediator. \nAs a master of prayer, the abbot emphasized the value of personal, experiential friendship with Christ. \nSchism.\nBernard made a self-confident impression and had an undeniable charisma in the eyes of his contemporaries; \"his first and greatest miracle,\" wrote the historian Holdsworth, \"was himself.\" He defended the rights of the church against the encroachments of kings and princes, and recalled to their duty Henri Sanglier, archbishop of Sens and Stephen of Senlis, bishop of Paris. When Honorius II died in 1130, a schism broke out in the Church by the election of two popes, Pope Innocent II and Antipope Anacletus II. Innocent, having been banished from Rome by Anacletus, took refuge in France. King Louis VI convened a national council of the French bishops at \u00c9tampes and Bernard, summoned there by the bishops, was chosen to judge between the rival popes. He decided in favour of Innocent.\nBernard travelled on to Italy and reconciled Pisa with Genoa, and Milan with the pope. The same year Bernard was again at the Council of Reims at the side of Innocent II. He then went to Aquitaine where he succeeded for the time in detaching William X, Duke of Aquitaine, from the cause of Anacletus.\nGermany had decided to support Innocent through Norbert of Xanten, who was a friend of Bernard's. Pope Innocent, however, insisted on Bernard's company when he met with Lothair II, Holy Roman Emperor. Lothair II became Innocent's strongest ally among the nobility. Although the councils of \u00c9tampes, W\u00fcrzburg, Clermont, and Rheims all supported Innocent, large portions of the Christian world still supported Anacletus.\nIn a letter by Bernard to German Emperor Lothair regarding Antipope Anacletus, Bernard wrote, \"It is a disgrace for Christ that a Jew sits on the throne of St. Peter's\" and \"Anacletus has not even a good reputation with his friends, while Innocent is illustrious beyond all doubt.\" (One of Anacletus' great-great-grandparents, Benedictus, maybe Baruch in Hebrew, was a Jew who had converted to Christianity - but Anacletus himself was not a Jew, and his family had been Christians for three generations).\nBernard wrote to Gerard of Angoul\u00eame (a letter known as Letter 126), which questioned Gerard's reasons for supporting Anacletus. Bernard later commented that Gerard was his most formidable opponent during the whole schism. After persuading Gerard, Bernard travelled to visit William X, Duke of Aquitaine. He was the hardest for Bernard to convince. He did not pledge allegiance to Innocent until 1135. After that, Bernard spent most of his time in Italy persuading the Italians to pledge allegiance to Innocent.\nIn 1132, Bernard accompanied Innocent II into Italy, and at Cluny, the pope abolished the dues which Clairvaux used to pay to that abbey. This action gave rise to a quarrel between the White Monks and the Black Monks which lasted 20 years. In May of that year, the pope, supported by the army of Lothair III, entered Rome, but Lothair III, feeling himself too weak to resist the partisans of Anacletus, retired beyond the Alps, and Innocent sought refuge in Pisa in September 1133. Bernard had returned to France in June and was continuing the work of peacemaking which he had commenced in 1130.\nTowards the end of 1134, he made a second journey into Aquitaine, where William X had relapsed into schism. Bernard invited William to the Mass which he celebrated in the Church of La Couldre. At the Eucharist, he \"admonished the Duke not to despise God as he did His servants\". William yielded and the schism ended.\nBernard went again to Italy, where Roger II of Sicily was endeavouring to withdraw the Pisans from their allegiance to Innocent. He recalled the city of Milan to obedience to the pope as they had followed the deposed Anselm V, Archbishop of Milan. For this, he was offered, and he refused, the see of Milan. He then returned to Clairvaux. Believing himself at last secure in his cloister, Bernard devoted himself to the composition of the works which won him the title of \"Doctor of the Church\". He wrote at this time his sermons on the Song of Songs.\nIn 1137, he was again forced to leave the abbey by order of the pope to put an end to the quarrel between Lothair and Roger of Sicily. At the conference held at Palermo, Bernard succeeded in convincing Roger of the rights of Innocent II. He also silenced the final supporters who sustained the schism. Anacletus died of \"grief and disappointment\" in 1138, and with him, the schism ended.\nIn 1139, Bernard assisted at the Second Council of the Lateran, in which the surviving adherents of the schism were definitively condemned. About the same time, Bernard was visited at Clairvaux by Malachy, Primate of All Ireland, and a very close friendship formed between them. Malachy wanted to become a Cistercian, but the pope would not give his permission. Malachy died at Clairvaux in 1148.\nConflict with Abelard.\nTowards the close of the 11th century, a spirit of independence flourished within schools of philosophy and theology. The movement found an ardent and powerful advocate in Peter Abelard. Abelard's treatise on the Trinity had been condemned as heretical in 1121, and he was compelled to throw his own book into a fire. However, Abelard continued to develop his controversial teachings. Bernard is said to have held a meeting with Abelard intending to persuade him to amend his writings, during which Abelard repented and promised to do so. But once out of Bernard's presence, he reneged.\nBernard then denounced Abelard to the pope and cardinals of the Curia. Abelard sought a debate with Bernard, but Bernard initially declined, saying he did not feel matters of such importance should be settled by logical analyses. Bernard's letters to William of St-Thierry also express his apprehension about confronting the preeminent logician. Abelard continued to press for a public debate, and made his challenge widely known, making it hard for Bernard to decline. In 1141, at the urgings of Abelard, the archbishop of Sens called a council of bishops, where Abelard and Bernard were to put their respective cases so Abelard would have a chance to clear his name.\nBernard lobbied the prelates on the evening before the debate, swaying many of them to his view. The next day, after Bernard made his opening statement, Abelard decided to retire without attempting to answer. The council found in favour of Bernard and their judgment was confirmed by the pope. Abelard submitted without resistance, and he retired to Cluny to live under the protection of Peter the Venerable, where he died two years later.\nThe challenge of heresy.\nBernard had occupied himself in sending bands of monks from his overcrowded monastery into Germany, Sweden, England, Ireland, Portugal, Switzerland, and Italy. Some of these, at the command of Innocent II, took possession of Tre Fontane Abbey, from which Eugene III was chosen in 1145. Pope Innocent II died in the year 1143. His two successors, Pope Celestine II and Pope Lucius II, reigned only a short time, and then Bernard saw one of his disciples, Bernard of Pisa, known thereafter as Eugene III, raised to the Chair of Saint Peter. Bernard sent him, at the pope's own request, various instructions which comprise the often-quoted \"De consideratione.\" Its main argument is that church reform ought to start with the pope. Temporal matters are merely accessories; Bernard insists that piety and meditation were to precede action.\nHaving previously helped end the schism within the Church, Bernard was now called upon to combat heresy. Henry of Lausanne, a former Cluniac monk, had adopted the teachings of the Petrobrusians, followers of Peter of Bruys and spread them in a modified form after Peter's death. Henry of Lausanne's followers became known as Henricians. In June 1145, at the invitation of Cardinal Alberic of Ostia, Bernard travelled in southern France. His preaching, aided by his ascetic looks and simple attire, helped doom the new sects. Both the Henrician and the Petrobrusian faiths began to die out by the end of that year. Soon afterwards, Henry of Lausanne was arrested, brought before the bishop of Toulouse, and probably imprisoned for life. In a letter to the people of Toulouse, undoubtedly written at the end of 1146, Bernard calls upon them to extirpate the last remnants of the heresy. He also preached against Catharism. Prior to the second hearing of Gilbert of Poitiers at the Council of Reims 1148, Bernard held a private meeting with a number of the attendees, attempting to pressure them to condemn Gilbert. This offended the various cardinals in attendance, who then proceeded to insist that they were the only persons who could judge the case, and no verdict of heresy was placed against Gilbert.\nMonastic and clerical preaching.\nAs abbot, Bernard often addressed his community, but he also spoke to other monastics and, in one particularly famous case, to students of Theology in Paris. He gave the sermon \"Ad clericos de conversione\" (to clerics on conversion) in 1139 or early 1140, to a group of scholars and student clerics. His many sermons on the Song of Songs belong to the often-studied sermons he addressed to the monks at Clairvaux.\nCrusade preaching.\nSecond Crusade (1146\u201349).\nNews came at this time from the Holy Land that alarmed Christendom. Christians had been defeated at the Siege of Edessa and most of the county had fallen into the hands of the Seljuk Turks. The Kingdom of Jerusalem and the other Crusader states were threatened with similar disaster. Deputations of the bishops of Armenia solicited aid from the pope, and the King of France also sent ambassadors. In 1144 Eugene III commissioned Bernard to preach the Second Crusade and granted the same indulgences for it which Pope Urban II had accorded to the First Crusade.\nThere was at first virtually no popular enthusiasm for the crusade as there had been in 1095. Bernard found it expedient to dwell upon taking the cross as a potent means of gaining absolution for sin and attaining grace. On 31 March, with King Louis VII of France present, he preached to an enormous crowd in a field at V\u00e9zelay, making \"the speech of his life\". When he had finished, many of his listeners enlisted; they supposedly ran out of the cloth used to make crosses for the new recruits.\nUnlike the First Crusade, the new venture attracted royalty, such as the French queen Eleanor of Aquitaine and scores of high aristocrats and bishops. But an even greater show of support came from the common people. Bernard wrote Pope Eugene a few days afterwards, \"Cities and castles are now empty. There is not left one man to seven women, and everywhere there are widows to still-living husbands.\"\nBernard then passed into Germany, with reported miracles contributing to the success of his mission. King Conrad III of Germany and his nephew Frederick Barbarossa, received the cross from the hand of Bernard. Pope Eugenius came in person to France to encourage the enterprise. As in the First Crusade, the preaching led to attacks on Jews; a fanatical French monk named Radulf was apparently inspiring massacres of Jews in the Rhineland, Cologne, Mainz, Worms, and Speyer, with Radulf claiming Jews were not contributing financially to the rescue of the Holy Land. The archbishop of Cologne and the archbishop of Mainz were vehemently opposed to these attacks and asked Bernard to denounce them. This he did, but when the campaign continued, Bernard travelled from Flanders to Germany to deal with the problems in person. He then found Radulf in Mainz and was able to silence him, returning him to his monastery.\nThe last years of Bernard's life were saddened by the failure of the Second Crusade he had preached, and the entire responsibility which was thrown upon him. Bernard sent an apology to the Pope and it is inserted in the second part of his \"\"Book of Considerations\".\" There he explains how the sins of the crusaders were the cause of their misfortune and failures.\nWendish Crusade (1147).\nBernard did not actually preach the Wendish Crusade, but he did write a letter that advocated subduing this group of Western Slavs so that they should not be an obstacle to the Second Crusade. He was for battling them \"until such a time as, by God's help, they shall either be converted or deleted\". A decree issued in Frankfurt stated that the letter should be proclaimed widely and read aloud, so that \"the letter functioned as a sermon.\"\nFinal years (1149\u201353).\nThe death of his contemporaries served as a warning to Bernard of his own approaching end. The first to die was Suger in 1152, of whom Bernard wrote to Eugene III, \"If there is any precious vase adorning the palace of the King of Kings it is the soul of the venerable Suger.\" Conrad III and his son Henry died the same year. Bernard died at age sixty-three on 20 August 1153, after forty years of monastic life. He was buried at Clairvaux Abbey. After its destruction in 1792 by the French revolutionary government his remains were transferred to Troyes Cathedral.\nLegacy.\nBernard's theology and Mariology continue to be of major importance. Bernard helped found 163 monasteries in different parts of Europe. Cistercians honour him as one of the greatest early Cistercians. His feast day is 20 August.\nBernard is Dante Alighieri's last guide, in \"Divine Comedy\", as he travels through the Empyrean.\nJohn Calvin and Martin Luther quoted Bernard several times in support of the doctrine of \"Sola Fide.\" Calvin also quotes him in setting forth his doctrine of forensic alien righteousness, or as it is commonly called imputed righteousness. Bernard introduced a major shift, a \"fundamental reorientation\" into medieval theology.\nThe Couvent et Basilique Saint-Bernard, a collection of buildings dating from the 12th, 17th, and 19th centuries, is dedicated to Bernard and stands in his birthplace of Fontaine-l\u00e8s-Dijon. Countless churches and chapels have St. Bernard as their patron saint.\nWorks.\nThe modern critical edition is \"\" (1957\u20131977), edited by Jean Leclercq.\nBernard's works include:\nHis sermons are also numerous:\nMany letters, treatises, and other works were falsely attributed to him. These include:"}
{"id": "4554", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4554", "title": "Bishkek", "text": "Bishkek, formerly known as Frunze, and earlier Pishpek, is the capital and largest city of Kyrgyzstan. Bishkek is also the administrative centre of the Ch\u00fcy Region. Bishkek is situated near the border with Kazakhstan and has a population of 1,074,075, as of 2021.\nThe Khanate of Kokand established the fortress of Pishpek in 1825 to control local caravan routes and to collect tribute from Kyrgyz tribes. On 4 September 1860, with the approval of the Kyrgyz, Russian forces led by Colonel Apollon Zimmermann destroyed the fortress. In the present day, the fortress ruins can be found just north of Jibek jolu Street, near the new main mosque. A Russian settlement was established in 1868 on the site of the fortress under its original name, Pishpek. It lay within the General Governorship of Russian Turkestan and its Semirechye Oblast.\nThe Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Oblast was established in 1925 in Russian Turkestan, promoting Pishpek to its capital. In 1926, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union renamed the city \"Frunze\", after Bolshevik military leader Mikhail Frunze (1885\u20131925), who was born there. Frunze became the capital of the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic in 1936, during the final stages of national delimitation in the Soviet Union. In 1991, the Kyrgyz parliament changed the capital's name to Bishkek.\nBishkek is situated at an altitude of about , just off the northern fringe of the Kyrgyz Ala-Too Range, an extension of the Tian Shan mountain range. These mountains rise to a height of . North of the city, a fertile and gently undulating steppe extends far north into neighboring Kazakhstan. The river Ch\u00fcy drains most of the area. Bishkek is connected to the Turkestan\u2013Siberia Railway by a spur line.\nBishkek is a city of wide boulevards and marble-faced public buildings combined with numerous Soviet-style apartment blocks surrounding interior courtyards. There are also thousands of smaller, privately built houses, mostly outside the city centre. Streets follow a grid pattern, with most flanked on both sides by narrow irrigation channels, which provide water to trees which provide shade during the hot summers.\nEtymology.\nBishkek is supposedly named after the paddle used to churn fermenting milk.\nThe official website of the Bishkek's city hall provides the following etymological justification for the name of the city: the pregnant wife of a hero lost a paddle used to churn kumis. While looking for it, she suddenly gave birth to a boy, who she named Bishkek. Bishkek would grow up to be a noble figure and after his death, was buried on a mound near the banks of the Alam\u00fcd\u00fcn. There, a tombstone was erected. The building was seen and described by travelers of the 17th and 18th centuries.\nHistory.\nBased on DNA evidence, the area near Bishkek is considered one of the possible origins of the Black Death between AD 1346 and 1353.\nKokhand rule.\nOriginally a caravan rest stop, possibly founded by the Sogdians, on one of the branches of the Silk Road through the Tian Shan range, the location was fortified in 1825 by the khan of Kokand with a mud fort. In the last years of Kokhand rule, the Pishpek fortress was led by Atabek, the Datka. In 1844, the forces of Ormon Khan, the leader of the , briefly captured the fortress.\nTsarist era.\nIn 1860, Imperial Russia annexed the area, and the military forces of Colonel Apollon Zimmerman took and razed the fort. Colonel Zimmermann rebuilt the town over the destroyed fort and appointed field-Poruchik Titov as head of a new Russian garrison. The Imperial Russian government redeveloped the site from 1877 onward, encouraging the settlement of Russian peasants by giving them fertile land to develop.\nSoviet era.\nIn 1926, the city became the capital of the newly established Kirghiz ASSR and was renamed Frunze after Mikhail Frunze, Lenin's close associate who was born in Bishkek and played key roles during the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 and during the Russian Civil War of the early 1920s.\nIndependence era.\nThe early 1990s were a tumultuous time for Bishkek. In June 1990, a state of emergency was declared following severe ethnic riots in southern Kyrgyzstan that threatened to spread to the capital. The city was renamed Bishkek on 5 February 1991, and Kyrgyzstan achieved independence later that year during the breakup of the Soviet Union. Before independence, the majority of Bishkek's population were ethnic Russians. In 2004, Russians made up approximately 20% of the city's population, and about in 2011.\nBishkek is Kyrgyzstan's financial centre, with all of the country's 21 commercial banks headquartered there. During the Soviet era, the city was home to many industrial plants, but most have been shut down since 1991 or now operate on a much-reduced scale. One of Bishkek's largest employment centres today is the Dordoy Bazaar open market, where many of the Chinese goods imported to CIS countries are sold.\nGeography.\nOrientation.\nAlthough Bishkek itself is relatively young, its surrounding area has some sites of interest dating to prehistoric times. There are also sites from the Greco-Buddhist period, the period of Nestorian influence, the era of the Central Asian \"khanates\", and the Soviet period.\nThe central part of the city is laid out on a rectangular grid plan. The city's main street is the east-west Ch\u00fcy Avenue (Ch\u00fcy Prospekti), named after the region's main river. In the Soviet era, it was called Lenin Avenue. Along or near it are many important government buildings and universities. These include the Academy of Sciences compound. The westernmost section of the avenue is known as Deng Xiaoping Avenue.\nThe main north\u2013south street is Yusup Abdrakhmanov Street, still commonly referred to by its old name, Sovietskaya Street. Its northern and southern sections are called, respectively, Yelebesov and Baityk Batyr Streets. Several major shopping centres are located along with it, and in the north, it provides access to Dordoy Bazaar.\nErkindik (\"Freedom\") Boulevard runs from north to south, from the main railroad station (Bishkek II) south of Ch\u00fcy Avenue to the museum quarter and sculpture park just north of Ch\u00fcy Avenue, and further north toward the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the past, it was called Dzerzhinsky Boulevard, named after a Communist revolutionary, Felix Dzerzhinsky, and its northern continuation is still called Dzerzhinsky Street.\nAn important east\u2013west street is Jibek Jolu ('Silk Road'). It runs parallel to Ch\u00fcy Avenue about north of it and is part of the main east\u2013west road of Ch\u00fcy Region. Both the eastern and western bus terminals are located along Jibek Jolu.\nThere is a Roman Catholic church located at ul. Vasiljeva 197 (near Rynok Bayat). It is the only Catholic cathedral in Kyrgyzstan.\nA stadium named in honour of Dolon Omurzakov is located near the centre of Bishkek. This is the largest stadium in the Kyrgyz Republic.\nOuter neighbourhoods.\nThe Dordoy Bazaar, just inside the bypass highway on the north-eastern edge of the city, is a major retail and wholesale market.\nOutside the city.\nThe Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range, some away, provides a spectacular backdrop to the city; the Ala Archa National Park is only a 30 to 45 minutes drive away.\nDistances.\nBishkek is about 300\u00a0km away directly from the country's second largest city Osh. However, its nearest large city is Almaty of Kazakhstan, which is 190\u00a0km to the east. Furthermore, it is 470\u00a0km from Tashkent (Uzbekistan), 680\u00a0km from Dushanbe (Tajikistan), and about 1,000\u00a0km each from Astana (Kazakhstan), \u00dcr\u00fcmqi (China), Islamabad (Pakistan), and Kabul (Afghanistan).\nClimate.\nBishkek has a Mediterranean-influenced humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dsa\"), as the average mean temperature in the winter is below . Average precipitation is around per year. Average daily high temperatures range from in January to about during July. The summer months are dominated by dry periods, punctuated by the occasional thunderstorm, which produces strong gusty winds and rare dust storms. The mountains to the south provide a natural boundary and protection from damaging weather, as does the smaller mountain chain that runs north-west to south-east. In the winter months, sparse snow storms and frequent heavy fog are the dominating features. There are sometimes temperature inversions, during which the fog can last for days at a time.\nDemographics.\nBishkek is the most populated city in Kyrgyzstan. Its population, estimated in 2021, was 1,074,075. From the foundation of the city to the mid-1990s, ethnic Russians and other peoples of European descent (Ukrainians, Germans) comprised the majority of the city's population. According to the 1970 census, the ethnic Kyrgyz were only 12.3%, while Europeans comprised more than 80% of the Frunze population. Now Bishkek is a predominantly Kyrgyz city, with 75% of its residents Kyrgyz, while European peoples make up around 15% of the population. Despite this fact, Russian is the main language while Kyrgyz continues losing ground, especially among the younger generations.\nEcology and environment.\nAir quality.\nEmissions of air pollutants in Bishkek amounted to 14,400 tons in 2010. Among all cities in Kyrgyzstan, the level of air pollution in Bishkek is the highest, occasionally exceeding maximum allowable concentrations by several times, especially in the city centre. For example, concentrations of formaldehyde occasionally exceed maximum allowable limits by a factor of four. The hydrogeologist Zheenbek Kulbekov identifies coal-heating mainly in informal settlements (\"samozakhvat\"), the exhaust from private vehicles and the lack of air circulation as the three main factors for the grave air pollution in Kyrgyzstan's capital. The latter is mainly due to the haphazard construction of private multi-story buildings - in contradiction to former city plans developed up until the end of the USSR - which prompted discussion on a moratorium on the further construction of high-rise buildings.\nResponsibility for ambient air quality monitoring in Bishkek lies with the Kyrgyz State Agency of Hydrometeorology. There are seven air-quality monitoring stations in Bishkek, measuring levels of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, formaldehyde, and ammonia.\nEconomy.\nBishkek uses the Kyrgyzstan currency, the som. The som's value fluctuates regularly but averaged around 86 som per U.S. dollar as of November 2024. The economy in Bishkek is primarily agricultural, and agricultural products are sometimes bartered in the outlying regions. The streets of Bishkek are regularly lined with produce vendors in a market-style venue. In most of the downtown area there is a more urban cityscape with banks, stores, markets, and malls. Sought-after goods include hand-crafted artisan pieces, such as statues, carvings, paintings, and many nature-based sculptures.\nHousing.\nAs with many cities in post-Soviet states, housing in Bishkek has undergone extensive changes since the collapse of the Soviet Union. While housing was formerly distributed to citizens in the Soviet era, housing in Bishkek has since become privatised.\nThough single-family houses are slowly becoming more popular, the majority of the residents live in Soviet-era apartments. Despite the Kyrgyz economy experiencing growth, increases in available housing have been slow with very little new construction and a doubling of prices from 2001 to 2002. This changed by the 2010s when an unprecedented housing boom has transformed the city. By 2021, over 246 construction firms were active in Kyrgyzstan, primarily focusing on upscale residences, often marketed as 'business class' or 'premium class' accommodations. The southern part of the city, where a significant portion of new constructions is concentrated, faces a critical concern due to its proximity to the Issyk-Ata fault line. Compounded by the inadequately seismic-proof architecture of most of these buildings, this situation poses a serious threat to the safety of residents and has sparked criticism. Limited land availability propels private developers to encroach into socialist-era residential zones, resulting in the loss of green spaces and vital social infrastructure, including sports fields and playgrounds.\nThose unable to afford the high housing price within Bishkek, notably internal migrants from rural villages and small provincial towns, often have to resort to informal squatter settlements on the city's outskirts such as Ak Jar, Ak Jol, Ak \u00d6rg\u00f6, Altyn Kazyk, Archa Beshik, Kalys-Ordo, Kayndy-2, Kelechek, Muras-Ordo and TETS-2 Yntymak. These urban settlements are estimated to house 400,000 people or about 30 percent of Bishkek's population. While many of the settlements have lacked basic necessities such as electricity and running water, recently, the local government has pushed to provide these services.\nGovernment.\nLocal government is administered by the Bishkek Mayor's Office. Askarbek Salymbekov was mayor until his resignation in August 2005, after which his deputy, Arstanbek Nogoev, took over the mayorship. Nogoev was in turn removed from his position in October 2007 through a decree of President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and replaced by businessman and former first deputy prime minister Daniar Usenov. In July 2008 former head of the Kyrgyz Railways Nariman Tuleyev was appointed mayor, who was dismissed by the interim government after 7 April 2010. From April 2010 to February 2011 Isa Omurkulov, also a former head of the Kyrgyz Railways, was an interim mayor, and from 4 February 2011 to 14 December 2013 he was re-elected the mayor of Bishkek. Kubanychbek Kulmatov was nominated for election by parliamentary group of Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan in city kenesh, and he was elected as a new mayor on 15 January 2014, and stepped down on 9 February 2016.\nThe next mayor, Albek Sabirbekovich Ibraimov, was also nominated for election by parliamentary group of Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan in city kenesh, and Bishkek City Kenesh elected him on 27 February 2016. The current mayor is Emil Abdykadyrov, who was elected on 24 February 2022.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBishkek city covers and is administered separately and not part of any region. Besides the city proper, one urban-type settlement and one village are administered by the city: Chong-Aryk and Orto-Say. The city is divided into 4 districts: Birinchi May, Lenin, Oktyabr and Sverdlov. Chong-Aryk and Orto-Say are part of Lenin District. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, there has been discussion of replacing the Soviet era district names with ones that reflect Kyrgyz identity and history. Other former Soviet republics have widely replaced Soviet era place names; despite renaming the capital in 1991, Kyrgyzstan is the only nation in Central Asia to retain Soviet era names for districts in its capital.\nCulture.\nBishkek is culturally the country's most important city. It is home to the National Library of the Kyrgyz Republic as well as a number of museums, e.g. the Kyrgyz State Historical Museum or the M. V. Frunze Museum. The national public broadcasting service KTRK or Kyrgyz Television is based in Bishkek. Newspapers in Bishkek include the English-language Bishkek Observer, the world's only dungan-language newspaper called Huimin bao and the Russian-language Vecherniy Bishkek newspaper.\nReligion.\nThe largest religion is Sunni Islam, but since many Russians live in Kyrgyzstan, there is also a large Russian Orthodox community. The Bishkek Central Mosque is one of the largest in Central Asia. Bishkek is home to the Roman Catholic Apostolic Administration of Kyrgyzstan.\nSports.\nBishkek is home to Dolen Omurzakov Stadium, the largest football stadium in Kyrgyzstan and the only one eligible to host international matches. Several Bishkek-based football teams play on this pitch, including six-time Kyrgyzstan League champions, Dordoi Bishkek. Others include Alga Bishkek, Ilbirs Bishkek, and RUOR-Guardia Bishkek.\nBishkek hosted the 2014 IIHF Challenge Cup of Asia \u2013 Division I.\nEducation.\nEducational institutions in Bishkek include:\nIn addition, the following international schools serve the expatriate community in Bishkek:\nTransportation.\nMass public transport.\nPublic transportation includes buses, electric trolleybuses, and public vans (known in Russian as \"marshrutka\"). The first bus and trolley bus services in Bishkek were introduced in 1934 and 1951, respectively.\nTaxi cabs can be found throughout the city.\nThe city is considering designing and building a light rail system.\nCommuter and long-distance buses.\nThere are two main bus stations in Bishkek. The smaller old Eastern Bus Station is primarily the terminal for minibusses to various destinations within or just beyond the eastern suburbs, such as Kant, Tokmok, Kemin, Issyk Ata, or the Korday border crossing.\nLong-distance regular bus and minibus services to all parts of the country, as well as to Almaty (the largest city in neighbouring Kazakhstan) and Kashgar, China, run mostly from the newer grand Western Bus Station; only a smaller number run from the Eastern Station.\nThe Dordoy Bazaar on the north-eastern outskirts of the city also contains makeshift terminals for frequent minibusses to suburban towns in all directions (from Sokuluk in the west to Tokmak in the east) and to some buses taking traders to Kazakhstan and Siberia.\nRail.\n, the Bishkek-2 railway station sees only a few trains a day. It offers a popular three-day train service from Bishkek to Moscow.\nThere are also long-distance trains that leave for Siberia (Novosibirsk and Novokuznetsk), via Almaty, over the TurkSib route, and to Yekaterinburg (Sverdlovsk) in the Urals, via Astana. These services are remarkably slow (over 48 hours to Yekaterinburg), due to long stops at the border and the indirect route (the trains first have to go west for more than a before they enter the main TurkSib line and can continue to the east or north). For example, as of the fall of 2008, train No. 305 Bishkek-Yekaterinburg was scheduled to take 11 hours to reach the Shu junction\u2014a distance of some by rail, and less than half of that by road.\nAir.\nThe city is served by Manas International Airport (IATA code FRU), located approximately north-west of the city centre.\nIn 2001, the United States obtained the right to use Manas International Airport as an air base for its military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. Russia subsequently (2003) established an airbase of its own (Kant Air Base) near Kant, some east of Bishkek. It is based at a facility that used to be home to a major Soviet military pilot training school; one of its students, Hosni Mubarak, later became president of Egypt.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBishkek is twinned with:"}
{"id": "4560", "revid": "1270818103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4560", "title": "Braveheart", "text": "Braveheart is a 1995 American epic historical drama film directed and produced by Mel Gibson, who portrays Scottish warrior William Wallace in the First War of Scottish Independence against King Edward I of England. The film also stars Sophie Marceau, Patrick McGoohan, Catherine McCormack and Angus Macfadyen. The story is inspired by Blind Harry's 15th century epic poem \"The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace\" and was adapted for the screen by Randall Wallace.\nDevelopment on the film initially started at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) when producer Alan Ladd Jr. picked up the project from Wallace, but when MGM was going through new management, Ladd left the studio and took the project with him. Despite initially declining, Gibson eventually decided to direct the film, and to star as Wallace. \"Braveheart\" was filmed in Scotland and Ireland from June to October 1994. The film, which was produced by Gibson's Icon Productions and The Ladd Company, was distributed by Paramount Pictures in North America and by 20th Century Fox internationally.\nReleased on May 24, 1995, \"Braveheart\" received generally positive reviews, with praise for its action scenes and score, and was a critical and commercial success, though it was criticized for its historical inaccuracies. The film also garnered numerous awards. A legacy sequel, \"Robert the Bruce\", was released in 2019.\nPlot.\nIn 1280, Edward I of England, known as \"Longshanks\", conquers Scotland following the death of the Scots' king, who left no heir. Young William Wallace witnesses the aftermath of Longshanks' execution of several Scottish nobles, then loses his father and brother when they resist the English. He leaves home to be raised by his uncle, Argyle.\nYears later, Longshanks grants his noblemen land and privileges in Scotland, including \"jus primae noctis\", while his son marries French princess Isabelle. Meanwhile, a grown Wallace returns home and secretly marries his childhood friend Murron MacClannough. Soon after, Wallace rescues Murron from a soldier, but Murron is subsequently captured and executed. In retribution, Wallace and the locals overthrow the garrison, beginning a rebellion that soon spreads. Longshanks orders his son to stop Wallace while he campaigns in France. Wallace defeats an army sent by the prince at Stirling, then invades England by sacking York. He also meets Robert the Bruce, a contender for the Scottish crown.\nAfter returning to England, Longshanks sends Isabelle to negotiate with Wallace as a distraction from the movement of Longshanks' forces. Meeting Wallace, Isabelle becomes enamored with him and warns him of Longshanks' plans. Wallace faces Longshanks at Falkirk. During the battle, nobles Mornay and Lochlan withdraw, having been bribed by Longshanks, resulting in Wallace's army being overwhelmed. Wallace also discovers Robert the Bruce had joined Longshanks. After helping Wallace escape, Robert vows to not be on the wrong side again. Wallace kills Mornay and Lochlan for their betrayal and foils an assassination plot with Isabelle's help. Wallace and Isabelle spend the following night together, while Longshanks' health declines. At a meeting in Edinburgh, Wallace is captured. Realizing his father's responsibility, Robert disowns him. In England, Wallace is condemned to execution. After a final meeting with Wallace, Isabelle tells Longshanks, who can no longer speak, that his bloodline will end upon his death as she is pregnant with Wallace's child and will ensure that Longshanks' son spends as short a time as possible as monarch. At his execution, Wallace refuses to submit, even while being disemboweled. The magistrate encourages Wallace to seek mercy and be granted a quick death. Wallace instead shouts, \"Freedom!\", while Longshanks dies. Before being beheaded, Wallace sees a vision of Murron in the crowd.\nIn 1314, Robert, now Scotland's king, faces the English at Bannockburn, and implores his men to fight with him as they did with Wallace. After Wallace's sword is thrown to land point-down in the ground, Robert leads the Scots to a final victory.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nProducer Alan Ladd Jr. initially had the project at MGM-Path\u00e9 Communications when he picked up the script from Randall Wallace. When Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) was going through new management in 1993, Ladd left the studio and took some of its top properties, including \"Braveheart\". Mel Gibson came across the script and even though he liked it, he initially passed on it. However, the thought of it kept coming back to him, and he ultimately decided to take on the project. Terry Gilliam was offered to direct the film, but he declined. Gibson was initially interested in directing only and considered Brad Pitt in the role of Sir William Wallace, but later reluctantly agreed to play Wallace as well. He also considered Jason Patric for the role. Sean Connery was approached to play King Edward, but he declined due to other commitments. Gibson said that Connery's pronunciation of \"Goulash\" helped him for the Scottish accent for the film.\nGibson and his production company, Icon Productions, had difficulty raising enough money for the film. Warner Bros. was willing to fund the project on the condition that Gibson sign for another \"Lethal Weapon\" sequel, which he refused. Gibson eventually gained enough financing for the film, with Paramount Pictures financing a third of the budget in exchange for North American distribution rights to the film, and 20th Century Fox putting up the other two-thirds in exchange for international distribution rights.\nFilming.\nFilming was initially due to take place fully in the United Kingdom, but most of the shoot was moved to Ireland at late notice after lobbying from the Irish government and their offer to supply 1,600 members of the Irish Army Reserve as extras. Shooting was planned to take 12 weeks on location in Ireland and at Ardmore Studios plus five weeks on location in Scotland. Principal photography on the film began on June 6, 1994. To lower costs, Gibson had the same extras portray both armies. The reservists had been given permission to grow beards and swapped their military uniforms for medieval garb. Principal photography ended on October 28, 1994. The film was shot in the anamorphic format with Panavision C- and E-Series lenses. Gibson also later said that while filming a battle scene a horse nearly \"killed him\" but his stunt double was able to save him as the horse fell.\nGibson had to tone down the film's battle scenes to avoid an NC-17 rating from the MPAA; the final version was rated R for \"brutal medieval warfare\". Gibson and editor Steven Rosenblum initially had a film at 195 minutes, but Sherry Lansing, who was the head of Paramount at the time, requested Gibson and Rosenblum to cut the film down to 177 minutes. According to Gibson in a 2016 interview with \"Collider\", there is a four-hour version of the film, and he expressed interest in reassembling it if both Paramount and Fox were interested.\nSoundtrack.\nThe score was composed and conducted by James Horner and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra. It is Horner's second of three collaborations with Mel Gibson as director. The score has gone on to be one of the most commercially successful soundtracks of all time. It received considerable acclaim from film critics and audiences and was nominated for a number of awards, including the Academy Award, Saturn Award, BAFTA Award, and Golden Globe Award.\nRelease.\n\"Braveheart\" premiered at the Seattle International Film Festival on May 18, 1995, and received its wide release in U.S. cinemas six days later.\nHome media.\n\"Braveheart\" was released on LaserDisc in both pan and scan and widescreen on March 12, 1996. That same day, it also was made available on VHS in pan and scan only and was re-issued in widescreen on August 27.\nThe film was released on DVD on August 29, 2000. This edition included the film only in widescreen, a commentary track by Gibson, a behind-the-scenes featurete, along the trailers.\nIt was released on Blu-ray as part of the \"Paramount Sapphire Series\" on September 1, 2009. It included the DVD features along with new bonus material. It was released on 4K UHD Blu-ray as part of the 4K upgrade of the \"Paramount Sapphire Series\" on May 15, 2018.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Braveheart\" grossed $75.5million in the United States and Canada and $133.5million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $209.0million, against a budget of $53\u2013$72million. It spent nine non-consecutive weeks in the Top 10 at the US box officeits first seven weeks, then two more weeks during its fifth month in theatres.\nCritical response.\nCaryn James of \"The New York Times\" praised the film, calling it \"one of the most spectacular entertainments in years.\" Roger Ebert gave the film three and a half out of four stars, calling it \"An action epic with the spirit of the Hollywood swordplay classics and the grungy ferocity of \"The Road Warrior\".\" In a positive review, Gene Siskel wrote that \"in addition to staging battle scenes well, Gibson also manages to recreate the filth and mood of 700 years ago.\" Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" felt that \"though the film dawdles a bit with the shimmery, dappled love stuff involving Wallace with a Scottish peasant and a French princess, the action will pin you to your seat.\" The depiction of the Battle of Stirling Bridge was listed by CNN as one of the best battles in cinema history.\nNot all reviews were positive. Richard Schickel of \"Time\" magazine argued that \"everybody knows that a non-blubbering clause is standard in all movie stars' contracts. Too bad there isn't one banning self-indulgence when they direct.\" Peter Stack of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" felt \"at times the film seems an obsessive ode to Mel Gibson machismo.\" In a 2005 poll by British film magazine \"Empire\", \"Braveheart\" was No. 1 on their list of \"The Top 10 Worst Pictures to Win Best Picture Oscar\". \"Empire\" readers had previously voted \"Braveheart\" the best film of 1995.\nAlex von Tunzelmann of \"The Guardian\" gave the film a grade of C\u2212, saying: \"Seemingly intended as a piece of anti-English propaganda, \"Braveheart\" offers an even greater insult to Scotland by making a total pig's ear of its heritage. \"Historians from England will say I am a liar,\" intones the voiceover, \"but history is written by those who have hanged heroes.\" Well, that's me told: but, regardless of whether you read English or Scottish historians on the matter, \"Braveheart\" still serves up a great big steaming haggis of lies..\"\nIn a 2012 article, Nathan Kamal called the film \"hugely overrated\", criticizing the characters as one-dimensional.\nEffect on tourism.\nThe European premiere was on September 3, 1995, in Stirling.\nIn 1996, the year after the film was released, the annual three-day \"Braveheart Conference\" at Stirling Castle attracted fans of \"Braveheart\", increasing the conference's attendance to 167,000 from 66,000 in the previous year. In the following year, research on visitors to the Stirling area indicated that 55% of the visitors had seen \"Braveheart\". Of visitors from outside Scotland, 15% of those who saw \"Braveheart\" said it influenced their decision to visit the country. Of all visitors who saw \"Braveheart\", 39% said the film influenced in part their decision to visit Stirling, and 19% said the film was one of the main reasons for their visit. In the same year, a tourism report said that the \"\"Braveheart\" effect\" earned Scotland \u00a37\u00a0million to \u00a315\u00a0million in tourist revenue, and the report led to various national organizations encouraging international film productions to take place in Scotland.\nThe film generated huge interest in Scotland and in Scottish history, not only around the world, but also in Scotland itself. At a \"Braveheart\" Convention in 1997, held in Stirling the day after the Scottish Devolution vote and attended by 200 delegates from around the world, \"Braveheart\" author Randall Wallace, Seoras Wallace of the Wallace Clan, Scottish historian David Ross and Bl\u00e1ith\u00edn FitzGerald from Ireland gave lectures on various aspects of the film. Several of the actors also attended including James Robinson (Young William), Andrew Weir (Young Hamish), Julie Austin (the young bride) and Mhairi Calvey (Young Murron).\nAwards and honors.\n\"Braveheart\" was nominated for many awards during the 1995 awards season, though it was not viewed by many as a major competitor to films such as \"Apollo 13\", \"\", \"Leaving Las Vegas\", \"Sense and Sensibility\", and \"The Usual Suspects\". It wasn't until after the film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Director at the 53rd Golden Globe Awards that it was viewed as a serious Oscar contender.\nWhen the nominations were announced for the 68th Academy Awards, \"Braveheart\" received ten Academy Award nominations, and a month later, won five including Best Picture, Best Director for Gibson, Best Cinematography, Best Sound Effects Editing, and Best Makeup. \"Braveheart\" became the ninth film to win Best Picture with no acting nominations and is one of only four films to win Best Picture without being nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture, the others being \"The Shape of Water\" in 2017, \"Green Book\" in 2018, and \"Nomadland\" in 2020.\nThe film also won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay. In 2010, the Independent Film &amp; Television Alliance selected the film as one of the 30 Most Significant Independent Films of the last 30 years.\nCultural effects and accusations of Anglophobia.\nLin Anderson, author of \"Braveheart: From Hollywood To Holyrood\", credits the film with playing a significant role in affecting the Scottish political landscape in the mid- to late 1990s. Peter Jackson cited \"Braveheart\" as an influence in making the \"Lord of the Ring\"s film trilogy.\nSections of the English media accused the film of harbouring Anti-English sentiment. \"The Economist\" called it \"xenophobic\", and John Sutherland writing in \"The Guardian\" stated that: \"\"Braveheart\" gave full rein to a toxic Anglophobia\". In \"The Times\", Colin McArthur said \"the political effects are truly pernicious. It's a xenophobic film.\" Ian Burrell of \"The Independent\" has said, \"The \"Braveheart\" phenomenon, a Hollywood-inspired rise in Scottish nationalism, has been linked to a rise in anti-English prejudice\".\nWallace Monument.\nIn 1997, a , sandstone statue depicting Mel Gibson as William Wallace in \"Braveheart\" was placed in the car park of the Wallace Monument near Stirling, Scotland. The statue, which was the work of Tom Church, a monumental mason from Brechin, included the word 'Braveheart' on Wallace's shield. The installation became the cause of much controversy; one local resident stated that it was wrong to \"desecrate the main memorial to Wallace with a lump of crap\".\nIn 1998, someone wielding a hammer vandalized the statue's face. After repairs were made, the statue was encased in a cage every night to prevent further vandalism. This only incited more calls for the statue to be removed, as it then appeared that the Gibson/Wallace figure was imprisoned. The statue was described as \"among the most loathed pieces of public art in Scotland\". In 2008, the statue was returned to its sculptor to make room for a new visitor centre being built at the foot of the Wallace Monument.\nHistorical inaccuracy.\nRandall Wallace, who wrote the screenplay, has acknowledged Blind Harry's 15th-century epic poem \"The Acts and Deeds of Sir William Wallace, Knight of Elderslie\" as a major inspiration for the film. In defending his script, Randall Wallace has said, \"Is Blind Harry true? I don't know. I know that it spoke to my heart and that's what matters to me, that it spoke to my heart.\" Blind Harry's poem is not regarded as historically accurate, and although some incidents in the film that are not historically accurate are taken from Blind Harry (e.g. the hanging of Scottish nobles at the start), there are large parts that are based neither on history nor Blind Harry (e.g. Wallace's affair with Princess Isabella).\nElizabeth Ewan describes \"Braveheart\" as a film that \"almost totally sacrifices historical accuracy for epic adventure\". It has been described as one of the most historically inaccurate modern films.\nSharon Krossa noted that the film contains numerous historical inaccuracies, beginning with the wearing of belted plaid (\"feileadh m\u00f3r l\u00e9ine\"), which was not introduced until the 16th century, by Wallace and his men. In that period \"no Scots [...] wore belted plaids (let alone kilts of any kind).\" Moreover, when Highlanders finally did begin wearing the belted plaid, it was not \"in the rather bizarre style depicted in the film\". She compares the inaccuracy to \"a film about Colonial America showing the colonial men wearing 20th-century business suits, but with the jackets worn back-to-front instead of the right way around.\" In a previous essay about the film, she wrote, \"The events aren't accurate, the dates aren't accurate, the characters aren't accurate, the names aren't accurate, the clothes aren't accurate\u2014in short, just about nothing is accurate.\" Peter Traquair has referred to Wallace's \"farcical representation as a wild and hairy highlander painted with woad (1,000 years too late) running amok in a tartan kilt (500 years too early).\"\nCaroline White of \"The Times \"described the film as being made up of a \"litany of fibs.\"\nIrish historian Se\u00e1n Duffy remarked that \"the battle of Stirling Bridge could have done with a bridge.\"\nIn 2009, the film was second on a list of \"most historically inaccurate movies\" in \"The Times\". In the humorous non-fictional historiography \"An Utterly Impartial History of Britain\" (2007), author John O'Farrell claims that \"Braveheart\" could not have been more historically inaccurate, even if a Plasticine dog had been inserted in the film and the title changed to \"William Wallace and Gromit\".\nIn the DVD audio commentary of \"Braveheart\", Mel Gibson acknowledged the historical inaccuracies but defended his choices as director, noting that the way events were portrayed in the film was much more \"cinematically compelling\" than the historical fact or conventional mythos.\n\"Jus primae noctis\".\nEdward Longshanks is shown invoking \"Jus primae noctis\" in the film, allowing the lord of a medieval estate to take the virginity of his serfs' maiden daughters on their wedding nights. Critical medieval scholarship regards this supposed right as a myth: \"the simple reason why we are dealing with a myth here rests in the surprising fact that practically all writers who make any such claims have never been able or willing to cite any trustworthy source, if they have any.\"\nOccupation and independence.\nThe film suggests Scotland had been under English occupation for some time, at least during Wallace's childhood, and in the run-up to the Battle of Falkirk Wallace says to the younger Bruce, \"[W]e'll have what none of us have ever had before, a country of our own.\" In fact, Scotland had been invaded by England only the year before Wallace's rebellion; before the death of King Alexander III it had been a fully separate kingdom.\nPortrayal of William Wallace.\nAs John Shelton Lawrence and Robert Jewett writes, \"Because [William] Wallace is one of Scotland's most important national heroes and because he lived in the very distant past, much that is believed about him is probably the stuff of legend. But there is a factual strand that historians agree to\", summarized from Scots scholar Matt Ewart:\nA. E. Christa Canitz writes about the historical William Wallace further: \"[He] was a younger son of the Scottish gentry, usually accompanied by his own chaplain, well-educated, and eventually, having been appointed Guardian of the Kingdom of Scotland, engaged in diplomatic correspondence with the Hanseatic cities of L\u00fcbeck and Hamburg\". She finds that in \"Braveheart\", \"any hint of his descent from the lowland gentry (i.e., the lesser nobility) is erased, and he is presented as an economically and politically marginalized Highlander and 'a farmer'\u2014as one with the common peasant, and with a strong spiritual connection to the land which he is destined to liberate.\"\nColin McArthur writes that \"Braveheart\" \"constructs Wallace as a kind of modern, nationalist guerrilla leader in a period half a millennium before the appearance of nationalism on the historical stage as a concept under which disparate classes and interests might be mobilised within a nation state.\" Writing about \"Braveheart\"s \"omissions of verified historical facts\", McArthur notes that Wallace made \"overtures to Edward I seeking less severe treatment after his defeat at Falkirk\", as well as \"the well-documented fact of Wallace's having resorted to conscription and his willingness to hang those who refused to serve.\" Canitz posits that depicting \"such lack of class solidarity\" as the conscriptions and related hangings \"would contaminate the movie's image of Wallace as the morally irreproachable \"primus inter pares\" among his peasant fighters.\"\nPortrayal of Isabella of France.\nIsabella of France is shown spending a night with Wallace after the Battle of Falkirk. She later tells Edward I she is pregnant with Wallace's child, implied to be Edward III. In reality, Isabella was a child and living in France at the time of the Battle of Falkirk, was not married to Edward II until he was already king, and Edward III was born seven years after Wallace died. The breakdown of the couple's relationship over his liaisons, and the menacing suggestion to a dying Longshanks that she would overthrow and destroy Edward II mirror and foreshadow actual facts; although not until 1326, over 20 years after Wallace's death, Isabella and her lover Roger Mortimer would depose \u2013 and later allegedly murder \u2013 Edward II.\nPortrayal of Robert the Bruce.\nRobert the Bruce did change sides between the Scots loyalists and the English more than once in the earlier stages of the Wars of Scottish Independence, but he probably did not fight on the English side at the Battle of Falkirk (although this claim does appear in a few medieval sources). Later, the Battle of Bannockburn was not a spontaneous battle soon after Wallace's execution; he had already been fighting a guerrilla campaign against the English for eight years. His title before becoming king was Earl of Carrick, not Earl of Bruce. Bruce's father is portrayed as an infirm leper, although it was Bruce himself who allegedly suffered from leprosy in later life. The actual Bruce's machinations around Wallace, rather than the meek idealist in the film, suggests the father\u2013son relationship represent different aspects of the historical Bruce's character. In the film, Bruce's father betrays Wallace to his son's disgust, calling it the price of his son's crown, when in real life Wallace was betrayed by the nobleman John de Menteith.\nPortrayal of Longshanks and Prince Edward.\nThe actual Edward I was ruthless and temperamental, but the film exaggerates his negative aspects for effect. Edward enjoyed poetry and harp music, was a devoted and loving husband to his wife Eleanor of Castile, and as a religious man, he gave generously to charity; the film's scene where he scoffs cynically at Isabella for distributing gold to the poor after Wallace refuses it as a bribe would have been unlikely. Furthermore, Edward died almost two years after Wallace's execution, not on the same day.\nThe depiction of the future Edward II as an effeminate homosexual drew accusations of homophobia against Gibson.\nGibson defended his depiction of Prince Edward as weak and ineffectual, saying:\nIn response to Longshanks's murder of the Prince's male lover Phillip, Gibson replied: \"The fact that King Edward throws this character out a window has nothing to do with him being gay ... He's terrible to his son, to everybody.\"\nGibson asserted that the reason Longshanks kills his son's lover is that the king is a \"psychopath\".\nWallace's military campaign.\n\"MacGregors from the next glen\" joining Wallace shortly after the action at Lanark is dubious, since it is questionable whether Clan Gregor existed at that stage, and when they did emerge their traditional home was Glen Orchy, some distance from Lanark.\nWallace did win an important victory at the Battle of Stirling Bridge, but the version in \"Braveheart\" is highly inaccurate, as it has no bridge (or Andrew Moray, joint commander of the Scots army, who was fatally injured in the battle). Later, Wallace did carry out a large-scale raid into the north of England, but he did not get as far south as York, nor did he kill Edward I's nephew.\nThe \"Irish conscripts\" at the Battle of Falkirk are unhistorical; there were no Irish troops at Falkirk (although many of the English army were, in fact, Welsh).\nThe two-handed long swords used by Gibson in the film were not in wide use in the period. A one-handed sword and shield would have been more accurate and more efficient, since in the enemy army there were a lot of archers.\nSequel.\nA sequel, \"Robert the Bruce\" (2019), continues directly on from \"Braveheart\" and features Robert the Bruce, with Angus Macfadyen reprising his role from \"Braveheart\"."}
{"id": "4561", "revid": "32191395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4561", "title": "Brian Aldiss", "text": "Brian Wilson Aldiss (; 18 August 1925 \u2013 19 August 2017) was an English writer, artist and anthology editor, best known for science fiction novels and short stories. His byline reads either Brian W. Aldiss or simply Brian Aldiss, except for occasional pseudonyms during the mid-1960s.\nGreatly influenced by science fiction pioneer H. G. Wells, Aldiss was a vice-president of the international H. G. Wells Society. He was (with Harry Harrison) co-president of the Birmingham Science Fiction Group. Aldiss was named a Grand Master by the Science Fiction Writers of America in 1999 and inducted by the Science Fiction Hall of Fame in 2004. He received two Hugo Awards, one Nebula Award and one John W. Campbell Memorial Award. He wrote the short story \"Supertoys Last All Summer Long\" (1969), the basis for the Stanley Kubrick-developed Steven Spielberg film \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" (2001). Aldiss was associated with the British New Wave of science fiction.\nLife and career.\nEarly life, education and military service.\nBrian Wilson Aldiss was born on 18 August 1925, above his paternal grandfather's draper's shop in Dereham, Norfolk. When Aldiss's grandfather died, his father, Bill (the younger of two sons), sold his share in the shop and the family left Dereham. Aldiss's mother, Dot, was the daughter of a builder. He had an older sister who was stillborn and a younger sister. As a three-year-old, Aldiss started to write stories which his mother would bind and put on a shelf.\nAt the age of 6, Aldiss went to Framlingham College, but moved to Devon and was sent to board at West Buckland School in 1939 after the outbreak of World War II. As a child, he discovered the pulp magazine \"Astounding Science Fiction\". He eventually read all the novels by H. G. Wells, Robert Heinlein, and Philip K. Dick. In 1943, he joined the Royal Signals and saw military action in Burma.\nWriting and publishing.\nHis army experience inspired the novel \"Hothouse\" and the Horatio Stubbs second and third books, \"A Soldier Erect\" and \"A Rude Awakening\", respectively.\nAfter the war, he worked as a bookseller in Oxford. He also wrote a number of short pieces for a booksellers' trade journal about life in a fictitious bookshop, which attracted the attention of Charles Monteith, an editor at the publisher Faber and Faber. As a result, Faber and Faber published Aldiss's first book, \"The Brightfount Diaries\" (1955), a 200-page novel in diary form about the life of a sales assistant in a bookshop.\nAbout this time he also began to write science fiction for various magazines. According to ISFDB, his first speculative fiction in print was the short story \"Criminal Record\", published by John Carnell in the July 1954 issue of \"Science Fantasy\". Several of his stories appeared in 1955, including three in monthly issues of \"New Worlds\", also edited by Carnell.\nIn 1954, \"The Observer\" newspaper ran a competition for a short story set in the year 2500. Aldiss's story \"Not For An Age\" was ranked third following a reader vote.\n\"The Brightfount Diaries\" had been a minor success, and Faber asked Aldiss if he had any more writing they could look at with a view to publishing. Aldiss confessed to being a science fiction author, to the delight of the publishers, who had a number of science fiction fans in high places, and so his first science fiction book was published, a collection of short stories entitled \"Space, Time and Nathaniel\" (Faber, 1957). By this time, his earnings from writing matched his wages in the bookshop, and he made the decision to become a full-time writer.\nAldiss led the voting for Most Promising New Author of 1958 at the next year's Worldcon, but finished behind \"no award\". He was elected president of the British Science Fiction Association in 1960. He was the literary editor of the \"Oxford Mail\" newspaper from 1958 to 1969. Around 1964, he and long-time collaborator Harry Harrison started the first ever journal of science fiction criticism, \"Science Fiction Horizons\", which during its brief span of two issues published articles and reviews by such authors as James Blish, and featured a discussion among Aldiss, C. S. Lewis, and Kingsley Amis in the first issue and an interview with William S. Burroughs in the second. In 1967 Algis Budrys listed Aldiss, J. G. Ballard, Roger Zelazny and Samuel R. Delany as \"an earthshaking new kind of\" writers, and leaders of the New Wave. Aldiss supported the New Wave movement, helping the magazine New Worlds to get financial backing from a 1967 Arts Council grant and publishing some of his more experimental work in the magazine.\nBesides his own writings, he edited a number of anthologies. For Faber he edited \"Introducing SF\", a collection of stories typifying various themes of science fiction, and \"Best Fantasy Stories\". In 1961, he edited an anthology of reprinted short science fiction for the British paperback publisher Penguin Books under the title \"Penguin Science Fiction\". This was remarkably successful, went into numerous reprints, and was followed up by two further anthologies: \"More Penguin Science Fiction\" (1963) and \"Yet More Penguin Science Fiction\" (1964). The later anthologies enjoyed the same success as the first, and all three were eventually published together as \"The Penguin Science Fiction Omnibus\" (1973), which also went into a number of reprints. In the 1970s, he produced several large collections of classic grand-scale science fiction, under the titles \"Space Opera\" (1974), \"Space Odysseys\" (1975), \"Galactic Empires\" (1976), \"Evil Earths\" (1976) and \"Perilous Planets\" (1978). Around this time, he edited a large-format volume \"Science Fiction Art\" (1975), with selections of artwork from the magazines and pulps.\nIn response to the results from the planetary probes of the 1960s and 1970s, which showed that Venus was completely unlike the hot, tropical jungle usually depicted in science fiction, Aldiss and Harrison edited an anthology \"Farewell, Fantastic Venus\", reprinting stories based on the pre-probe ideas of Venus. He also edited, with Harrison, a series of anthologies \"The Year's Best Science Fiction\" (Nos. 1\u20139, 1968\u20131976).\nAldiss invented a form of extremely short story called the \"mini-saga\". \"The Daily Telegraph\" hosted a competition for the best mini-saga for several years, and Aldiss was the judge. He edited several anthologies of the best mini-sagas.\nAldiss travelled to Yugoslavia, where he met fans in Ljubljana, Slovenia and published a travel book about Yugoslavia entitled \"Cities and Stones\" (1966), his only work in the genre. He published an alternative-history fantasy story, \"The Day of the Doomed King\" (1968), about Serbian kings in the Middle Ages, and wrote a novel called \"The Malacia Tapestry\", about an alternative Dalmatia.\nArt.\nIn addition to a highly successful career as a writer, Aldiss was an accomplished artist. His first solo exhibition, \"The Other Hemisphere\", was held in Oxford, August\u2013September 2010, and the exhibition's centrepiece \"Metropolis\" (see figure) has since been released as a limited edition fine art print. (The exhibition title denotes the writer/artist's notion, \"words streaming from one side of his brain inspiring images in what he calls 'the other hemisphere'\".)\nPersonal life.\nIn 1948, Aldiss married Olive Fortescue, secretary to the owner of Sanders' bookseller's in Oxford, where he had worked since 1947. He had two children from his first marriage: Clive in 1955 and Caroline Wendy in 1959, but the marriage \"finally collapsed\" in 1959 and dissolved in 1965.\nIn 1965, he married his second wife, Margaret Christie Manson (daughter of John Alexander Christie Manson, an aeronautical engineer), a Scot and secretary to the editor of the \"Oxford Mail\"; Aldiss was 40, and she 31. They lived in Oxford and had two children together, Tim and Charlotte. She died in 1997.\nDeath.\nAldiss died at his home in Headington, Oxford, on 19 August 2017, the day after his 92nd birthday.\nAwards and honours.\nHe was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1990.\nAldiss was the \"Permanent Special Guest\" at the annual International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts (ICFA) from 1989 through 2008. He was also the Guest of Honor at the conventions in 1986 and 1999.\nThe Science Fiction Writers of America made him its 18th SFWA Grand Master in 1999 and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2004.\nHe was awarded the title of Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to literature in the 2005 Birthday Honours list.\nIn January 2007 he appeared on \"Desert Island Discs\". His choice of record to 'save' was \"Old Rivers\" sung by Walter Brennan, his choice of book was John Heilpern's biography of John Osborne, and his luxury a banjo. The full selection of eight favourite records is on the BBC website.\nOn 1 July 2008 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Liverpool in recognition of his contribution to literature. The Brian W Aldiss Archive at the university holds manuscripts from the period 1943\u20131995.\nIn 2013, Aldiss was recipient of the World Fantasy Convention Award at the World Fantasy Convention in Brighton, England.\nAldiss sat on the Council of the Society of Authors.\nHe won two Hugo awards: in 1962 for the \"Hothouse\" series; and in 1987 for \"\". Aldiss also won a Nebula award in 1965 for \"The Saliva Tree\".\nWorks.\nAldiss was the author of over 80 books and 300 short stories, as well as several volumes of poetry.\nShort stories.\nCollections:\nUncollected short stories:\nPoems.\nCollections:\nUncollected poems:"}
{"id": "4562", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4562", "title": "British public houses", "text": ""}
{"id": "4563", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4563", "title": "Battle of Jutland", "text": "The Battle of Jutland () was a naval battle between Britain's Royal Navy Grand Fleet, under Admiral Sir John Jellicoe, and the Imperial German Navy's High Seas Fleet, under Vice-Admiral Reinhard Scheer, during World War I. The battle unfolded in extensive manoeuvring and three main engagements from 31 May to 1 June 1916, off the North Sea coast of Denmark's Jutland Peninsula. It was the largest naval battle and only full-scale clash of battleships of the war, and the outcome ensured that the Royal Navy denied the German surface fleet access to the North Sea and the Atlantic for the remainder of the war, as Germany avoided all fleet-to-fleet contact thereafter. Jutland was also the last major naval battle, in any war, fought primarily by battleships.\nGermany's High Seas Fleet intended to lure out, trap, and destroy a portion of the British Grand Fleet, as the German naval force was insufficient to openly engage the British fleet. This was part of a larger strategy to break the British blockade of Germany and allow German naval vessels access to the Atlantic. Britain's Royal Navy pursued a strategy of engaging and destroying the High Seas Fleet, thereby keeping German naval forces contained and away from Britain and her shipping lanes. The Germans planned to use Vice-Admiral Franz Hipper's fast scouting group of five modern battlecruisers to lure Vice-Admiral Sir David Beatty's battlecruiser squadrons into the path of the main German fleet. They stationed submarines across the likely routes of the British ships. However, the British learned from signal intercepts that a major fleet operation was likely, so on 30 May, Jellicoe sailed with the Grand Fleet to rendezvous with Beatty, passing over the German submarine picket lines while they were unprepared. The German plan had been delayed, causing further problems for their submarines, which had reached the limit of their endurance at sea.\nOn the afternoon of 31 May, Beatty encountered Hipper's battlecruiser force before the Germans had expected. Hipper successfully drew the British vanguard into the path of the High Seas Fleet. By the time Beatty sighted the larger force and turned back towards the British main fleet, he had lost two battlecruisers, from a force of six battlecruisers and four battleships. Beatty's withdrawal at the sight of the High Seas Fleet, which the British had not known were in the open sea, reversed the battle by drawing the Germans towards the British Grand Fleet. Between 18:30, when the sun was lowering, back-lighting the German forces, and nightfall at 20:30, the two fleets\u2014totalling 250 ships\u2014directly engaged twice. Fourteen British and eleven German ships sank, with a total of 9,823 casualties. After sunset Jellicoe manoeuvred to cut the Germans off from their base, hoping to continue the battle the next morning, but under the cover of darkness Scheer broke through the British light forces forming the rearguard of the Grand Fleet and returned to port.\nBoth sides claimed victory. The British lost more ships and over twice as many sailors but succeeded in containing the German fleet. The British press criticised the Grand Fleet's failure to force a decisive outcome, while Scheer's plan of destroying a substantial portion of the British fleet failed. The British long-term strategy of denying Germany access to the United Kingdom and Atlantic succeeded. The Germans' \"fleet in being\" continued to pose a threat, requiring the British to keep their battleships concentrated in the North Sea, but the battle reinforced the German policy of avoiding all fleet-to-fleet contact. At the end of 1916, after further unsuccessful attempts to reduce the Royal Navy's numerical advantage, the German Navy accepted its surface ships had been successfully contained, turning its resources to unrestricted submarine warfare for the second time (the first attempt of the war having ended with the controversy following the sinking of the RMS Lusitania) and destruction of Allied and neutral shipping, which\u2014with the Zimmermann Telegram\u2014by April 1917 triggered the United States of America's declaration of war on Germany. Reviews by the Royal Navy generated disagreement between supporters of Jellicoe and Beatty concerning their performance in battle; debate over this and the significance of the battle continues.\nBackground and planning.\nGerman planning.\nWith 16 dreadnought-type battleships, compared with the Royal Navy's 28, the German High Seas Fleet stood little chance of winning a head-to-head clash. The Germans therefore adopted a divide-and-conquer strategy. They would stage raids into the North Sea and bombard the English coast, with the aim of luring out small British squadrons and pickets, which could then be destroyed by superior forces or submarines.\nIn January 1916, Admiral von Pohl, commander of the German fleet, fell ill. He was replaced by Scheer, who believed that the fleet had been used too defensively, had better ships and men than the British, and ought to take the war to them. According to Scheer, the German naval strategy should be:\nOn 25 April 1916, a decision was made by the German Imperial Admiralty to halt indiscriminate attacks by submarines on merchant shipping. This followed protests from neutral countries, notably the United States, that their nationals had been the victims of attacks. Germany agreed that future attacks would only take place in accord with internationally agreed prize rules, which required an attacker to give a warning and allow the crews of vessels time to escape, and not to attack neutral vessels at all. Scheer believed that it would not be possible to continue attacks on these terms, which took away the advantage of secret approach by submarines and left them vulnerable to even relatively small guns on the target ships. Instead, he set about deploying the submarine fleet against military vessels.\nIt was hoped that, following a successful German submarine attack, fast British escorts, such as destroyers, would be tied down by anti-submarine operations. If the Germans could catch the British in the expected locations, good prospects were thought to exist of at least partially redressing the balance of forces between the fleets. \"After the British sortied in response to the raiding attack force\", the Royal Navy's centuries-old instincts for aggressive action could be exploited to draw its weakened units towards the main German fleet under Scheer. The hope was that Scheer would thus be able to ambush a section of the British fleet and destroy it.\nSubmarine deployments.\nA plan was devised to station submarines offshore from British naval bases, and then stage some action that would draw out the British ships to the waiting submarines. The battlecruiser had been damaged in a previous engagement, but was due to be repaired by mid-May, so an operation was scheduled for 17 May 1916. At the start of May, difficulties with condensers were discovered on ships of the third battleship squadron, so the operation was put back to 23 May. Ten submarines\u2014, , , , , , , , , and \u2014were given orders first to patrol in the central North Sea between 17 and 22 May, and then to take up waiting positions. \"U-43\" and \"U-44\" were stationed in the Pentland Firth, which the Grand Fleet was likely to cross when leaving Scapa Flow, while the remainder proceeded to the Firth of Forth, awaiting battlecruisers departing Rosyth. Each boat had an allocated area, within which it could move around as necessary to avoid detection, but was instructed to keep within it. During the initial North Sea patrol the boats were instructed to sail only north\u2013south so that any enemy who chanced to encounter one would believe it was departing or returning from operations on the west coast (which required them to pass around the north of Britain). Once at their final positions, the boats were under strict orders to avoid premature detection that might give away the operation. It was arranged that a coded signal would be transmitted to alert the submarines exactly when the operation commenced: \"Take into account the enemy's forces may be putting to sea\".\nAdditionally, \"UB-27\" was sent out on 20 May with instructions to work its way into the Firth of Forth past May Island. \"U-46\" was ordered to patrol the coast of Sunderland, which had been chosen for the diversionary attack, but because of engine problems it was unable to leave port and \"U-47\" was diverted to this task. On 13 May, \"U-72\" was sent to lay mines in the Firth of Forth; on the 23rd, \"U-74\" departed to lay mines in the Moray Firth; and on the 24th, \"U-75\" was dispatched similarly west of the Orkney Islands. \"UB-21\" and \"UB-22\" were sent to patrol the Humber, where (incorrect) reports had suggested the presence of British warships. \"U-22\", \"U-46\" and \"U-67\" were positioned north of Terschelling to protect against intervention by British light forces stationed at Harwich.\nOn 22 May 1916, it was discovered that \"Seydlitz\" was still not watertight after repairs and would not now be ready until the 29th. The ambush submarines were now on station and experiencing difficulties of their own: visibility near the coast was frequently poor due to fog, and sea conditions were either so calm the slightest ripple, as from the periscope, could give away their position, or so rough as to make it very hard to keep the vessel at a steady depth. The British had become aware of unusual submarine activity, and had begun counter-patrols that forced the submarines out of position. \"UB-27\" passed Bell Rock on the night of 23 May on its way into the Firth of Forth as planned, but was halted by engine trouble. After repairs it continued to approach, following behind merchant vessels, and reached Largo Bay on 25 May. There the boat became entangled in nets that fouled one of the propellers, forcing it to abandon the operation and return home. \"U-74\" was detected by four armed trawlers on 27 May and sunk south-east of Peterhead. \"U-75\" laid its mines off the Orkney Islands, which, although they played no part in the battle, were responsible later for sinking the cruiser carrying Lord Kitchener, the Secretary of State for War on 5 June, killing him and all but 12 of the crew. \"U-72\" was forced to abandon its mission without laying any mines when an oil leak meant it was leaving a visible surface trail astern.\nZeppelins.\nThe Germans maintained a fleet of Zeppelins that they used for aerial reconnaissance and occasional bombing raids. The planned raid on Sunderland intended to use Zeppelins to watch out for the British fleet approaching from the north, which might otherwise surprise the raiders.\nBy 28 May, strong north-easterly winds meant that it would not be possible to send out the Zeppelins, so the raid again had to be postponed. The submarines could only stay on station until 1 June before their supplies would be exhausted and they had to return, so a decision had to be made quickly about the raid.\nIt was decided to use an alternative plan, abandoning the attack on Sunderland but instead sending a patrol of battlecruisers to the Skagerrak, where it was likely they would encounter merchant ships carrying British cargo and British cruiser patrols. It was felt this could be done without air support, because the action would now be much closer to Germany, relying instead on cruiser and torpedo boat patrols for reconnaissance.\nOrders for the alternative plan were issued on 28 May, although it was still hoped that last-minute improvements in the weather would allow the original plan to go ahead. The German fleet assembled in the Jade River and at Wilhelmshaven and was instructed to raise steam and be ready for action from midnight on 28 May.\nBy 14:00 on 30 May, the wind was still too strong and the final decision was made to use the alternative plan. The coded signal \"31 May G.G.2490\" was transmitted to the ships of the fleet to inform them the Skagerrak attack would start on 31 May. The pre-arranged signal to the waiting submarines was transmitted throughout the day from the E-Dienst radio station at Bruges, and the U-boat tender \"Arcona\" anchored at Emden. Only two of the waiting submarines, \"U-66\" and \"U-32\", received the order.\nBritish response.\nUnfortunately for the German plan, the British had obtained a copy of the main German codebook from the light cruiser , which had been boarded by the Russian Navy after the ship ran aground in Russian territorial waters in 1914. German naval radio communications could therefore often be quickly deciphered, and the British Admiralty usually knew about German activities.\nThe British Admiralty's Room 40 maintained direction finding and interception of German naval signals. It had intercepted and decrypted a German signal on 28 May that provided \"ample evidence that the German fleet was stirring in the North Sea\". Further signals were intercepted, and although they were not decrypted it was clear that a major operation was likely. At 11:00 on 30 May, Jellicoe was warned that the German fleet seemed prepared to sail the following morning. By 17:00, the Admiralty had intercepted the signal from Scheer, \"31 May G.G.2490\", making it clear something significant was imminent.\nNot knowing the Germans' objective, Jellicoe and his staff decided to position the fleet to head off any attempt by the Germans to enter the North Atlantic or the Baltic through the Skagerrak, by taking up a position off Norway where they could potentially cut off any German raid into the shipping lanes of the Atlantic or prevent the Germans from heading into the Baltic. A position further west was unnecessary, as that area of the North Sea could be patrolled by air.\nConsequently, Admiral Jellicoe led the sixteen dreadnought battleships of the 1st and 4th Battle Squadrons of the Grand Fleet and three battlecruisers of the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron eastwards out of Scapa Flow at 22:30 on 30 May. He was to meet the 2nd Battle Squadron of eight dreadnought battleships commanded by Vice-Admiral Martyn Jerram coming from Cromarty. Beatty's force of six ships of the 1st and 2nd Battlecruiser Squadrons plus the 5th Battle Squadron of four fast battleships left the Firth of Forth at around the same time; Jellicoe intended to rendezvous with him west of the mouth of the Skagerrak off the coast of Jutland and wait for the Germans to appear or for their intentions to become clear. The planned position would give him the widest range of responses to likely German moves. Hipper's raiding force did not leave the Outer Jade Roads until 01:00 on 31 May, heading west of Heligoland Island following a cleared channel through the minefields, heading north at . The main German fleet of sixteen dreadnought battleships of 1st and 3rd Battle Squadrons left the Jade at 02:30, being joined off Heligoland at 04:00 by the six pre-dreadnoughts of the 2nd Battle Squadron coming from the Elbe River.\nNaval tactics in 1916.\nThe principle of concentration of force was fundamental to the fleet tactics of this time. As outlined by Captain Reginald Hall in 1914, tactical doctrine called for a fleet approaching battle to be in a compact formation of parallel columns, allowing relatively easy manoeuvring, and giving shortened sight lines within the formation, which simplified the passing of the signals necessary for command and control.\nA fleet formed in several short columns could change its heading faster than one formed in a single long column. Since most command signals were made with flags or signal lamps between ships, the flagship was usually placed at the head of the centre column so that its signals might be more easily seen by the many ships of the formation. Wireless telegraphy was in use, though security (radio direction finding), encryption, and the limitation of the radio sets made their extensive use more problematic. Command and control of such huge fleets remained difficult.\nThus, it might take a very long time for a signal from the flagship to be relayed to the entire formation. It was usually necessary for a signal to be confirmed by each ship before it could be relayed to other ships, and an order for a fleet movement would have to be received and acknowledged by every ship before it could be executed. In a large single-column formation, a signal could take 10 minutes or more to be passed from one end of the line to the other, whereas in a formation of parallel columns, visibility across the diagonals was often better (and always shorter) than in a single long column, and the diagonals gave signal \"redundancy\", increasing the probability that a message would be quickly seen and correctly interpreted.\nHowever, before battle was joined the heavy units of the fleet would, if possible, deploy into a single column. To form the battle line in the correct orientation relative to the enemy, the commanding admiral had to know the enemy fleet's distance, bearing, heading, and speed. It was the task of the scouting forces, consisting primarily of battlecruisers and cruisers, to find the enemy and report this information in sufficient time, and, if possible, to deny the enemy's scouting forces the opportunity of obtaining the equivalent information.\nIdeally, the battle line would cross the intended path of the enemy column so that the maximum number of guns could be brought to bear, while the enemy could fire only with the forward guns of the leading ships, a manoeuvre known as \"crossing the T\". Admiral T\u014dg\u014d, commander of the Japanese battleship fleet, had achieved this against Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky's Russian battleships in 1905 at the Battle of Tsushima, with devastating results. Jellicoe achieved this twice in one hour against the High Seas Fleet at Jutland, but on both occasions, Scheer managed to turn away and disengage, thereby avoiding a decisive action. \nShip design.\nWithin the existing technological limits, a trade-off had to be made between the weight and size of guns, the weight of armour protecting the ship, and the maximum speed. Battleships sacrificed speed for armour and heavy naval guns ( or larger). British battlecruisers sacrificed weight of armour for greater speed (their purpose being to catch and destroy cruisers while avoiding battleships), while their German counterparts were armed with lighter guns and heavier armour. These weight savings allowed them to escape danger or catch other ships. Generally, the larger guns mounted on British ships allowed an engagement at greater range. In theory, a lightly armoured ship could stay out of range of a slower opponent while still scoring hits. The fast pace of development in the pre-war years meant that every few years, a new generation of ships rendered its predecessors obsolete. Thus, fairly young ships could still be obsolete compared with the newest ships, and fare badly in an engagement against them. Some research has also shown that the chemicals used in British naval ammunition increased the chances of internal explosions. \nAdmiral John Fisher, responsible for reconstruction of the British fleet in the pre-war period, favoured large guns, fuel oil, and speed. Admiral Tirpitz, responsible for the German fleet, favoured ship survivability and chose to sacrifice some gun size for improved armour. The German battlecruiser had belt armour equivalent in thickness\u2014though not as comprehensive\u2014to the British battleship , significantly better than on the British battlecruisers such as \"Tiger\". German ships had better internal subdivision and had fewer doors and other weak points in their bulkheads, but with the disadvantage that space for crew was greatly reduced. As they were designed only for sorties in the North Sea they did not need to be as habitable as the British vessels and their crews could live in barracks ashore when in harbour.\nOrder of battle.\nWarships of the period were armed with guns firing projectiles of varying weights, bearing high explosive warheads. The sum total of weight of all the projectiles fired by all the ship's broadside guns is referred to as \"weight of broadside\". At Jutland, the total of the British ships' weight of broadside was , while the German fleet's total was . This does not take into consideration the ability of some ships and their crews to fire more or less rapidly than others, which would increase or decrease amount of fire that one combatant was able to bring to bear on their opponent for any length of time.\nJellicoe's Grand Fleet was split into two sections. The dreadnought Battle Fleet, with which he sailed, formed the main force and was composed of 24 battleships and three battlecruisers. The battleships were formed into three squadrons of eight ships, further subdivided into divisions of four, each led by a flag officer. Accompanying them were eight armoured cruisers (classified by the Royal Navy since 1913 as \"cruisers\"), eight light cruisers, four scout cruisers, 51 destroyers, and one destroyer-minelayer.\nThe Grand Fleet sailed without three of its battleships: in refit at Invergordon, dry-docked at Rosyth and in refit at Devonport. The brand new was left behind; with only three weeks in service, her untrained crew was judged unready for battle. had been sunk by a German mine on 27 October 1914.\nBritish reconnaissance was provided by the Battlecruiser Fleet under David Beatty: six battlecruisers, four fast s, 14 light cruisers and 27 destroyers. Air scouting was provided by the attachment of the seaplane tender , one of the first aircraft carriers in history to participate in a naval engagement.\nThe German High Seas Fleet under Scheer was also split into a main force and a separate reconnaissance force. Scheer's main battle fleet was composed of 16 battleships and six pre-dreadnought battleships arranged in an identical manner to the British. With them were six light cruisers and 31 torpedo-boats, (the latter being roughly equivalent to a British destroyer). The only German battleship missing was .\nThe German scouting force, commanded by Franz Hipper, consisted of five battlecruisers, five light cruisers and 30 torpedo-boats. The Germans had no equivalent to \"Engadine\" and no heavier-than-air aircraft to operate with the fleet but had the Imperial German Naval Airship Service's force of rigid airships available to patrol the North Sea.\nAll of the battleships and battlecruisers on both sides carried torpedoes of various sizes, as did the lighter craft. The British battleships carried three or four underwater torpedo tubes. The battlecruisers carried from two to five. All were either 18-inch or 21-inch diameter. The German battleships carried five or six underwater torpedo tubes in three sizes from 18 to 21 inch and the battlecruisers carried four or five tubes.\nThe German battle fleet was hampered by the slow speed and relatively poor armament of the six pre-dreadnoughts of II Squadron, which limited maximum fleet speed to , compared to maximum British fleet speed of . On the British side, the eight armoured cruisers were deficient in both speed and armour protection.\nBattlecruiser action.\nThe route of the British battlecruiser fleet took it through the patrol sector allocated to \"U-32\". After receiving the order to commence the operation, the U-boat moved to a position east of the Isle of May at dawn on 31 May. At 03:40, it sighted the cruisers and leaving the Forth at . It launched one torpedo at the leading cruiser at a range of , but its periscope jammed 'up', giving away the position of the submarine as it manoeuvred to fire a second. The lead cruiser turned away to dodge the torpedo, while the second turned towards the submarine, attempting to ram. \"U-32\" crash dived, and on raising its periscope at 04:10 saw two battlecruisers (the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron) heading south-east. They were too far away to attack, but \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" von Spiegel reported the sighting of two battleships and two cruisers to Germany.\n\"U-66\" was also supposed to be patrolling off the Firth of Forth but had been forced north to a position off Peterhead by patrolling British vessels. This now brought it into contact with the 2nd Battle Squadron, coming from the Moray Firth. At 05:00, it had to crash dive when the cruiser appeared from the mist heading toward it. It was followed by another cruiser, , and eight battleships. \"U-66\" got within of the battleships preparing to fire, but was forced to dive by an approaching destroyer and missed the opportunity. At 06:35, it reported eight battleships and cruisers heading north.\nThe courses reported by both submarines were incorrect, because they reflected one leg of a zigzag being used by British ships to avoid submarines. Taken with a wireless intercept of more ships leaving Scapa Flow earlier in the night, they created the impression in the German High Command that the British fleet, whatever it was doing, was split into separate sections moving apart, which was precisely as the Germans wished to meet it.\nJellicoe's ships proceeded to their rendezvous undamaged and undiscovered. However, he was now misled by an Admiralty intelligence report advising that the German main battle fleet was still in port. The Director of Operations Division, Rear Admiral Thomas Jackson, had asked the intelligence division, Room 40, for the current location of German call sign DK, used by Admiral Scheer. They had replied that it was currently transmitting from Wilhelmshaven. It was known to the intelligence staff that Scheer deliberately used a different call sign when at sea, but no one asked for this information or explained the reason behind the query\u2014to locate the German fleet.\nThe German battlecruisers cleared the minefields surrounding the Amrum swept channel by 09:00. They then proceeded north-west, passing west of the Horn's Reef lightship heading for the Little Fisher Bank at the mouth of the Skagerrak. The High Seas Fleet followed some behind. The battlecruisers were in line ahead, with the four cruisers of the II scouting group plus supporting torpedo boats ranged in an arc ahead and to either side. The IX torpedo boat flotilla formed close support immediately surrounding the battlecruisers. The High Seas Fleet similarly adopted a line-ahead formation, with close screening by torpedo boats to either side and a further screen of five cruisers surrounding the column away. The wind had finally moderated so that Zeppelins could be used, and by 11:30 five had been sent out: \"L14\" to the Skagerrak, \"L23\" east of Noss Head in the Pentland Firth, \"L21\" off Peterhead, \"L9\" off Sunderland, and \"L16\" east of Flamborough Head. Visibility, however, was still bad, with clouds down to .\nContact.\nBy around 14:00, Beatty's ships were proceeding eastward at roughly the same latitude as Hipper's squadron, which was heading north. Had the courses remained unchanged, Beatty would have passed between the two German fleets, south of the battlecruisers and north of the High Seas Fleet at around 16:30, possibly trapping his ships just as the German plan envisioned. His orders were to stop his scouting patrol when he reached a point east of Britain and then turn north to meet Jellicoe, which he did at this time. Beatty's ships were divided into three columns, with the two battlecruiser squadrons leading in parallel lines apart. The 5th Battle Squadron was stationed to the north-west, on the side furthest away from any expected enemy contact, while a screen of cruisers and destroyers was spread south-east of the battlecruisers. After the turn, the 5th Battle Squadron was now leading the British ships in the westernmost column, and Beatty's squadron was centre and rearmost, with the 2nd BCS to the west.\nAt 14:20 on 31 May, despite heavy haze and scuds of fog giving poor visibility, scouts from Beatty's force reported enemy ships to the south-east; the British light units, investigating a neutral Danish steamer (\"N J Fjord\"), which was stopped between the two fleets, had found two German destroyers engaged on the same mission ( and ). The first shots of the battle were fired at 14:28 when \"Galatea\" and \"Phaeton\" of the British 1st Light Cruiser Squadron opened on the German torpedo boats, which withdrew toward their approaching light cruisers. At 14:36, the Germans scored the first hit of the battle when , of Rear-Admiral Friedrich Boedicker's Scouting Group II, hit her British counterpart \"Galatea\" at extreme range.\nBeatty began to move his battlecruisers and supporting forces south-eastwards and then east to cut the German ships off from their base and ordered \"Engadine\" to launch a seaplane to try to get more information about the size and location of the German forces. This was the first time in history that a carrier-based aeroplane was used for reconnaissance in naval combat. \"Engadine\"s aircraft did locate and report some German light cruisers just before 15:30 and came under anti-aircraft gunfire but attempts to relay reports from the aeroplane failed.\nUnfortunately for Beatty, his initial course changes at 14:32 were not received by Sir Hugh Evan-Thomas's 5th Battle Squadron (the distance being too great to read his flags), because the battlecruiser \u2014the last ship in his column\u2014was no longer in a position where she could relay signals by searchlight to Evan-Thomas, as she had previously been ordered to do. Whereas before the north turn, \"Tiger\" had been the closest ship to Evan-Thomas, she was now further away than Beatty in \"Lion\". Matters were aggravated because Evan-Thomas had not been briefed regarding standing orders within Beatty's squadron, as his squadron normally operated with the Grand Fleet. Fleet ships were expected to obey movement orders precisely and not deviate from them. Beatty's standing instructions expected his officers to use their initiative and keep station with the flagship. As a result, the four \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class battleships\u2014which were the fastest and most heavily armed in the world at that time\u2014remained on the previous course for several minutes, ending up behind rather than five. Beatty also had the opportunity during the previous hours to concentrate his forces, and no reason not to do so, whereas he steamed ahead at full speed, faster than the battleships could manage. Dividing the force had serious consequences for the British, costing them what would have been an overwhelming advantage in ships and firepower during the first half-hour of the coming battle.\nWith visibility favouring the Germans, Hipper's battlecruisers at 15:22, steaming approximately north-west, sighted Beatty's squadron at a range of about , while Beatty's forces did not identify Hipper's battlecruisers until 15:30 (position 1 on map). At 15:45, Hipper turned south-east to lead Beatty toward Scheer, who was south-east with the main force of the High Seas Fleet.\nRun to the south.\nBeatty's conduct during the next 15 minutes has received a great deal of criticism, as his ships out-ranged and outnumbered the German squadron, yet he held his fire for over 10 minutes with the German ships in range. He also failed to use the time available to rearrange his battlecruisers into a fighting formation, with the result that they were still manoeuvring when the battle started.\nAt 15:48, with the opposing forces roughly parallel at , with the British to the south-west of the Germans (i.e., on the right side), Hipper opened fire, followed by the British ships as their guns came to bear upon targets (position 2). Thus began the opening phase of the battlecruiser action, known as the \"Run to the South\", in which the British chased the Germans, and Hipper intentionally led Beatty toward Scheer. During the first minutes of the ensuing battle, all the British ships except \"Princess Royal\" fired far over their German opponents, due to adverse visibility conditions, before finally getting the range. Only \"Lion\" and \"Princess Royal\" had settled into formation, so the other four ships were hampered in aiming by their own turning. Beatty was to windward of Hipper, and therefore funnel and gun smoke from his own ships tended to obscure his targets, while Hipper's smoke blew clear. Also, the eastern sky was overcast and the grey German ships were indistinct and difficult to range.\nBeatty had ordered his ships to engage in a line, one British ship engaging with one German and his flagship doubling on the German flagship . However, due to another mistake with signalling by flag, and possibly because \"Queen Mary\" and \"Tiger\" were unable to see the German lead ship because of smoke, the second German ship, \"Derfflinger\", was left un-engaged and free to fire without disruption. drew fire from two of Beatty's battlecruisers, but still fired with great accuracy during this time, hitting \"Tiger\" 9 times in the first 12 minutes. The Germans drew first blood. Aided by superior visibility, Hipper's five battlecruisers quickly registered hits on three of the six British battlecruisers. Seven minutes passed before the British managed to score their first hit.\nThe first near-kill of the Run to the South occurred at 16:00, when a shell from \"L\u00fctzow\" wrecked the \"Q\" turret amidships on Beatty's flagship \"Lion\". Dozens of crewmen were instantly killed, but far larger destruction was averted when the mortally wounded turret commander\u2014Major Francis Harvey of the Royal Marines\u2014promptly ordered the magazine doors shut and the magazine flooded. This prevented a magazine explosion at 16:28, when a flash fire ignited ready cordite charges beneath the turret and killed everyone in the chambers outside \"Q\" magazine. \"Lion\" was saved. was not so lucky; at 16:02, just 14 minutes into the gunnery exchange, she was hit aft by three shells from , causing damage sufficient to knock her out of line and detonating \"X\" magazine aft. Soon after, despite the near-maximum range, \"Von der Tann\" put another shell on \"Indefatigable\"s \"A\" turret forward. The plunging shells probably pierced the thin upper armour, and seconds later \"Indefatigable\" was ripped apart by another magazine explosion, sinking immediately and leaving only two survivors from her crew of 1,019 officers and men. (position 3).\nHipper's position deteriorated somewhat by 16:15 as the 5th Battle Squadron finally came into range, so that he had to contend with gunfire from the four battleships astern as well as Beatty's five remaining battlecruisers to starboard. But he knew his baiting mission was close to completion, as his force was rapidly closing with Scheer's main body. At 16:08, the lead battleship of the 5th Battle Squadron, , caught up with Hipper and opened fire at extreme range, scoring a hit on \"Von der Tann\" within 60 seconds. Still, it was 16:15 before all the battleships of the 5th were able to fully engage at long range.\nAt 16:25, the battlecruiser action intensified again when was hit by what may have been a combined salvo from \"Derfflinger\" and \"Seydlitz\"; she disintegrated when both forward magazines exploded, sinking with all but nine of her 1,275 man crew lost. (position 4). Commander von Hase, the first gunnery officer aboard \"Derfflinger\", noted:\nDuring the Run to the South, from 15:48 to 16:54, the German battlecruisers made an estimated total of forty-two hits on the British battlecruisers (nine on \"Lion\", six on \"Princess Royal\", seven on \"Queen Mary\", 14 on \"Tiger\", one on \"New Zealand\", five on \"Indefatigable\"), and two more on the battleship \"Barham\", compared with only eleven hits by the British battlecruisers (four on \"L\u00fctzow\", four on \"Seydlitz\", two on \"Moltke\", one on \"von der Tann\"), and six hits by the battleships (one on \"Seydlitz\", four on \"Moltke\", one on \"von der Tann\").\nShortly after 16:26, a salvo struck on or around , which was obscured by spray and smoke from shell bursts. A signalman promptly leapt on to the bridge of \"Lion\" and announced \"\"Princess Royal\"s blown up, Sir.\" Beatty famously turned to his flag captain, saying \"Chatfield, there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today.\" (In popular legend, Beatty also immediately ordered his ships to \"turn two points to port\", i.e., two points nearer the enemy, but there is no official record of any such command or course change.) \"Princess Royal\", as it turned out, was still afloat after the spray cleared.\nAt 16:30, Scheer's leading battleships sighted the distant battlecruiser action; soon after, of Beatty's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron led by Commodore William Goodenough sighted the main body of Scheer's High Seas Fleet, dodging numerous heavy-calibre salvos to report in detail the German strength: 16 dreadnoughts with six older battleships. This was the first news that Beatty and Jellicoe had that Scheer and his battle fleet were even at sea. Simultaneously, an all-out destroyer action raged in the space between the opposing battlecruiser forces, as British and German destroyers fought with each other and attempted to torpedo the larger enemy ships. Each side fired many torpedoes, but both battlecruiser forces turned away from the attacks and all escaped harm except \"Seydlitz\", which was hit forward at 16:57 by a torpedo fired by the British destroyer . Though taking on water, \"Seydlitz\" maintained speed. The destroyer , under the command of Captain Barry Bingham, led the British attacks. The British disabled the German torpedo boat , which the Germans soon abandoned and sank, and \"Petard\" then torpedoed and sank , her second score of the day. and rescued the crews of their sunken sister ships. But \"Nestor\" and another British destroyer\u2014\u2014were immobilised by shell hits, and were later sunk by Scheer's passing dreadnoughts. Bingham was rescued, and awarded the Victoria Cross for his leadership in the destroyer action.\nRun to the north.\nAs soon as he himself sighted the vanguard of Scheer's distant battleship line away, at 16:40, Beatty turned his battlecruiser force 180\u00b0, heading north to draw the Germans toward Jellicoe. (position 5). Beatty's withdrawal toward Jellicoe is called the \"Run to the North\", in which the tables turned and the Germans chased the British. Because Beatty once again failed to signal his intentions adequately, the battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron\u2014which were too far behind to read his flags\u2014found themselves passing the battlecruisers on an opposing course and heading directly toward the approaching main body of the High Seas Fleet. At 16:48, at extreme range, Scheer's leading battleships opened fire.\nMeanwhile, at 16:47, having received Goodenough's signal and knowing that Beatty was now leading the German battle fleet north to him, Jellicoe signalled to his own forces that the fleet action they had waited so long for was finally imminent; at 16:51, by radio, he informed the Admiralty so in London.\nThe difficulties of the 5th Battle Squadron were compounded when Beatty gave the order to Evan-Thomas to \"turn in succession\" (rather than \"turn together\") at 16:48 as the battleships passed him. Evan-Thomas acknowledged the signal, but Lieutenant-Commander Ralph Seymour, Beatty's flag lieutenant, aggravated the situation when he did not haul down the flags (to execute the signal) for some minutes. At 16:55, when the 5BS had moved within range of the enemy battleships, Evan-Thomas issued his own flag command warning his squadron to expect sudden manoeuvres and to follow his lead, before starting to turn on his own initiative. The order to turn in succession would have resulted in all four ships turning in the same patch of sea as they reached it one by one, giving the High Seas Fleet repeated opportunity with ample time to find the proper range. However, the captain of the trailing ship () turned early, mitigating the adverse results.\nFor the next hour, the 5th Battle Squadron acted as Beatty's rearguard, drawing fire from all the German ships within range, while by 17:10 Beatty had deliberately eased his own squadron out of range of Hipper's now-superior battlecruiser force. Since visibility and firepower now favoured the Germans, there was no incentive for Beatty to risk further battlecruiser losses when his own gunnery could not be effective. Illustrating the imbalance, Beatty's battlecruisers did not score any hits on the Germans in this phase until 17:45, but they had rapidly received five more before he opened the range (four on \"Lion\", of which three were by \"L\u00fctzow\", and one on \"Tiger\" by \"Seydlitz\"). Now the only targets the Germans could reach, the ships of the 5th Battle Squadron, received simultaneous fire from Hipper's battlecruisers to the east (which HMS \"Barham\" and engaged) and Scheer's leading battleships to the south-east (which and \"Malaya\" engaged). Three took hits: \"Barham\" (four by \"Derfflinger\"), \"Warspite\" (two by \"Seydlitz\"), and \"Malaya\" (seven by the German battleships). Only \"Valiant\" was unscathed.\nThe four battleships were far better suited to take this sort of pounding than the battlecruisers, and none were lost, though \"Malaya\" suffered heavy damage, an ammunition fire, and heavy crew casualties. At the same time, the fire of the four British ships was accurate and effective. As the two British squadrons headed north at top speed, eagerly chased by the entire German fleet, the 5th Battle Squadron scored 13 hits on the enemy battlecruisers (four on \"L\u00fctzow\", three on \"Derfflinger\", six on \"Seydlitz\") and five on battleships (although only one, on , did any serious damage). (position 6).\nThe fleets converge.\nJellicoe was now aware that full fleet engagement was nearing, but had insufficient information on the position and course of the Germans. To assist Beatty, early in the battle at about 16:05, Jellicoe had ordered Rear-Admiral Horace Hood's 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron to speed ahead to find and support Beatty's force, and Hood was now racing SSE well in advance of Jellicoe's northern force. Rear-Admiral Arbuthnot's 1st Cruiser Squadron patrolled the van of Jellicoe's main battleship force as it advanced steadily to the south-east.\nAt 17:33, the armoured cruiser of Arbuthnot's squadron, on the far southwest flank of Jellicoe's force, came within view of , which was about ahead of Beatty with the 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron, establishing the first visual link between the converging bodies of the Grand Fleet. At 17:38, the scout cruiser , screening Hood's oncoming battlecruisers, was intercepted by the van of the German scouting forces under Rear-Admiral Boedicker.\nHeavily outnumbered by Boedicker's four light cruisers, \"Chester\" was pounded before being relieved by Hood's heavy units, which swung westward for that purpose. Hood's flagship disabled the light cruiser shortly after 17:56. \"Wiesbaden\" became a sitting target for most of the British fleet during the next hour, but remained afloat and fired some torpedoes at the passing enemy battleships from long range. Meanwhile, Boedicker's other ships turned toward Hipper and Scheer in the mistaken belief that Hood was leading a larger force of British capital ships from the north and east. A chaotic destroyer action in mist and smoke ensued as German torpedo boats attempted to blunt the arrival of this new formation, but Hood's battlecruisers dodged all the torpedoes fired at them. In this action, after leading a torpedo counter-attack, the British destroyer was disabled, but continued to return fire at numerous passing enemy ships for the next hour.\nFleet action.\nDeployment.\nIn the meantime, Beatty and Evan-Thomas had resumed their engagement with Hipper's battlecruisers, this time with the visual conditions to their advantage. With several of his ships damaged, Hipper turned back toward Scheer at around 18:00, just as Beatty's flagship \"Lion\" was finally sighted from Jellicoe's flagship \"Iron Duke\". Jellicoe twice demanded the latest position of the German battlefleet from Beatty, who could not see the German battleships and failed to respond to the question until 18:14. Meanwhile, Jellicoe received confused sighting reports of varying accuracy and limited usefulness from light cruisers and battleships on the starboard (southern) flank of his force.\nJellicoe was in a worrying position. He needed to know the location of the German fleet to judge when and how to deploy his battleships from their cruising formation (six columns of four ships each) into a single battle line. The deployment could be on either the westernmost or the easternmost column, and had to be carried out before the Germans arrived; but early deployment could mean losing any chance of a decisive encounter. Deploying to the west would bring his fleet closer to Scheer, gaining valuable time as dusk approached, but the Germans might arrive before the manoeuvre was complete. Deploying to the east would take the force away from Scheer, but Jellicoe's ships might be able to cross the \"T\", and visibility would strongly favour British gunnery\u2014Scheer's forces would be silhouetted against the setting sun to the west, while the Grand Fleet would be indistinct against the dark skies to the north and east, and would be hidden by reflection of the low sunlight off intervening haze and smoke. Deployment would take twenty irreplaceable minutes, and the fleets were closing at full speed. In one of the most critical and difficult tactical command decisions of the entire war, Jellicoe ordered deployment to the east at 18:15.\nWindy Corner.\nMeanwhile, Hipper had rejoined Scheer, and the combined High Seas Fleet was heading north, directly toward Jellicoe. Scheer had no indication that Jellicoe was at sea, let alone that he was bearing down from the north-west, and was distracted by the intervention of Hood's ships to his north and east. Beatty's four surviving battlecruisers were now crossing the van of the British dreadnoughts to join Hood's three battlecruisers; at this time, Arbuthnot's flagship, the armoured cruiser , and her squadron-mate both charged across Beatty's bows, and \"Lion\" narrowly avoided a collision with \"Warrior\". Nearby, numerous British light cruisers and destroyers on the south-western flank of the deploying battleships were also crossing each other's courses in attempts to reach their proper stations, often barely escaping collisions, and under fire from some of the approaching German ships. This period of peril and heavy traffic attending the merger and deployment of the British forces later became known as \"Windy Corner\".\nArbuthnot was attracted by the drifting hull of the crippled \"Wiesbaden\". With \"Warrior\", \"Defence\" closed in for the kill, only to blunder right into the gun sights of Hipper's and Scheer's oncoming capital ships. \"Defence\" was deluged by heavy-calibre gunfire from many German battleships, which detonated her magazines in a spectacular explosion viewed by most of the deploying Grand Fleet. She sank with all hands (903 officers and men). \"Warrior\" was also hit badly, but was spared destruction by a mishap to the nearby battleship \"Warspite\". \"Warspite\" had her steering gear overheat and jam under heavy load at high speed as the 5th Battle Squadron made a turn to the north at 18:19. Steaming at top speed in wide circles, \"Warspite\" attracted the attention of German dreadnoughts and took 13 hits, inadvertently drawing fire away from the hapless \"Warrior\". \"Warspite\" was brought back under control and survived the onslaught, but was badly damaged, had to reduce speed, and withdrew northward; later (at 21:07), she was ordered back to port by Evan-Thomas. \"Warspite\" went on to a long and illustrious career, serving also in World War II. \"Warrior\", on the other hand, was abandoned and sank the next day after her crew was taken off at 08:25 on 1 June by \"Engadine\", which towed the sinking armoured cruiser during the night.\nAs \"Defence\" sank and \"Warspite\" circled, at about 18:19, Hipper moved within range of Hood's 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron, but was still also within range of Beatty's ships. At first, visibility favoured the British: hit \"Derfflinger\" three times and \"Seydlitz\" once, while \"L\u00fctzow\" quickly took 10 hits from \"Lion\", and \"Invincible\", including two below-waterline hits forward by \"Invincible\" that would ultimately doom Hipper's flagship. But at 18:30, \"Invincible\" abruptly appeared as a clear target before \"L\u00fctzow\" and \"Derfflinger\". The two German ships then fired three salvoes each at \"Invincible\", and sank her in 90 seconds. A shell from the third salvo struck \"Invincible\"s Q-turret amidships, detonating the magazines below and causing her to blow up and sink. All but six of her crew of 1,032 officers and men, including Rear-Admiral Hood, were killed. Of the remaining British battlecruisers, only \"Princess Royal\" received heavy-calibre hits at this time (two by the battleship \"Markgraf\"). \"L\u00fctzow\", flooding forward and unable to communicate by radio, was now out of action and began to attempt to withdraw; therefore Hipper left his flagship and transferred to the torpedo boat , hoping to board one of the other battlecruisers later.\nCrossing the T.\nBy 18:30, the main battle fleet action was joined for the first time, with Jellicoe effectively \"crossing Scheer's T\". The officers on the lead German battleships, and Scheer himself, were taken completely by surprise when they emerged from drifting clouds of smoky mist to suddenly find themselves facing the massed firepower of the entire Grand Fleet main battle line, which they did not know was even at sea. Jellicoe's flagship \"Iron Duke\" quickly scored seven hits on the lead German dreadnought, , but in this brief exchange, which lasted only minutes, as few as 10 of the Grand Fleet's 24 dreadnoughts actually opened fire. The Germans were hampered by poor visibility, in addition to being in an unfavourable tactical position, just as Jellicoe had intended. Realising he was heading into a death trap, Scheer ordered his fleet to turn and disengage at 18:33. Under a pall of smoke and mist, Scheer's forces succeeded in disengaging by an expertly executed 180\u00b0 turn in unison (\"battle about turn to starboard\", German \"Gefechtskehrtwendung nach Steuerbord\"), which was a well-practised emergency manoeuvre of the High Seas Fleet. Scheer declared:\nConscious of the risks to his capital ships posed by torpedoes, Jellicoe did not chase directly but headed south, determined to keep the High Seas Fleet west of him. Starting at 18:40, battleships at the rear of Jellicoe's line were in fact sighting and avoiding torpedoes, and at 18:54 was hit by a torpedo (probably from the disabled \"Wiesbaden\"), which reduced her speed to . Meanwhile, Scheer, knowing that it was not yet dark enough to escape and that his fleet would suffer terribly in a stern chase, doubled back to the east at 18:55. In his memoirs he wrote, \"the manoeuvre would be bound to surprise the enemy, to upset his plans for the rest of the day, and if the blow fell heavily it would facilitate the breaking loose at night.\" But the turn to the east took his ships, again, directly towards Jellicoe's fully deployed battle line.\nSimultaneously, the disabled British destroyer HMS \"Shark\" fought desperately against a group of four German torpedo boats and disabled with gunfire, but was eventually torpedoed and sunk at 19:02 by the German destroyer . \"Shark\"s Captain Loftus Jones was awarded the Victoria Cross for his heroism in continuing to fight against all odds.\nDeath Ride.\nCommodore Goodenough's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron dodged the fire of German battleships for a second time to re-establish contact with the High Seas Fleet shortly after 19:00. By 19:15, Jellicoe had crossed Scheer's \"T\" again. This time his arc of fire was tighter and deadlier, causing severe damage to the German battleships, particularly Rear-Admiral Behncke's leading 3rd Squadron (SMS \"K\u00f6nig\", , \"Markgraf\", and all being hit, along with of the 1st Squadron), while on the British side, only the battleship was hit (twice, by \"Seydlitz\" but with little damage done).\nAt 19:17, for the second time in less than an hour, Scheer turned his outnumbered and out-gunned fleet to the west using the \"battle about turn\" (German: \"Gefechtskehrtwendung\"), but this time it was executed only with difficulty, as the High Seas Fleet's lead squadrons began to lose formation under concentrated gunfire. To deter a British chase, Scheer ordered a major torpedo attack by his destroyers and a potentially sacrificial charge by Scouting Group I's four remaining battlecruisers. Hipper was still aboard the torpedo boat \"G39\" and was unable to command his squadron for this attack. Therefore, \"Derfflinger\", under Captain Hartog, led the already badly damaged German battlecruisers directly into \"the greatest concentration of naval gunfire any fleet commander had ever faced\", at ranges down to .\nIn what became known as the \"death ride\", all the battlecruisers except \"Moltke\" were hit and further damaged, as 18 of the British battleships fired at them simultaneously. \"Derfflinger\" had two main gun turrets destroyed. The crews of Scouting Group I suffered heavy casualties, but survived the pounding and veered away with the other battlecruisers once Scheer was out of trouble and the German destroyers were moving in to attack. In this brief but intense portion of the engagement, from about 19:05 to about 19:30, the Germans sustained a total of 37 heavy hits while inflicting only two; \"Derfflinger\" alone received 14.\nWhile his battlecruisers drew the fire of the British fleet, Scheer slipped away, laying smoke screens. Meanwhile, from about 19:16 to about 19:40, the British battleships were also engaging Scheer's torpedo boats, which executed several waves of torpedo attacks to cover his withdrawal. Jellicoe's ships turned away from the attacks and successfully evaded all 31 of the torpedoes launched at them\u2014though, in several cases, only barely\u2014and sank the German destroyer \"S35\", attributed to a salvo from \"Iron Duke\". British light forces also sank \"V48\", which had previously been disabled by HMS \"Shark\". This action, and the turn away, cost the British critical time and range in the last hour of daylight\u2014as Scheer intended, allowing him to get his heavy ships out of immediate danger.\nThe last major exchanges between capital ships in this battle\u2014and in the war\u2014took place just after sunset, from about 20:19 to about 20:35, as the surviving British battlecruisers caught up with their German counterparts, which were briefly relieved by Rear-Admiral Mauve's obsolete pre-dreadnoughts (the German 2nd Squadron). The British received one heavy hit on \"Princess Royal\" but scored five more on \"Seydlitz\" and three on other German ships.\nNight action and German withdrawal.\nAt 21:00, Jellicoe, conscious of the Grand Fleet's deficiencies in night fighting, decided to try to avoid a major engagement until early dawn. He placed a screen of cruisers and destroyers behind his battle fleet to patrol the rear as he headed south to guard Scheer's expected escape route. In reality, Scheer opted to cross Jellicoe's wake and escape via Horns Reef. Luckily for Scheer, most of the light forces in Jellicoe's rearguard failed to report the seven separate encounters with the German fleet during the night; the very few radio reports that were sent to the British flagship were never received, possibly because the Germans were jamming British frequencies. Many of the destroyers failed to make the most of their opportunities to attack discovered ships, despite Jellicoe's expectations that the destroyer forces would, if necessary, be able to block the path of the German fleet.\nJellicoe and his commanders did not understand that the furious gunfire and explosions to the north (seen and heard for hours by all the British battleships) indicated that the German heavy ships were breaking through the screen astern of the British fleet. Instead, it was believed that the fighting was the result of night attacks by German destroyers. The most powerful British ships of all (the 15-inch-guns of the 5th Battle Squadron) directly observed German battleships crossing astern of them in action with British light forces, at ranges of or less, and gunners on HMS \"Malaya\" made ready to fire, but her captain declined, deferring to the authority of Rear-Admiral Evan-Thomas\u2014and neither commander reported the sightings to Jellicoe, assuming that he could see for himself and that revealing the fleet's position by radio signals or gunfire was unwise.\nWhile the nature of Scheer's escape, and Jellicoe's inaction, indicate the overall German superiority in night fighting, the results of the night action were no more clear-cut than were those of the battle as a whole. In the first of many surprise encounters by darkened ships at point-blank range, \"Southampton\", Commodore Goodenough's flagship, which had scouted so proficiently, was heavily damaged in action with a German Scouting Group composed of light cruisers, but managed to torpedo , which went down at 22:23 with all but 9 hands (320 officers and men).\nFrom 23:20 to approximately 02:15, several British destroyer flotillas launched torpedo attacks on the German battle fleet in a series of violent and chaotic engagements at extremely short range (often under ). At the cost of five destroyers sunk and some others damaged, they managed to torpedo the light cruiser , which sank several hours later, and the pre-dreadnought , which blew up and sank with all hands (839 officers and men) at 03:10 during the last wave of attacks before dawn. Three of the British destroyers collided in the chaos, and the German battleship rammed the British destroyer , blowing away most of the British ship's superstructure merely with the muzzle blast of its big guns, which could not be aimed low enough to hit the ship. \"Nassau\" was left with an hole in her side, reducing her maximum speed to , while the removed plating was left lying on \"Spitfire\"s deck. \"Spitfire\" survived and made it back to port. Another German cruiser, \"Elbing\", was accidentally rammed by the dreadnought and abandoned, sinking early the next day. Of the British destroyers, , , , and were lost during the night fighting.\nJust after midnight on 1 June, and other German battleships sank \"Black Prince\" of the ill-fated 1st Cruiser Squadron, which had blundered into the German battle line. Deployed as part of a screening force several miles ahead of the main force of the Grand Fleet, \"Black Prince\" had lost contact in the darkness and took a position near what she thought was the British line. The Germans soon identified the new addition to their line and opened fire. Overwhelmed by point-blank gunfire, \"Black Prince\" blew up (all 857 officers and men were lost), as her squadron leader \"Defence\" had done hours earlier. Lost in the darkness, the battlecruisers \"Moltke\" and \"Seydlitz\" had similar point-blank encounters with the British battle line and were recognised, but were spared the fate of \"Black Prince\" when the captains of the British ships, again, declined to open fire, reluctant to reveal their fleet's position.\nAt 01:45, the sinking battlecruiser \"L\u00fctzow\" \u2013 fatally damaged by \"Invincible\" during the main action \u2013 was torpedoed by the destroyer on orders of \"L\u00fctzow\"s Captain Viktor von Harder after the surviving crew of 1,150 transferred to destroyers that came alongside. At 02:15, the German torpedo boat suddenly had its bow blown off; \"V2\" and \"V6\" came alongside and took off the remaining crew, and the \"V2\" then sank the hulk. Since there was no enemy nearby, it was assumed that she had hit a mine or had been torpedoed by a submarine.\nAt 02:15, five British ships of the 13th Destroyer Flotilla under Captain James Uchtred Farie regrouped and headed south. At 02:25, they sighted the rear of the German line. inquired of the leader as to whether he thought they were British or German ships. Answering that he thought they were German, Farie then veered off to the east and away from the German line. All but \"Moresby\" in the rear followed, as through the gloom she sighted what she thought were four pre-dreadnought battleships away. She hoisted a flag signal indicating that the enemy was to the west and then closed to firing range, letting off a torpedo set for high running at 02:37, then veering off to rejoin her flotilla. The four pre-dreadnought battleships were in fact two pre-dreadnoughts, \"Schleswig-Holstein\" and , and the battlecruisers \"Von der Tann\" and \"Derfflinger\". \"Von der Tann\" sighted the torpedo and was forced to steer sharply to starboard to avoid it as it passed close to her bows. \"Moresby\" rejoined \"Champion\" convinced she had scored a hit.\nFinally, at 05:20, as Scheer's fleet was safely on its way home, the battleship struck a British mine on her starboard side, killing one man and wounding ten, but was able to make port. \"Seydlitz\", critically damaged and very nearly sinking, barely survived the return voyage: after grounding and taking on even more water on the evening of 1 June, she had to be assisted stern first into port, where she dropped anchor at 07:30 on the morning of 2 June.\nThe Germans were helped in their escape by the failure of the British Admiralty in London to pass on seven critical radio intercepts obtained by naval intelligence indicating the true position, course and intentions of the High Seas Fleet during the night. One message was transmitted to Jellicoe at 23:15 that accurately reported the German fleet's course and speed as of 21:14. However, the erroneous signal from earlier in the day that reported the German fleet still in port, and an intelligence signal received at 22:45 giving another unlikely position for the German fleet, had reduced his confidence in intelligence reports. Had the other messages been forwarded, which confirmed the information received at 23:15, or had British ships reported accurately sightings and engagements with German destroyers, cruisers and battleships, then Jellicoe could have altered course to intercept Scheer at the Horns Reef. The unsent intercepted messages had been duly filed by the junior officer left on duty that night, who failed to appreciate their significance. By the time Jellicoe finally learned of Scheer's whereabouts at 04:15, the German fleet was too far away to catch and it was clear that the battle could no longer be resumed.\nOutcome.\nAs both the Grand Fleet and the High Seas Fleet could claim to have at least partially satisfied their objectives, both Britain and Germany have at various points claimed victory in the Battle of Jutland. There is no consensus over which nation was victorious, or if there was a victor at all.\nReporting.\nAt midday on 2 June, German authorities released a press statement claiming a victory, including the destruction of a battleship, two battlecruisers, two armoured cruisers, a light cruiser, a submarine and several destroyers, for the loss of \"Pommern\" and \"Wiesbaden\". News that \"L\u00fctzow\", \"Elbing\" and \"Rostock\" had been scuttled was withheld, on the grounds this information would not be known to the enemy. The victory of the Skagerrak was celebrated in the press, children were given a holiday and the nation celebrated. The Kaiser announced a new chapter in world history. Post-war, the official German history hailed the battle as a victory and it continued to be celebrated until after World War II.\nIn Britain, the first official news came from German wireless broadcasts. Ships began to arrive in port, their crews sending messages to friends and relatives both of their survival and the loss of some 6,000 others. The authorities considered suppressing the news, but it had already spread widely. Some crews coming ashore found rumours had already reported them dead to relatives, while others were jeered for the defeat they had suffered. At 19:00 on 2 June, the Admiralty released a statement based on information from Jellicoe containing the bare news of losses on each side. The following day British newspapers reported a German victory. The \"Daily Mirror\" described the German Director of the Naval Department telling the \"Reichstag\": \"The result of the fighting is a significant success for our forces against a much stronger adversary\". The British population was shocked that the long anticipated battle had been a victory for Germany. On 3 June, the Admiralty issued a further statement expanding on German losses, and another the following day with exaggerated claims. However, on 7 June the German admission of the losses of \"L\u00fctzow\" and \"Rostock\" started to redress the sense of the battle as a loss. International perception of the battle began to change towards a qualified British victory, the German attempt to change the balance of power in the North Sea having been repulsed. In July, bad news from the Somme campaign swept concern over Jutland from the British consciousness.\nAssessments.\nJutland was the third fleet action between steel battleships, following the Battle of the Yellow Sea in 1904 and the Battle of Tsushima in 1905, during the Russo-Japanese War.\nAt Jutland, the Germans, with a 99-strong fleet, sank of British ships, while a 151-strong British fleet sank of German ships. The British lost 6,094 seamen; the Germans 2,551. Several other ships were badly damaged, such as \"Lion\" and \"Seydlitz\".\nAs of the summer of 1916, the High Seas Fleet's strategy was to whittle away the numerical advantage of the Royal Navy by bringing its full strength to bear against isolated squadrons of enemy capital ships whilst declining to be drawn into a general fleet battle until it had achieved something resembling parity in heavy ships. In tactical terms, the High Seas Fleet had clearly inflicted significantly greater losses on the Grand Fleet than it had suffered itself at Jutland, and the Germans never had any intention of attempting to hold the site of the battle, so some historians support the German claim of victory at Jutland. The Germans declared a great victory immediately afterwards, while the British by contrast had only reported short and simple results. In response to public outrage, the First Lord of the Admiralty Arthur Balfour asked Winston Churchill to write a second report that was more positive and detailed.\nHowever, Scheer seems to have quickly realised that further battles with a similar rate of attrition would exhaust the High Seas Fleet long before they reduced the Grand Fleet. Further, after the 19 August advance was nearly intercepted by the Grand Fleet, he no longer believed that it would be possible to trap a single squadron of Royal Navy warships without having the Grand Fleet intervene before he could return to port. Therefore, the High Seas Fleet abandoned its forays into the North Sea and turned its attention to the Baltic for most of 1917 whilst Scheer switched tactics against Britain to unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic.\nAt a strategic level, the outcome has been the subject of a huge amount of literature with no clear consensus. The battle was widely viewed as indecisive in the immediate aftermath, and this view remains influential.\nDespite numerical superiority, the British had been disappointed in their hopes for a decisive battle comparable to Trafalgar and the objective of the influential strategic doctrines of Alfred Mahan. The High Seas Fleet survived as a fleet in being. Most of its losses were made good within a month\u2014even \"Seydlitz\", the most badly damaged ship to survive the battle, was repaired by October and officially back in service by November. However, the Germans had failed in their objective of destroying a substantial portion of the British Fleet, and no progress had been made towards the goal of allowing the High Seas Fleet to operate in the Atlantic Ocean.\nSubsequently, there has been considerable support for the view of Jutland as a strategic victory for the British. While the British had not destroyed the German fleet and had lost more ships and lives than their enemy, the Germans had retreated to harbour; at the end of the battle, the British were in command of the area. Britain enforced the blockade, reducing Germany's vital imports to 55%, affecting the ability of Germany to fight the war.\nThe German fleet would only sortie into the North Sea thrice more, with a raid on 19 August, one in October 1916, and another in April 1918. All three were unopposed by capital ships and quickly aborted as neither side was prepared to take the risks of mines and submarines.\nApart from these three abortive operations the High Seas Fleet\u2014unwilling to risk another encounter with the British fleet\u2014confined its activities to the Baltic Sea for the remainder of the war. Jellicoe issued an order prohibiting the Grand Fleet from steaming south of the line of Horns Reef owing to the threat of mines and U-boats. A German naval expert, writing publicly about Jutland in November 1918, commented, \"Our Fleet losses were severe. On 1 June 1916, it was clear to every thinking person that this battle must, and would be, the last one\".\nAt the end of the battle, the British had maintained their numerical superiority and had 23 dreadnoughts ready and four battlecruisers still able to fight, while the Germans had only 10 dreadnoughts. One month after the battle, the Grand Fleet was stronger than it had been before sailing to Jutland. \"Warspite\" was dry-docked at Rosyth, returning to the fleet on 22 July, while \"Malaya\" was repaired in the floating dock at Invergordon, returning to duty on 11 July. \"Barham\" was docked for a month at Devonport before undergoing speed trials and returning to Scapa Flow on 8 July. \"Princess Royal\" stayed initially at Rosyth but transferred to dry dock at Portsmouth before returning to duty at Rosyth 21 July. \"Tiger\" was dry-docked at Rosyth and ready for service 2 July. \"Queen Elizabeth\", \"Emperor of India\" and , which had been undergoing maintenance at the time of the battle, returned to the fleet immediately, followed shortly after by \"Resolution\" and \"Ramillies\". \"Lion\" initially remained ready for sea duty despite the damaged turret, then underwent a month's repairs in July when Q turret was removed temporarily and replaced in September.\nA third view, presented in a number of recent evaluations, is that Jutland, the last major fleet action between battleships, illustrated the irrelevance of battleship fleets following the development of the submarine, mine and torpedo. In this view, the most important consequence of Jutland was the decision of the Germans to engage in unrestricted submarine warfare. Although large numbers of battleships were constructed in the decades between the wars, it has been argued that this outcome reflected the social dominance among naval decision-makers of battleship advocates who constrained technological choices to fit traditional paradigms of fleet action. Battleships played a relatively minor role in World War II, in which the submarine and aircraft carrier emerged as the dominant offensive weapons of naval warfare.\nBritish self-critique.\nThe official British Admiralty examination of the Grand Fleet's performance recognised two main problems:\nShell performance.\nGerman armour-piercing shells were far more effective than the British ones, which often failed to penetrate heavy armour. The issue particularly concerned shells striking at oblique angles, which became increasingly the case at long range. Germany had adopted trinitrotoluene (TNT) as the explosive filler for artillery shells in 1902, while the United Kingdom was still using a picric acid mixture (Lyddite). The shock of impact of a shell against armour often prematurely detonated Lyddite in advance of fuze function while TNT detonation could be delayed until after the shell had penetrated and the fuze had functioned in the vulnerable area behind the armour plate. Some 17 British shells hit the side armour of the German dreadnoughts or battlecruisers. Of these, four would not have penetrated under any circumstances. Of the remaining 13, one penetrated the armour and exploded inside. This showed a 7.5% chance of proper shell function on the British side, a result of overly brittle shells and Lyddite exploding too soon.\nThe issue of poorly performing shells had been known to Jellicoe, who as Third Sea Lord from 1908 to 1910 had ordered new shells to be designed. However, the matter had not been followed through after his posting to sea and new shells had never been thoroughly tested. Beatty discovered the problem at a party aboard \"Lion\" a short time after the battle, when a Swedish Naval officer was present. He had recently visited Berlin, where the German navy had scoffed at how British shells had broken up on their ships' armour. The question of shell effectiveness had also been raised after the Battle of Dogger Bank, but no action had been taken. Hipper later commented, \"It was nothing but the poor quality of their bursting charges which saved us from disaster.\"\nAdmiral Dreyer, writing later about the battle, during which he had been captain of the British flagship \"Iron Duke\", estimated that effective shells as later introduced would have led to the sinking of six more German capital ships, based upon the actual number of hits achieved in the battle. The system of testing shells, which remained in use up to 1944, meant that, statistically, a batch of shells of which 70% were faulty stood an even chance of being accepted. Indeed, even shells that failed this relatively mild test had still been issued to ships. Analysis of the test results afterwards by the Ordnance Board suggested the likelihood that 30\u201370% of shells would not have passed the standard penetration test specified by the Admiralty.\nEfforts to replace the shells were initially resisted by the Admiralty, and action was not taken until Jellicoe became First Sea Lord in December 1916. As an initial response, the worst of the existing shells were withdrawn from ships in early 1917 and replaced from reserve supplies. New shells were designed, but did not arrive until April 1918, and were never used in action.\nBattlecruiser losses.\nBritish battlecruisers were designed to chase and destroy enemy cruisers from out of the range of those ships. They were not designed to be ships of the line and exchange broadsides with the enemy. One German and three British battlecruisers were sunk\u2014but none were destroyed by enemy shells penetrating the belt armour and detonating the magazines. Each of the British battlecruisers was penetrated through a turret roof and their magazines ignited by flash fires passing through the turret and shell-handling rooms. \"L\u00fctzow\" sustained 24 hits and her flooding could not be contained. She was eventually sunk by her escorts' torpedoes after most of her crew had been safely removed (though six trapped stokers died when the ship was scuttled). \"Derfflinger\" and \"Seydlitz\" sustained 22 hits each but reached port (although in \"Seydlitz\"'s case only just).\nJellicoe and Beatty, as well as other senior officers, gave an impression that the loss of the battlecruisers was caused by weak armour, despite reports by two committees and earlier statements by Jellicoe and other senior officers that Cordite and its management were to blame. This led to calls for armour to be increased, and an additional was placed over the relatively thin decks above magazines. To compensate for the increase in weight, ships had to carry correspondingly less fuel, water and other supplies. Whether or not thin deck armour was a potential weakness of British ships, the battle provided no evidence that it was the case. At least amongst the surviving ships, no enemy shell was found to have penetrated deck armour anywhere. The design of the new battlecruiser (which was being built at the time of the battle) was altered to give her of additional armour.\nAmmunition handling.\nBritish and German propellant charges differed in packaging, handling, and chemistry. The British propellant was of two types, MK1 and MD. The Mark 1 cordite had a formula of 37% nitrocellulose, 58% nitroglycerine, and 5% petroleum jelly. It was a good propellant but burned hot and caused an erosion problem in gun barrels. The petroleum jelly served as both a lubricant and a stabiliser. Cordite MD was developed to reduce barrel wear, its formula being 65% nitrocellulose, 30% nitroglycerine, and 5% petroleum jelly. While cordite MD solved the gun-barrel erosion issue, it did nothing to improve its storage properties, which were poor. Cordite was very sensitive to variations of temperature, and acid propagation/cordite deterioration would take place at a very rapid rate. Cordite MD also shed micro-dust particles of nitrocellulose and iron pyrite. While cordite propellant was manageable, it required a vigilant gunnery officer, strict cordite lot control, and frequent testing of the cordite lots in the ships' magazines.\nBritish cordite propellant (when uncased and exposed in the silk bag) tended to burn violently, causing uncontrollable \"flash fires\" when ignited by nearby shell hits. In 1945, a test was conducted by the U.S.N. Bureau of Ordnance (Bulletin of Ordnance Information, No. 245, pp.\u00a054\u201360) testing the sensitivity of cordite to then-current U.S. Naval propellant powders against a measurable and repeatable flash source. It found that cordite would ignite at from the flash, the current U.S. powder at , and the U.S. flashless powder at .\nThis meant that about 75 times the propellant would immediately ignite when exposed to flash, as compared to the U.S. powder. British ships had inadequate protection against these flash fires. German propellant (\"RP C/12\", handled in brass cartridge cases and used in German artillery because their sliding wedge breeches were hard to obturate with smokeless powder,) was less vulnerable and less volatile in composition. German propellants were not that different in composition from cordite\u2014with one major exception: centralite. This was symmetrical diethyl diphenyl urea, which served as a stabiliser that was superior to the petroleum jelly used in British practice. It stored better and burned but did not explode. Stored and used in brass cases, it proved much less sensitive to flash. RP C/12 was composed of 64.13% nitrocellulose, 29.77% nitroglycerine, 5.75% centralite, 0.25% magnesium oxide and 0.10% graphite.\nThe Royal Navy Battle Cruiser Fleet had also emphasised speed in ammunition handling over established safety protocol. In practice drills, cordite could not be supplied to the guns rapidly enough through the hoists and hatches. To bring up the propellant in good time to load for the next broadside, many safety doors were kept open that should have been shut to safeguard against flash fires. Bags of cordite were also stocked and kept locally, creating a total breakdown of safety design features. By staging charges in the chambers between the gun turret and magazine, the Royal Navy enhanced their rate of fire but left their ships vulnerable to chain reaction ammunition fires and magazine explosions. This 'bad safety habit' carried over into real battle practices. Furthermore, the doctrine of a high rate of fire also led to the decision in 1913 to increase the supply of shells and cordite held on the British ships by 50%, for fear of running out of ammunition. When this exceeded the capacity of the ships' magazines, cordite was stored in insecure places.\nThe British cordite charges were stored two silk bags to a metal cylindrical container, with a 16-oz gunpowder igniter charge, which was covered with a thick paper wad, four charges being used on each projectile. The gun crews were removing the charges from their containers and removing the paper covering over the gunpowder igniter charges. The effect of having eight loads at the ready was to have of exposed explosive, with each charge leaking small amounts of gunpowder from the igniter bags. In effect, the gun crews had laid an explosive train from the turret to the magazines, and one shell hit to a battlecruiser turret was enough to end a ship.\nA diving expedition during the summer of 2003 provided corroboration of this practice. It examined the wrecks of \"Invincible\", \"Queen Mary\", \"Defence\", and \"L\u00fctzow\" to investigate the cause of the British ships' tendency to suffer from internal explosions. From this evidence, a major part of the blame may be laid on lax handling of the cordite propellant for the shells of the main guns. The wreck of the \"Queen Mary\" revealed cordite containers stacked in the working chamber of the X turret instead of the magazine.\nThere was a further difference in the propellant itself. While the German \"RP C/12\" burned when exposed to fire, it did not explode, as opposed to cordite. \"RP C/12\" was extensively studied by the British and, after World War I, would form the basis of the later Cordite SC.\nThe memoirs of Alexander Grant, Gunner on \"Lion\", suggest that some British officers were aware of the dangers of careless handling of cordite:\nGrant had already introduced measures onboard \"Lion\" to limit the number of cartridges kept outside the magazine and to ensure doors were kept closed, probably contributing to her survival.\nOn 5 June 1916, the First Lord of the Admiralty advised Cabinet Members that the three battlecruisers had been lost due to unsafe cordite management.\nAfter the battle, the B.C.F. Gunnery Committee issued a report (at the command of Admiral David Beatty) advocating immediate changes in flash protection and charge handling. It reported, among other things, that:\nGunnery.\nBritish gunnery control systems, based on Dreyer tables, were well in advance of the German ones, as demonstrated by the proportion of main calibre hits made on the German fleet. Because of its demonstrated advantages, it was installed on ships progressively as the war went on, had been fitted to a majority of British capital ships by May 1916, and had been installed on the main guns of all but two of the Grand Fleet's capital ships. The Royal Navy used centralised fire-control systems on their capital ships, directed from a point high up on the ship where the fall of shells could best be seen, utilising a director sight for both training and elevating the guns. In contrast, the German battlecruisers controlled the fire of turrets using a training-only director, which also did not fire the guns at once. The rest of the German capital ships were without even this innovation. German range-finding equipment was generally superior to the British FT24, as its operators were trained to a higher standard due to the complexity of the Zeiss range finders. Their stereoscopic design meant that in certain conditions they could range on a target enshrouded by smoke. The German equipment was not superior in range to the British Barr &amp; Stroud rangefinder found in the newest British capital ships, and, unlike the British range finders, the German range takers had to be replaced as often as every thirty minutes, as their eyesight became impaired, affecting the ranges provided to their gunnery equipment.\nThe results of the battle confirmed the value of firing guns by centralised director. The battle prompted the Royal Navy to install director firing systems in cruisers and destroyers, where it had not thus far been used, and for secondary armament on battleships.\nGerman ships were considered to have been quicker in determining the correct range to targets, thus obtaining an early advantage. The British used a 'bracket system', whereby a salvo was fired at the best-guess range and, depending where it landed, the range was progressively corrected up or down until successive shots were landing in front of and behind the enemy. The Germans used a 'ladder system', whereby an initial volley of three shots at different ranges was used, with the centre shot at the best-guess range. The ladder system allowed the gunners to get ranging information from the three shots more quickly than the bracket system, which required waiting between shots to see how the last had landed. British ships adopted the German system.\nIt was determined that range finders of the sort issued to most British ships were not adequate at long range and did not perform as well as the range finders on some of the most modern ships. In 1917, range finders of base lengths of were introduced on the battleships to improve accuracy.\nSignalling.\nThroughout the battle, British ships experienced difficulties with communications, whereas the Germans did not suffer such problems. The British preferred signalling using ship-to-ship flag and lamp signals, avoiding wireless, whereas the Germans used wireless successfully. One conclusion drawn was that flag signals were not a satisfactory way to control the fleet. Experience using lamps, particularly at night when issuing challenges to other ships, demonstrated this was an excellent way to advertise your precise location to an enemy, inviting a reply by gunfire. Recognition signals by lamp, once seen, could also easily be copied in future engagements.\nBritish ships both failed to report engagements with the enemy but also, in the case of cruisers and destroyers, failed to actively seek out the enemy. A culture had arisen within the fleet of not acting without orders, which could prove fatal when any circumstances prevented orders being sent or received. Commanders failed to engage the enemy because they believed other, more senior officers must also be aware of the enemy nearby, and would have given orders to act if this was expected. Wireless, the most direct way to pass messages across the fleet (although it was being jammed by German ships), was avoided either for perceived reasons of not giving away the presence of ships or for fear of cluttering up the airwaves with unnecessary reports.\nFleet Standing Orders.\nNaval operations were governed by standing orders issued to all the ships. These attempted to set out what ships should do in all circumstances, particularly in situations where ships would have to react without referring to higher authority, or when communications failed. A number of changes were introduced as a result of experience gained in the battle.\nA new signal was introduced instructing squadron commanders to act independently as they thought best while still supporting the main fleet, particularly for use when circumstances would make it difficult to send detailed orders. The description stressed that this was not intended to be the only time commanders might take independent action, but was intended to make plain times when they definitely should. Similarly, instructions on what to do if the fleet was instructed to take evasive action against torpedoes were amended. Commanders were given discretion that if their part of the fleet was not under immediate attack, they should continue engaging the enemy rather than turning away with the rest of the fleet. In this battle, when the fleet turned away from Scheer's destroyer attack covering his retreat, not all the British ships had been affected, and could have continued to engage the enemy.\nA number of opportunities to attack enemy ships by torpedo had presented themselves but had been missed. All ships, not just the destroyers armed principally with torpedoes but also battleships, were reminded that they carried torpedoes intended to be used whenever an opportunity arose. Destroyers were instructed to close the enemy fleet to fire torpedoes as soon as engagements between the main ships on either side would keep enemy guns busy directed at larger targets. Destroyers should also be ready to immediately engage enemy destroyers if they should launch an attack, endeavouring to disrupt their chances of launching torpedoes and keep them away from the main fleet.\nTo add some flexibility when deploying for attack, a new signal was provided for deploying the fleet to the centre, rather than as previously only either to left or right of the standard closed-up formation for travelling. The fast and powerful 5th Battle Squadron was moved to the front of the cruising formation so it would have the option of deploying left or right depending upon the enemy position. In the event of engagements at night, although the fleet still preferred to avoid night fighting, a destroyer and cruiser squadron would be specifically detailed to seek out the enemy and launch destroyer attacks.\nControversy.\nAt the time, Jellicoe was criticised for his caution and allowing Scheer to escape. Beatty, in particular, was convinced Jellicoe had missed a tremendous opportunity to annihilate the High Seas Fleet and win what would amount to another Trafalgar. Jellicoe was promoted away from active command to become First Sea Lord, the professional head of the Royal Navy, while Beatty replaced him as commander of the Grand Fleet.\nThe controversy raged within the navy and in public for about a decade after the war. Criticism focused on Jellicoe's decision at 19:15. Scheer had ordered his cruisers and destroyers forward in a torpedo attack to cover the turning away of his battleships. Jellicoe chose to turn to the south-east, and so keep out of range of the torpedoes. Supporters of Jellicoe, including the historian Cyril Falls, pointed to the folly of risking defeat in battle when one already has command of the sea. Jellicoe himself, in a letter to the Admiralty seventeen months before the battle, said that he intended to turn his fleet away from any mass torpedo attack (that being the universally accepted proper tactical response to such attacks, practised by all the major navies of the world). He said that, in the event of a fleet engagement in which the enemy turned away, he would assume they intended to draw him over mines or submarines, and he would decline to be so drawn. The Admiralty approved this plan and expressed full confidence in Jellicoe at the time (October 1914).\nThe stakes were high, the pressure on Jellicoe immense, and his caution it may be argued was understandable. Jellicoe had not only the responsibility of immediate command of the Grand Fleet, the defence of the British waters and British trade; but also of the maintenance of the blockade of Germany which hinged on the continuing presence and superiority of the Grand Fleet. Therefore, Jellicoe had to consider the wider strategic consequences of his actions and results of the battle; which outweighed the short term benefits of a more outright victory. Churchill said of the battle that Jellicoe \"was the only man on either side who could have lost the war in an afternoon.\"\nThe criticism of Jellicoe also fails to sufficiently credit Scheer, who was determined to preserve his fleet by avoiding the full British battle line, and who showed great skill in effecting his escape.\nBeatty's actions.\nOn the other hand, some of Jellicoe's supporters condemned the actions of Beatty for the British failure to achieve a complete victory. Although Beatty was undeniably brave, his mismanagement of the initial encounter with Hipper's squadron and the High Seas Fleet cost him a considerable advantage in the first hours of the battle. His most glaring failure was in not providing Jellicoe with periodic information on the position, course, and speed of the High Seas Fleet. Beatty, aboard the battlecruiser \"Lion\", left behind the four fast battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron\u2014the most powerful warships in the world at the time\u2014engaging with six ships when better control would have given him 10 against Hipper's five. Though Beatty's larger guns out-ranged Hipper's guns by thousands of yards, Beatty held his fire for 10 minutes and closed the German squadron until within range of the Germans' superior gunnery, under lighting conditions that favoured the Germans. Most of the British losses in tonnage occurred in Beatty's force.\nDeath toll.\nThe total loss of life on both sides was 9,823 personnel: the British losses numbered 6,784 and the German 3,039. Counted among the British losses were two members of the Royal Australian Navy and one member of the Royal Canadian Navy. Six Australian nationals serving in the Royal Navy were also killed.\nBritish.\n113,300 tons sunk:\n\u0e3f indicates ships in Beatty's Battle Cruiser Fleet.\nGerman.\n62,300 tons sunk:\nStatus of the survivors and wrecks.\nIn the years following the battle the wrecks were slowly discovered. \"Invincible\" was found by the Royal Navy minesweeper in 1919. After the Second World War some of the wrecks seem to have been commercially salvaged. For instance, the Hydrographic Office record for SMS \"L\u00fctzow\" (No. 32344) shows that salvage operations were taking place on the wreck in 1960.\nDuring 2000\u20132016 a series of diving and marine survey expeditions involving veteran shipwreck historian and archaeologist Innes McCartney located all of the wrecks sunk in the battle. It was discovered that over 60 per cent of them had suffered from metal theft. In 2003 McCartney led a detailed survey of the wrecks for the Channel 4 documentary \"Clash of the Dreadnoughts\". The film examined the last minutes of the lost ships and revealed for the first time how both 'P' and 'Q' turrets of \"Invincible\" had been blasted out of the ship and tossed into the sea before she broke in half. This was followed by the Channel 4 documentary \"Jutland: WWI's Greatest Sea Battle\", broadcast in May 2016, which showed how several of the major losses at Jutland had actually occurred and just how accurate the \"Harper Record\" actually was.\nOn the 90th anniversary of the battle, in 2006, the UK Ministry of Defence belatedly announced that the 14 British vessels lost in the battle were being designated as \"protected places\" under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986. This legislation only affects British ships and citizens and in practical terms offers no real protection from non-British salvors of the wreck sites. In May 2016 a number of British newspapers named the Dutch salvage company \"Friendship Offshore\" as one of the main salvors of the Jutland wrecks in recent years and depicted leaked photographs revealing the extent of their activities on the wreck of \"Queen Mary\".\nThe last surviving veteran of the battle, Henry Allingham, a British RAF (originally RNAS) airman, died on 18 July 2009, aged 113, by which time he was the oldest documented man in the world and one of the last surviving veterans of the whole war. Also among the combatants was the then 20-year-old Prince Albert, serving as a junior officer aboard . He was second in the line to the throne, but would become king as George VI following his brother Edward's abdication in 1936.\nOne ship from the battle survives and is still (in 2024) afloat: the light cruiser . Decommissioned in 2011, she is docked at the Alexandra Graving Dock in Belfast, Northern Ireland and is a museum ship.\nRemembrance.\nThe Battle of Jutland was annually celebrated as a great victory by the right wing in Weimar Germany. This victory was used to repress the memory that the Kiel sailors' mutiny initiated the German Revolution of 1918\u20131919, as well as the memory of the defeat in World War I in general. (The celebrations of the Battle of Tannenberg played a similar role.) This is especially true for the city of Wilhelmshaven, where wreath-laying ceremonies and torch-lit parades were performed until the end of the 1960s.\nIn 1916 Contreadmiral Friedrich von K\u00fchlwetter (1865\u20131931) wrote a detailed analysis of the battle and published it in a book under the title \"Skagerrak\" (first anonymously published), which was reprinted in large numbers until after WWII and had a huge influence in keeping the battle in public memory amongst Germans as it was not tainted by the ideology of the Third Reich. K\u00fchlwetter built the School for Naval Officers at M\u00fcrwik near Flensburg, where he is still remembered.\nMay 2016 marked the 100th-anniversary of the Battle of Jutland. On 29 May, a commemorative service was held at St Mary's Church, Wimbledon, where the ensign from HMS \"Inflexible\" is on permanent display. On 31 May, the main service was held at St Magnus Cathedral in Orkney, attended by the British prime minister, David Cameron, and the German president, Joachim Gauck, along with Princess Anne and Vice Admiral Sir Tim Laurence. Another service was held on board HMS \"Duncan\", attended by both British and German sailors, while the German frigate \"Brandenburg\" laid a flower wreath at the site of the sinking of HMS \"Invincible\". A centennial exposition was held at the Deutsches Marinemuseum in Wilhemshaven from 29 May 2016 to 28 February 2017."}
{"id": "4564", "revid": "63691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4564", "title": "Bitter ale", "text": ""}
{"id": "4565", "revid": "48596062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4565", "title": "Bambara language", "text": "Bambara, also known as Bamana (N'Ko script: ) or Bamanankan (N'Ko script: ; Arabic script: ), is a lingua franca and national language of Mali spoken by perhaps 14 million people, natively by 4.2 million Bambara people and about 10 million second-language users. It is estimated that about 80 percent of the population of Mali speak Bambara as a first or second language. It has a subject\u2013object\u2013verb clause structure and two lexical tones.\nClassification.\nBambara is a variety of a group of closely related languages called Manding, whose native speakers trace their cultural history to the medieval Mali Empire. Varieties of Manding are generally considered (among native speakers) to be mutually intelligible \u2013 dependent on exposure or familiarity with dialects between speakers \u2013 and spoken by 9.1 million people in the countries Burkina Faso, Senegal, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Liberia, Ivory Coast and the Gambia. Manding is part of the larger Mand\u00e9 family of languages.\nGeographical distribution.\nBambara is spoken throughout Mali as a lingua franca. The language is most widely spoken in the areas east, south, and north of Bamako, where native speakers and/or those that identify as members of the Bambara ethnic group are most densely populated. These regions are also usually considered to be the historical geographical origin of Bambara people, particularly S\u00e9gou, after diverging from other Manding groups.\nDialects.\nThe main dialect is Standard Bamara, which has significant influence from Maninkakan. Bambara has many local dialects: Kaarta, Tambacounda (west); Beledugu, Bananba, Mesekele (north); Jitumu, Jamaladugu, Segu (center); Cakadugu, Keleyadugu, Jalakadougu, Kurulamini, Banim\u0254nc\u025b, C\u025bmala, C\u025bndugu, Banink\u0254, Sh\u025bndugu, Ganadugu (south); Kala, Kuruma, Saro, dialects to the northeast of Mopti (especially B\u0254r\u025b); Zegedugu, B\u025bndugu, Bak\u0254kan, J\u0254nka (southeast).\nWriting.\nSince 1967, Bambara has mostly been written in the Latin script, using some additional phonetic characters from the Africa Alphabet. The vowels are \"a, e, \u025b\" (formerly \"\u00e8\"), \"i, o, \u0254\" (formerly \"\u00f2\"), \"u\"; accents can be used to indicate tonality. The former digraph \"ny\" is now written \"\u0272\" when it designates a palatal nasal; the \"ny\" spelling is kept for the combination of a nasal vowel with a subsequent oral palatal glide. Following the 1966 Bamako spelling conventions, a velar nasal \"\u014b\" is written as \"\u014b\", although in early publications it was often transcribed as \"ng\" or \"nk\".\nThe N'Ko () alphabet is a script devised by Solomana Kante in 1949 as a writing system for the Manding languages of West Africa; N\u2019Ko means 'I say' in all Manding languages. Kante created N\u2019Ko in response to what he felt were beliefs that Africans were a \"cultureless people\" since prior to this time there had been no indigenous African writing system for his language. N'ko first gained a strong user base around the Maninka-speaking area of Kante's hometown of Kankan, Guinea and disseminated from there into other Manding-speaking parts of West Africa. N'ko and the Arabic script are still in use for Bambara, although only the Latin-based orthography is officially recognized in Mali.\nAdditionally, a script known as Masaba or Ma-sa-ba was developed for the language beginning in 1930 by Woyo Couloubayi (-1982) of Assati\u00e9mala. Named for the first characters in Couloubayi's preferred collation order, Masaba is a syllabary which uses diacritics to indicate vowel qualities such as tone, length, and nasalization. Though not conclusively demonstrated to be related to other writing systems, Masaba appears to draw on traditional Bambara iconography and shares some similarities with the Vai syllabary of Liberia and with Arabic-derived secret alphabets used in Hodh (now Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech Chargui Regions of Mauritania). As of 1978, Masaba was in limited use in several communities in Nioro Cercle for accounting, personal correspondence, and the recording of Muslim prayers; the script's current status and prevalence is unknown.\nLatin orthography.\nIt uses seven vowels a, e, \u025b, i, o, \u0254 and u, each of which can be nasalized, pharyngealized and murmured, giving a total number of 21 vowels (the letters approximate their equivalents). \nWriting with the Latin alphabet began during the French colonization, and the first orthography was introduced in 1967. Literacy is limited, especially in rural areas. Although written literature is only slowly evolving (due to the predominance of French as the \"language of the educated\"), there exists a wealth of oral literature, which is often tales of kings and heroes. This oral literature is mainly passed on by the griots (\"Jeliw\" in Bambara) who are a mixture of storytellers, praise singers, and human history books who have studied the trade of singing and reciting for many years. Many of their songs are very old and are said to date back to the old empire of Mali.\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nEach consonant represents a single sound with some exceptions:\nGrammar.\nThe basic sentence structure is subject\u2013object\u2013verb (SOV). Take the phrase, \"n t'a lon\" (I don't know [it]). \"n\" is the subject (I), \"a\" is the object (it), and \"[ta] lon\" is the verb ([to] know). The \"t' \" is from the negative present tense marker \"t\u00e9\", \"b\u00e9\" being the affirmative present tense marker (\"n b'a don\" would mean \"I know it\"). Like many SOV languages, Bambara uses postpositions rather than prepositions - their role being similar to English prepositions but placed after the noun.\nThe language has two (mid/standard and high) tones; e.g. \"sa\" 'die' vs. \"s\u00e1\" 'snake.' The typical argument structure of the language consists of a subject, followed by an aspectival auxiliary, followed by the direct object, and finally a transitive verb.\nBambara does not inflect for gender. Gender for a noun can be specified by adding a suffix, \"-c\u025b\" or \"-k\u025b\" for male and \"-muso\" for female. The plural is formed by attaching a vocalic suffix \"-u\", most often with a low tone (in the orthography, \"-w\") to nouns or adjectives.\nLoan words.\nIn urban areas, many Bamanankan conjunctions have been replaced in everyday use by French borrowings that often mark code-switches. The Bamako dialect makes use of sentences like: \"N taara Kita mais il n'y avait personne l\u00e0-bas.\" : \"I went to Kita [Bamanankan ] but there was no one there [French].\" The sentence in Bamanankan alone would be \"\u0143 taara Kita nka m\u0254k\u0254 si tun t\u025b yen.\" The French proposition \"est-ce que\" is also used in Bamanankan ; however, it is pronounced more slowly and as three syllables, .\nBamanankan uses many French loan words. For example, some people might say: \"I ka kurusi ye nere ye\": \"Your skirt is yellow\" (using a derivation of \"jaune\", the French word for yellow, they often use \"joni\".)\nHowever, one could also say: \"I ka kulosi ye n\u025br\u025bmukuman ye\", also meaning \"your skirt is yellow.\" The original Bamanankan word for yellow comes from \"\"n\u025br\u025bmuku\",\" being flour (\"muku\") made from n\u00e9r\u00e9 (locust bean), a seed from a long seed pod. N\u025br\u025bmuku is often used in sauces in Southern Mali.\nMost French loan words are suffixed with the sound 'i'; this is particularly common when using French words which have a meaning not traditionally found in Mali. For example, the Bamanankan word for snow is \"niegei\", based on the French word for snow \"neige\". As there has never been snow in Mali, there was no unique word in Bamanankan to describe it.\nMusic.\nMalian artists such as Oumou Sangar\u00e9, Sidiki Diabat\u00e9, Fatoumata Diawara, Rokia Traor\u00e9, Ali Farka Tour\u00e9, Habib Koit\u00e9 and the married duo Amadou &amp; Mariam often sing in Bambara. Lyrics in Bambara occur on \"Stevie Wonder's Journey Through \"The Secret Life of Plants\".\" In 2010, Spanish rock group Dover released its 7th studio album \"I Ka Ken\u00e9\" with the majority of lyrics in Bambara, Spanish, English and French. American rapper Nas also released a track titled \"Patience\" in 2010, which featured Damian Marley and extensively sampled the Amadou &amp; Mariam song \"Sabali\", as \"sabali\" is a Bambara word meaning patience.\nLegal status.\nBambara was until 2023 one of several languages designated by Mali as a national language.\nIn 2023, after a new constitution was approved by a majority of voters, Bambara became co-official, together with 12 other languages spoken in the country. French was removed as the official language and was kept only as a working language."}
{"id": "4566", "revid": "4934695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4566", "title": "Baku", "text": "Baku (, ; ) is the capital and largest city of Azerbaijan, as well as the largest city on the Caspian Sea and in the Caucasus region. Baku is below sea level, which makes it the lowest lying national capital in the world and also the largest city in the world below sea level. Baku lies on the southern shore of the Absheron Peninsula, on the Bay of Baku. Baku's urban population was estimated at two million people as of 2009. Baku is the primate city of Azerbaijan\u2014it is the sole metropolis in the country, and about 25% of all inhabitants of the country live in Baku's metropolitan area.\nBaku is divided into twelve administrative raions and 48 townships. Among these are the townships on the islands of the Baku Archipelago, as well as the industrial settlement of Neft Da\u015flar\u0131 built on oil rigs away from Baku city in the Caspian Sea. The Old City, containing the Palace of the Shirvanshahs and the Maiden Tower, was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000.\nThe city is the scientific, cultural, and industrial centre of Azerbaijan. Many sizeable Azerbaijani institutions have their headquarters there. In the 2010s, Baku became a venue for major international events. It hosted the 57th Eurovision Song Contest in 2012, the 2015 European Games, 4th Islamic Solidarity Games, the European Grand Prix in 2016, the Azerbaijan Grand Prix since 2017, the final of the 2018\u201319 UEFA Europa League, UEFA Euro 2020 and 2024 United Nations Climate Change Conference. The Baku International Sea Trade Port is capable of handling two million tonnes of general and dry bulk cargoes per year. Baku is renowned for its harsh winds, reflected in its nickname, the \"City of Winds\".\nEtymology.\nBaku is long attested under the Perso-Arabic name \u0628\u0627\u06a9\u0648 (\"B\u0101k\u016b\"). Early Arabic sources also refer to the city as \"B\u0101kuh\" and \"B\u0101kuya\", all of which seem to come from a Persian name. The further etymology is unclear.\nA popular etymology in the 19th century considered it to be derived from Persian \u0628\u0627\u062f\u06a9\u0648\u0628\u0647 (\"B\u00e2d-kube\", meaning \"wind-pounded city\", a compound of \"b\u0101d\", \"wind\", and \"kube\", which is rooted in the verb \u06a9\u0648\u0628\u06cc\u062f\u0646 \"kubidan\", \"to pound\", thus referring to a place where wind would be strong and pounding, as is the case of Baku, which is known to experience fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds). This popular name (\"Badkub\u0259\" in modern Azerbaijani script) gained currency as a nickname for the city by the 19th century (e.g., it is used in \"Akinchi\", volume 1, issue 1, p.\u00a01), and is also reflected in the city's modern nickname as the \"City of Winds\" (). Another and even less probable folk etymology explains the name as deriving from \"Baghkuy\", meaning \"God's town\". \"Baga\" (now \"\u0628\u063a\" \"bagh\") and \"kuy\" are the Old Persian words for \"god\" and \"town\" respectively; the name \"Baghkuy\" may be compared with \"Baghd\u0101d\" (\"God-given\") in which \"d\u0101d\" is the Old Persian word for \"give\".\nDuring Soviet rule, the city was spelled in Cyrillic as \"\u0411\u0430\u043a\u044b\" in Azerbaijani (while the Russian spelling was and still is \"\u0411\u0430\u043a\u0443\", \"\"). The modern Azerbaijani spelling, which has been using the Latin alphabet since 1991, is ; the shift from the Perso-Arabic letter \u0648 (\"\u016b\") to Cyrillic \"\u044b\" and, later, Latin \"\u0131\" may be compared to that in other Azerbaijani words (e.g. compare \"q\u0101p\u016b\" in old Perso-Arabic spelling with modern Azerbaijani , \"door\") or in suffixes, as \u0648 was often used to transcribe the vowel harmony in Azerbaijani (which was also the practice in Ottoman Turkish). (See also Azerbaijani alphabet.)\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nTraces of human settlement in the region of present-day Baku date back to the Stone Age. Bronze Age rock carvings have been discovered near Bayil, and a bronze figure of a small fish in the territory of the Old City. These have led some to suggest the existence of a Bronze-Age settlement within the city's territory. Near Nardaran, a place called Umid Gaya features a prehistoric observatory, where images of the sun and of various constellations are carved into rock together with a primitive astronomic table. Further archeological excavations have revealed various prehistoric settlements, native temples, statues and other artifacts within the territory of the modern city and around it.\nIn the 1st century AD, the Romans organised two Caucasian campaigns and reached what is today Baku. Near the city, in what is today Gobustan, Roman inscriptions dating from AD 84 to 96 survive \u2013 some of the earliest written evidences for a city there.\nAccording to the 6th-century archbishop and historian St. Sophronius of Cyprus, in 71, St. Bartholomew the Apostle was preaching Christianity in the city of Albana or Albanopolis, associated with present-day Baku or Derbent, both located by the Caspian Sea. St. Bartholomew managed to convert even members of the local royal family who had worshipped the idol Astaroth, but was later martyred by being flayed alive and crucified head down on orders from the pagan king Astyages. The remains of St. Bartholomew were secretly transferred to Mesopotamia.\nRise of the Shirvanshahs and the Safavid era.\nBaku was the realm of the Shirvanshahs during the 8th century AD. The city frequently came under assault from the Khazars and (starting from the 10th century) from the Rus'. Akhsitan I built a navy in Baku and successfully repelled a Rus' assault in 1170. After a devastating earthquake struck Shamakhi, the capital of Shirvan, Shirvanshah's court moved to Baku in 1191.\nThe Shirvan era greatly influenced Baku and the remainder of present-day Azerbaijan. Between the 12th and 14th centuries, massive fortifications were built in Baku and the surrounding towns. The Maiden Tower, the Ramana Tower, the Nardaran Fortress, the Shagan Castle, the Mardakan Castle, the Round Castle and also the Sabayil Castle on the island of the Bay of Baku date from this period. The city walls of Baku were also rebuilt and strengthened.\nBy the early 16th century, Baku's wealth and strategic position attracted the attention of its larger neighbours; in the previous two centuries, it was under the rule of the Iran-centred Kara Koyunlu and Ak Koyunlu. The fall of the Ak Koyunlu brought the city immediately into the sphere of the newly formed Iranian Safavid dynasty, led by king (\"shah\") Ismail I (). Ismail I laid siege to Baku in 1501 and captured it; he allowed the Shirvanshahs to remain in power, under Safavid suzerainty. His successor, king Tahmasp I (), completely removed the Shirvanshahs from power and made Baku a part of the Shirvan province. Baku remained as an integral part of his empire and of successive Iranian dynasties for the next centuries, until ceded to the Russian Empire through the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan. The House of Shirvan, which had ruled Baku since the 9th century, was extinguished in the course of Safavid rule.\nAt this time, the city was enclosed within lines of strong walls, which were washed by the sea on one side and protected by a wide trench on land. The Ottomans briefly gained control over Baku as a result of the Ottoman-Safavid War of 1578\u20131590; by 1607, it came under Iranian control again. In 1604 Shah Abbas I () destroyed Baku fortress.\nBaku had a reputation as a focal point for traders from across the world during the Early modern period; commerce was active and the area prospered. Notably, traders from the Indian subcontinent established themselves in the region. These Indian traders built the Ateshgah of Baku during 17th\u201318th centuries; the temple was used as a Hindu, Sikh, and Zoroastrian place of worship.\nDownfall of the Safavids and the Khanate of Baku.\nThe Safavids temporarily lost power in Iran in 1722; Emperor Peter the Great of Russia took advantage of the situation and invaded. As a result of the Russo-Persian War of 1722\u20131723, the Safavids were forced to cede Baku to Russia. By 1730 the situation had deteriorated for the Russians; the successes of Nader Shah () led them to sign the Treaty of Ganja near Ganja on 10 March 1735, ceding the city and all other conquered territories in the Caucasus back to Iran.\nThe eruption of instability following Nader Shah's death in 1747 gave rise to the various Caucasian khanates. The semi-autonomous Persian-ruled\nRusso-Persian Wars and Iran's cession.\nFrom the late 18th century, Imperial Russia switched to a more aggressive geopolitical stance towards its two neighbours and rivals to the south, namely Iran and the Ottoman Empire. In the spring of 1796, by Catherine II's order, General Valerian Zubov's troops started a large campaign against Qajar Persia. Zubov had sent 13,000 men to capture Baku, and it was overrun subsequently without any resistance. On 13 June 1796, a Russian flotilla entered Baku Bay, and a garrison of Russian troops was stationed inside the city. Later, however, Emperor Paul I of Russia ordered the cessation of the campaign and the withdrawal of Russian forces following the death of his predecessor, Catherine the Great. In March 1797 the tsarist troops left Baku and the city became part of Qajar Iran again.\nIn 1813, following the Russo-Persian War of 1804\u20131813, Qajar Iran had to sign the Treaty of Gulistan with Russia this provided for the cession of Baku and of most of Iran's territories in the North Caucasus and South Caucasus to Russia. During the next and final bout of hostilities between the two, the Russo-Persian War of 1826\u20131828, the Iranians briefly recaptured Baku. However, the militarily superior Russians ended this war with a victory as well, and the resulting Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) made Baku's inclusion in the Russian Empire definite. When Baku was occupied by the Russian troops during the war of 1804\u201313, nearly the entire population of some 8,000 people was ethnic Tat. Baku within Russia was the administrative center of the Baku Uyezd, Baku Governorate, and the Baku Gradonachalstvo.\nDiscovery of oil.\nThe Russians built the first oil-distilling factory in Balaxani in 1837. The first person to drill oil in Baku was an ethnic Armenian Ivan Mirzoev, who is also known as a 'founding father of Baku's oil industry.' Digging for oil began in the 1840s, with the first oil well drilled in the Bibi-Heybat suburb of Baku in 1846. Large-scale oil exploration started in 1872 when the Russian imperial authorities auctioned parcels of oil-rich land around Baku to private investors. The pioneer of oil extracting from the bottom of the sea was the Polish geologist Witold Zglenicki. Soon after, investors appeared in Baku, including the Nobel Brothers in 1873 and the Rothschilds in 1882. An industrial area of oil refineries, better known as Black Town (), developed near Baku by the early 1880s.\nProfessor A. V. Williams Jackson of Columbia University wrote in his work \"From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam\" (1911):\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, half of the oil sold in international markets was extracted in Baku. The oil boom contributed to the massive growth of Baku. Between 1856 and 1910 Baku's population grew at a faster rate than that of London, Paris, New York, or Tokyo.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1917, after the October Revolution and amidst the turmoil of World War I and the Russian Revolution, Baku came under the control of the Baku Commune, led by the veteran Bolshevik Stepan Shahumyan. Seeking to capitalize on the existing ethnic conflicts, by spring 1918, Bolsheviks inspired and condoned civil war in and around Baku. During the March Days of 1918, Bolsheviks and Dashnaks, seeking to establish control over Baku streets, faced armed Azerbaijani groups. The Azerbaijanis suffered defeat from the united forces of the Baku Soviet and were massacred by Dashnak teams in what was called the March Days. An estimated 3,000\u201312,000 Azerbaijanis were killed in their own capital. After the massacre, on 28 May 1918, the Azerbaijani faction of the Transcaucasian Sejm proclaimed the independence of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) in Ganja, thereby founding the first Muslim-majority democratic and secular republic. The newly independent Azerbaijani republic, being unable to defend the independence of the country on their own, asked the Ottoman Empire for military support in accordance with clause 4 of the treaty between the two countries. Shortly after, Azerbaijani forces, with support of the Ottoman Army of Islam led by Nuru Pasha, started their advance on Baku, eventually capturing the city from the loose coalition of Bolsheviks, SRs, Dashnaks, Mensheviks and British forces under the command of General Lionel Dunsterville on 15 September 1918.\nAfter the Battle of Baku of August\u2013September 1918, the Azerbaijani irregular troops, with the tacit support of the Turkish command, conducted four days of pillaging and killing 10,000\u201330,000 Armenians of Baku. This pogrom became known as the \"September Days\". Shortly after this, Baku was proclaimed the new capital of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic.\nThe Ottoman Empire, recognising defeat in World War I by October 1918, signed the Armistice of Mudros with the British (30 October 1918); this meant the evacuation of Turkish forces from Baku. Headed by General William Thomson, some 5,000 British troops, including parts of the former Dunsterforce, arrived in Baku on 17 November. Thomson declared himself military governor of Baku and implemented martial law in the city until \"the civil power would be strong enough to release the forces from the responsibility to maintain the public order\". British forces left before the end of 1919.\nSoviet period.\nThe independence of the Azerbaijani republic was a significant but short-lived chapter in Baku's history. On 28 April 1920, the 11th Red Army invaded Baku and reinstalled the Bolsheviks, making Baku the capital of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.\nThe city underwent many major changes. As a result, Baku played a great role in many branches of Soviet life. Baku was the major oil city of the Soviet Union. From about 1921 the city was headed by the Baku City Executive Committee, commonly known in Russian as \"Bakgorispolkom\". Together with Baku Party Committee (known as the \"Baksovet\"), it developed the economic significance of the Caspian metropolis. From 1922 to 1930 Baku became the venue for one of the major trade fairs of the Soviet Union, serving as a commercial bridgehead to Iran and the Middle East.\nWorld War II.\nThe major powers continued to note Baku's growing importance as a major energy hub. During World War II (1939\u20131945) and particularly during the 1942 Nazi German invasion of the southwestern Soviet Union, Baku became of vital strategic importance to the Axis powers. In fact, capturing the oil fields of Baku was a primary goal of the Wehrmacht's Operation Edelweiss, carried out between May and November 1942. However, the German Army reached only a point some northwest of Baku in November 1942, falling far short of the city's capture before being driven back during the Soviet Operation Little Saturn in mid-December 1942.\nFall of the Soviet Union and later.\nAfter the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union, Baku embarked on a process of restructuring on a scale unseen in its history. Thousands of panel buildings from the Soviet period were demolished to make way for a green belt on its shores; parks and gardens were built on the land reclaimed by filling up the beaches of the Baku Bay. Improvements were made in general cleaning, maintenance, and garbage collection to bring these services up to Western European standards. The city is growing dynamically and developing at pace on an east\u2013west axis along the shores of the Caspian Sea. Sustainability has become a key factor in future urban development.\nGeography.\nBaku is situated on the western coast of the Caspian Sea. In the vicinity of the city there are a number of mud volcanoes (Keyraki, Bogkh-bogkha, Lokbatan and others) and salt lakes (Boyukshor, Khodasan, etc.).\nClimate.\nBaku has a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSk\") with hot and humid summers, cool and occasionally wet winters, and strong winds all year long. However, unlike many other cities with such climate features, Baku does not see extremely hot summers and substantial sunshine hours. This is largely because of its northerly latitude and the fact that it is located on a peninsula on the shore of the Caspian Sea.\nBaku, and the Absheron Peninsula on which it is situated, is the most arid part of Azerbaijan (precipitation here is around or less than a year). This is largely due to the rain shadow effect from the Caucasus Mountains, with corresponding latitudes on the Black Sea on average receiving or more. The majority of the light annual precipitation occurs in seasons other than summer, but none of these seasons is particularly wet.\nDuring Soviet times, Baku, with its long hours of sunshine and dry healthy climate, was a vacation destination where citizens could enjoy beaches or relax in now-dilapidated spa complexes overlooking the Caspian Sea. The city's past as a Soviet industrial centre left it one of the most polluted cities in the world, .\nAt the same time, Baku is noted as a very windy city throughout the year, hence the city's nickname the \"City of Winds\", and gale-force winds, the cold northern wind \"khazri\" and the warm southern wind \"gilavar\" are typical here in all seasons. Indeed, the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds.\nThe speed of the \"khazri\" sometimes reaches , which can cause damage to crops, trees and roof tiles.\nThe daily mean temperature in July and August averages , and there is very little rainfall during that season. During summer, the \"khazri\" sweeps through, bringing desired coolness. Winter is cool and occasionally wet, with the daily mean temperature in January and February averaging . During winter, the \"khazri\" sweeps through, driven by polar air masses; temperatures on the coast frequently drop below freezing and make it feel bitterly cold. Winter snow storms are occasional; snow usually melts within a few days after each snowfall.\nAdministrative divisions.\nBaku is divided into 12 \"rayonlar (sub-rayons)\" (administrative districts) and 5 settlements of city type.\nDemographics.\nUntil 1988, Baku had very large Russian, Armenian, and Jewish populations which contributed to cultural diversity and added in various ways (music, literature, architecture and progressive outlook) to Baku's history. With the onset of the First Nagorno-Karabakh War and the pogrom against Armenians starting in January 1990, the city's large Armenian population was expelled. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Azerbaijani President Heydar Aliyev returned several synagogues and a Jewish college, nationalised by the Soviets, to the Jewish community; he encouraged the restoration of these buildings. Seven of the original 11 synagogues, including the Gilah synagogue, built in 1896, and the large Kruei Synagogue, were renovated.\nEthnic groups.\nToday, the vast majority of Baku's population is made up of ethnic Azerbaijanis, and the rest are Talysh, Russians, Lezgi and others. The intensive growth of the population started in the middle of the 19th century when Baku was a small town with a population of about 7,000 people. The population increased again from about 13,000 in the 1860s to 112,000 in 1897 and 215,000 in 1913, making Baku the largest city in the Caucasus region.\nBaku has been a cosmopolitan city at certain times during its history, meaning ethnic Azerbaijanis did not constitute the majority of population. It was only in the 1970s that ethnic Azerbaijanis achieved demographic dominance in Baku. In 2003 Baku additionally had 153,400 internally displaced persons and 93,400 refugees.\nReligion.\nThe religion with the largest community of followers is Islam. The majority of the Muslims are Shia Muslims, and the Republic of Azerbaijan has the second-highest Shia population percentage in the world, after Iran. The city's notable mosques include Juma Mosque, Bibi-Heybat Mosque, Muhammad Mosque and Taza Pir Mosque.\nThere are some other faiths practised among the different ethnic groups within the country. By article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state and ensures religious freedom. Religious minorities include Russian Orthodox Christians, Catholic Levantines, Georgian Orthodox Christians, Albanian-Udi Apostolic Christians, Lutherans, Ashkenazi Jews, and Sufi Muslims. Baku is the seat of the Catholic Apostolic Prefecture of Azerbaijan.\nZoroastrianism, although extinct in the city as well as in the rest of the country by the present time, had a long history in Azerbaijan and the Zoroastrian New Year (Nowruz) continues to be the main holiday in the city as well as in the rest of Azerbaijan.\nEconomy.\nBaku is the economic hub of Azerbaijan, hosting many of the country's major companies and serving as the center for key industries such as oil and gas, finance, trade, and technology. The city is home to major financial institutions, multinational corporations, and various businesses that contribute to the country\u2019s economy. Baku accounts for approximately 65% of Azerbaijan\u2019s total GDP. The city also attracts a significant portion of the country\u2019s workforce, with many people relocating for job opportunities and business prospects. As of the end of the first quarter of 2023, 52% of hired workers in Azerbaijan were employed in Baku. In addition to its role as the economic hub, Baku is home to the largest port in the Caspian Sea, the Baku International Sea Trade Port, more commonly known as Port of Baku. It handles a wide range of cargo, including containers, bulk goods, and liquid cargo, with an annual capacity of 15 million tons of cargo. The port also plays an essential role in the Trans-Caspian International Transport Route, facilitating trade between East Asia, Central Asia, Europe, and the Caucasus through integrated sea, rail, and road transport. \nBaku's largest industry is petroleum, and its petroleum exports make it a large contributor to Azerbaijan's balance of payments. The existence of petroleum has been known since the 8th century. In the 10th century, the Arabian traveler, Marudee, reported that both white and black oil were being extracted naturally from Baku. By the 15th century, oil for lamps was obtained from hand-dug surface wells. Commercial exploitation began in 1872, and by the beginning of the 20th century the Baku oil fields were the largest in the world. Towards the end of the 20th century, much of the onshore petroleum had been exhausted, and drilling had extended into the sea offshore. By the end of the 19th century skilled workers and specialists flocked to Baku. By 1900 the city had more than 3,000 oil wells, of which 2,000 were producing oil at industrial levels. Baku ranked as one of the largest centres for the production of oil industry equipment before World War II. The World War II Battle of Stalingrad was fought to determine who would have control of Baku oil fields. Fifty years before the battle, Baku produced half of the world's oil supply.\nThe oil economy of Baku is undergoing a resurgence, with the development of the massive Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli field (Shallow water Gunashli by SOCAR, deeper areas by a consortium led by BP), development of the Shah Deniz gas field, the expansion of the Sangachal Terminal and the construction of the BTC Pipeline. The South Caucasus Pipeline (SCP), also known as the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum Pipeline, transports natural gas from Azerbaijan's Shah Deniz gas field to Turkey, with further connections to Europe. Spanning over 690 kilometers, the pipeline has been operational since 2007 and plays a central role in the Southern Gas Corridor, which aims to diversify Europe's energy sources with an annual export capacity of up to 25 billion cubic metres of gas.\nThe Baku Stock Exchange is Azerbaijan's largest stock exchange, and largest in the Caucasian region by market capitalization. A relatively large number of transnational companies are headquartered in Baku. One of the more prominent institutions headquartered in Baku is the International Bank of Azerbaijan, which employs over 1,000 people. International banks with branches in Baku include HSBC, Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale and Credit Suisse.\nTourism and shopping.\nBaku is one of the most important tourist destinations in the Caucasus, with hotels in the city earning 7\u00a0million euros in 2009. Many sizable world hotel chains have a presence in the city. Baku has many popular tourist and entertainment spots, such as the downtown Fountains Square, the One and Thousand Nights Beach, Shikhov Beach and Oil Rocks. Baku's vicinities feature Yanar Dag, an ever-blazing spot of natural gas. On 2 September 2010 with the inauguration of National Flag Square, Baku set the world record for tallest flagpole; on 24 May 2011, the city of Dushanbe in Tajikistan set a new record with a -higher flagpole. A few years later, the Flag Pole was dismantled and the National Flag Square was closed off with fences. It was opened once again after years of repair on On November 8, 2024, to commemorate the Victory Day over Armenia's forces in Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan. The National Flag Square features a museum, with a collection of about 400 items, along with flags of Khanates and Empires that have been prevalent in the region.\nBaku has several shopping malls, including Ganjlik Mall, Deniz Mall, Crescent Mall, Port Baku Mall, 28 Mall, Park Bulvar, City Park and Metro Park. The retail areas contain shops from chain stores up to high-end boutiques. Ganjlik Mall particularly stands out, as it is the largest mall in the city of Baku. Crescent Mall is the newest shopping center in Baku, opening on May 28, 2024. It adds to the city\u2019s growing collection of malls, bringing a variety of stores, restaurants, and entertainment options to the area.\nThe city is listed 48th in the 2011 list of the most expensive cities in the world conducted by the Mercer Human Resource Consulting. Nizami Street, also known as Targovaya, and the Neftchilar Avenue, a street known for being home to many luxury and high fashion shops such as Gucci, Dolce &amp; Gabbana, Tom Ford, Burberry, Celine, are among the most expensive streets in the world. Monthly expenses for a single person in Baku are estimated to be around 945 manat without rent ($555 USD), which is significantly lower in comparison to other countries. For example, average cost of living for a person in Los Angeles, California, is about $1308 USD, while in Seoul, South Korea, its $1074 USD. Living costs in Baku per person are below average when comparing to other developed countries, however, average reported salary of a Bakuvian sits at 997 manat, or about $586USD.\nCulture.\nBaku, often referred to as the \"Paris of the East,\" is a city where Eastern and Western cultural traditions coexist. The city\u2019s core is the historic center, known as Icheri Sheher or the Inner City, commonly referred to as the Old City, which contains various landmarks dating back to at least the 12th century. Among these are the Maiden Tower and the Shirvanshahs' Palace. These buildings reflect the city\u2019s history and the Asian architectural styles that have influenced Baku\u2019s development. The city's skyline showcases a blend of traditional and contemporary architecture, with places like Baku Boulevard and Fountains Square presenting a harmonious mix of historic and modern design elements. The urban landscape of Baku is characterized by a diverse range of buildings that combine the charm of the past with the innovation of the present. Baku also has a variety of museums and galleries, including the National Art Museum of Azerbaijan and the National Museum of History of Azerbaijan, which display both traditional Azerbaijani and contemporary art. The city maintains certain traditional crafts such as carpet-weaving and pottery, of which majority are displayed in Azerbaijan National Carpet Museum, with older techniques still practiced. Baku\u2019s theater scene includes institutions like the Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theater and the Azerbaijan State Academic National Drama Theatre, which host both local and international performances. Music is an important part of Baku\u2019s cultural landscape, with mugham being a traditional genre of music that has been recognized by UNESCO as part of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, which was proclaimed to be a \"Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\" The city also has a diverse music scene, with genres such as pop, rock, and jazz being represented. Additionally, Baku hosts events like the Baku International Jazz Festival and the Baku International Film Festival.\nIn 2007, the Heydar Aliyev Cultural Centre, designed by Pritzker Prize-winning architect Zaha Hadid, was opened. Baku also has many museums such as Baku Museum of Modern Art and National Museum of History, most notably featuring historical artifacts and art. Many of the city's cultural sites were celebrated in 2009 when Baku was designated an Islamic Culture Capital. Baku was chosen to host the Eurovision Dance Contest 2010. It has also become the first city to host the first European Games in 2015.\nTheatres.\nAmong Baku's cultural venues are Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall, Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre. The main movie theater is Azerbaijan Cinema. Festivals include Baku International Film Festival, Baku International Jazz Festival, Novruz Festival, \"G\u00fcl Bayram\u0131\" (Flower Festival) and the National Theater Festival. International and local exhibitions are presented at the Baku Expo Centre.\nMuseums.\nAbsheron Museum of History and Local Studies.\nThe Absheron Museum of History and Local Studies() started its activities on 21 November 1983. The area of the museum, which was thoroughly renovated in 2015, is 296 square meters and consists of 5 halls. Currently, about 3000 exhibits are preserved in the museum and 1800 items are displayed in the exposition. Exhibits reflecting the history, geography, nature, everyday life and culture of Absheron region are preserved in the museum. The museum consists of 4 halls, 1 fund room and 1 room for employees. The exhibition area is 250 square meters, the manager's room is 1 square meter, the fund room is 10 square meters, and the staff room is 25 square meters. In 2018, the number of visitors to the museum was 1,932.\nArchitecture.\nBaku has wildly varying architecture, ranging from the Old City core to modern buildings and the spacious layout of Baku port. Many of the city's landmarks were built during the early 20th century, when architectural elements of the European styles were combined in eclectic style. Baku has an original and unique appearance, earning it a reputation as the \"Paris of the East\". Baku joined UNESCO's Network of Creative Cities as a Design City on 31 October 2019 on the occasion of World Cities' Day.\nHamams.\nThere are a number of ancient hamams in Baku dating back to the 12th, 14th and 18th centuries. Hamams play a very important role in the architectural appearance of Baku.\nTeze Bey Hamam.\nTeze Bey is the most popular hamam (traditional Islamic bath) in Baku. It was built in 1886 in the centre of Baku, and in 2003 it was fully restored and modernised. Along with its modern amenities, Teze Bey features a swimming pool and architectural details inspired by Oriental, Russian and Finnish baths.\nGum Hamam.\nGum Hamam was discovered during archaeological excavations underneath the sand; hence the name: Gum hamam (sand bath). It was built sometime during the 12th\u201314th centuries.\nBairamali hamam.\nIn ancient times, Bairamali Hamam was called \"Bey Hamam\". The original structure was built sometime during the 12th\u201314th centuries and was reconstructed in 1881.\nAgha Mikayil Hamam.\nAgha Mikayil Hamam was constructed in the 18th century by Haji Agha Mikayil on Kichik Gala Street in the Old City (Icherisheher). It is still operating in its ancient setting. The Hamam is open to women on Mondays and Fridays and to men on the other days of the week.\nModern architecture.\nLate modern and postmodern architecture began to appear in the early 2000s. With economic development, old buildings such as Atlant House were razed to make way for new ones. Buildings with all-glass shells have appeared around the city, the most prominent examples being the International Mugham Center, Azerbaijan Tower, Heydar Aliyev Cultural Centre, Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City, SOCAR Tower and DENIZ Mall. These projects also caught the attention of international media as notable programmes such as Discovery Channel's Extreme Engineering did pieces focusing in on changes to the city.\nThe Old City of Baku, also known as the Walled City of Baku, refers to the ancient Baku settlement. Most of the walls and towers, strengthened after the Russian conquest in 1806, survived. This section is picturesque, with its maze of narrow alleys and ancient buildings: the cobbled streets past the Palace of the Shirvanshahs, two caravansaries, the baths and the Juma Mosque (which used to house the Azerbaijan National Carpet and Arts Museum but is now a mosque again). The old town core also has dozens of small mosques, often without any particular sign to distinguish them as such.\nIn 2003, UNESCO placed the Inner City on the List of World Heritage in Danger, citing damage from a November 2000 earthquake, poor conservation as well as \"dubious\" restoration efforts. In 2009 the Inner City was removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger.\nVisual arts.\nThe three main institutions for exhibiting modern and contemporary art in Baku are:\nMusic and media.\nThe music scene in Baku can be traced back to ancient times and villages of Baku, generally revered as the fountainhead of meykhana and mugham in the Azerbaijan.\nRecently, the success of Azerbaijani performers such as AySel, Farid Mammadov, Sabina Babayeva, Safura and Elnur H\u00fcseynov in the Eurovision Song Contest has boosted the profile of Baku's music scene, prompting international attention. Following the victory of Azerbaijan's representative Eldar &amp; Nigar at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011, Baku hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2012.\n2005 was a landmark in the development of Azerbaijani jazz in the city. It has been home to legendary jazz musicians like Vagif Mustafazadeh, Aziza Mustafa Zadeh, Rafig Babayev and Rain Sultanov. Among Baku's prominent annual fairs and festivals is Baku International Jazz Festival, which features some of the world's most identifiable jazz names.\nBaku also has a thriving International Centre of Mugham, which is located in Baku Boulevard, Gulustan Palace and Buta Palace, one of the principal performing arts centres and music venues in the city.\nThe majority of Azerbaijan's media companies (including television, newspaper and radio, such as, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Ictimai TV, Lider TV and Region TV) are headquartered in Baku. The films \"The World Is Not Enough\" and \"The Diamond Arm\", among others, are set in the city, while \"Amphibian Man\" includes several scenes filmed in Old City.\nThe city's radio stations include: \"Ictimai Radio\", \"Radio Antenn\", \"Burc FM\", \"Avto FM\", \"ASAN Radio\" and \"Lider FM Jazz\"\nSome of Baku's newspapers include the daily \"Azadliq\", \"Zaman\" (The Time), \"Bakinskiy Rabochiy\" (Baku Worker), \"Echo\" and the English-language \"Baku Today\".\nBaku is also featured in the video game \"Battlefield 4\".\nNightlife.\nMany clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city. Clubs with an eastern flavour provide special treats from the cuisine of Azerbaijan along with local music. Western-style clubs target younger, more energetic crowds. Most of the public houses and bars are located near Fountains Square and are usually open until the early hours of the morning.\nParks and gardens.\nBaku has large sections of greenery, either preserved by the National Government or designated as green zones. The city, however, continues to lack a green belt development as economic activity pours into the capital, resulting in massive housing projects along the suburbs.\nBaku Boulevard is a pedestrian promenade that runs parallel to Baku's seafront. The boulevard contains an amusement park, yacht club, musical fountain, statues and monuments. The park is popular with dog-walkers and joggers and is convenient for tourists. It is adjacent to the newly built International Centre of Mugham and the musical fountain.\nOther parks and gardens include Heydar Aliyev Park, Samad Vurgun Park, Narimanov Park, Alley of Honor and the Fountains Square. The Martyrs' Lane, formerly the Kirov Park, is dedicated to the memory of those who died during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and also to the 137 people killed on Black January.\nSports.\nBaku hosts a Formula One race on the Baku City Circuit. The first was the 2016 European Grand Prix, with the track going around the old city. The track measures , and it has been on the Formula One calendar since its 2016 debut.\nThe city also hosted three group games and one quarter-final of the UEFA Euro 2020 European Football Championship.\nSince 2002, Baku has hosted 36 major sporting events and selected to host the 2015 European Games. Baku is also to host the fourth edition of the Islamic Solidarity Games in 2017.\nBaku is also one of world's leading chess centres, having produced grandmasters like Teimour Radjabov, Vugar Gashimov, Garry Kasparov, Shahriyar Mammadyarov and Rauf Mammadov, as well as the arbiter Faik Hasanov. The city also annually hosts the international tournaments such as Baku Chess Grand Prix, President's Cup, Baku Open and bidding to host 42nd Chess Olympiad in 2014.\nFirst class sporting facilities were built for the indoor games, including the Palace of Hand Games and Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex. It hosted many sporting events, including FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, Rhythmic Gymnastics European Championships in 2007 and 2009, 2005 World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships, 2007 FILA Wrestling World Championships and 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2011 World Amateur Boxing Championships, 2009 Women's Challenge Cup and European Taekwondo Championships in 2007. Since 2011 the city annually hosts WTA tennis event called Baku Cup.\nThe Synergy Baku Cycling Project participates in the Tour d'Azerba\u00efdjan a 2.2 multi-stage bicycle race on the UCI Europe Tour.\nBaku made a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and 2020 Summer Olympics, but failed to become a Candidate City both times.\nThe largest sports hub in the city is Baku Olympic Stadium with 69,870 seating capacity, whose construction was completed in 2015. UEFA Europa League Final 2019 was played at the Olympic Stadium in Baku on 29 May 2019 between English sides Chelsea and Arsenal. The city's main football clubs is Neft\u00e7i Baku of who first has nine Premier League titles, making Neftchi the most successful Azerbaijani football club. Baku also has several football clubs in the premier and regional leagues, including AZAL and Ravan in Premier League. The city's second-largest stadium, Tofiq Bahramov Stadium hosts a number of domestic and international competitions and was the main sports centre of the city for a long period until the construction of Baku Olympic Stadium.\nIn the Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League, Baku is represented by Rabita Baku, Azerrail Baku, Lokomotiv Baku and Azeryol Baku.\nTransport.\nThroughout history, the transport system of Baku used the now-defunct horsecars, trams and narrow gauge railways. , 1,000 black cabs are ordered by Baku Taxi Company, and as part of a programme originally announced by the Transport Ministry of Azerbaijan, there is a plan to introduce London cabs into Baku. The move was part of \u00a316\u00a0million agreement between Manganese Bronze subsidiary LTI Limited and Baku Taxi Company.\nLocal rail transport includes the Baku Funicular and the Baku Metro, a rapid-transit system notable for its art, murals, mosaics and ornate chandeliers. Baku Metro was opened in November 1967 and includes 3 lines and 25 stations at present; 170\u00a0million people used Baku Metro over the past five years. In 2008, the Chief of Baku Metro, Taghi Ahmadov, announced plans to construct 41 new stations over the next 17 years. These will serve the new bus complex as well as the international airport. In 2019, the Baku suburban railway opened.\nBakuCard is a single Smart Card for payment on all types of city transport. The intercity buses and metro use this type of card-based fare-payment system.\nBaku Railway Station is the terminus for national and international rail links to the city. The Kars\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Baku railway, which directly connects Turkey, Georgia and Azerbaijan, began to be constructed in 2007 and opened in 2017. The completed branch will connect Baku with Tbilisi in Georgia, and from there trains will continue to Akhalkalaki, and Kars in Turkey.\nSea transport is vital for Baku, as the city is practically surrounded by the Caspian Sea to the east. Shipping services operate regularly from Baku across the Caspian Sea to Turkmenbashi (formerly Krasnovodsk) in Turkmenistan and to Bandar Anzali and Bandar Nowshar in Iran. The commuter ferries, along with the high-speed catamaran \"Seabus\" (\"Deniz Avtobusu\"), also form the main connection between the city and the Absheron peninsula.\nBaku Port was founded in 1902 and claims to be the largest Caspian Sea port. It has six facilities: the main cargo terminal, the container terminal, the ferry terminal, the oil terminal, the passenger terminal and the port fleet terminal. The port's throughput capacity reaches 15\u00a0million tonnes of liquid bulk and up to 10\u00a0million tons of dry cargoes. In 2010, the Baku International Sea Trade Port began to be reconstructed. The construction was planned to take place in three stages and to be completed by 2016. The estimated costs were US$400\u00a0million. From April to November, Baku Port is accessible to ships loading cargoes for direct voyages from Western European and Mediterranean ports. The State Road M-1 and the European route E60 are the two main motorway connections between Europe and Azerbaijan. The motorway network around Baku is well-developed and is constantly being extended.\nThe Heydar Aliyev International Airport is the only commercial airport serving Baku. The new Baku Cargo Terminal was officially opened in March 2005. It was constructed to be a major cargo hub in the CIS countries, and is actually now one of the biggest and most technically advanced in the region. There are also several smaller military airbases near Baku, such as Baku Kala Air Base, intended for private aircraft, helicopters and charters.\nHealth care.\nAccording to the Ministry of Healthcare, healthcare facilities in Baku are \"highly developed compared with the regions and doctors are waiting to work there. The regions, meanwhile, lack both doctors and clinics providing specialized medical treatment.\" Resulting in citizens travelling for many hours to Baku to receive adequate medical treatment.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nBaku is twinned with:[in chronological order]"}
{"id": "4567", "revid": "1266864269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4567", "title": "Balalaika", "text": "The balalaika (, ) is a Russian stringed musical instrument with a characteristic triangular wooden, hollow body, fretted neck, and three strings. Two strings are usually tuned to the same note and the third string is a perfect fourth higher. The higher-pitched balalaikas are used to play melodies and chords. The instrument generally has a short sustain, necessitating rapid strumming or plucking when it is used to play melodies. Balalaikas are often used for Russian folk music and dancing.\nThe balalaika \"family of instruments\" includes instruments of various sizes, from the highest-pitched to the lowest: the piccolo balalaika, prima balalaika, secunda balalaika, alto balalaika, bass balalaika, and contrabass balalaika. There are balalaika orchestras which consist solely of different balalaikas; these ensembles typically play Classical music that has been arranged for balalaikas. The prima balalaika is the most common; the piccolo is rare. There have also been \"descant\" and \"tenor\" balalaikas, but these are considered obsolete. All have three-sided bodies; spruce, evergreen, or fir tops; and backs made of three to nine wooden sections (usually maple).\nThe prima, secunda, and alto balalaikas are played either with the fingers or a plectrum (pick), depending on the music being played, and the bass and contrabass (equipped with extension legs that rest on the floor) are played with leather plectra. The rare piccolo instrument is usually played with a pick.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest mention of the term \"balalaika\" dates back to a 1688 arrest document. Another appearance of the word is found in a claim dated October 1700 in what is now the Verkhotursky district of Russia. Peter the Great requested balalaika performers to play at the wedding celebrations of N.M. Zotov in Saint Petersburg.\nIn the Ukrainian language, the word was first documented in the 18th century as \"balabaika\"; this form is also present in South Russian dialects and the Belarusian language, as well as in Siberian Russia.\nIt made its way into literature in the 18th century, first appearing in \"Elysei\", a 1771 poem by V. Maykov. \"Balalaika\" also appears in Nikolai Gogol's \"Dead Souls\", written between 1837 and 1842.\nTypes.\nThe most common solo instrument is the prima, which is tuned E4\u2013E4\u2013A4 (thus the two lower strings are tuned to the same pitch). Sometimes the balalaika is tuned \"guitar style\" by folk musicians to G3\u2013B3\u2013D4 (mimicking the three highest strings of the Russian guitar), whereby it is easier to play for Russian guitar players, although classically trained balalaika purists avoid this tuning. It can also be tuned to E4\u2013A4\u2013D5, like its cousin, the domra, to make it easier for those trained on the domra to play the instrument, and still have a balalaika sound. The folk (pre-Andreev) tunings D4\u2013F4\u2013A4 and C4\u2013E4\u2013G4 were very popular, as this makes it easier to play certain riffs.\nBalalaikas have been made in the following sizes:\nFactory-made six-string prima balalaikas with three sets of double courses are also common. These have three double courses similar to the stringing of the mandolin and often use a \"guitar\" tuning.\nFour-string alto balalaikas are also encountered and are used in the orchestra of the Piatnistky Folk Choir.\nThe piccolo, prima, and secunda balalaikas were originally strung with gut with the thinnest melody string made of stainless steel. Today, nylon strings are commonly used in place of gut.\nAmateur and/or souvenir-style prima balalaikas usually have a total of 16 frets, while in professional orchestra-like ones that number raises to 24.\nTechnique.\nAn important part of balalaika technique is the use of the left thumb to fret notes on the lower string, particularly on the prima, where it is used to form chords. Traditionally, the side of the index finger of the right hand is used to sound notes on the prima, while a plectrum is used on the larger sizes.\nBecause of the large size of the contrabass's strings, it is not uncommon to see players using a plectrum made from a leather shoe or boot heel. Bass and contrabass balalaikas rest on the ground, on a wooden or metal pin that is drilled into one of its corners.\nHistory.\nIt is possible that the emergence and evolution of the balalaika was a product of interaction with Asian-Oriental cultures. In addition to European culture, early Russian states, also called Rus' or Rusi, were also influenced by Oriental-Asian cultures. Some theories say that the instrument is descended from the domra, an instrument from the East Slavs. In the Caucasus, similar instruments such as the Mongolian topshur, used in Kalmykia, and the Panduri used in Georgia are played. It is also similar to the Kazakh dombra, which has two strings. Variants of the dombra played by the Bashkirs often have 3 strings and may represent an instrument related to both the dombra and the balalaika.\nThe pre-Andreyev period.\nEarly representations of the balalaika show it with anywhere from two to six strings. Similarly, frets on earlier balalaikas were made of animal gut and tied to the neck so that they could be moved around by the player at will (as is the case with the modern saz, which allows for the playing distinctive to Turkish and Central Asian music).\nThe first known document mentioning the instrument dates back to 1688. A guard's logbook from the Moscow Kremlin records that two commoners were stopped from playing the Balalaika whilst drunk. Further documents from 1700 and 1714 also mention the instrument. In the early 18th century the term appeared in Ukrainian documents, where it sounded like \"Balabaika\". Balalaika appeared in \"Elysei\", a 1771 poem by V. Maikov. In the 19th century, the balalaika evolved into a triangular instrument with a neck that was substantially shorter than that of its Asian counterparts. It was popular as a village instrument for centuries, particularly with the \"skomorokhs\", sort of free-lance musical jesters whose tunes ridiculed the Tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church, and Russian society in general.\nThe Andreyev period.\nIn the 1880s, Vasily Vasilievich Andreyev, who was then a professional violinist in the music salons of St Petersburg, developed what became the standardized balalaika, with the assistance of violin maker V. Ivanov. The instrument began to be used in his concert performances. A few years later, St. Petersburg craftsman Paserbsky further refined the instruments by adding a fully chromatic set of frets and also a number of balalaikas in orchestral sizes with the tunings now found in modern instruments. One of the reasons why the instruments were not standardised, was because people in the outlying areas built their own instruments because there was so little communication for them. There were no roads and weather conditions were generally bad. Andreyev patented the design and arranged numerous traditional Russian folk melodies for the orchestra. He also composed a body of concert pieces for the instrument.\nBalalaika orchestra.\nThe result of Andreyev's labours was the establishment of an orchestral folk tradition in Tsarist Russia, which later grew into a movement within the Soviet Union. The balalaika orchestra in its full form consists of balalaikas, domras, gusli, bayan, Vladimir Shepherd's Horns, garmoshkas, and several types of percussion instruments.\nWith the establishment of the Soviet system and the entrenchment of a proletarian cultural direction, the culture of the working classes (which included that of village labourers) was actively supported by the Soviet establishment. The concept of the balalaika orchestra was adopted wholeheartedly by the Soviet government as something distinctively proletarian (that is, from the working classes) and was also deemed progressive. Significant amounts of energy and time were devoted to support and foster the formal study of the balalaika, from which highly skilled ensemble groups such as the Osipov State Russian Folk Orchestra emerged. Balalaika virtuosi such as Boris Feoktistov and Pavel Necheporenko became stars both inside and outside the Soviet Union. The movement was so powerful that even the renowned Red Army Choir, which initially used a normal symphonic orchestra, changed its instrumentation, replacing violins, violas, and violoncellos with orchestral balalaikas and domras.\nSolo instrument.\nOften musicians perform solo on the balalaika. In particular, Alexey Arkhipovsky is well known for his solo performances. In particular, he was invited to play at the opening ceremony of the second semi final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 in Moscow because the organizers wanted to give a \"more Russian appearance\" to the contest.\nNotable players.\nSee Category: Russian balalaika players (English Wikipedia) and a larger one in Russian\nIn popular culture.\nThrough the 20th century, interest in Russian folk instruments grew outside of Russia, likely as a result of western tours by Andreyev and other balalaika virtuosi early in the century. Significant balalaika associations are found in Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, New York, Atlanta and Seattle."}
{"id": "4568", "revid": "8931761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4568", "title": "Bank of China Tower (Hong Kong)", "text": "The Bank of China Tower (BOC Tower) is a skyscraper located in Central, Hong Kong. Located at 1 Garden Road on Hong Kong Island, the tower houses the headquarters of the Bank of China (Hong Kong) Limited. One of the most recognisable landmarks in Hong Kong, the building is notable for its distinct shape and design, consisting of triangular frameworks covered by glass curtain walls.\nThe building was designed by Chinese-American architect I. M. Pei and L. C. Pei of I. M. Pei and Partners. At a height of , reaching high including a spire, the building is the fourth tallest skyscraper in Hong Kong, after International Commerce Centre, Two International Finance Centre (2 IFC) and Central Plaza. It was the tallest building in Hong Kong and Asia from 1990 to 1992, and it was the first supertall skyscraper outside the United States, the first to break the 305\u00a0m (1,000\u00a0ft) mark. It was surpassed by Central Plaza on the same island in 1992.\nConstruction began on 18 April 1985 on the former site of Murray House, and was completed five years later in 1990. Sporting a steel-column design, the building is accessible from the MTR's Central station. The building lies between Cotton Tree Drive and Garden Road.\nHistory.\nSite.\nThe site on which the building is constructed was formerly the location of Murray House. After its brick-by-brick relocation to Stanley, the site was sold by the Government for \"only HK$1 billion\" in August 1982 amidst growing concern over the future of Hong Kong in the run-up to the transfer of sovereignty.\nThe building was initially built by the Hong Kong Branch of the Bank of China; its Garden Road entrance continues to display the name \"Bank of China\", rather than BOCHK. The top four and the bottom 19 stories are used by the Bank, while the other floors are leased out. Ownership has since been transferred to BOCHK, although the Bank of China has leased back several floors for use by its own operations in Hong Kong.\nFavouritism controversy.\nThe Government had apparently given preferential treatment to Chinese companies, and was again criticised for the apparent preferential treatment to the BOCHK.\nThe price paid was half the amount of the Admiralty II plot, for which the MTR Corporation paid HK$1.82 billion in cash. The BOC would make initial payment of $60 million, with the rest payable over 13 years at 6% interest. The announcement of the sale was also poorly handled, and a dive in business confidence ensued. The Hang Seng Index fell 80 points, and the HK$ lost 1.5% of its value the next day.\nConstruction.\nThe tower was built by Japanese contractor Kumagai Gumi. Superstructure work began in May 1986. The tower is a steel-frame structure.\nThe Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 interrupted publicity surrounding the building's design and construction. A press conference scheduled for 24 May 1989, two weeks before the incident, was intended to show off the building's \"designer socialist furnishings\", but was called off as the student demonstrations in Beijing escalated. The public relations firm that organised the conference explained to the \"South China Morning Post\" that \"under the circumstances, it has been decided to stop any publicity to do with the Bank of China.\"\nOnce developed, gross floor area was expected to be . The original project was intended for completion on the auspicious date of 8 August 1988. However, owing to project delays, groundbreaking took place in March 1985, almost two years late, with the completion also facing a nearly two-year delay. It was topped out in 1989, and occupied on 15 June 1990.\nArchitecture.\nDesigned by Pritzker Prize-winning architect I. M. Pei, the building is high with two masts reaching high. The 72-storey building is located near Central MTR station. This was the tallest building in Hong Kong and Asia from 1990 to 1992, the first building outside the United States to break the 305\u00a0m (1,000\u00a0ft) mark, and the first composite space frame high-rise building. That also means it was the tallest outside the United States from its completion year, 1990. It is now the fourth tallest skyscraper in Hong Kong, after International Commerce Centre, Two International Finance Centre and Central Plaza.\nA small observation deck on the 43rd floor of the building was once open to the public, but is now closed.\nThe whole structure is supported by the four steel columns at the corners of the building, with the triangular frameworks transferring the weight of the structure onto these four columns. It is covered with glass curtain walls. Structural engineer Leslie E. Robertson, best known for his work on the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center, provided the structural engineering design, while Jaros, Baum &amp; Bolles was the mechanical, electrical and plumbing engineer.\nWhile its distinctive look makes it one of Hong Kong's most identifiable landmarks today, it was the source of some controversy at one time, as the bank is the only major building in Hong Kong to have bypassed the convention of consulting with feng shui masters on matters of design prior to construction.\nThe building has been criticised by some practitioners of feng shui for its sharp edges and its negative symbolism by the numerous 'X' shapes in its original design, though Pei modified the design to some degree before construction following this feedback. The building's profile from some angles resembles that of a meat cleaver and it is sometimes referred to as a \"vertical knife\". This earned it the nickname () in Cantonese, literally meaning 'one knife'.\nTransport.\nThe Bank of China Tower can be accessed by the Mass Transit Railway (MTR) by walking through Chater Garden from Central station Exit J2."}
{"id": "4569", "revid": "230475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4569", "title": "Blind Lemon Jefferson", "text": "Lemon Henry \"Blind Lemon\" Jefferson (September 24, 1893 \u2013 December 19, 1929) was an American blues and gospel singer-songwriter and musician. He was one of the most popular and successful blues singers of the 1920s and has been called the \"Father of the Texas Blues\".\nDue mainly to his high-pitched voice and the originality of his guitar playing, Jefferson's performances were distinctive. His recordings sold well, but he was not a strong influence on younger blues singers of his generation, who could not imitate him as easily as they could other commercially successful artists. Later blues and rock and roll musicians, however, did attempt to imitate both his songs and his musical style.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJefferson was born blind, near Coutchman, Texas. He was the youngest of seven (or possibly eight) children born to Clarissa and Alex Jefferson, who were African-American sharecroppers. Disputes regarding the date of his birth derive from the fact that census records and his draft registration show different dates. By 1900, the family was farming southeast of Streetman, Texas. Jefferson's birth date was recorded as September 1893 in the 1900 census. The 1910 census, taken in May, before his birthday, confirms his year of birth as 1893 and indicated that the family was farming northwest of Wortham, near his birthplace.\nIn his 1917 draft registration, Jefferson gave his birthday as October 26, 1894, stating that he lived in Dallas, Texas, and had been blind since birth. In the 1920 census, he is recorded as having returned to Freestone County and was living with his half-brother, Kit Banks, on a farm between Wortham and Streetman.\nJefferson began playing the guitar in his early teens and soon after he began performing at picnics and parties. He became a street musician, playing in East Texas towns in front of barbershops and on street corners. According to his cousin Alec Jefferson, quoted in the notes for the compilation album \"The Complete 94 Classic Sides: Remastered\":\nOne of Jefferson's first appearances was at the General Association of Baptist Churches in Buffalo, Texas. There he would perform classic gospel music which would later lead to his first album release in 1926 containing two hit gospel songs, \u00a0\"I Want to Be Like Jesus in My Heart\" and \"All I Want Is That Pure Religion\". According to his friend, the folk musician Lead Belly, in 1917, Jefferson was commonly found on the corner of Elm and Central Tracks in a part of Dallas called Deep Ellum. Jefferson was restricted in many parts of Dallas by the white population, leaving his only option to play the African-American neighborhood that made up Deep Ellum.\nIn 1912, Jefferson began traveling frequently to Dallas, where he played with Lead Belly. Jefferson was one of the earliest and most prominent figures in the blues movement developing in Deep Ellum. It is probable that he moved to Deep Ellum on a more permanent basis by 1917, where he met Aaron Thibeaux Walker, also known as T-Bone Walker. Jefferson taught Walker the basics of playing blues guitar in exchange for Walker's occasional services as a guide. By the early 1920s, Jefferson was earning enough money for his musical performances to support a wife and, possibly, a child. However, firm evidence of his marriage and children has not been found.\nBeginning of recording career.\nPrior to Jefferson, few artists had recorded solo voice and blues guitar, the first of which were the vocalist Sara Martin and the guitarist Sylvester Weaver, who recorded \"Longing for Daddy Blues\", probably on October 24, 1923. The first self-accompanied solo performer of a self-composed blues song was Lee Morse, whose \"Mail Man Blues\" was recorded on October 7, 1924. Jefferson's music is uninhibited and represented the classic sounds of everyday life, from a honky-tonk to a country picnic, to street corner blues, to work in the burgeoning oil fields (a reflection of his interest in mechanical objects and processes).\nJefferson did what few had ever done before him \u2013 he became a successful solo guitarist and male vocalist in the commercial recording world. Unlike many artists who were \"discovered\" and recorded in their normal venues, Jefferson was taken to Chicago in December 1925 or January 1926 to record his first tracks. Uncharacteristically for him, the first two recordings on this session were gospel songs (\"I Want to Be Like Jesus in My Heart\" and \"All I Want Is That Pure Religion\"), and they were released under the name Deacon L. J. Bates. A second recording session was held in March 1926. His first releases under his own name, \"Booster Blues\" and \"Dry Southern Blues\", were hits. Their popularity led to the release of the other two songs from that session, \"Got the Blues\" and \"Long Lonesome Blues\", which became a runaway success, with sales in six figures. He recorded about a hundred tracks between 1926 and 1929; forty-three records were issued, all but one of them on Paramount Records. Almost all of his recordings for Paramount had poor sound quality because Paramount's studio techniques and production were poor during that time. In May 1926, Paramount re-recorded Jefferson performing his hits \"Got the Blues\" and \"Long Lonesome Blues\" in the superior facilities at Marsh Laboratories, and their subsequent releases used these newer versions. Both the original and re-recorded versions appear on modern compilation albums.\nSuccess with Paramount Records.\nLargely because of the popularity of artists such as Jefferson and his contemporaries Blind Blake and Ma Rainey, Paramount became the leading recording company for the blues in the 1920s. Jefferson's earnings reputedly enabled him to buy a car and employ chauffeurs (this information has been disputed); he was given a Ford car \"worth over $700\" by Mayo Williams, Paramount's connection with the black community. This was a common compensation for recording rights in that market. Jefferson is known to have done an unusual amount of traveling for the time in the American South, which is reflected in the difficulty of placing his music in a single regional category.\nJefferson's \"old-fashioned\" sound and confident musicianship made it easy to market him. His skillful guitar playing and impressive vocal range opened the door for a new generation of male solo blues performers, such as Furry Lewis, Charlie Patton, and Barbecue Bob. He stuck to no musical conventions, varying his riffs and rhythm and singing complex and expressive lyrics in a manner exceptional at the time for a \"simple country blues singer.\" According to the North Carolina musician Walter Davis, Jefferson played on the streets in Johnson City, Tennessee, during the early 1920s, at which time Davis and the entertainer Clarence Greene learned the art of blues guitar.\nJefferson was reputedly unhappy with his royalties (although Williams said that Jefferson had a bank account containing as much as $1,500). In 1927, when Williams moved to Okeh Records, he took Jefferson with him, and Okeh quickly recorded and released Jefferson's \"Matchbox Blues\", backed with \"Black Snake Moan\". It was his only Okeh recording, probably because of contractual obligations with Paramount. Jefferson's two songs released on Okeh have considerably better sound quality than his Paramount records at the time. When he returned to Paramount a few months later, \"Matchbox Blues\" had already become such a hit that Paramount re-recorded and released two new versions, with the producer Arthur Laibly. In 1927, Jefferson recorded another of his classic songs, the haunting \"See That My Grave Is Kept Clean\" (again using the pseudonym Deacon L. J. Bates), and two other uncharacteristically spiritual songs, \"He Arose from the Dead\" and \"Where Shall I Be\". \"See That My Grave Is Kept Clean\" was so successful that it was re-recorded and re-released in 1928.\nDeath and grave.\nJefferson died in Chicago at 10:00\u00a0a.m. on December 19, 1929, of what his death certificate said was \"probably acute myocarditis\". For many years, rumors circulated that a jealous lover had poisoned his coffee, but a more likely explanation is that he died of a heart attack after becoming disoriented during a snowstorm. Some have said that he died of a heart attack after being attacked by a dog in the middle of the night. In his 1983 book \"Tolbert's Texas\", Frank X. Tolbert claims that he was killed while being robbed of a large royalty payment by a guide escorting him to Chicago Union Station to catch a train home to Texas. Paramount Records paid for the return of his body to Texas by train, accompanied by the pianist William Ezell.\nJefferson was buried at Wortham Negro Cemetery (later Wortham Black Cemetery) in Wortham, Freestone County, Texas. His grave was unmarked until 1967, when a Texas historical marker was erected in the general area of his plot; however, the precise location of the grave is still unknown. By 1996, the cemetery and marker were in poor condition, and a new granite headstone was erected in 1997. The inscription reads: \"Lord, it's one kind favor I'll ask of you, see that my grave is kept clean.\" In 2007, the cemetery's name was changed to Blind Lemon Memorial Cemetery, and his gravesite is kept clean by a cemetery committee in Wortham.\nDiscography and awards.\nJefferson had an intricate and fast style of guitar playing and a particularly high-pitched voice. He was a founder of the Texas blues sound and an important influence on other blues singers and guitarists, including Lead Belly and Lightnin' Hopkins.\nHe was the author of many songs covered by later musicians, including the classic \"See That My Grave Is Kept Clean\". Another of his songs, \"Matchbox Blues\", was recorded more than 30 years later by the Beatles, in a rockabilly version credited to Carl Perkins, who did not credit Jefferson on his 1955 recording. Fellow blues artist B.B. King credited Jefferson as one of his biggest musical influences, next to Lonnie Johnson, Louis Jordan and T-Bone Walker.\nThe Rock and Roll Hall of Fame selected Jefferson's 1927 recording of \"Matchbox Blues\" as one of the 500 songs that shaped rock and roll. Jefferson was among the inaugural class of blues musicians inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 1980."}
{"id": "4571", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4571", "title": "Baku (mythology)", "text": " are Japanese supernatural beings that are said to devour nightmares. They originate from the Chinese Mo. According to legend, they were created by the spare pieces that were left over when the gods finished creating all other animals. They have a long history in Japanese folklore and art, and more recently have appeared in manga and anime.\nThe Japanese term \"baku\" has two current meanings, referring to both the traditional dream-devouring creature and to the Malayan tapir. In recent years, there have been changes in how the \"baku\" is depicted.\nHistory and description.\nThe traditional Japanese nightmare-devouring \"baku\" originates in Chinese folklore from the \"mo\" \u8c98 (giant panda) and was familiar in Japan as early as the Muromachi period (14th\u201315th century). Hori Tadao has described the dream-eating abilities attributed to the traditional \"baku\" and relates them to other preventatives against nightmare such as amulets. Kaii-Y\u014dkai Densh\u014d Database, citing a 1957 paper, and Mizuki also describe the dream-devouring capacities of the traditional \"baku\".\nBefore its adaptation to the Japanese dream-caretaker myth creature, an early 17th-century Japanese manuscript, the \"Sankai Ibutsu\" (), describes the \"baku\" as a shy, Chinese mythical chimera with the trunk and tusks of an elephant, the ears of a rhinoceros, the tail of a cow, the body of a bear and the paws of a tiger, which protected against pestilence and evil, although eating nightmares was not included among its abilities. However, in a 1791 Japanese wood-block illustration, a specifically dream-destroying \"baku\" is depicted with an elephant's head, tusks, and trunk, with horns and tiger's claws. The elephant's head, trunk, and tusks are characteristic of \"baku\" portrayed in classical era (pre-Meiji) Japanese wood-block prints (see illustration) and in shrine, temple, and netsuke carvings.\nWriting in the Meiji period, Lafcadio Hearn (1902) described a \"baku\" with very similar attributes that was also able to devour nightmares.\nLegend has it that a person who wakes up from a bad dream can call out to \"baku\". A child having a nightmare in Japan will wake up and repeat three times, \"Baku-san, come eat my dream.\" Legends say that the \"baku\" will come into the child's room and devour the bad dream, allowing the child to go back to sleep peacefully. However, calling to the \"baku\" must be done sparingly, because if he remains hungry after eating one's nightmare, he may also devour their hopes and desires as well, leaving them to live an empty life. The \"baku\" can also be summoned for protection from bad dreams prior to falling asleep at night. In the 1910s, it was common for Japanese children to keep a \"baku\" talisman at their bedside."}
{"id": "4572", "revid": "777667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4572", "title": "Blackbeard", "text": "Edward Teach (or Thatch; \u2013 22 November 1718), better known as Blackbeard, was an English pirate who operated around the West Indies and the eastern coast of Britain's North American colonies. Little is known about his early life, but he may have been a sailor on privateer ships during Queen Anne's War before he settled on the Bahamian island of New Providence, a base for Captain Benjamin Hornigold, whose crew Teach joined around 1716. Hornigold placed him in command of a sloop that he had captured, and the two engaged in numerous acts of piracy. Their numbers were boosted by the addition to their fleet of two more ships, one of which was commanded by Stede Bonnet, but Hornigold retired from piracy toward the end of 1717, taking two vessels with him.\nTeach captured a French slave ship known as , renamed her \"Queen Anne's Revenge,\" equipped her with 40 guns, and crewed her with over 300 men. He became a renowned pirate. His nickname derived from his thick black beard and fearsome appearance. He was reported to have tied lit fuses (slow matches) under his hat to frighten his enemies. He formed an alliance of pirates and blockaded the port of Charles Town, South Carolina, ransoming the port's inhabitants. He then ran \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" aground on a sandbar near Beaufort, North Carolina. He parted company with Stede Bonnet and settled in Bath, North Carolina, also known as Bath Town, where he accepted a royal pardon. However, he was soon back at sea, where he attracted the attention of Alexander Spotswood, the governor of Virginia. Spotswood arranged for a party of soldiers and sailors to capture him. On 22 November 1718, following a ferocious battle, Teach and several of his crew were killed by a small force of sailors led by Lieutenant Robert Maynard.\nTeach was a shrewd and calculating leader who spurned the use of violence, relying instead on his fearsome image to elicit the response that he desired from those whom he robbed. He was romanticised after his death and became the inspiration for an archetypal pirate in works of fiction across many genres.\nEarly life.\nLittle is known about Blackbeard's early life. It is commonly believed that at the time of his death he was between 35\u00a0and\u00a040 years old and thus born around 1680. In contemporary records his name is most often given as Blackbeard, Edward Thatch or Edward Teach. The latter is most often used because it is the form used in the dispatches of North America's only newspaper at the time, the Boston News-Letter, but primary sources written by people who had actually met the pirate all refer to him as \"Thatch\" or variations thereof. Several spellings of his surname exist: Thatch, Thach, Thache, Thack, Tack, Thatche, and Theach. One source claims that his surname was Drummond, but the lack of any supporting documentation makes this unlikely. Pirates habitually used fictitious surnames while engaged in piracy so as not to tarnish the family name, which makes it unlikely that Teach's real name will ever be known.\nThe 17th-century rise of Britain's American colonies and the rapid 18th-century expansion of the Atlantic slave trade had made Bristol an important international sea port, and Teach was most likely raised in what was then the second-largest city in England. He could almost certainly read and write. He communicated with merchants and, upon his death, had in his possession a letter addressed to him by the Chief Justice and Secretary of the Province of Carolina, Tobias Knight. Author Robert Lee speculated that Teach may therefore have been born into a respectable, wealthy family. He may have arrived in the Caribbean in the last years of the 17th century, on a merchant vessel (possibly a slave ship). The 18th-century author Charles Johnson claimed that Teach was for some time a sailor operating from Jamaica on privateer ships during the War of the Spanish Succession, and that \"he had often distinguished himself for his uncommon boldness and personal courage.\" It is unknown at what point during the war Teach joined the fighting, as with the record of most of his life before he became a pirate.\nLife as a pirate.\nNew Providence.\nWith its history of colonialism, trade and piracy, the West Indies was the setting for many 17th- and 18th-century maritime incidents. The privateer-turned-pirate Henry Jennings and his followers decided, early in the 18th century, to use the uninhabited island of New Providence as a base for their operations since it was within easy reach of the Florida Strait and its busy shipping lanes, which were filled with European vessels crossing the Atlantic. New Providence's harbour could easily accommodate hundreds of ships but was too shallow for the Royal Navy's larger vessels. The author George Woodbury described New Providence as \"no city of homes. It was a place of temporary sojourn and refreshment for a literally floating population,\" continuing, \"The only permanent residents were the piratical camp followers, the traders, and the hangers-on. All others were transient.\" In New Providence, pirates found a welcome respite from the law.\nTeach was one of those who came to enjoy the island's benefits. Probably shortly after the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht, he moved there from Jamaica, and, along with most privateers once involved in the war, became involved in piracy. Possibly about 1716, he joined the crew of Captain Benjamin Hornigold, a renowned pirate who operated from New Providence's safe waters. In 1716, Hornigold placed Teach in charge of a sloop he had taken as a prize. In early 1717, Hornigold and Teach, each captaining a sloop, set out for the mainland. They captured a boat carrying 120\u00a0barrels of flour out of Havana, and shortly thereafter took 100\u00a0barrels of wine from a sloop out of Bermuda. A few days later they stopped a vessel sailing from Madeira to Charles Town, South Carolina. Teach and his quartermaster, William Howard, may at this time have struggled to control their crews. By then they had probably developed a taste for Madeira wine, and on 29 September near Cape Charles all they took from the \"Betty\" of Virginia was her cargo of Madeira, before they scuttled her with the remaining cargo.\nIt was during this cruise with Hornigold that the earliest known report of Teach was made, in which he is recorded as a pirate in his own right, in command of a large crew. In a report made by a Captain Mathew Munthe on an anti-piracy patrol for North Carolina, \"Thatch\" was described as operating \"a sloop 6 and about 70 men.\" In September, Teach and Hornigold encountered Stede Bonnet, a landowner and military officer from a wealthy family who had turned to piracy earlier that year. Bonnet's crew of about 70 were reportedly dissatisfied with his command, so with Bonnet's permission, Teach took control of his ship, \"Revenge.\" The pirates' flotilla now consisted of three ships: Teach on \"Revenge,\" Teach's old sloop, and Hornigold's \"Ranger.\" By October, another vessel had been captured and added to the small fleet. The sloops \"Robert\" of Philadelphia and \"Good Intent\" of Dublin were stopped on 22 October 1717 and their cargo holds emptied.\nAs a former British privateer, Hornigold attacked only his old enemies, but for his crew, the sight of British vessels filled with valuable cargo passing by unharmed became too much, and at some point toward the end of 1717 he was demoted. Whether Teach had any involvement in this decision is unknown, but Hornigold quickly retired from piracy. He took \"Ranger\" and one of the sloops, leaving Teach with \"Revenge\" and the remaining sloop. The two never met again and, as did many other occupants of New Providence, Hornigold accepted the King's pardon.\nBlackbeard.\nOn 28 November 1717 Teach's two ships attacked a French merchant vessel off the coast of Saint Vincent. They each fired a broadside across its bulwarks, killing several of its crew, and forcing its captain to surrender. The ship was , a large French Guineaman registered in Saint-Malo and carrying a cargo of slaves. This ship had originally been the English merchantman \"Concord\", captured in 1711 by a French squadron, and then changed hands several times by 1717. Teach and his crews sailed the vessel south along Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to Bequia, where they disembarked her crew and cargo, and converted the ship for their own use. The crew of were given the smaller of Teach's two sloops, which they renamed (\"Bad Meeting\"), and sailed for Martinique. Teach may have recruited some of their slaves, but the remainder were left on the island and were later recaptured by the returning crew of .\nTeach immediately renamed as \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" and equipped her with 40\u00a0guns. By this time Teach had placed his lieutenant Richards in command of Bonnet's \"Revenge\". In late November the same year, near Saint Vincent, he attacked the \"Great Allen\". After a lengthy engagement, he forced the large and well-armed merchant ship to surrender. He ordered her to move closer to the shore, disembarked her crew and emptied her cargo holds, and then burned and sank the vessel. The incident was chronicled in the \"Boston News-Letter\", which called Teach the commander of a \"French ship of 32\u00a0Guns, a Briganteen of 10\u00a0guns and a Sloop of 12\u00a0guns.\" It is not known when or where Teach collected the ten-gun briganteen, but by that time he may have been in command of at least 150\u00a0men split among three vessels.\nOn 5 December 1717 Teach stopped the merchant sloop \"Margaret\" off the coast of Crab Island, near Anguilla. Her captain, Henry Bostock, and crew, remained Teach's prisoners for about eight hours, and were forced to watch as their sloop was ransacked. Bostock, who had been held aboard \"Queen Anne's Revenge\", was returned unharmed to \"Margaret\" and was allowed to leave with his crew. He returned to his base of operations on Saint Christopher Island and reported the matter to Governor Walter Hamilton, who requested that he sign an affidavit about the encounter. Bostock's deposition details Teach's command of two vessels: a sloop and a large French guineaman, Dutch-built, with 36\u00a0cannons and a crew of 300\u00a0men. The captain believed that the larger ship carried valuable gold dust, silver plate, and \"a very fine cup\" supposedly taken from the commander of \"Great Allen\". Teach's crew had apparently informed Bostock that they had destroyed several other vessels, and that they intended to sail to Hispaniola and lie in wait for an expected Spanish armada, supposedly laden with money to pay the garrisons. Bostock also claimed that Teach had questioned him about the movements of local ships, but also that he had seemed unsurprised when Bostock told him of an expected royal pardon from London for all pirates.\nBostock's deposition describes Teach as a \"tall spare man with a very black beard which he wore very long\". It is the first recorded account of Teach's appearance and is the source of his nickname Blackbeard. Later descriptions mention that his thick black beard was braided into pigtails, sometimes tied in with small coloured ribbons. Johnson (1724) described him as \"such a figure that imagination cannot form an idea of a fury from hell to look more frightful.\" Whether Johnson's description was entirely truthful or embellished is unclear, but it seems likely that Teach understood the value of appearances; better to strike fear into the heart of one's enemies than rely on bluster alone. Teach was tall, with broad shoulders. He wore knee-length boots and dark clothing, topped with a wide hat and sometimes a long coat of brightly coloured silk or velvet. Johnson also described Teach in times of battle as wearing \"a sling over his shoulders, with three brace of pistols, hanging in holsters like bandoliers; and stuck lighted slow matches under his hat\", the latter apparently to emphasise the fearsome appearance he wished to present to his enemies. Despite his ferocious reputation, there are no verified accounts of his ever having murdered or harmed those he held captive. Teach may have used other aliases; on 30 November, the \"Monserrat Merchant\" encountered two ships and a sloop, commanded by a Captain Kentish and Captain Edwards (the latter a known alias of Stede Bonnet).\nEnlargement of Teach's fleet.\nTeach's movements between late 1717 and early 1718 are not known. He and Bonnet were probably responsible for an attack off Sint Eustatius in December 1717. Henry Bostock claimed to have heard the pirates say they would head toward the Spanish-controlled Saman\u00e1 Bay in Hispaniola, but a cursory search revealed no pirate activity. Captain Hume of reported on 6 February that a \"Pyrate Ship of 36\u00a0Guns and 250\u00a0men, and a Sloop of 10\u00a0Guns and 100\u00a0men were Said to be Cruizing amongst the Leeward Islands\". Hume reinforced his crew with soldiers armed with muskets, and joined up with to track the two ships, to no avail, though they discovered that the two ships had sunk a French vessel off St Christopher Island, and reported also that they had last been seen \"gone down the North side of Hispaniola\". Although no confirmation exists that these two ships were controlled by Teach and Bonnet, author Angus Konstam believes it very likely they were.\nIn March 1718, while taking on water at Turneffe Island east of Belize, both ships spotted the Jamaican logwood-cutting sloop \"Adventure\" making for the harbour. She was stopped and her captain, Harriot, invited to join the pirates. Harriot and his crew accepted the invitation, and Teach sent over a crew to sail \"Adventure\" making Israel Hands the captain. They sailed for the Bay of Honduras, where they added another ship and four sloops to their flotilla. On 9 April Teach's enlarged fleet of ships looted and burnt \"Protestant Caesar\". His fleet then sailed to Grand Cayman where they captured a \"small turtler\". Teach probably sailed toward Havana, where he may have captured a small Spanish vessel that had left the Cuban port. They then sailed to the wrecks of the 1715 Spanish fleet, off the eastern coast of Florida. There Teach disembarked the crew of the captured Spanish sloop, before proceeding north to the port of Charles Town, South Carolina, attacking three vessels along the way.\nBlockade of Charles Town.\nBy May 1718, Teach had awarded himself the rank of Commodore and was at the height of his power. Late that month his flotilla blockaded the port of Charles Town in the Province of South Carolina. All vessels entering or leaving the port were stopped, and as the town had no guard ship, its pilot boat was the first to be captured. Over the next five or six days about nine vessels were stopped and ransacked as they attempted to sail past Charles Town Bar, where Teach's fleet was anchored. One such ship, headed for London with a group of prominent Charles Town citizens which included Samuel Wragg (a member of the Council of the province of Carolina), was the \"Crowley\". Her passengers were questioned about the vessels still in port and then locked below decks for about half a day. Teach informed the prisoners that his fleet required medical supplies from the colonial government of South Carolina, and that if none were forthcoming, all prisoners would be executed, their heads sent to the Governor and all captured ships burnt.\nWragg agreed to Teach's demands, and a Mr. Marks and two pirates were given two days to collect the drugs. Teach moved his fleet, and the captured ships, to within about five or six leagues from land. Three days later a messenger, sent by Marks, returned to the fleet; Marks's boat had capsized and delayed their arrival in Charles Town. Teach granted a reprieve of two days, but still the party did not return. He then called a meeting of his fellow sailors and moved eight ships into the harbour, causing panic within the town. When Marks finally returned to the fleet, he explained what had happened. On his arrival he had presented the pirates' demands to the Governor and the drugs had been quickly gathered, but the two pirates sent to escort him had proved difficult to find; they had been busy drinking with friends and were finally discovered, drunk.\nTeach kept to his side of the bargain and released the captured ships and his prisoners\u2014albeit relieved of their valuables, including the fine clothing some had worn.\nBeaufort Inlet.\nWhilst at Charles Town, Teach learned that Woodes Rogers had left England with several men-of-war, with orders to purge the West Indies of pirates. Teach's flotilla sailed northward along the Atlantic coast and into Topsail Inlet (commonly known as Beaufort Inlet), off the coast of North Carolina. There they intended to careen their ships to scrape their hulls, but on 10 June 1718 the \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" ran aground on a sandbar, cracking her main-mast and severely damaging many of her timbers. Teach ordered several sloops to throw ropes across the flagship in an attempt to free her. A sloop commanded by Israel Hands of \"Adventure\" also ran aground, and both vessels appeared to be damaged beyond repair, leaving only \"Revenge\" and the captured Spanish sloop.\nPardon.\nTeach had at some stage learnt of the offer of a royal pardon and probably confided in Bonnet his willingness to accept it. The pardon was open to all pirates who surrendered on or before 5 September 1718, but contained a caveat stipulating that immunity was offered only against crimes committed before 5 January. Although in theory this left Bonnet and Teach at risk of being hanged for their actions at Charles Town Bar, most authorities could waive such conditions. Teach thought that Governor Charles Eden was a man he could trust, but to make sure, he waited to see what would happen to another captain. Bonnet left immediately on a small sailing boat for Bath Town, where he surrendered to Governor Eden, and received his pardon. He then travelled back to Beaufort Inlet to collect the \"Revenge\" and the remainder of his crew, intending to sail to Saint Thomas Island to receive a commission. Unfortunately for him, Teach had stripped the vessel of its valuables and provisions, and had marooned its crew; Bonnet set out for revenge, but was unable to find him. He and his crew returned to piracy and were captured on 27 September 1718 at the mouth of the Cape Fear River. All but four were tried and hanged in Charles Town.\nThe author Robert Lee surmised that Teach and Hands intentionally ran the ships aground to reduce the fleet's crew complement, increasing their share of the spoils. During the trial of Bonnet's crew, \"Revenge\"s boatswain Ignatius Pell testified that \"the ship was run ashore and lost, which Thatch [Teach] caused to be done.\" Lee considers it plausible that Teach let Bonnet in on his plan to accept a pardon from Governor Eden. He suggested that Bonnet do the same, and as war between the Quadruple Alliance of 1718 and Spain was threatening, to consider taking a privateer's commission from England. Lee suggests that Teach also offered Bonnet the return of his ship \"Revenge\". Konstam (2007) proposes a similar idea, explaining that Teach began to see \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" as something of a liability; while a pirate fleet was anchored, news of this was sent to neighbouring towns and colonies, and any vessels nearby would delay sailing. It was prudent therefore for Teach not to linger for too long, although wrecking the ship was an extreme measure.\nBefore sailing northward on his remaining sloop to Ocracoke Inlet, Teach marooned about 25\u00a0men on a small sandy island about 5\u00a0km from the mainland. He may have done this to stifle any protest they made, if they guessed their captain's plans. Bonnet rescued them two days later. Teach continued on to Bath, where in June 1718\u2014only days after Bonnet had departed with his pardon\u2014he and his much-reduced crew received their pardon from Governor Eden.\nHe settled in Bath, on the eastern side of Bath Creek at Plum Point, near Eden's home. During July and August he travelled between his base in the town and his sloop off Ocracoke. Johnson's account states that he married the daughter of a local plantation owner, although there is no supporting evidence for this. Eden gave Teach permission to sail to St Thomas to seek a commission as a privateer (a useful way of removing bored and troublesome pirates from the small settlement), and Teach was given official title to his remaining sloop, which he renamed \"Adventure\". By the end of August he had returned to piracy, and in the same month the governor of Pennsylvania issued a warrant for his arrest, but by then Teach was probably operating in Delaware Bay, some distance away. He took two French ships leaving the Caribbean, moved one crew across to the other, and sailed the remaining ship back to Ocracoke. In September he told Eden that he had found the French ship at sea, deserted. A Vice Admiralty Court was quickly convened, presided over by Tobias Knight and the Collector of Customs. The ship was judged as a derelict found at sea, and of its cargo twenty\u00a0hogsheads of sugar were awarded to Knight and sixty\u00a0to Eden; Teach and his crew were given what remained in the vessel's hold.\nOcracoke Inlet was Teach's favourite anchorage. It was a perfect vantage point from which to view ships travelling between the various settlements of northeast Carolina, and it was from there that Teach first spotted the approaching ship of Charles Vane, another English pirate. Several months earlier Vane had rejected the pardon brought by Woodes Rogers and escaped the men-of-war the English captain brought with him to Nassau. He had also been pursued by Teach's old commander, Benjamin Hornigold, who was by then a pirate hunter. Teach and Vane spent several nights on the southern tip of Ocracoke Island, accompanied by such notorious figures as Israel Hands, Robert Deal and Calico Jack.\nAlexander Spotswood.\nAs it spread throughout the neighbouring colonies, the news of Teach and Vane's impromptu party worried the governor of Pennsylvania enough to send out two sloops to capture the pirates. They were unsuccessful, but Governor of Virginia Alexander Spotswood was also concerned that the supposedly retired freebooter and his crew were living in nearby North Carolina. Some of Teach's former crew had already moved into several Virginian seaport towns, prompting Spotswood to issue a proclamation on 10 July, requiring all former pirates to make themselves known to the authorities, to give up their arms and to not travel in groups larger than three. As head of a Crown colony, Spotswood viewed the proprietary colony of North Carolina with contempt; he had little faith in the ability of the Carolinians to control the pirates, who he suspected would be back to their old ways, disrupting Virginian commerce, as soon as their money ran out.\nSpotswood learned that William Howard, the former quartermaster of \"Queen Anne's Revenge\", was in the area, and believing that he might know of Teach's whereabouts had him and his two slaves arrested. Spotswood had no legal authority to have pirates tried, and as a result, Howard's attorney, John Holloway, brought charges against Captain Brand of , where Howard was imprisoned. He also sued on Howard's behalf for damages of \u00a3500, claiming wrongful arrest.\nSpotswood's council claimed that under a statute of William III the governor was entitled to try pirates without a jury in times of crisis and that Teach's presence was a crisis. The charges against Howard referred to several acts of piracy supposedly committed after the pardon's cut-off date, in \"a sloop belonging to ye subjects of the King of Spain\", but ignored the fact that they took place outside Spotswood's jurisdiction and in a vessel then legally owned. Another charge cited two attacks, one of which was the capture of a slave ship off Charles Town Bar, from which one of Howard's slaves was presumed to have come. Howard was sent to await trial before a Court of Vice-Admiralty, on the charge of piracy, but Brand and his colleague, Captain Gordon (of ) refused to serve with Holloway present. Incensed, Holloway had no option but to stand down, and was replaced by the Attorney General of Virginia, John Clayton, whom Spotswood described as \"an honester man [than Holloway]\". Howard was found guilty and sentenced to be hanged, but was saved by a commission from London, which directed Spotswood to pardon all acts of piracy committed by surrendering pirates before 18 August 1718.\nSpotswood had obtained from Howard valuable information on Teach's whereabouts, and he planned to send his forces across the border into North Carolina to capture him. He gained the support of two men keen to discredit North Carolina's governor\u2014Edward Moseley and Colonel Maurice Moore. He also wrote to the Lords of Trade, suggesting that the Crown might benefit financially from Teach's capture. Spotswood personally financed the operation, possibly believing that Teach had fabulous treasures hidden away. He ordered Captains Gordon and Brand of HMS \"Pearl\" and HMS \"Lyme\" to travel overland to Bath. Lieutenant Robert Maynard of HMS \"Pearl\" was given command of two commandeered sloops, to approach the town from the sea. An extra incentive for Teach's capture was the offer of a reward from the Assembly of Virginia, over and above any that might be received from the Crown.\nMaynard took command of the two armed sloops on 17 November. He was given 57\u00a0men\u201433\u00a0from HMS \"Pearl\" and 24 from HMS \"Lyme\". Maynard and the detachment from HMS \"Pearl\" took the larger of the two vessels and named her \"Jane\"; the rest took \"Ranger\", commanded by one of Maynard's officers, a Mister Hyde. Some from the two ships' civilian crews remained aboard. They sailed from Kecoughtan, along the James River, on 17 November. The two sloops moved slowly, giving Brand's force time to reach Bath. Brand set out for North Carolina six days later, arriving within three miles of Bath on 23 November. Included in Brand's force were several North Carolinians, including Colonel Moore and Captain Jeremiah Vail, sent to counter any local objection to the presence of foreign soldiers. Moore went into the town to see if Teach was there, reporting back that he was not, but that he was expected at \"every minute.\" Brand then went to Governor Eden's home and informed him of his purpose. The next day, Brand sent two canoes down Pamlico River to Ocracoke Inlet, to see if Teach could be seen. They returned two days later and reported on what eventually transpired.\nLast battle.\nMaynard found the pirates anchored on the inner side of Ocracoke Island, on the evening of 21 November. He had ascertained their position from ships he had stopped along his journey, but being unfamiliar with the local channels and shoals he decided to wait until the following morning to make his attack. He stopped all traffic from entering the inlet\u2014preventing any warning of his presence\u2014and posted a lookout on both sloops to ensure that Teach could not escape to sea. On the other side of the island, Teach was busy entertaining guests and had not set a lookout. With Israel Hands ashore in Bath with about\u00a024 of \"Adventure\"s sailors, he also had a much-reduced crew. Johnson (1724) reported Teach had \"no more than twenty-five men on board\" and that he \"gave out to all the vessels that he spoke with that he had forty\". \"Thirteen white and six Negroes\", was the number later reported by Brand to the Admiralty.\nAt daybreak, preceded by a small boat taking soundings, Maynard's two sloops entered the channel. The small craft was quickly spotted by \"Adventure\" and fired at as soon as it was within range of her guns. While the boat made a quick retreat to the \"Jane\", Teach cut the \"Adventure\"s anchor cable. His crew hoisted the sails and the \"Adventure\" manoeuvred to point her starboard guns toward Maynard's sloops, which were slowly closing the gap. Hyde moved \"Ranger\" to the port side of \"Jane\" and the Union flag was unfurled on each ship. \"Adventure\" then turned toward the beach of Ocracoke Island, heading for a narrow channel. What happened next is uncertain. Johnson claimed that there was an exchange of small arms fire following which \"Adventure\" ran aground on a sandbar, and Maynard anchored and then lightened his ship to pass over the obstacle. Another version claimed that \"Jane\" and \"Ranger\" ran aground, although Maynard made no mention of this in his log.\nThe \"Adventure\" eventually turned her guns on the two ships and fired. The broadside was devastating; in an instant, Maynard had lost as much as a third of his forces. About 20\u00a0on \"Jane\" were either wounded or killed and 9\u00a0on \"Ranger\". Hyde was dead and his second and third officers either dead or seriously injured. His sloop was so badly damaged that it played no further role in the attack. Contemporary accounts of what happened next are confused, but small-arms fire from \"Jane\" may have cut \"Adventure\"s jib sheet, causing her to lose control and run onto the sandbar. In the aftermath of Teach's overwhelming attack, \"Jane\" and \"Ranger\" may also have been grounded; the battle would have become a race to see who could float their ship first.\nMaynard had kept many of his men below deck, and in anticipation of being boarded told them to prepare for close fighting. Teach watched as the gap between the vessels closed, and ordered his men to be ready. The two vessels contacted one another as the \"Adventure\"s grappling hooks hit their target and several grenades, made from powder and shot-filled bottles and ignited by fuses, broke across the sloop's deck. As the smoke cleared, Teach led his men aboard, buoyant at the sight of Maynard's apparently empty ship, his men firing at the small group of men with Maynard at the stern.\nThe rest of Maynard's men then burst from the hold, shouting and firing. The plan to surprise Teach and his crew worked; the pirates were apparently taken aback at the assault. Teach rallied his men and the two groups fought across the deck, which was already slick with blood from those killed or injured by Teach's broadside. Maynard and Teach fired their flintlocks at each other. Maynard managed to hit Teach, while Teach missed. Both then threw their flintlocks away and drew their cutlasses. Teach broke Maynard's cutlass at the hilt. Against superior training and a slight advantage in numbers, the pirates were pushed back toward the bow, allowing the \"Jane\"s crew to surround Maynard and Teach, who was by then completely isolated. Teach pressed onward and was about to deliver a killing blow, but was slashed across the neck by one of Maynard's men. This redirected Teach's cutlass to strike Maynard's knuckles instead of killing him. Badly wounded, Teach was then attacked and killed by several more of Maynard's crew. The remaining pirates quickly surrendered. Those left on the \"Adventure\" were captured by the \"Ranger\"s crew, including one who planned to set fire to the powder room and blow up the ship. Varying accounts exist of the battle's list of casualties; Maynard reported that\u00a08 of his men and 12\u00a0pirates were killed. Brand reported that 10\u00a0pirates and 11\u00a0of Maynard's men were killed. Spotswood claimed ten\u00a0pirates and ten\u00a0of the King's men dead.\nMaynard later examined Teach's body, noting that it had been shot five times and cut about twenty. He also found several items of correspondence, including a letter from Tobias Knight. Teach's corpse was thrown into the inlet and his head was suspended from the bowsprit of Maynard's sloop so that the reward could be collected. On their return to Virginia, Teach's head was placed on a pole at the entrance to the Chesapeake Bay as a warning to other pirates and a greeting to other ships, and it stood there for several years.\nLegacy.\nLieutenant Maynard remained at Ocracoke for several more days, making repairs and burying the dead. Teach's loot\u2014sugar, cocoa, indigo and cotton\u2014found \"in pirate sloops and ashore in a tent where the sloops lay\", was sold at auction along with sugar and cotton found in Tobias Knight's barn, for \u00a32,238. Governor Spotswood used a portion of this to pay for the entire operation. The prize money for capturing Teach was to have been about \u00a3400 (\u00a3 in ), but it was split between the crews of HMS \"Lyme\" and HMS \"Pearl\". As Captain Brand and his troops had not been the ones fighting for their lives, Maynard thought this extremely unfair. He lost much of any support he might have had though when it was discovered that he and his crew had helped themselves to about \u00a390 of Teach's booty. The two companies did not receive their prize money for another four years, and despite his bravery Maynard was not promoted, and faded into obscurity.\nThe remainder of Teach's crew and former associates were found by Brand, in Bath, and were transported to Williamsburg, Virginia, where they were jailed on charges of piracy. Several were black, prompting Spotswood to ask his council what could be done about \"the Circumstances of these Negroes to exempt them from undergoing the same Tryal as other pirates.\" Regardless, the men were tried with their comrades in Williamsburg's Capitol building, under admiralty law, on 12 March 1719. No records of the day's proceedings remain, but 14\u00a0of the 16\u00a0accused were found guilty. Of the remaining two, one proved that he had partaken of the fight out of necessity, having been on Teach's ship only as a guest at a drinking party the night before, and not as a pirate. The other, Israel Hands, was not present at the fight. He claimed that during a drinking session Teach had shot him in the knee, and that he was still covered by the royal pardon. The remaining pirates were hanged, then left to rot in gibbets along Williamsburg's Capitol Landing Road (known for some time after as \"Gallows Road\").\nGovernor Eden was certainly embarrassed by Spotswood's invasion of North Carolina, and Spotswood disavowed himself of any part of the seizure. He defended his actions, writing to Lord Carteret, a shareholder of the province of Carolina, that he might benefit from the sale of the seized property and reminding the Earl of the number of Virginians who had died to protect his interests. He argued for the secrecy of the operation by suggesting that Eden \"could contribute nothing to the Success of the Design\", and told Eden that his authority to capture the pirates came from the king. Eden was heavily criticised for his involvement with Teach and was accused of being his accomplice. By criticising Eden, Spotswood intended to bolster the legitimacy of his invasion. Lee (1974) concludes that although Spotswood may have thought that the ends justified the means, he had no legal authority to invade North Carolina, to capture the pirates and to seize and auction their goods. Eden doubtless shared the same view. As Spotswood had also accused Tobias Knight of being in league with Teach, on 4 April 1719, Eden had Knight brought in for questioning. Israel Hands had, weeks earlier, testified that Knight had been on board the \"Adventure\" in August 1718, shortly after Teach had brought a French ship to North Carolina as a prize. Four pirates had testified that with Teach they had visited Knight's home to give him presents. This testimony and the letter found on Teach's body by Maynard appeared compelling, but Knight conducted his defence with competence. Despite being very sick and close to death, he questioned the reliability of Spotswood's witnesses. He claimed that Israel Hands had talked under duress, and that under North Carolinian law the other witness, an African, was unable to testify. The sugar, he argued, was stored at his house legally, and Teach had visited him only on business, in his official capacity. The board found Knight innocent of all charges. He died later that year.\nEden was annoyed that the accusations against Knight arose during a trial in which he played no part. The goods which Brand seized were officially North Carolinian property and Eden considered him a thief. The argument raged back and forth between the colonies until Eden's death on 17 March 1722. His will named one of Spotswood's opponents, John Holloway, a beneficiary. In the same year, Spotswood, who for years had fought his enemies in the House of Burgesses and the council, was replaced by Hugh Drysdale, once Robert Walpole was convinced to act.\nModern view.\nOfficial views on pirates were sometimes quite different from those held by contemporary authors, who often described their subjects as despicable rogues of the sea. Privateers who became pirates were generally considered by the English government to be reserve naval forces, and were sometimes given active encouragement; as far back as 1581 Francis Drake was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, when he returned to England from a round-the-world expedition with plunder worth an estimated \u00a31,500,000. Royal pardons were regularly issued, usually when England was on the verge of war, and the public's opinion of pirates was often favourable, some considering them akin to patrons. Economist Peter Leeson believes that pirates were generally shrewd businessmen, far removed from the modern, romanticised view of them as barbarians. After Woodes Rogers' 1718 landing at New Providence and his ending of the pirate republic, piracy in the West Indies fell into terminal decline. With no easily accessible outlet to fence their stolen goods, pirates were reduced to a subsistence livelihood, and following almost a century of naval warfare between the British, French and Spanish\u2014during which sailors could find easy employment\u2014lone privateers found themselves outnumbered by the powerful ships employed by the British Empire to defend its merchant fleets. The popularity of the slave trade helped bring to an end the frontier condition of the West Indies, and in these circumstances, piracy was no longer able to flourish as it once did.\nSince the end of the Golden Age of Piracy, Teach and his exploits have become the stuff of lore, inspiring books, films and even amusement park rides. Much of what is known about him can be sourced to Charles Johnson's \"A General Historie of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious Pyrates\", published in Britain in 1724. A recognised authority on the pirates of his time, Johnson's descriptions of such figures as Anne Bonny and Mary Read were for years required reading for those interested in the subject. Readers were titillated by his stories and a second edition was quickly published, though author Angus Konstam suspects that Johnson's entry on Blackbeard was \"coloured a little to make a more sensational story.\" \"A General Historie\", though, is generally considered to be a reliable source. Johnson may have been an assumed alias. As Johnson's accounts have been corroborated in personal and official dispatches, Lee (1974) considers that whoever he was, he had some access to official correspondence. Konstam speculates further, suggesting that Johnson may have been the English playwright Charles Johnson, the British publisher Charles Rivington, or the writer Daniel Defoe. In his 1951 work \"The Great Days of Piracy\", author George Woodbury wrote that Johnson is \"obviously a pseudonym\", continuing \"one cannot help suspecting that he may have been a pirate himself.\"\nDespite his infamy, Teach was not the most successful of pirates. Henry Every retired a rich man, and Bartholomew Roberts took an estimated five times the amount Teach stole. Treasure hunters have long busied themselves searching for any trace of his rumoured hoard of gold and silver, but nothing found in the numerous sites explored along the east coast of the US has ever been connected to him. Some tales suggest that pirates often killed a prisoner on the spot where they buried their loot, and Teach is no exception in these stories, but that no finds have come to light is not exceptional; buried pirate treasure is often considered a modern myth for which almost no supporting evidence exists. The available records include nothing to suggest that the burial of treasure was a common practice, except in the imaginations of the writers of fictional accounts such as \"Treasure Island\". Such hoards would necessitate a wealthy owner, and their supposed existence ignores the command structure of a pirate vessel, in which the crew served for a share of the profit. The only pirate ever known to bury treasure was William Kidd. The only treasure so far recovered from Teach's exploits is that taken from the wreckage of what is presumed to be the \"Queen Anne's Revenge\", which was found in 1996 by Intersal Inc., a private research firm. As of 2013 around 280,000 artefacts had been recovered from the wreck site, a selection of which is on public display at the North Carolina Maritime Museum.\nVarious superstitious tales exist of Teach's ghost. Unexplained lights at sea are often referred to as \"Teach's light\", and some recitals claim that the notorious pirate now roams the afterlife searching for his head, for fear that his friends, and the Devil, will not recognise him. A North Carolinian tale holds that Teach's skull was used as the basis for a silver drinking chalice; a local judge even claimed to have drunk from it one night in the 1930s.\nThe name of Blackbeard has been attached to many local attractions, such as Charleston's Blackbeard's Cove. His name and persona have also featured heavily in literature. He is the main subject of Matilda Douglas's fictional 1835 work \"Blackbeard: A page from the colonial history of Philadelphia\".\nFilm renditions of his life include \"Blackbeard the Pirate\" (1952) starring West Country native Robert Newton whose exaggerated West Country accent is credited with popularising the stereotypical \"pirate voice\", \"Blackbeard's Ghost\" (1968), \"Blackbeard: Terror at Sea\" (2005) and the 2006 Hallmark Channel miniseries \"Blackbeard\". Parallels have also been drawn between Johnson's Blackbeard and the character of Captain Jack Sparrow in the 2003 adventure film \"\". Blackbeard is also portrayed as a central character in three TV series: by John Malkovich in \"Crossbones\" (2014), by Ray Stevenson in seasons three and four of \"Black Sails\" (2016\u20132017), and by Taika Waititi in \"Our Flag Means Death\" (2022).\nIn 2013 and 2015, the state government of North Carolina uploaded Nautilus Productions videos of the wreck of the \"Queen Anne's Revenge\" to its website without permission. As a result, Nautilus Productions, the company documenting the recovery since 1998, filed suit in federal court over copyright violations and the passage of \"Blackbeard's Law\" by the North Carolina General Assembly. Before posting the videos the General Assembly passed \"Blackbeard's Law\", N.C. Gen Stat \u00a7121-25(b), which stated, \"All photographs, video recordings, or other documentary materials of a derelict vessel or shipwreck or its contents, relics, artifacts, or historic materials in the custody of any agency of North Carolina government or its subdivisions shall be a public record pursuant to Chapter 132 of the General Statutes.\" On 5 November 2019, the U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments in \"Allen v. Cooper\". The Supreme Court subsequently ruled in the state's favor, and struck down the Copyright Remedy Clarification Act, which Congress passed in 1989 to attempt to curb such infringements of copyright by states.\nAs a result of the ruling Nautilus filed a motion for reconsideration in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina. On 18 August 2021 Judge Terrence Boyle granted the motion for reconsideration which North Carolina promptly appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. The 4th Circuit denied the state's motion on 14 October 2022. Nautilus then filed their second amended complaint on 8 February 2023 alleging 5th and 14th Amendment violations of Nautilus' constitutional rights, additional copyright violations, and claiming that North Carolina's \"Blackbeard's Law\" represents a Bill of Attainder. Eight years after the passage of Blackbeard's Law, on 30 June 2023, North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper signed a bill repealing the law.\nReferences.\nNotes\nCitations\nBibliography"}
{"id": "4573", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4573", "title": "Bugzilla", "text": "Bugzilla is a web-based general-purpose bug tracking system and testing tool originally developed and used by the Mozilla project, and licensed under the Mozilla Public License.\nReleased as open-source software by Netscape Communications in 1998, it has been adopted by a variety of organizations for use as a bug tracking system for both free and open-source software and proprietary projects and products. Bugzilla is used, among others, by the Mozilla Foundation, WebKit, Linux kernel, FreeBSD, KDE, Apache, Eclipse and LibreOffice. Red Hat uses it, but is gradually migrating its product to use Jira. It is also self-hosting.\nHistory.\nBugzilla was originally devised by Terry Weissman in 1998 for the nascent Mozilla.org project, as an open source application to replace the in-house system then in use at Netscape Communications for tracking defects in the Netscape Communicator suite. Bugzilla was originally written in Tcl, but Weissman decided to port it to Perl before its release as part of Netscape's early open-source code drops, in the hope that more people would be able to contribute to it, given that Perl seemed to be a more popular language at the time.\nBugzilla 2.0 was the result of that port to Perl, and the first version was released to the public via anonymous CVS. In April 2000, Weissman handed over control of the Bugzilla project to Tara Hernandez. Under her leadership, some of the regular contributors were coerced into taking more responsibility, and Bugzilla development became more community-driven. In July 2001, facing distraction from her other responsibilities in Netscape, Hernandez handed control to Dave Miller, who was still in charge .\nBugzilla 3.0 was released on May 10, 2007, and brought a refreshed UI, an XML-RPC interface, custom fields and resolutions, mod_perl support, shared saved searches, and improved UTF-8 support, along with other changes.\nBugzilla 4.0 was released on February 15, 2011, and Bugzilla 5.0 was released in July 2015.\nTimeline.\nBugzilla's release timeline:\nRequirements.\nBugzilla's system requirements include:\nCurrently supported database systems are MariaDB, MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, and SQLite. Bugzilla is usually installed on Linux using the Apache HTTP Server, but any web server that supports CGI such as Lighttpd, Hiawatha, Cherokee can be used. Bugzilla's installation process is command line driven and runs through a series of stages where system requirements and software capabilities are checked.\nDesign.\nWhile the potential exists in the code to turn Bugzilla into a technical support ticket system, task management tool, or project management tool, Bugzilla's developers have chosen to focus on the task of designing a system to track software defects.\nZarro Boogs.\nBugzilla returns the string \"zarro boogs found\" instead of \"0 bugs found\" when a search for bugs returns no results. \"Zarro Boogs\" is intended as a 'buggy' statement itself (a misspelling of \"zero bugs\") and is thus a meta-statement about the nature of software debugging, implying that even when no bugs have been identified, some may exist.\nThe following comment is provided in the Bugzilla source code to developers who may be confused by this behaviour:\nWONTFIX.\nWONTFIX is used as a label on issues in Bugzilla and other systems. It indicates that a verified issue will not be addressed for one of several possible reasons including fixing would be too expensive, complicated or risky."}
{"id": "4574", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4574", "title": "Bangor", "text": "Bangor or City of Bangor may refer to:"}
{"id": "4575", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4575", "title": "Ballad", "text": "A ballad is a form of verse, often a narrative set to music. Ballads were particularly characteristic of the popular poetry and song of Great Britain and Ireland from the Late Middle Ages until the 19th century. They were widely used across Europe, and later in Australia, North Africa, North America and South America.\nWhile ballads have no prescribed structure and may vary in their number of lines and stanzas, many ballads employ quatrains with ABCB or ABAB rhyme schemes, the key being a rhymed second and fourth line. Contrary to a popular conception, it is rare if not unheard-of for a ballad to contain exactly 13 lines. Additionally, couplets rarely appear in ballads.\nMany ballads were written and sold as single-sheet broadsides. The form was often used by poets and composers from the 18th century onwards to produce lyrical ballads. In the later 19th century, the term took on the meaning of a slow form of popular love song and is often used for any love song, particularly the sentimental ballad of pop or rock music, although the term is also associated with the concept of a stylized storytelling song or poem, particularly when used as a title for other media such as a film.\nOrigins.\nA ballad is a form of verse, often a narrative set to music. Ballads derive from the medieval French \"chanson ballad\u00e9e\" or \"ballade\", which were originally \"dancing songs\" (L: \"ballare\", to dance), yet becoming \"stylized forms of solo song\" before being adopted in England. As a narrative song, their theme and function may originate from Scandinavian and Germanic traditions of storytelling that can be seen in poems such as \"Beowulf\". Musically they were influenced by the Minnelieder of the Minnesang tradition. The earliest example of a recognizable ballad in form in England is \"Judas\" in a 13th-century manuscript.\nBallad form.\nBallads were originally written to accompany dances, and so were composed in couplets with refrains in alternate lines. These refrains would have been sung by the dancers in time with the dance. Most northern and west European ballads are written in ballad stanzas or quatrains (four-line stanzas) of alternating lines of iambic (an unstressed followed by a stressed syllable) tetrameter (eight syllables) and iambic trimeter (six syllables), known as ballad meter. Usually, only the second and fourth line of a quatrain are rhymed (in the scheme a, b, c, b), which has been taken to suggest that, originally, ballads consisted of couplets (two lines) of rhymed verse, each of 14 syllables. This can be seen in this stanza from \"Lord Thomas and Fair Annet\":\nThe horse | fair Ann | et rode | upon |\nHe amb | led like | the wind |,\nWith sil | ver he | was shod | before,\nWith burn | ing gold | behind |.\nThere is considerable variation on this pattern in almost every respect, including length, number of lines and rhyming scheme, making the strict definition of a ballad extremely difficult. In southern and eastern Europe, and in countries that derive their tradition from them, ballad structure differs significantly, like Spanish \"romanceros\", which are octosyllabic and use consonance rather than rhyme.\nBallads usually are heavily influenced by the regions in which they originate and use the common dialect of the people. Scotland's ballads in particular, both in theme and language, are strongly characterised by their distinctive tradition, even exhibiting some pre-Christian influences in the inclusion of supernatural elements such as travel to the Fairy Kingdom in the Scots ballad \"Tam Lin\". The ballads do not have any known author or correct version; instead, having been passed down mainly by oral tradition since the Middle Ages, there are many variations of each. The ballads remained an oral tradition until the increased interest in folk songs in the 18th century led collectors such as Bishop Thomas Percy (1729\u20131811) to publish volumes of popular ballads.\nIn all traditions most ballads are narrative in nature, with a self-contained story, often concise, and rely on imagery, rather than description, which can be tragic, historical, romantic or comic. Themes concerning rural labourers and their sexuality are common, and there are many ballads based on the Robin Hood legend. Another common feature of ballads is repetition, sometimes of fourth lines in succeeding stanzas, as a refrain, sometimes of third and fourth lines of a stanza and sometimes of entire stanzas.\nComposition.\nScholars of ballads have been divided into \"communalists\", such as Johann Gottfried Herder (1744\u20131803) and the Brothers Grimm, who argue that ballads are originally communal compositions, and \"individualists\" such as Cecil Sharp, who assert that there was one single original author. Communalists tend to see more recent, particularly printed, broadside ballads of known authorship as a debased form of the genre, while individualists see variants as corruptions of an original text. More recently scholars have pointed to the interchange of oral and written forms of the ballad.\nTransmission.\nThe transmission of ballads comprises a key stage in their re-composition. In romantic terms this process is often dramatized as a narrative of degeneration away from the pure 'folk memory' or 'immemorial tradition'. In the introduction to \"Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border\" (1802) the romantic poet and historical novelist Walter Scott argued a need to 'remove obvious corruptions' in order to attempt to restore a supposed original. For Scott, the process of multiple recitations 'incurs the risk of impertinent interpolations from the conceit of one rehearser, unintelligible blunders from the stupidity of another, and omissions equally to be regretted, from the want of memory of a third.' Similarly, John Robert Moore noted 'a natural tendency to oblivescence'.\nClassification.\nEuropean Ballads have been generally classified into three major groups: traditional, broadside and literary. In America a distinction is drawn between ballads that are versions of European, particularly British and Irish songs, and 'Native American ballads', developed without reference to earlier songs. A further development was the evolution of the blues ballad, which mixed the genre with Afro-American music. For the late 20th century the music publishing industry found a market for what are often termed sentimental ballads, and these are the origin of the modern use of the term 'ballad' to mean a slow love song.\nTraditional ballads.\nThe traditional, classical or popular (meaning of the people) ballad has been seen as beginning with the wandering minstrels of late medieval Europe. From the end of the 15th century there are printed ballads that suggest a rich tradition of popular music. A reference in William Langland's \"Piers Plowman\" indicates that ballads about Robin Hood were being sung from at least the late 14th century and the oldest detailed material is Wynkyn de Worde's collection of Robin Hood ballads printed about 1495.\nEarly collections of English ballads were made by Samuel Pepys (1633\u20131703) and in the Roxburghe Ballads collected by Robert Harley, (1661\u20131724), which paralleled the work in Scotland by Walter Scott and Robert Burns. Inspired by his reading as a teenager of \"Reliques of Ancient English Poetry\" by Thomas Percy, Scott began collecting ballads while he attended Edinburgh University in the 1790s. He published his research from 1802 to 1803 in a three-volume work, \"Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border\". Burns collaborated with James Johnson on the multi-volume \"Scots Musical Museum\", a miscellany of folk songs and poetry with original work by Burns. Around the same time, he worked with George Thompson on \"A Select Collection of Original Scottish Airs for the Voice\".\nBoth Northern English and Southern Scots shared in the identified tradition of Border ballads, particularly evinced by the cross-border narrative in versions of \"The Ballad of Chevy Chase\" sometimes associated with the Lancashire-born sixteenth-century minstrel Richard Sheale.\nIt has been suggested that the increasing interest in traditional popular ballads during the eighteenth century was prompted by social issues such as the enclosure movement as many of the ballads deal with themes concerning rural laborers. James Davey has suggested that the common themes of sailing and naval battles may also have prompted the use (at least in England) of popular ballads as naval recruitment tools.\nKey work on the traditional ballad was undertaken in the late 19th century in Denmark by Svend Grundtvig and for England and Scotland by the Harvard professor Francis James Child. They attempted to record and classify all the known ballads and variants in their chosen regions. Since Child died before writing a commentary on his work it is uncertain exactly how and why he differentiated the 305 ballads printed that would be published as \"The English and Scottish Popular Ballads\". There have been many different and contradictory attempts to classify traditional ballads by theme, but commonly identified types are the religious, supernatural, tragic, love ballads, historic, legendary and humorous. The traditional form and content of the ballad were modified to form the basis for twenty-three bawdy pornographic ballads that appeared in the underground Victorian magazine \"The Pearl\", which ran for eighteen issues between 1879 and 1880. Unlike the traditional ballad, these obscene ballads aggressively mocked sentimental nostalgia and local lore.\nBroadsides.\nBroadside ballads (also known as 'broadsheet', 'stall', 'vulgar' or 'come all ye' ballads) were a product of the development of cheap print in the 16th century. They were generally printed on one side of a medium to large sheet of poor quality paper. In the first half of the 17th century, they were printed in black-letter or gothic type and included multiple, eye-catching illustrations, a popular tune title, as well as an alluring poem. By the 18th century, they were printed in white letter or roman type and often without much decoration (as well as tune title). These later sheets could include many individual songs, which would be cut apart and sold individually as \"slip songs.\" Alternatively, they might be folded to make small cheap books or \"chapbooks\" which often drew on ballad stories. They were produced in huge numbers, with over 400,000 being sold in England annually by the 1660s. Tessa Watt estimates the number of copies sold may have been in the millions. Many were sold by travelling chapmen in city streets or at fairs. The subject matter varied from what has been defined as the traditional ballad, although many traditional ballads were printed as broadsides. Among the topics were love, marriage, religion, drinking-songs, legends, and early journalism, which included disasters, political events and signs, wonders and prodigies.\nLiterary ballads.\nLiterary or lyrical ballads grew out of an increasing interest in the ballad form among social elites and intellectuals, particularly in the Romantic movement from the later 18th century. Respected literary figures Robert Burns and Walter Scott in Scotland collected and wrote their own ballads. Similarly in England William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge produced a collection of \"Lyrical Ballads\" in 1798 that included Coleridge's \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\". Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Keats were attracted to the simple and natural style of these folk ballads and tried to imitate it. At the same time in Germany Goethe cooperated with Schiller on a series of ballads, some of which were later set to music by Schubert. Later important examples of the poetic form included Rudyard Kipling's \"Barrack-Room Ballads\" (1892\u20136) and Oscar Wilde's \"The Ballad of Reading Gaol\" (1897).\nBallad operas.\nIn the 18th century ballad operas developed as a form of English stage entertainment, partly in opposition to the Italian domination of the London operatic scene. It consisted of racy and often satirical spoken (English) dialogue, interspersed with songs that are deliberately kept very short to minimize disruptions to the flow of the story. Rather than the more aristocratic themes and music of the Italian opera, the ballad operas were set to the music of popular folk songs and dealt with lower-class characters. Subject matter involved the lower, often criminal, orders, and typically showed a suspension (or inversion) of the high moral values of the Italian opera of the period.\nThe first, most important and successful was \"The Beggar's Opera\" of 1728, with a libretto by John Gay and music arranged by John Christopher Pepusch, both of whom probably influenced by Parisian vaudeville and the burlesques and musical plays of Thomas d'Urfey (1653\u20131723), a number of whose collected ballads they used in their work. Gay produced further works in this style, including a sequel under the title \"Polly\". Henry Fielding, Colley Cibber, Arne, Dibdin, Arnold, Shield, Jackson of Exeter, Hook and many others produced ballad operas that enjoyed great popularity. Ballad opera was attempted in America and Prussia. Later it moved into a more pastoral form, like Isaac Bickerstaffe's \"Love in a Village\" (1763) and Shield's \"Rosina\" (1781), using more original music that imitated, rather than reproduced, existing ballads. Although the form declined in popularity towards the end of the 18th century its influence can be seen in light operas like that of Gilbert and Sullivan's early works like \"The Sorcerer\" as well as in the modern musical.\nIn the 20th century, one of the most influential plays, Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht's (1928) \"The Threepenny Opera\" was a reworking of \"The Beggar's Opera\", setting a similar story with the same characters, and containing much of the same satirical bite, but only using one tune from the original. The term ballad opera has also been used to describe musicals using folk music, such as \"The Martins and the Coys\" in 1944, and Peter Bellamy's \"The Transports\" in 1977. The satiric elements of ballad opera can be seen in some modern musicals such as \"Chicago\" and \"Cabaret\".\nBeyond Europe.\nAmerican ballads.\nSome 300 ballads sung in North America have been identified as having origins in Scottish traditional or broadside ballads. Examples include 'The Streets of Laredo', which was found in Great Britain and Ireland as 'The Unfortunate Rake'; however, a further 400 have been identified as originating in America, including among the best known, 'The Ballad of Davy Crockett' and 'Jesse James'. They became an increasing area of interest for scholars in the 19th century and most were recorded or catalogued by George Malcolm Laws, although some have since been found to have British origins and additional songs have since been collected. They are usually considered closest in form to British broadside ballads and in terms of style are largely indistinguishable, however, they demonstrate a particular concern with occupations, journalistic style and often lack the ribaldry of British broadside ballads.\nBlues ballads.\nThe blues ballad has been seen as a fusion of Anglo-American and Afro-American styles of music from the 19th century. Blues ballads tend to deal with active protagonists, often anti-heroes, resisting adversity and authority, but frequently lacking a strong narrative and emphasizing character instead. They were often accompanied by banjo and guitar which followed the blues musical format. The most famous blues ballads include those about John Henry and Casey Jones.\nBush ballads.\nThe ballad was taken to Australia by early settlers from Great Britain and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback. The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush, and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards. The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia. The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing, wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike, class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly, as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking. The most famous bush ballad is \"Waltzing Matilda\", which has been called \"the unofficial national anthem of Australia\".\nSentimental ballads.\nSentimental ballads, sometimes called \"tear-jerkers\" or \"drawing-room ballads\" owing to their popularity with the middle classes, had their origins in the early \"Tin Pan Alley\" music industry of the later 19th century. They were generally sentimental, narrative, strophic songs published separately or as part of an opera (descendants perhaps of broadside ballads, but with printed music, and usually newly composed). Such songs include \"Little Rosewood Casket\" (1870), \"After the Ball\" (1892) and \"Danny Boy\". The association with sentimentality led to the term \"ballad\" being used for slow love songs from the 1950s onwards. Modern variations include \"jazz ballads\", \"pop ballads\", \"rock ballads\", \"R&amp;B ballads\" and \"power ballads\"."}
{"id": "4579", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4579", "title": "Blue \u00d6yster Cult", "text": "Blue \u00d6yster Cult ( ; sometimes abbreviated B\u00d6C or BOC) is an American rock band formed on Long Island, New York, in the hamlet of Stony Brook, in 1967. \nThe band has sold 25 million records worldwide, including 7 million in the United States. The band's fusion of hard rock with psychedelia, and penchant for occult, fantastical and tongue-in-cheek lyrics, had a major influence on heavy metal music. They developed a cult following and, while achieving mainstream hits like \"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\" (1976) and \"Burnin' for You\" (1981), their commercial success was limited. Both songs, and others such as \"Godzilla\" (1977), remain classic rock radio staples. The band were early adopters of the music video format, and their videos received heavy rotation on MTV in its early period.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult continued making studio albums and touring throughout the 1980s, although their popularity had declined such that they were dropped from their longtime label CBS/Columbia Records, following the commercial failure of their 11th studio album \"Imaginos\" (1988). Other than contributing to the soundtrack of the 1992 film \"Bad Channels\" and an album of re-recorded material, \"Cult Classic\", in 1994, the band continued as a live act until releasing its first studio album of original material in 10 years, \"Heaven Forbid\" (1998). The lackluster sales of its follow-up \"Curse of the Hidden Mirror\" (2001) led to another hiatus from studio recording, but they continued performing live. Two more studio albums were released in the 2020s, \"The Symbol Remains\" (2020) and \"Ghost Stories\" (2024), the latter of which is said to be the band's last.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult's longest-lasting and the most commercially successful lineup included Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser (lead guitar, vocals), Eric Bloom (lead vocals, \"stun guitar\", keyboards, synthesizer), Allen Lanier (keyboards, rhythm guitar), Joe Bouchard (bass, vocals, keyboards), and Albert Bouchard (drums, percussion, vocals, miscellaneous instruments). The band's current lineup still includes Bloom and Roeser, in addition to Danny Miranda (bass, backing vocals), Richie Castellano (keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals), and Jules Radino (drums, percussion). The duo of the band's manager Sandy Pearlman and rock critic Richard Meltzer, who also met at Stony Brook University, played a key role in writing many of the band's lyrics.\nHistory.\nEarly years as Soft White Underbelly (1967\u20131971).\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult was formed in 1967 as Soft White Underbelly (a name the group would occasionally use in the 1970s and 1980s to play small club gigs around the United States and UK) in a communal house at Stony Brook University on Long Island when rock critic Sandy Pearlman overheard a jam session consisting of fellow Stony Brook classmate Donald Roeser and his friends. Pearlman offered to become the band's manager and creative partner, to which the band agreed. The band's original lineup consisted of guitarist Roeser, drummer Albert Bouchard, keyboardist Allen Lanier, Les Braunstein and bassist Andrew Winters.\nIn October 1967, the band made its debut performance as Steve Noonan's backing band at the Stony Brook University Gymnasium, a gig booked by Pearlman. The band's name came from Winston Churchill's description of Italy as \"the soft underbelly of the Axis.\"\nPearlman was important to the band\u00a0\u2013 he was able to get them gigs and recording contracts with Elektra and Columbia, and he provided them with his poetry for use as lyrics for many of their songs, including \"Astronomy.\" Writer Richard Meltzer, also a Stony Brook University student, provided the band with lyrics from their early days up through their most recent studio album. In 1968, the band moved in together at their first house in the Thomaston area of Great Neck, New York. The band recorded an album's worth of material for Elektra Records in 1968.\nBraunstein played his final show as Soft White Underbelly's lead singer in the spring of 1969. His departure led Elektra to shelve the album recorded with him on vocals.\nEric Bloom was hired by the band as their acoustic engineer. He eventually replaced Braunstein as lead singer through a series of unlikely coincidences, one being Lanier deciding to join Bloom on a drive to an upstate gig, where he spent the night with Bloom's old college bandmates and got to hear old tapes of Bloom's talent as lead vocalist. Because of this, Bloom was offered the job of lead singer for Soft White Underbelly.\nHowever, a bad review of a 1969 Fillmore East show caused Pearlman to change the name of the band\u00a0\u2013 first to Oaxaca, then to the Stalk-Forrest Group. Pearlman also gave stage names to each of the band members (Jesse Python for Eric Bloom, Buck Dharma for Donald Roeser, Andy Panda for Andy Winters, Prince Omega for Albert Bouchard, La Verne for Allen Lanier) but only Buck Dharma kept his. The band recorded yet another album's worth of material for Elektra, but only one single (\"What Is Quicksand?\" b/w \"Arthur Comics\") was released (and only in a promo edition of 300 copies) on Elektra Records (this album was eventually released, with additional outtakes, by Rhino Handmade Records as \"\" in 2001). The album featured Bloom as their main lead singer, but Roeser also sang lead on a few songs, a pattern of sharing lead vocals that has continued throughout the band's career. With Bloom, Soft White Underbelly/Stalk-Forrest Group became one of Stony Brook University's \"house bands,\" popular on campus.\nAfter a few more temporary band names, including the Santos Sisters, the band settled on Blue \u00d6yster Cult in 1971 (see below for its origin).\nNew York City producer/composer and jingle writer David Lucas saw the band perform and took them into his Warehouse Recording Studio and produced four demos, with which Pearlman was able to get the renamed band another audition with Columbia Records. Clive Davis liked what he heard, and signed the band to the label. The first album was subsequently produced and recorded by Lucas on eight-track at Lucas' studio. Winters would leave the band and be replaced by Bouchard's brother, Joe Bouchard.\nBlack-and-white years (1971\u20131975).\nTheir debut album \"Blue \u00d6yster Cult\" was released in January 1972, with a black-and-white cover designed by artist Bill Gawlik. The album featured the songs \"Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll\", \"Stairway to the Stars\", and \"Then Came the Last Days of May\". By this time, the band's sound had become more oriented toward hard rock, but songs like \"She's As Beautiful As a Foot\" and \"Redeemed\" also showed a strong element of the band's psychedelic roots. Pearlman wanted the group to be the American answer to Black Sabbath. All of the band members except for Allen Lanier sang lead, a pattern that would continue on many subsequent albums, although lead singer Eric Bloom sang the majority of the songs. The album sold well, and Blue \u00d6yster Cult toured with artists such as the Byrds, Mahavishnu Orchestra and Alice Cooper. As the band toured, its sound became heavier and more direct.\nTheir second album \"Tyranny and Mutation\", released in 1973, was written while the band was on tour for their first album. It contained songs such as \"The Red and the Black\" (an ode to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and a rewrite of \"I'm on the Lamb But I Ain't No Sheep\" from their debut album, and also a reference to the novel of the same name by Stendhal), \"Hot Rails to Hell\" and \"Baby Ice Dog\", the first of the band's many collaborations with Patti Smith. It featured a harder-rocking approach than before, although the band's songs were also growing more complex. The album outsold its predecessor, a trend that would continue with their next few albums.\nThe band's third album, \"Secret Treaties\" (1974), received positive reviews, featuring songs such as \"Career of Evil\" (co-written by Patti Smith), \"Dominance and Submission\" and \"Astronomy\". As a result of constant touring, the band was now capable of headlining shows. The album continued their upward sales trend, and would eventually go gold.\nAs the three albums during this formative period all had black-and-white covers, the period of their career has been dubbed the \"black and white years\" by fans and critics.\nCommercial success (1975\u20131981).\nThe band's first live album \"On Your Feet or on Your Knees\" (1975) achieved greater success and went gold. Its success gave the band more time to work on a follow-up. The band members were able to purchase home recording equipment to record demos for their next album.\nTheir next studio album, \"Agents of Fortune\" (1976), was their first to go platinum and was again produced by David Lucas. It contained the hit single \"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\", which reached number 12 on the Billboard charts and has become a classic of the hard rock genre. Other major songs on the album were \"(This Ain't) The Summer of Love\", \"E.T.I. (Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence)\" and \"The Revenge of Vera Gemini\". Having recorded demos of the songs at home before recording the album, the band's songwriting process had become more individual, with none of the songs featuring the collaborative writing between the band members that had been common on their earlier albums. Although the album still featured their trademark hard rock with sinister lyrics, the songs had become more conventional in structure, and the production was more polished. For the first and only time, the album featured lead vocals from all five band members, with Allen Lanier singing lead on the song \"True Confessions.\" With Albert Bouchard singing lead on three songs and Joe Bouchard and Donald Roeser singing lead on one each, Eric Bloom ended up taking the lead on only four of the album's ten songs.\nFor the tour, the band added lasers to their light show, for which they became known. They were among the first acts to use lasers in performance.\nTheir next album, \"Spectres\" (1977), had the FM radio hit \"Godzilla,\" and would become one of the band's better-selling albums, with other well-known songs like \"I Love the Night\" and \"Goin' Through the Motions\". However, its sales were not as strong as those for the previous album, going gold but not platinum, becoming their first album to sell less than its predecessor. It featured even more polished production, and continued the trend of the lead vocals extensively shared between members, although Allen Lanier did not sing lead. As with the previous album, Eric Bloom sang lead on fewer than half the songs.\nThe band then released another live album, \"Some Enchanted Evening\" (1978). Although it was intended as another double-live album in the vein of \"On Your Feet or on Your Knees\", Columbia insisted that it be edited down to single-album length. It was a resounding commercial success, becoming Blue \u00d6yster Cult's most popular album and eventually selling over two million copies. It also revealed that while the band's studio work was becoming increasingly well-produced, they were still very much a hard rock band on stage.\nIt was followed by the studio album \"Mirrors\" (1979). For \"Mirrors\", instead of working with previous producers Sandy Pearlman (who instead went on to manage Black Sabbath) and Murray Krugman, Blue \u00d6yster Cult chose Tom Werman, who had worked with acts such as Cheap Trick and Ted Nugent. It featured the band's glossiest production to date. It also gave Roeser, the lead vocalist on the band's biggest hits, bigger prominence as a vocalist, singing lead on four of the nine songs. However, the resulting album sales were disappointing.\nPearlman's association with Black Sabbath led to Sabbath's \"Heaven and Hell\" producer Martin Birch being hired for the next Blue \u00d6yster Cult record. The album found the band returning to their hard rock roots, and although both of the Bouchard brothers and guitarist Roeser all got lead vocal turns, Bloom would sing the majority of the tracks. The result was positive, with \"Cult\u00f6saurus Erectus\" (1980) receiving good reviews. The album went to number 12 in the United Kingdom, but did not do as well in the United States. The song \"Black Blade\", which was written by Bloom with lyrics by science fiction and fantasy author Michael Moorcock, is a kind of retelling of Moorcock's epic Elric of Melnibon\u00e9 saga. The band also did a co-headlining tour with Black Sabbath in support of the album, calling the tour \"Black and Blue\".\nBirch produced the band's next album as well, \"Fire of Unknown Origin\" (1981), which peaked at number 24 on the \"Billboard\" 200, becoming the band's highest-charting album. The biggest hit on this album was the Top 40 hit \"Burnin' for You,\" a song Roeser had written with a Richard Meltzer lyric. He had intended to use it on his solo album, \"Flat Out\" (1982), but he was convinced to use it on the Blue \u00d6yster Cult album instead. The revival of the band's heavier sound continued, albeit with fairly heavy use of synthesizers and some noticeable New Wave influence on a few tracks. It contained other fan favorites such as \"Joan Crawford\" (inspired by the book and film \"Mommie Dearest\") and \"Veteran of the Psychic Wars\", another song co-written by Moorcock. Several of the songs had been written for the animated film \"Heavy Metal\", but only \"Veteran of the Psychic Wars\" (which had not been written for \"Heavy Metal\") was actually used in the movie. The album marked a strong commercial resurgence for the band and achieved gold status, their first studio album since \"Spectres\" to do so.\nDuring the tour for \"Fire of Unknown Origin\", Albert Bouchard had a falling out with the others and left the band, and Rick Downey (formerly the band's lighting designer) replaced him on drums. This marked the end of the band's original and best-known lineup.\nDeclining popularity (1982\u20131989).\nAfter leaving the band, Albert Bouchard spent five years working on a solo album based on Sandy Pearlman's poem \"Imaginos\". Blue \u00d6yster Cult also released their third live album, \"Extraterrestrial Live\", in 1982.\nThe band then went to the studio for the next album, \"The Rev\u00f6lution by Night\" (1983), with Bruce Fairbairn as producer. After two albums of a return to a harder rocking sound, the band adopted a more radio-friendly, AOR-oriented sound with Fairbairn providing a 1980s-style production. This approach met with some success, especially on its highest-charting single, Roeser's \"Shooting Shark\", co-written by Patti Smith and featuring Randy Jackson on bass, which reached number 83 on the charts. Bloom's \"Take Me Away\" achieved some FM radio play. However, the album didn't match sales of its predecessor, failed to achieve gold status, and marked the beginning of the band's second commercial decline. After touring for \"Rev\u00f6lution\", Rick Downey left, leaving Blue \u00d6yster Cult without a drummer.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult re-united with Albert Bouchard for a California tour in February 1985, infamously known as the 'Albert Returns' Tour. This arrangement was only temporary and caused more tensions between the band and Bouchard, since he had thought he would be staying on permanently, which was not the case. The band had intended to use him only as a fill-in until another drummer could come on board, which resulted in Bouchard's leaving after the tour. Allen Lanier also quit the band shortly thereafter, leaving them without a keyboardist and with only three remaining original members. This incarnation of the band would sometimes be referred to as '3\u00d6C' by fans, which is a pun on the number of original members left.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult hired drummer Jimmy Wilcox and keyboardist Tommy Zvoncheck to finish the album \"Club Ninja\", which was poorly received, with only \"Dancin' in the Ruins,\" one of several songs on the record written entirely by outside songwriters, enjoying minimal success on radio and MTV. The best-known original on the album is \"Perfect Water\" written by Dharma and Jim Carroll (noted author of \"The Basketball Diaries\"). While the band members have generally been disparaging about the album in retrospect, Joe Bouchard has stated that \"Perfect Water\" is \"perfect genius\".\nThe band toured in Germany, after which bassist Bouchard left, leaving only two members of the classic lineup: Eric Bloom and Donald Roeser. Some people referred to the band as \"Two \u00d6yster Cult\" during this period. Jon Rogers was hired to replace Joe and this version of the band finished out the 1986 tour. After it wound up that year, the band took a temporary break from recording and touring. When Blue \u00d6yster Cult received an offer to tour in Greece in the early summer of 1987, the band reformed. Wilcox quit while Zvoncheck was fired for making excessive financial demands. Allen Lanier then was offered to rejoin and agreed, so the new line-up now featured three founding members, along with Jon Rogers returning on bass and Ron Riddle as their newest drummer.\nColumbia Records was not interested in releasing the \"Imaginos\" project as an Albert Bouchard solo album so it was arranged for the record to be released in 1988 by Columbia as a Blue \u00d6yster Cult album, with some new lead vocal overdubs from Bloom and Roeser and lead guitar overdubs from Roeser. These replaced most of Albert Bouchard's lead vocals, as well as many lead guitar parts that had been recorded by session musicians. Joe Bouchard and Allen Lanier had earlier contributed some minor keyboard and backing vocal parts to the album, allowing all five original members to be credited. The album did not sell well (despite a positive review in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine) and although the then-current Blue \u00d6yster Cult lineup (minus both Bouchard brothers) toured to promote \"Imaginos\", promotion by the label was virtually non-existent. Most songs from the album have not been performed live by the band since at least 1989. When Columbia Records' parent company CBS Records was purchased by Sony and became Sony Music Entertainment, Blue \u00d6yster Cult were dropped from the label.\nFirst studio hiatus, \"Heaven Forbid\" and \"Curse of the Hidden Mirror\" (1990\u20132003).\nThe band spent most of the 1990s touring without releasing an album of new material, although they did contribute two new songs to the \"Bad Channels\" movie soundtrack, released in 1992, and also released an album of re-recorded songs from the band's original lineup, called \"Cult Classic\", in 1994. During these years, while the three original members remained constant, there were several changes in the band's rhythm section. Ron Riddle quit in 1991 and was followed by a series of other drummers including\nChuck Burgi (1991\u20131992, 1992\u20131995, 1996\u20131997), John Miceli (1992, 1995), John O'Reilly (1995\u20131996) and Bobby Rondinelli (1997\u20132004). As for the bass position, Rogers left in 1995, and was replaced by Danny Miranda.\nIn the late 1990s, Blue \u00d6yster Cult secured a recording contract with CMC Records (later purchased by Sanctuary Records), and continued to tour frequently. Two studio albums were released, \"Heaven Forbid\" (1998) and \"Curse of the Hidden Mirror\" (2001). Both albums featured songs co-written by cyberpunk/horror novelist John Shirley. The first mostly featured Miranda on bass and Burgi on drums, although a few tracks feature earlier bassist Jon Rogers and one track features Rondinelli on drums, who had joined the band near the end of the recording. \"Curse of the Hidden Mirror\" features Miranda and Rondinelli as the rhythm section, and the pair contributed to the songwriting as well. Neither album sold well.\nIn 2001, Sony/Columbia's reissue arm, Legacy Records issued expanded versions of the first four Blue \u00d6yster Cult studio albums, including some previously unreleased demos and outtakes from album sessions, live recordings (from the \"Live 72\" EP), and post-\"St. Cecilia\" tunes from the Stalk-Forrest Group era.\nAnother live record and DVD \"A Long Day's Night\" followed in 2002, both drawn from one concert in Chicago. This album also featured the Bloom, Roeser, Lanier, Miranda, Rondinelli lineup.\nLive-only activities (2004\u20132016).\nAlthough the band's lineup had remained stable from 1997 to 2004, they began to experience personnel changes again in 2004. Rondinelli left in 2004, and was replaced by Jules Radino. Miranda left during the same year to become the bassist for Queen + Paul Rodgers in place of the retired John Deacon. He was replaced by Richie Castellano, who would also take occasional turns as a lead vocalist onstage.\nAllen Lanier retired from live performances in 2007 after not appearing with the band since late 2006. Castellano switched to rhythm guitar and keyboards (Castellano also filled in on lead guitar and vocals for an ailing Buck Dharma in two shows in 2005), and the position of bassist was taken up by Rudy Sarzo (previously a member of Quiet Riot, Whitesnake, Ozzy Osbourne and Dio), with the band employing Danny Miranda and Jon Rogers as guest bassists to fill in when Sarzo was unavailable. Sarzo then joined as an official member of the band, although Rogers continued to occasionally fill in when Sarzo was busy.\nIn February 2007, the Sony Legacy remaster series continued, releasing expanded versions of studio album \"Spectres\" and live album \"Some Enchanted Evening\".\nIn June 2012, the band announced that bassist Rudy Sarzo was leaving the band and was being replaced by former Utopia bassist Kasim Sulton.\nIn August of the same year, it was announced that Sony Legacy would be releasing a 17-disc boxed set entitled \"The Complete Columbia Albums Collection\" on October 30, 2012. The set includes the first round of the remastered series plus the long-awaited remastered versions of \"On Your Feet or on Your Knees\", \"Mirrors\", \"Cult\u00f6saurus Erectus\", \"Fire Of Unknown Origin\", \"Extraterrestrial Live\", \"The Rev\u00f6lution by Night\", \"Club Ninja\" and \"Imaginos\". Also exclusive to this set are two discs of rare and unreleased B-sides, demos and radio broadcasts.\nAlso in 2012, celebrating the 40th anniversary of Blue \u00d6yster Cult, the then-current incarnation of the band reunited for the first time in 25 years with other original members Joe and Albert Bouchard and Allen Lanier as guests for a special event in New York.\nFounding keyboardist/guitarist Allen Lanier died of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on August 14, 2013.\nIn 2016, Albert Bouchard played again as guest with the then-current line-up of the band, playing at shows in New York, Los Angeles, Dublin and London, where Blue \u00d6yster Cult played the album \"Agents of Fortune\" in its entirety. The shows featured songs from \"Agents of Fortune\" that had either not been played live before (\"True Confessions\", \"The Revenge of Vera Gemini\", \"Sinful Love\", \"Tenderloin\", \"Debbie Denise\"), songs that had not been played since the album's debut tour (\"Morning Final\"), and songs that were no longer/never played frequently (\"This Ain't the Summer of Love\", \"Tattoo Vampire\"), as well as the fan favorite \"Five Guitars\", which had not been played since Albert initially left the band in 1981. Albert played in the following songs at the show: \"The Revenge of Vera Gemini\" (vocals, guitar), \"Sinful Love\" (vocals, guitar), \"Tattoo Vampire\" (guitar), \"Morning Final\" (guitar), \"Tenderloin\" (cymbals), \"Debbie Denise\" (vocals, acoustic guitar), \"Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll\" (vocals, drums), and \"Five Guitars\" (guitar).\n\"The Symbol Remains\" and \"Ghost Stories\" (2017\u2013present).\nIn a May 2017 appearance on Castellano's \"Band Geek\" podcast, Bloom confirmed that there were tentative plans to release a new album in 2018 and that the band was currently considering offers from multiple record labels. He also stated that former bassist Danny Miranda would be playing with the band for the remainder of the year due to Sulton's prior touring commitments with Todd Rundgren. During the same year, the band's official website started to list Miranda as an official member, stating that Miranda had \"returned to B\u00d6C\" in early 2017.\nBuck Dharma stated in February 2019 that the band would be recording a new album to be released by fall. On July 10, 2019, it was announced that the band had signed to Frontiers Music, and would in fact be releasing the new album in 2020. \"It's been a long time since B\u00d6C's last studio album. Recording with Danny, Richie and Jules should be a great experience as we've been touring together for years, and Buck and I look forward to including them in the creative and recording process,\" said Bloom. \"The current band is GREAT and has never been recorded other than live, so we feel now's the time for new songs to be written and recorded. About half of the songs for the new record exist and the rest will be finished during the process,\" added Buck Dharma. In February 2020, Richie Castellano posted a short video to Facebook featuring himself and Eric Bloom, stating that the band were working on the new Blue \u00d6yster Cult record remotely by using ConnectionOpen online audio collaboration tool.\nIn August 2020, the band announced on their website that their fifteenth studio album \"The Symbol Remains\" would be released on October 9, 2020. The span of nineteen years between \"Curse of the Hidden Mirror\" and \"The Symbol Remains\" marks the longest gap between studio albums in Blue \u00d6yster Cult's career. The album was released to a positive critical reception, with tracks such as \"Box In My Head\" and \"The Alchemist\" receiving high praise.\nIn October 2022, during their European headlining tour, Blue \u00d6yster Cult supported Deep Purple at five arena shows in the United Kingdom.\nOn April 12, 2024, Blue \u00d6yster Cult released their sixteenth and final studio album \"Ghost Stories\", which includes both reimagined tracks and \"lost gems\" from between 1978 and 2016, as well as studio versions of their covers of MC5's \"Kick Out the Jams\" and The Animals' \"We Gotta Get Out of This Place.\".\nMusical style.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult is usually described as a hard rock band, albeit one with their own tongue-in-cheek style. Their music has also been described as heavy metal, psychedelic rock, occult rock, acid rock, and progressive rock. They have also been recognized for helping pioneer genres such as stoner metal. The band has also experimented with additional genres on specific albums, such as on \"Mirrors\".\nThey have acknowledged the influence of artists such as Alice Cooper, Grateful Dead, The Doors, Jefferson Airplane, MC5, The Blues Project, Jimi Hendrix, and Black Sabbath.\nLyrics.\nThe band have frequently collaborated with outside lyricists, although all of the original members wrote lyrics at some point, most notably Donald Roeser. The principal lyricists in the early days were manager Sandy Pearlman and fellow rock critic Richard Meltzer. Key members of the New York punk scene Patti Smith, Helen \"Wheels\" Robbins and Jim Carroll - all friends of the band - contributed from the mid-1970s. Later in the decade frontman Eric Bloom, a science fiction fan, recruited English author Michael Moorcock to write for the band, and later did the same with Eric Van Lustbader and John Shirley.\nIn order to add to their mystique the band would often use out-of-context fragments of Pearlman's unpublished sci-fi poetry cycle \"The Soft Doctrines of Imaginos\" as lyrics, rendering their meaning obscure. Additionally, they kept a folder of Pearlman's and Meltzer's word associations to insert into their songs.\nBand name and logo.\nThe name \"Blue \u00d6yster Cult\" also came from Pearlman's \"Imaginos\" cycle, explored most extensively on the 1988 album of the same name. Pearlman had also come up with the band's earlier name, \"Soft White Underbelly\", from a phrase used by Winston Churchill in describing Italy during World War II. In Pearlman's poetry, the \"Blue Oyster Cult\" is a group of aliens who had assembled secretly to guide Earth's history. \"Initially, the band was not happy with the name, but settled for it, and went to work preparing to record their first release...\"\nIn a 1976 interview published in the U.K. music magazine \"ZigZag\", Pearlman claimed the origin of the band's name was as an anagram of \"Cully Stout Beer\".\nThe addition of an umlaut was suggested by Allen Lanier, but Richard Meltzer claims to have suggested it just after Pearlman came up with the name, reportedly \"because of the Wagnerian aspect of Metal\". Other bands later copied the practice of using umlauts or diacritic marks in their own band names, such as Mot\u00f6rhead, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce, Queensr\u00ffche and parodied by Sp\u0131n\u0308al Tap.\nThe hook-and-cross logo was designed by fellow Stony Brook student Bill Gawlik for his master's thesis in January 1972, and appears on all of the band's albums. In Greek mythology, \"... the hook-and-cross symbol is that of Kronos (Cronus), the king of the Titans and father of Zeus ... and is the alchemical symbol for lead (a heavy metal), one of the heaviest of metals.\" Sandy Pearlman considered this, along with the \"heavy\" distorted guitar sound of the band, meant that the description \"heavy metal\" would be apt for the band's sound. The hook-and-cross symbol also resembled the astrological symbol for Saturn, the Roman god of agriculture, and the sickle, which is associated with both Kronos (Cronus) and Saturn (both the planet and the Roman god). The logo's \"... metaphysical, alchemical and mythological connotations, combined with its similarity to some religious symbols gave it a flair of decadence and mystery ...\"\nThe band was billed, for the only time, as \"\"The\" Blue \u00d6yster Cult\" on the cover and label of their second album, \"Tyranny and Mutation\".\nLegacy and influence.\nBlue \u00d6yster Cult have been influential to the realm of hard rock and heavy metal, leading them to being referred to as \"the thinking man's heavy metal band\" due to their often cryptic lyrics, literate songwriting, and links to famous authors. They have influenced many acts including Iron Maiden, Metallica, Fates Warning, Iced Earth, Cirith Ungol, Alice in Chains, Twisted Sister, Ratt, Steel Panther, Green River (and later Mudhoney), Body Count, Possessed, Candlemass, Saint Vitus, Trouble, Opeth, White Zombie, Kvelertak, HIM, Turbonegro, Radio Birdman, The Cult, The Minutemen, Firehose, Hoodoo Gurus, Widespread Panic, Queens of the Stone Age, Umphrey's McGee, Stabbing Westward, Royal Trux, and Moe.\nThe band's influence has extended beyond the musical sphere. The lyrics of \"Astronomy\" have been named by author Shawn St. Jean as inspirational to the later chapters of his fantasy novel \"Clotho's Loom\", wherein Sandy Pearlman's \"Four Winds Bar\" provides the setting for a portion of the action. Titles and lines from the band's songs provided structure and narrative for the third book in Robert Galbraith's (a pseudonym for J. K. Rowling), series of Cormoran Strike novels, \"Career of Evil\".\nTheir hit single \"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\" was featured in the famous \"Saturday Night Live\" sketch \"More Cowbell\". The original recording was produced at The Record Plant in New York by David Lucas, who sang background vocals with Roeser, and introduced the now-famous cowbell part, which may have been played by himself, Albert Bouchard, or Eric Bloom.\n\"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\" was also used in writer/director John Carpenter's horror film classic, \"Halloween\" (1978), and employed the band's hook-and-cross logo for Prince of Darkness (film). The opening sequence of the miniseries adaptation of \"The Stand\" (1994) by Stephen King, and covered by The Mutton Birds for Peter Jackson's horror-comedy film \"The Frighteners\" (1996). \"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\" was also used throughout the comedy film \"The Stoned Age\" (1994) and plays a role in its storyline. In the film \"Gone Girl\" (2014), the song plays on the radio during a car driving scene with actor Ben Affleck. The song was also used as the opening theme and main story element in the 1996 FMV computer game \"Ripper\", by Take Two Interactive, and was also featured in the 2006 game \"Prey\" and the 2021 game \"Returnal\". The lyrics for \"(Don't Fear) The Reaper\" are featured in the introduction of Stephen King's book \"The Stand\". The song was also used in Orange Is the New Black's season 2 finale.\nMembers.\nCurrent members"}
{"id": "4580", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4580", "title": "Battery Park City", "text": "Battery Park City is a mainly residential planned community and neighborhood on the west side of the southern tip of the island of Manhattan in New York City. It is bounded by the Hudson River on the west, the Hudson River shoreline on the north and south, and the West Side Highway on the east. The neighborhood is named for the Battery, formerly known as Battery Park, located directly to the south.\nMore than one-third of the development is parkland. The land upon which it is built was created in the 1970s by land reclamation on the Hudson River using over of soil and rock excavated during the construction of the World Trade Center, the New York City Water Tunnel, and certain other construction projects, as well as from sand dredged from New York Harbor off Staten Island. The neighborhood includes Brookfield Place (formerly the World Financial Center), along with numerous buildings designed for housing, commercial, and retail.\nBattery Park City is part of Manhattan Community District 1. It is patrolled by the 1st Precinct of the New York City Police Department.\nGeography.\nBattery Park City is bounded on the east by West Street, which separates the area from the Financial District of Lower Manhattan. To the west, north, and south, the area is surrounded by the Hudson River.\nThe development consists of roughly five major sections. Traveling north to south, the first neighborhood has high-rise residential buildings, the Stuyvesant High School, a Regal Entertainment Group movie theater, and the Battery Park City branch of the New York Public Library. It is also the site of the 463-suite Conrad New York luxury hotel, which has a ballroom and a conference center. Other restaurants located in that hotel, as well as a DSW store and a New York Sports Club branch, were closed in 2009 after the takeover of the property by Goldman Sachs. Former undeveloped lots in the area have been developed into high-rise buildings; for example, Goldman Sachs built a new headquarters at 200 West Street.\nNearby is Brookfield Place, a complex of several commercial buildings formerly known as the World Financial Center.\nCurrent residential neighborhoods of Battery Park City are divided into northern and southern sections, separated by Brookfield Place. The northern section consists entirely of large, 20\u201345-story buildings, all various shades of orange brick. The southern section, extending down from the Winter Garden, which is located in Brookfield Place, contains residential apartment buildings such as Gateway Plaza and the Rector Place apartment buildings. In this section lies the majority of Battery Park City's residential areas, in three sections: Gateway Plaza, a high-rise building complex; the \"Rector Place Residential Neighborhood\"; and the\" Battery Place Residential Neighborhood\". These subsections contain most of the area's residential buildings, along with park space, supermarkets, restaurants, and movie theaters. Construction of residential buildings began north of the World Financial Center in the late 1990s, and completion of the final lots took place in early 2011. Additionally, a park restoration was completed in 2013.\nHistory.\nSite and formation.\nThroughout the 19th century and early-20th century, the area adjoining today's Battery Park City was known as Little Syria with Lebanese, Greeks, Armenians, and other ethnic groups. In 1929, the land was the proposed site of a $50\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in ) residential development that would have served workers in the Wall Street area. The Battery Tower project was left unfinished after workers digging the foundation ran into forty feet of old bulkheads, sunken docks, and ships.\nBy the late-1950s, the once-prosperous port area of downtown Manhattan was occupied by a number of dilapidated shipping piers, casualties of the rise of container shipping which drove sea traffic to Port Elizabeth, New Jersey. The initial proposal to reclaim this area through landfill was offered in the early-1960s by private firms and supported by the mayor, part of a long history of Lower Manhattan expansion. That plan became complicated when Governor Nelson Rockefeller announced his desire to redevelop a part of the area as a separate project. The various groups reached a compromise, and in 1966 the governor unveiled the proposal for what would become Battery Park City. The creation of architect Wallace K. Harrison, the proposal called for a 'comprehensive community' consisting of housing, social infrastructure and light industry.\nIn 1968, the New York State Legislature created the Battery Park City Authority (BPCA) to oversee development. Rockefeller named Charles J. Urstadt as the first chairman of the authority's board that year. He then served as the chief executive officer from 1973 to 1978. Urstadt later served as the authority's vice chair from 1996 to 2010. The New York State Urban Development Corporation and ten other public agencies were also involved in the development project. For the next several years, the BPCA made slow progress. In April 1969, it unveiled a master plan for the area, which was approved in October. In early-1972, the BPCA issued $200 million in bonds to fund construction efforts, with Harry B. Helmsley designated as the developer. That same year, the city approved plans to alter the number of apartments designated for lower, middle and upper income renters. Urstadt said the changes were needed to make the financing for the project viable. In addition to the change in the mix of units, the city approved adding nine acres, which extended the northern boundary from Reade Street to Duane Street.\nLandfill material from construction of the World Trade Center and other buildings in Lower Manhattan was used to add fill for the southern portion. Cellular cofferdams were constructed to retain the material. After removal of the piers, wooden piles and overburden of silt, the northern portion (north of, and including the marina) was filled with sand dredged from areas adjacent to Ambrose Channel in the Atlantic Ocean, as well as stone from the construction of Water Tunnel #3. By 1976, the landfill was completed. Seating stands for viewing the American Bicentennial \"Operation Sail\" flotilla parade were set up on the completed landfill in July 1976. Construction efforts ground to a halt in 1977, as a result of the city's fiscal crisis. That year, the presidential administration of Jimmy Carter approved mortgage insurance for 1,600 of the development's proposed units. In 1979, the title to the landfill was transferred from the city to the Battery Park City Authority, which financially restructured itself and created a new, more viable master plan, designed by Alex Cooper of Cooper, Robertson &amp; Partners and Stanton Eckstut. By that time, only two of the proposed development's buildings had been built, and the $200 million bond issue was supposed to have been paid off the next year.\nThe design of BPC to some degree reflects the values of vibrant city neighborhoods championed by Jane Jacobs. The Urban Land Institute (ULI) awarded the Battery Park City Master Plan its 2010 Heritage Award, for having \"facilitated the private development of of commercial space, of residential space, and nearly of open space in lower Manhattan, becoming a model for successful large-scale planning efforts and marking a positive shift away from the urban renewal mindset of the time.\"\nConstruction and early development.\nDuring the late-1970s and early-1980s, the site hosted Creative Time's landmark Art on the Beach sculpture exhibitions. On September 23, 1979, the landfill was the site of an anti-nuclear rally attended by 200,000 people.\nIn 1978, a temporary heliport operated by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey opened at the southern end of the landfill and was initially used by New York Airways helicopters providing scheduled service to Kennedy, LaGuardia and Newark airports. The helicopter landing pad later accommodated flights diverted from the Downtown Manhattan Heliport while that facility was closed for reconstruction from 1983 to 1987. The Battery Park City Heliport was located on the south side of the future site of the Museum of Jewish Heritage.\nConstruction began on the first residential building in June 1980. In April 1981, the New York State Urban Development Corporation (now the Empire State Development Corporation) issued a request for proposal, ultimately selecting six real-estate companies to develop over 1,800 residential units. The same year, the World Financial Center started construction; Olympia and York of Toronto was named as the developer for the World Financial Center, who then hired Cesar Pelli as the lead architect. By 1985, construction was completed and the World Financial Center (later renamed Brookfield Place New York) saw its first tenants. The newly completed development was lauded by \"The New York Times\" as \"a triumph of urban design\", with the World Financial Center being deemed \"a symbol of change\".\nDuring early construction, two acres of land in the southern section of the Battery Park landfill was used by artist Agnes Denes to plant wheat in an exhibition titled \"Wheatfield \u2013 A Confrontation\". The project was a visual contradiction: a golden field of wheat set among the steel skyscrapers of downtown Manhattan. It was created during a six-month period in the spring, summer, and fall of 1982 when Denes, with the support of the Public Art Fund, planted the field of wheat on rubble-strewn land near Wall Street and the World Trade Center site. Denes stated that her \"decision to plant a wheatfield in Manhattan, instead of designing just another public sculpture, grew out of a long-standing concern and need to call attention to our misplaced priorities and deteriorating human values.\"\nThroughout the 1980s, the BPCA oversaw a great deal of construction, including the entire Rector Place neighborhood and the river esplanade. It was during that period that Amanda Burden, later City Planning Department Director in the Bloomberg administration, worked on Battery Park City. During the 1980s, a total of 13 buildings were constructed. The Vietnam Veterans Plaza was established by Edward I. Koch in 1985. Constructed at a cost of $150\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in ) and with a capacity for 2,700 students, Battery Park City became the new home of the Stuyvesant High School in 1992. During the 1990s, an additional six buildings were added to the neighborhood. By the turn of the 21st century, Battery Park City was mostly completed, with the exception of some ongoing construction on West Street.\nInitially, in the 1980s, 23 buildings were built in the area. By the 1990s, 9 more buildings were built, followed by the construction of 11 buildings in the 2000s and 3 buildings in the 2010s. The Battery Park City Authority, wishing to attract more middle-class residents, started providing subsidies in 1998 to households whose annual incomes were $108,000 or less. By the end of the decade, nearly the entire landfill had been developed.\nEarly 21st century.\nThe September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001 had a major impact on Battery Park City. The residents of Lower Manhattan and particularly of Battery Park City were displaced for an extended period of time. Parts of the community were an official crime scene and therefore residents were unable to return to live or even collect property. Many of the displaced residents were not allowed to return to the area for months and none were given government guidance of where to live temporarily on the already-crowded island of Manhattan. With most hotel rooms booked, residents, including young children and the elderly, were forced to fend for themselves. When they were finally allowed to return to Battery Park City, some found that their homes had been looted.\nUpon residents' return, the air in the area was still filled with toxic smoke from the World Trade Center fires that persisted until December 2001. More than half of the area's residents moved away permanently from the community after the adjacent World Trade Center towers collapsed and spread toxic dust, debris, and smoke. Gateway Plaza's 600 building, Hudson View East, and Parc Place (now Rector Square) were punctured by airplane parts. The Winter Garden and other portions of the World Financial Center were severely damaged. Environmental concerns regarding dust from the Trade Center are a continuing source of concern for many residents, scientists, and elected officials. Since the attacks, the damage has been repaired. Temporarily reduced rents and government subsidies helped restore residential occupancy in the years following the attacks.\nAfter September 11, 2001, residents of Battery Park City and Tribeca formed the TriBattery Pops Tom Goodkind Conductor in response to the events of the attacks. The \"Pops\" have been Grammy-nominated and are the first lower Manhattan all-volunteer community band in a century.\nSince then, real estate development in the area has continued robustly. Commercial development includes the 200 West Street, the Goldman Sachs global headquarters, which began construction in 2005 and opened for occupancy in October 2009. 200 West Street received in 2010 gold-level certification under the United States Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program by incorporating various water and energy conservation features. As of 2018, there is no new construction planned.\nOwnership and maintenance.\nBattery Park City is owned and managed by the Hugh L. Carey Battery Park City Authority (BPCA), a Class A New York State public-benefit corporation created by New York State in 1968 to redevelop outmoded and deteriorated piers, a project that has involved reclaiming the land, replanning the area and facilitating new construction of a mixed commercial and residential community. It has operated under the authority of the Urban Development Corporation. Its mission is \"to plan, create, coordinate and sustain a balanced community of commercial, residential, retail, and park space within its designated 92-acre site on the lower west side of Manhattan\". The authority's board is composed of seven uncompensated members who are appointed by the governor and who serve six-year terms. Raju Mann is the president and chief executive officer. The BPCA is invested with substantial powers: it can acquire, hold and dispose of real property, enter into lease agreements, borrow money and issue debt, and manage the project. Like other public benefit corporations, the BPCA is exempt from property taxes and has the ability to issue tax exempt bonds. In 2021, the BPCA has operating expenses of $69.1 million as well as an outstanding debt of $875.09 million, and it employed 200 people.\nUnder the 1989 agreement between the BPCA and the City of New York, $600 million was transferred by the BPCA to the city. Charles J. Urstadt, the first chairman and CEO of the BPCA, noted in an August 19, 2007, op-ed piece in the \"New York Post\" that the aggregate figure of funds transferred to the City of New York is above $1.4 billion, with the BPCA continuing to contribute $200 million a year. The Independent Budget Office of the City of New York also recommended the city take over Battery Park City in a report published in February 2020. The report echoed Urstadt's proposal as a way to increase revenue to the city. An article published by \"The Broadsheet Daily\" described the complex shared ownership structure of Battery Park City between the city and state that was set up by Urstadt.\nExcess revenue from the area was to be contributed to other housing efforts, typically low-income projects in the Bronx and Harlem. Much of this funding has historically been diverted to general city expenses, under section 3.d of the 1989 agreement. However, in July 2006, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Governor George Pataki, and Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr. announced the final approval for the New York City Housing Trust Fund derived from $130 million in Battery Park City revenues. The fund aimed to preserve or create 4,300 units of low- and moderate-income housing by 2009. It also provided seed financing for the New York Acquisition Fund, a $230 million initiative that aims to serve as a catalyst for the construction and preservation of more than 30,000 units of affordable housing citywide by 2016. The Acquisition Fund has since established itself as a model for similar funds in cities and states across the country.\nBy 2018, thirty residential buildings had been built in Battery Park City and no new construction was planned. The Battery Park City Authority's main focus turned to maintenance of existing infrastructure, security and conservancy of the public spaces. The authority was creating over 1,000 free activities per year.\nCondo owners in Battery Park City pay higher monthly charges than owners of comparable apartments elsewhere in New York City because residents pay their building's common charges in addition to PILOT (payment in lieu of taxes). The PILOT payments replace real estate taxes and the land lease. The cumulative effect is lower property values for homeowners.\nBecause none of the properties in Battery Park City own the land they are built on, many banks have refused to write loans when those ground leases are periodically up for renewal. This has been a regular source of anger and frustration for owners in Battery Park City who are looking to sell.\nDemographics.\nFor census purposes, the New York City government classifies Battery Park City as part of a larger neighborhood tabulation area called Battery Park City-Lower Manhattan. Based on data from the 2010 United States census, the population of Battery Park City-Lower Manhattan was 39,699, an increase of 19,611 (97.6%) from the 20,088 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of . The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 65.4% (25,965) White, 3.2% (1,288) African American, 0.1% (35) Native American, 20.2% (8,016) Asian, 0.0% (17) Pacific Islander, 0.4% (153) from other races, and 3.0% (1,170) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.7% (3,055) of the population.\nThe entirety of Community District 1, which comprises Battery Park City and other Lower Manhattan neighborhoods, had 63,383 inhabitants as of NYC Health's 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 85.8 years. This is higher than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are young to middle-aged adults: half (50%) are between the ages of 25 and 44, while 14% are between 0 and 17, and 18% between 45 and 64. The ratio of college-aged and elderly residents was lower, at 11% and 7% respectively.\nAs of 2017, the median household income in Community Districts 1 and 2 (including Greenwich Village and SoHo) was $144,878, though the median income in Battery Park City individually was $126,771. In 2018, an estimated 9% of Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan residents lived in poverty, compared to 14% in all of Manhattan and 20% in all of New York City. One in twenty-five residents (4%) were unemployed, compared to 7% in Manhattan and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 38% in Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan, compared to the boroughwide and citywide rates of 45% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, , Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan are considered high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.\n, about 10,000 people live in Battery Park City, most of whom are upper middle class and upper class (54.0% of households have incomes over $100,000). When fully built out, the neighborhood is projected to have 14,000 residents.\nCensus.\nBased on the 2020 census, the racial makeup of Northern Battery Park City (10282) was 66% White, 2% Black, 0% Native American, 16% Asian, 0% Islander, 0% from other races, and 5% from two or more races. Hispanic of Latino of any race were 11% of the population. The racial makeup of South Battery Park City (10280) was 69% White, 1% Black, 0% Native, 17% Asian, 0% Islander, 0% from other races, 3% from two or more races, and 11% Hispanic.\nAs of 2020, the population of the area was 16,169.\nBuildings.\nResidential.\nThe first residential building in Battery Park City, Gateway Plaza, was completed in 1983. , the population of the area was 13,386. Some of the more prominent residential buildings include:\nOther residential condominiums include:\nOther residential apartments include:\nOffice.\nBattery Park City, which is mainly residential, also has a few office buildings. The seven buildings including the Brookfield Place complex, as well as 200 West Street, are the neighborhood's only office buildings.\nBrookfield Place complex.\nLocated in the middle of Battery Park City and overlooking the Hudson River, Brookfield Place, designed by C\u00e9sar Pelli and owned mostly by Toronto-based Brookfield Properties, has been home to offices of various major companies, including Merrill Lynch, RBC Capital Markets, Nomura Group, American Express and Brookfield Asset Management, among others. Brookfield Place also serves as the United States headquarters for Brookfield Properties, which has its headquarters located in 200 Vesey Street. Brookfield Place also has its own zip code, 10281.\nBrookfield Place's ground floor and portions of the second floor are occupied by a mall; its center point is a steel-and-glass atrium known as the Winter Garden. Outside of the Winter Garden lies a sizeable yacht harbor on the Hudson known as North Cove.\nThe building's original developer was Olympia and York of Toronto, Ontario. It used to be named the World Financial Center, but in 2014, the complex was given its current name following the completion of extensive renovations. The World Financial Center complex was built by Olympia and York between 1982 and 1988; it was damaged in the September 11 attacks but later repaired. It has six constituent buildings \u2013 200 Liberty Street, 225 Liberty Street, 200 Vesey Street, 250 Vesey Street, the Winter Garden Atrium, and One North End Avenue (a.k.a. the New York Mercantile Exchange building).\n200 West Street.\n200 West Street is the location of the global headquarters of Goldman Sachs, an investment banking firm. A , 44-story building located on the west side of West Street between Vesey and Murray Streets, it is north of Brookfield Place and the Conrad Hotels, across the street from the Verizon Building, and diagonally opposite the World Trade Center. It is distinctive for being the only office building in the northern section of Battery Park City. It started construction in 2005 and opened in 2009.\nPolice and crime.\nBattery Park City and Lower Manhattan are patrolled by the 1st Precinct of the NYPD, located at 16 Ericsson Place. The 1st Precinct ranked 63rd safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. Though the number of crimes is low compared to other NYPD precincts, the residential population is also much lower. , with a non-fatal assault rate of 24 per 100,000 people, Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan's rate of violent crimes per capita is less than that of the city as a whole. The incarceration rate of 152 per 100,000 people is lower than that of the city as a whole.\nThe 1st Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 86.3% between 1990 and 2018. The 1st precinct reported 2 murders, 15 rapes, 135 robberies, 121 felony assaults, 191 burglaries, 848 grand larcenies, and 68 grand larcenies auto in 2021.\nFire safety.\nBattery Park City is served by the New York City Fire Department (FDNY)'s Engine Co. 10/Ladder Co. 10 fire station, located at 124 Liberty Street.\nHealth.\n, preterm births and births to teenage mothers are less common in Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan than in other places citywide. In Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan, there were 77 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 2.2 teenage births per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide), though the teenage birth rate is based on a small sample size. Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan have a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 4%, less than the citywide rate of 12%, though this was based on a small sample size.\nThe concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan is , more than the city average. Sixteen percent of Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan residents are smokers, which is more than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan, 4% of residents are obese, 3% are diabetic, and 15% have high blood pressure, the lowest rates in the city\u2014compared to the citywide averages of 24%, 11%, and 28% respectively. In addition, 5% of children are obese, the lowest rate in the city, compared to the citywide average of 20%.\nNinety-six percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is more than the city's average of 87%. In 2018, 88% of residents described their health as \"good\", \"very good\", or \"excellent\", more than the city's average of 78%. For every supermarket in Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan, there are 6 bodegas.\nThe nearest major hospital is NewYork-Presbyterian Lower Manhattan Hospital in the Civic Center area.\nPost office and ZIP Codes.\nBattery Park City is located within two ZIP Codes. The neighborhood north of Brookfield Place is covered by 10282, while much of the neighborhood south of Brookfield Place is covered by 10280. Brookfield Place is part of 10281, and the southernmost tip is part of 10004. The United States Postal Service does not operate any post offices in Battery Park City. The nearest post office is the Church Street Station at 90 Church Street in the Financial District.\nEducation.\nBattery Park City and Lower Manhattan generally have a higher rate of college-educated residents than the rest of the city . The vast majority of residents age 25 and older (84%) have a college education or higher, while 4% have less than a high school education and 12% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 64% of Manhattan residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan students excelling in math rose from 61% in 2000 to 80% in 2011, and reading achievement increased from 66% to 68% during the same time period.\nBattery Park City and Lower Manhattan's rate of elementary school student absenteeism is lower than the rest of New York City. In Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan, 6% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, less than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 96% of high school students in Battery Park City and Lower Manhattan graduate on time, more than the citywide average of 75%.\nSchools.\nThe New York City Department of Education operates the following public schools in Battery Park City:\nLibrary.\nBattery Park City has a New York Public Library branch at 175 North End Avenue, designed by 1100 Architect and completed in 2010. A , two-story library on the street level of a high-rise residential building, it utilizes several sustainable design features, earning it LEED Gold certification.\nSustainability was a driving factor in the design of the library including use of an energy-efficient lighting system, maximization of natural lighting, and use of recycled materials. 1100 Architect, in collaboration with Atelier Ten, an international team of environmental design consultants and building services engineers, designed the library's energy-efficient lighting system. The open plan layout and large use of glass allow for ample natural daylight year-round and low-energy LED light illuminates communal spaces. Recycled materials are incorporated into the design including carpet made from re-purposed truck tires, floors made from reclaimed window frame wood, and furniture made from FSC-certified plywood and recycled steel. Design features include a seemingly \"floating\" origami-style ceiling made up of triangular panels hung at varying angles and a padded reading nook fitted into the library's terrazzo-finished steel and concrete staircase. The interior uses an easy-to-navigate layout with its three distinct spatial areas of entry area, first floor space, and mezzanine visually unified through the ceiling.\nThe building also won the \"Interior Design\", Best of Year Merit Award in 2011, followed by \"The National Terrazzo and Mosaic Association\", Port Morris Tile and Marble Corporation Craftsmanship Award in 2011 and the \"Contract\", Public Space Interiors Award in 2012.\nTransportation.\nCurrently, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority provides bus service to the area. , the bus lines service parts of Battery Park City, with the nearby at Battery Park. Additionally, the Downtown Alliance provides a free bus service that runs along North End Avenue and South End Avenue, connecting the various residential complexes with subway stations on the other side of West Street.\nThere is currently no New York City Subway access in Battery Park City proper; however, the West Street pedestrian bridges, as well as crosswalks across West Street, connect Battery Park City to subway stations and the PATH station in the nearby Financial District. The West Concourse, a tunnel from Brookfield Place passing under West Street, also provides access from Battery Park City to the World Trade Center PATH station, the WTC Cortlandt station, and the Fulton Street station (New York City Subway).\nThe Battery Park City Ferry Terminal is at the foot of Vesey Street opposite the New York Mercantile Exchange and provides ferry transportation to various points in New Jersey via NY Waterway, Seastreak, and Liberty Water Taxi routes. NYC Ferry's St. George route, to West Midtown Ferry Terminal and St. George Terminal, stops at Battery Park City Ferry Terminal.\nThe West Thames Street Bridge, one of the West Street pedestrian bridges connecting Battery Park City to the Financial District, was completed in 2019, replacing the older Rector Street Bridge. On June 11, 2021, it was dedicated as the Robert F. Douglass Bridge. Its namesake, who died in 2016, was an early advocate for lower Manhattan as a senior advisor to Governor Nelson Rockefeller and later as a founding member and chairman of the Downtown Alliance and board member of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.\nParks and open spaces.\nMore than one-third of the neighborhood is parkland.\nSome large open spaces and parks include:\nIn addition, there are:\nNotable residents.\nNotable residents include:\nReferences.\nNotes\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "4581", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4581", "title": "Bacterial vaginosis", "text": "Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is an infection of the vagina caused by excessive growth of bacteria. Common symptoms include increased vaginal discharge that often smells like fish. The discharge is usually white or gray in color. Burning with urination may occur. Itching is uncommon. Occasionally, there may be no symptoms. Having BV approximately doubles the risk of infection by a number of sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. It also increases the risk of early delivery among pregnant women.\nBV is caused by an imbalance of the naturally occurring bacteria in the vagina. There is a change in the most common type of bacteria and a hundred to thousandfold increase in total numbers of bacteria present. Typically, bacteria other than \"Lactobacilli\" become more common. Risk factors include douching, new or multiple sex partners, antibiotics, and using an intrauterine device, among others. However, it is not considered a sexually transmitted infection and, unlike gonorrhoea and chlamydia, sexual partners are not treated. Diagnosis is suspected based on the symptoms, and may be verified by testing the vaginal discharge and finding a higher than normal vaginal pH, and large numbers of bacteria. BV is often confused with a vaginal yeast infection or infection with \"Trichomonas\".\nUsually treatment is with an antibiotic, such as clindamycin or metronidazole. These medications may also be used in the second or third trimesters of pregnancy. The antiseptic boric acid can also be effective. BV often recurs following treatment. Probiotics may help prevent re-occurrence. It is unclear if the use of probiotics or antibiotics affects pregnancy outcomes.\nBV is the most common vaginal infection in women of reproductive age. The percentage of women affected at any given time varies between 5% and 70%. BV is most common in parts of Africa and least common in Asia and Europe. In the United States about 30% of women between the ages of 14 and 49 are affected. Rates vary considerably between ethnic groups within a country. While BV-like symptoms have been described for much of recorded history, the first clearly documented case occurred in 1894.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAlthough about 50% of women with BV are asymptomatic, common symptoms include increased vaginal discharge that usually smells like fish. The discharge is often white or gray in color. There may be burning with urination. Occasionally, there may be no symptoms.\nThe discharge coats the walls of the vagina, and is usually without significant irritation, pain, or erythema (redness), although mild itching can sometimes occur. By contrast, the normal vaginal discharge will vary in consistency and amount throughout the menstrual cycle and is at its clearest at ovulation\u2014about two weeks before the period starts. Some practitioners claim that BV can be asymptomatic in almost half of affected women, though others argue that this is often a misdiagnosis.\nComplications.\nAlthough previously considered a mere nuisance infection, untreated bacterial vaginosis may cause increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and pregnancy complications.\nIt has been shown that HIV-infected women with bacterial vaginosis (BV) are more likely to transmit HIV to their sexual partners than those without BV.\nThere is evidence of an association between BV and increased rates of sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS. BV is associated with up to a six-fold increase in HIV shedding. BV is a risk factor for viral shedding and herpes simplex virus type 2 infection. BV may increase the risk of infection with or reactivation of human papillomavirus (HPV).\nIn addition, bacterial vaginosis as either pre-existing, or acquired, may increase the risk of pregnancy complications, most notably premature birth or miscarriage.\nPregnant women with BV have a higher risk of chorioamnionitis, miscarriage, preterm birth, premature rupture of membranes, and postpartum endometritis. Women with BV who are treated with in vitro fertilization have a lower implantation rate and higher rates of early pregnancy loss.\nCauses.\nHealthy vaginal microbiota consists of species that neither cause symptoms or infections, nor negatively affect pregnancy. It is dominated mainly by Lactobacillus species. BV is defined by the disequilibrium in the vaginal microbiota, with decline in the number of lactobacilli. While the infection involves a number of bacteria, it is believed that most infections start with \"Gardnerella vaginalis\" creating a biofilm, which allows other opportunistic bacteria, such as \"Prevotella\" and \"Bacteroides\", to thrive.\nOne of the main risks for developing BV is douching, which alters the vaginal microbiota and predisposes women to developing BV. Douching is strongly discouraged by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and various medical authorities, for this and other reasons.\nBV is a risk factor for pelvic inflammatory disease, HIV, sexually transmitted infections (STIs), endometriosis, and reproductive and obstetric disorders or negative outcomes. Although BV can be associated with sexual activity, there is no clear evidence of sexual transmission. It is possible for sexually inactive persons to develop bacterial vaginosis.\nAlso, subclinical iron deficiency may correlate with bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy. A longitudinal study published in February 2006, in the \"American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology\", showed a link between psychosocial stress and bacterial vaginosis persisted even when other risk factors were taken into account. Exposure to the spermicide nonoxynol-9 does not affect the risk of developing bacterial vaginosis.\nThe cause of the fishy smell of BV is mainly due to reduction of trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) to trimethylamine (TMA) by bacteria in vaginal secretion. TMA is the same compound that is predominantly responsible for the smell of decomposing fish. The diamines putrescine and cadaverine, which are the decarboxylation products of arginine and lysine amino acid metabolism, respectively, are also present in BV and may contribute to the fishy smell of the condition as well.\nDiagnosis.\nTo make a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis, a swab from inside the vagina should be obtained. These swabs can be tested for:\nDifferential diagnosis for bacterial vaginosis includes the following:\nThe Center for Disease Control (CDC) defines STIs as \"a variety of clinical syndromes and infections caused by pathogens that can be acquired and transmitted through sexual activity.\" But the CDC does not specifically identify BV as sexually transmitted infection.\nAmsel criteria.\nIn clinical practice BV can be diagnosed using the Amsel criteria:\nAt least three of the four criteria should be present for a confirmed diagnosis.\nA modification of the Amsel criteria accepts the presence of two instead of three factors and is considered equally diagnostic.\nGram stain.\nAn alternative is to use a Gram-stained vaginal smear, with the Hay/Ison criteria or the Nugent criteria. The Hay/Ison criteria are defined as follows:\n\"Gardnerella vaginalis\" is the main culprit in BV. \"Gardnerella vaginalis\" is a short, Gram-variable rod (coccobacillus). Hence, the presence of clue cells and gram variable coccobacilli are indicative or diagnostic of bacterial vaginosis.\nNugent score.\nThe Nugent score is now rarely used by physicians due to the time it takes to read the slides and requires the use of a trained microscopist. A score of 0\u201310 is generated from combining three other scores. The scores are as follows:\nAt least 10\u201320 high power (1000\u00d7 oil immersion) fields are counted and an average determined.\nDNA hybridization testing with Affirm VPIII was compared to the Gram stain using the Nugent criteria. The Affirm VPIII test may be used for the rapid diagnosis of BV in symptomatic women but uses expensive proprietary equipment to read results, and does not detect other pathogens that cause BV, including \"Prevotella\" spp, \"Bacteroides\" spp, and \"Mobiluncus\" spp. The cervicovaginal microbiome measured using 16S rRNA sequencing has the capacity to increase throughput of the Nugent Score and has demonstrate to be directly comparable to clinical Nugent Score measurement.\nScreening.\nScreening during pregnancy is not recommended in the United States as of 2020 because \" the US Preventive Services Task Force concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for bacterial vaginosis in pregnant persons at increased risk for preterm delivery\".\nPrevention.\nSome steps suggested to lower the risk include: not douching, avoiding sex, or limiting the number of sex partners.\nSystematic reviews and meta-analyses from 2022 to 2023 have concluded that probiotics may help prevent re-occurrence.\nEarly evidence suggested that antibiotic treatment of male partners could re-establish the normal microbiota of the male urogenital tract and prevent the recurrence of infection. However, a 2016 Cochrane review found high-quality evidence that treating the sexual partners of women with bacterial vaginosis had no effect on symptoms, clinical outcomes, or recurrence in the affected women. It also found that such treatment may lead treated sexual partners to report increased adverse events.\nTreatment.\nAntibiotics.\nTreatment is typically with the antibiotics metronidazole or clindamycin. They can be either given by mouth or applied inside the vagina with similar efficacy. Other antibiotics related to metronidazole, including tinidazole and the newer secnidazole, are also approved and used to treat BV. When clindamycin is given to pregnant women symptomatic with BV before 22 weeks of gestation the risk of pre-term birth before 37 weeks of gestation is lower. Additional antibiotics that are not approved for treatment of BV but might work include macrolides, lincosamides, and penicillins.\nAlthough antibiotics are effective, about 10% to 15% of people do not improve with the first course of antibiotics and recurrence rates of up to 80% have been documented. Recurrence rates are increased with sexual activity with the same pre-/post-treatment partner and inconsistent condom use. Estrogen-containing contraceptives have been found to decrease recurrence.\nBV is not considered a sexually transmitted infection, and treatment of a male sexual partner of a woman with BV is not recommended.\nProbiotics.\nA 2009 Cochrane review found tentative but insufficient evidence for probiotics as a treatment for BV. A 2014 review reached the same conclusion. A 2013 review found some evidence supporting the use of probiotics during pregnancy. The preferred probiotics for BV are those containing high doses of lactobacilli (around 109 ) given in the vagina. Intravaginal administration is preferred to taking them by mouth. Prolonged repetitive courses of treatment appear to be more promising than short courses.\nThe lack of effectiveness of commercially available \"Lactobacillus\" probiotics may be because most do not actually contain vaginal lactobacilli strains. LACTIN-V is a live biopharmaceutical medication containing the vaginally important \"Lactobacillus crispatus\" which is under development for the treatment of bacterial vaginosis and recurrent urinary tract infections. It has shown initial effectiveness in considerably reducing recurrence of bacterial vaginosis following antibiotic treatment. LACTIN-V is not yet Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved or commercially available.\nAntiseptics.\nTopical antiseptics, for example dequalinium chloride, policresulen, hexetidine, or povidone-iodine vaginal suppositories may be applied, if the risk of ascending infections is low (outside of pregnancy and in immunocompetent people without histories of upper genital tract infections). One study found that vaginal irrigations with hydrogen peroxide (3%) resulted in a slight improvement, but this was much less than with the use of oral metronidazole. Intravaginal boric acid, alone or in conjunction with other medications, may be helpful in the treatment of recurrent BV.\nTOL-463, an experimental formulation of boric acid enhanced with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), is under development as an intravaginal medication for the treatment of BV and has shown preliminary effectiveness in clinical trials.\nEpidemiology.\nBV is the most common infection of the vagina in women of reproductive age. The percentage of women affected at any given time varies between 5% and 70%. BV is most common in parts of Africa, and least common in Asia and Europe. In the United States, about 30% of those between the ages of 14 and 49 are affected. Rates vary considerably between ethnic groups within a country."}
{"id": "4582", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4582", "title": "Bud Selig", "text": "Allan Huber \"Bud\" Selig (; born July 30, 1934) is an American baseball executive who currently serves as the Commissioner Emeritus of Baseball. Previously, he served as the ninth commissioner of baseball from 1998 to 2015. He initially served as de facto acting commissioner beginning in 1992 in his capacity as chairman of the Major League Baseball (MLB) Executive Committee before being named the official commissioner in 1998. Selig oversaw baseball through the 1994 strike, the introduction of the wild card, interleague play, and the de facto merging of the National and American Leagues under the Office of the Commissioner. He was instrumental in organizing the World Baseball Classic in 2006. Selig also introduced revenue sharing. He is credited for the financial turnaround of baseball during his tenure with a 400 percent increase in the revenue of MLB and annual record breaking attendance.\nDuring Selig's term of service, the use of steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs became a public issue. The Mitchell Report, commissioned by Selig, concluded that the MLB commissioners, club officials, the Players Association, and the players all share \"to some extent in the responsibility for the steroid era.\" Following the release of the Mitchell Report, Congressman Cliff Stearns called publicly for Selig to step down as commissioner, citing his \"glacial response\" to the \"growing stain on baseball.\" Selig has pledged on numerous occasions to rid baseball of performance-enhancing drugs, and has overseen and instituted many rule changes and penalties to that end.\nA Milwaukee native, Selig was previously the owner and team president of the Milwaukee Brewers. The franchise, originally known as the Seattle Pilots, was acquired by Selig in bankruptcy court in 1970, and renamed after the minor league team of the same name that he had watched in his youth and had existed until the arrival of the Braves in Milwaukee in 1953. Selig was credited with keeping baseball in Milwaukee. The Brewers went to the 1982 World Series (but were defeated in seven games by the St. Louis Cardinals), and Selig won seven Organization of the Year awards during his tenure. Selig remains a resident of Milwaukee.\nOn January 17, 2008, Selig's contract was extended through 2012, after which he planned to retire, but he then decided to stay as commissioner until the end of the 2014 season, a move approved by the owners on January 12, 2012, which would take his leadership past his 80th birthday. Selig made $14.5 million in the 12-month period ending October 31, 2005. Selig announced on September 26, 2013, that he would retire in January 2015. On January 22, 2015, MLB announced that Selig would formally step down from the office when his current term expired on January 24, 2015. He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2017.\nEarly life.\nSelig was born in Milwaukee, and grew up in a Jewish family. His father, Ben Selig, had come to the United States from Romania with his family when he was four years old. Selig graduated from the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison with a B.A. in American history and political science in 1956. He served two years in the U.S. Army before working with his father who owned a car leasing business in Milwaukee. Selig continues to be involved in the automotive industry, serving as president of the Selig Executive Lease Company.\nSelig's interest in baseball came from his mother. An immigrant from Ukraine, Marie Selig attended college, a rare accomplishment for a woman in the early 20th century, and became a school teacher. When Selig was only three, Marie began taking him and his older brother, Jerry, to Borchert Field, where the minor league Milwaukee Brewers played. When the Boston Braves relocated to Milwaukee in 1953, Selig switched allegiances, and eventually became the team's largest public stockholder. Selig was devastated when he learned that the Braves were going to leave Milwaukee in favor of Atlanta. In 1965, when the Braves left Milwaukee, he divested his stock in the team. As a youngster, Selig's favorite player was Hershel Martin. He developed a friendship with Hank Aaron, when the young player joined the Braves. The elder Selig's company provided loaner cars to Braves players, which gave the family access to the clubhouse and players. Selig and Aaron attended Green Bay Packers games together and sat together on the Brave's plane.\nMilwaukee Brewers owner.\nAs a minority owner of the Milwaukee Braves, Selig founded the organization Teams, Inc., in an attempt to prevent the majority owners (based out of Chicago) from moving the club to a larger television market. This was challenged legally on the basis that no prior team relocations (in the modern era) left a city without a team. Prior movements had all originated in cities that were home to at least two teams. When his quest to keep the team in Milwaukee finally failed after the 1965 season, he changed the group's name to Milwaukee Brewers Baseball Club, Inc., after the minor league baseball team he grew up watching, and devoted himself to returning Major League Baseball to Milwaukee.\nSelig arranged for major league games to be played at Milwaukee County Stadium. The first, a pre-season match-up between the Chicago White Sox and Minnesota Twins, drew more than 51,000 spectators. Selig followed this up by hosting nine White Sox regular-season games in 1968 and eleven in 1969. One of the games played in Milwaukee that year was against the expansion Seattle Pilots, the team that would become the Brewers. Those Milwaukee \"home\" games were phenomenally successful, with the handful of games accounting for about \"one-third\" of total White Sox home attendance.\nTo satisfy that fan base, Selig decided to purchase the White Sox (with the intention of moving them to Milwaukee) in 1969. He entered into an agreement to buy the club, but the American League vetoed the sale, preferring to keep an American League team in Chicago, which at the time was still America's second-largest city. Selig turned his attention to other franchises.\nIn 1970, he purchased the bankrupt Seattle Pilots franchise, moving them to his hometown and officially renaming the team the \"Brewers\".\nDuring Selig's tenure as club president, the Brewers participated in postseason play in 1981, when the team finished first in the American League East during the second half of the season, and in 1982, when the team made it to the World Series, under the leadership of future Hall of Famers Robin Yount and Paul Molitor. Under Selig's watch, the Brewers also won seven Organization of the Year awards. Selig was part of the owners' collusion in 1985\u20131987, resulting in the owners paying US$280 million in damages to the players.\nUpon his assumption of the commissioner's role, Selig transferred his ownership interest in the Brewers to his daughter Wendy Selig-Prieb in order to remove any technical conflicts of interest, though it was widely presumed he maintained some hand in team operations. Although the team was sold to Los Angeles investor Mark Attanasio in 2005, questions remain regarding Selig's past involvement. Selig's defenders point to the poor management of the team after Selig-Prieb took control as proof that Selig was not working behind the scenes.\nSelig was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 2001.\nOn August 24, 2010, a statue of Selig, the \"Selig Monument\", commissioned by Brewers owner Mark Attanasio and designed by artist Brian Maughan, was unveiled outside Miller Park in Milwaukee.\nActing Commissioner (1992\u20131998).\nSelig became an increasingly vocal opponent of Commissioner Fay Vincent, and soon became the leader of a group of owners seeking his removal. Selig has never stated that the owners colluded, while Vincent has:\nFollowing an 18-9 no-confidence vote, Vincent resigned. Selig had by this time become chairman of the Executive Council of Major League Baseball, and as such became de facto acting commissioner.\nHis first major act was to institute the Wild Card and divisional playoff play, which has created much controversy amongst baseball fans. Those against the Wild Card see it as diminishing the importance of the pennant race and the regular season, with the true race often being for second rather than first place, while those in favor of it view it as an opportunity for teams to have a shot at the playoffs even when they have no chance of a first-place finish in their division, thus maintaining fan interest later in the season.\nSelig suspended Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott for a year in 1993 for repeated racially insensitive and prejudicial remarks and actions. The same year, Selig reinstated New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner from a lifelong suspension that was instituted by Selig's predecessor Fay Vincent. Pete Rose has claimed that he applied for reinstatement over the years and received no such consideration. Rose, along with his close friend and former teammate Mike Schmidt (who is a strong supporter of Rose's reinstatement into baseball), met with Selig in 2002, where Rose privately admitted to Selig (two years before going public with his admission) about betting on baseball. Bud Selig was a close friend of the late Bart Giamatti, who was the commissioner when Rose was first banned from the sport in 1989.\nAs acting commissioner, Selig represented MLB owners during the 1994 strike. On September 15, he cancelled the World Series, marking the first time the annual event had not been staged since 1904.\nWhile serving as acting commissioner, MLB also implemented interleague play in 1997. \nCommissioner (1998\u20132015).\nAfter a six-year search for a new commissioner, the owners voted to give Selig the title on a permanent basis on July 9, 1998.\nDuring his tenure, MLB avoided additional work stoppages by adopting collective bargaining agreements with its players in 2002 and 2006.\nWhereas in the past, the National and American leagues had separate administrative organizations (which, for example, allowed for the introduction of different rules such as the designated hitter), under Selig, Major League Baseball consolidated the administrative functions of both leagues into the Commissioner's Office in 2000. The last official presidents of the NL and AL were Leonard S. Coleman Jr. and Dr. Gene Budig respectively.\nReaction after September 11, 2001.\nOn September 11, 2001, Selig ordered all baseball games postponed for a week because of the terror attacks on New York and Washington. The games were postponed not only out of respect and mourning for the victims, but also out of concern for the safety and security of fans and players.\n2001 contraction attempt.\nAfter the conclusion of the 2001 World Series, Selig held a vote on contracting two teams, reportedly the Minnesota Twins and Montreal Expos. This action led to Selig (along with former Expos owner Jeffrey Loria) being sued for racketeering and conspiring with Loria to deliberately defraud the Expos minority owners. If found liable, the league could have been ordered to pay as much as $500 million in total damages. The judge ruled that the Expos could not be moved or contracted until the case was over. The case eventually went to arbitration and was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum.\nA week after Selig's announcement, Hennepin County Judge Harry Seymour Crump issued a temporary restraining order that forced the Twins to honor their lease and play the 2002 season at the Metrodome. In August 2002, the effort to contract the Twins officially fizzled as players and owners reached a consensus on a new labor agreement which extended the team's Metrodome lease.\nChanges to the MLB All-Star Game.\nThe 2002 All-Star Game, played in Selig's hometown of Milwaukee, was tied 7\u20137 after nine innings, and remained tied after the bottom of the 11th inning. Due to the recent managerial trend of granting playing time to as many available players as possible within the regulation nine innings, both managers had used their entire roster. Concerned for the arms of the pitchers currently on the mound, Selig made the controversial decision to declare the game a tie, to the dissatisfaction of the Milwaukee fans. Selig later said that this call was \"embarrassing\" and that he was \"tremendously saddened\" by the outcome of the game.\nSelig subsequently tried to reinvigorate the All-Star Game by awarding the winning league home-field advantage in the World Series; that practice was initiated in 2003 and continued through 2016. The 2003 All-Star Game had the same U.S. viewership as 2002 (9.5 rating; 17 share) and the ratings declined in 2004 (8.8 rating; 15 share) and 2005 (8.1 rating; 14 share). The American television audience increased in 2006 (9.3 rating; 16 share).\nDisciplinary actions.\nOn July 1, 2005, Selig suspended Texas Rangers pitcher Kenny Rogers for 20 games and fined him US$50,000. The punishment stemmed from an incident on June 29, 2005, during a Rangers pre-game warmup session, where Rogers had shoved two local news reporters and knocked one camera to the ground. One of the reporters resumed filming after picking up said camera, which angered Rogers into shoving him again, after grabbing and throwing the camera to the ground, kicking it. He was then led away by a teammate and later sent home by the club. While an appeal of his suspension was pending, Rogers appeared at the 2005 All-Star Game in Detroit, where fans loudly booed him. On July 22, 2005, Selig heard Rogers' appeal of his suspension. Selig decided to uphold the 20 games, however, an independent arbitrator ruled that Selig had exceeded his authority and reduced it to 13 games, but upheld the fine.\nPerformance-enhancing drugs.\nIn 2005, Selig faced Congress on the issue of steroids. After the Congressional hearings in early 2005, and with the scrutiny of the sports and national media upon this issue, Selig put forth a proposal for a stricter performance-enhancing drug testing regime to replace the current system. This proposal also included the banning of amphetamines, a first for the major North American sports leagues. The MLB Players Association and MLB reached an agreement in November on the new policy.\nSelig's testimony on the subject has been contradictory. In 2005, Selig told reporters, \"I never even heard about them [steroids] until 1998 or 1999. I ran a team and nobody was closer to their players and I never heard any comment from them. It wasn't until 1998 or '99 that I heard the discussion.\" But a year later, testifying to Congress in 2006, Selig claimed personal credit for spotting the problem early: \"In 1994, before anybody was really talking about steroids in baseball, we proposed a program of testing for such substances to the MLBPA. As early as 1998, I began formulating a strategic plan to eliminate the use of performance-enhancing substances from the game.\" During the 1988 ALCS, Oakland's Jose Canseco had been repeatedly taunted by Boston fans with a chant of \"ster-oids, ster-oids, ster-oids.\" Speaking at the 2013 All-Star Game, Selig complained, \"People say, 'Well, you were slow to react.' We were not slow to react. In fact, I heard that this morning, and it aggravated me all over again.\"\nBy early 2006, Selig was forced to deal with the issue of steroid use. On March 30, 2006, as a response to the controversy of the use of performance-enhancing drugs and the anticipated career home run record to be set by Barry Bonds, Selig asked former U.S. Senator George J. Mitchell to lead an independent investigation into the use of steroids in baseball's recent past. Joe Sheehan from \"Baseball Prospectus\" wrote that the commission has been focusing \"blame for the era exclusively on uniformed personnel\", and failing to investigate any role played by team ownership and management.\nMuch controversy surrounded Selig and his involvement in Bonds' all-time home run record chase. For months, speculation surrounded Selig and the possibility that he and Henry Aaron would not attend Bonds' games as he closed in on the record. Selig announced in July 2007 when Bonds was near 755 home runs that he would attend the games. Selig was in attendance for Bonds' record-tying home run against the San Diego Padres, sitting in Padres owner John Moores' private suite. When Bonds hit his 755th home run, Selig refused to applaud Bonds' accomplishment, instead choosing to keep his hands in his pockets and have a look of disdain on his face. Bud Selig also did not attend the San Francisco Giants' game on August 7 when Barry Bonds hit his record-breaking 756th home run against the Washington Nationals; after the event, Selig released a statement congratulating Bonds.\nOn December 13, 2007, former senator Mitchell released his report on the use of performance-enhancing substances by MLB players. The report names many current and former players who allegedly used performance-enhancing drugs during their careers.\nSelig has been widely criticized for not taking an active enough role to stem the tide of steroid use in baseball until it had blossomed into a debilitating problem for the industry. \"Chicago Sun-Times\" columnist Jay Mariotti called Selig the \"Steroids Commissioner.\" Selig has been called to Congress several times to testify on performance-enhancing drug use. Congressman Cliff Stearns said in December 2007 that Selig should resign because of use of performance-enhancing drugs in baseball during his tenure.\nPost-season schedule.\nSelig's decision to extend the traditional post-season schedule into November in an attempt to increase Nielsen ratings was met with widespread disdain, both inside and outside the baseball community. Mike Scioscia, manager of the American League West Division Champion Los Angeles Angels, dismissed the decision as \"Ridiculous. I don't know. Can I say it any clearer than that? We should have never had a day off last Wednesday. We should never have three days off after the season. You shouldn't even have two days off after the season.\"\nControversies.\nSelig has been embroiled in a number of controversial decisions during his tenure as commissioner. Notably, he has been accused of favoring the Milwaukee Brewers, his former team, such as he was during the 2001 contraction controversy when it was suggested the Minnesota Twins be one of two teams (the other being the Montreal Expos) to be contracted for economic reasons. Sportswriter Rob Dibble posted an open letter to Bud Selig, criticizing the plan for benefiting only the Brewers, noting that the contraction of the Twins would benefit the Brewers, as they would potentially claim the Twins' share of the upper Midwest market.\nDuring the 2011 Los Angeles Dodgers ownership dispute, he was accused of not acting in good faith towards and treating the Dodgers differently from other teams when he rejected the television deal that Frank McCourt negotiated that intended to bring the franchise out of bankruptcy, claiming McCourt violated the Baseball Agreement. In comparison, no action was taken against New York Mets owner Fred Wilpon despite being in a similar position. United States bankruptcy judge Kevin Gross rendered a stern warning to Selig, stating: \"Should the Commissioner falter in proving alleged wrongdoing, the Court may allow LAD (Los Angeles Dodgers) to take further, limited discovery.\" Some critics have used Selig's handling of the Dodgers to point out a double standard in treatment of MLB owners. More specifically in regards to the Mets, critics have accused Selig of favoritism towards the Mets due to Selig's personal relationship with Wilpon, claiming that it motivated him to stall any possible removal of Wilpon as that club's principal owner.\nSelig also notably failed to resolve a 6-year conflict between the San Francisco Giants and the Oakland Athletics regarding the Athletics' proposed move to San Jose. Selig established a blue-ribbon panel in 2009 to resolve the dispute; however, despite years to find a resolution, the blue-ribbon panel completely failed to make any progress toward resolving the issue, leading San Jose to sue MLB. The lawsuit, which is currently ongoing, questions the league's anti-trust exemption and its ability to enforce particular clubs' geographic territories. In addition, he blocked the sale of the Athletics in 1999 to an ownership group led by Bob Piccinini, then the CEO of Save Mart Supermarkets, and Joe Lacob, who would later purchase Golden State Warriors, from purchasing the Athletics in 2005. Both potential ownership groups were committed to keeping the team in Oakland that would render this territorial dispute meaningless. Instead, Selig permitted only Lew Wolff, his fraternity brother from college, and John J. Fisher to buy the team. The latter has since initiated the process to move the Athletics from Oakland to Las Vegas.\nTerm of service.\nOn December 1, 2006, Selig announced that he would be retiring as commissioner of baseball upon the expiration of his contract in 2009. Selig earned $14.5 million from MLB over the timespan October 31, 2005 to October 31, 2006. However, in January 2008, Selig agreed to a three-year contract extension, announcing he planned to retire after the 2012 season. He further decided against retirement, and after a two-year extension for the previous deal was agreed to on January 12, 2012, it was announced that Selig would remain commissioner until the end of the 2014 season.\nPost-Commissioner Activities.\nIn 2021, Selig was appointed as \"non-voting co-Chair\" (with Jane Forbes Clark) for the December 2021 Early Baseball Era Committee meeting, to consider candidates for election to the Hall of Fame whose major contributions to the game took place prior to 1950. The committee elected Bud Fowler and Buck O'Neil.\nNotable changes to Major League Baseball.\nBud Selig has overseen the following changes in Major League Baseball:\nDuring Selig's terms as executive council chairman (from 1992 to 1998) and commissioner, new stadiums opened in Arizona, Atlanta, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Colorado, Detroit, Houston, Miami, Milwaukee, Minneapolis, New York City (Flushing, Queens and the Bronx), Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle, Arlington, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C.\nIsrael Baseball League.\nSelig and his family served a supportive role on the advisory board of the Israel Baseball League during its inaugural season in 2007. In response to issues with the league's financial management, after the season, the Selig family requested that their names be removed from the list of board members.\n\"Selig Experience\".\nIn May 2015, the Milwaukee Brewers honored Bud Selig with the unveiling of the \"Selig Experience\" exhibit at American Family Field (formerly Miller Park.) The \"Selig Experience\" is a fifteen-minute documentary showing Bud Selig's life and work for the Milwaukee Brewers.\nPersonal life.\nSelig has been married twice. He married his first wife, Donna Chaimson, in the 1950s, and they had two daughters: Sari (born 1957) and Wendy (born 1960). The couple divorced in 1976 after 19 years of marriage on the grounds that Selig had been \"unduly absenting yourself from the home of the parties and isolating yourself ... in pursuit of your baseball interests to the detriment of your marriage.\" Chaimson later stated that\nthe marriage ended because her husband \"divorced me and married baseball.\" Since 1977, Selig has been married to the former Suzanne Steinman, who has a daughter from a previous marriage.\nTeaching.\nIn 2009, Selig began teaching as an adjunct professor of sports law and policy at Marquette University Law School. His classes have covered numerous topics, including \"the history of collective bargaining and free agency, baseball's antitrust exemption, revenue sharing \u2013 as well as finer points of sports law like intellectual property rights, ambush marketing, and why baseball does not allow game footage on YouTube.\"\nIn 2010, Selig endowed the Allan H. Selig Chair in the History of Sport and Society in the United States, as well as a Distinguished Lecture Series in Sport and Society at his alma mater, the University of Wisconsin. The inaugural lecture was given by Adrian Burgos. Selig has since endowed two more chairs in the university's history department.\nIn February 2016, Selig began teaching at the Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law at Arizona State University. His title at the law school is distinguished professor of sports in America. He is also a lecturer at UW\u2013Madison and Marquette.\nHonors.\nSelig was awarded the U.S. Department of the Army Outstanding Civilian Service Award in April 2015 for supporting soldiers, veterans, and their families through his work in Major League Baseball. On April 6, 2015, the Milwaukee Brewers retired uniform number 1 in his honor.\nIn 2014, Selig was inducted onto the inaugural Milwaukee Brewers Wall of Honor.\nOn December 4, 2016, it was announced Selig was elected into the National Baseball Hall of Fame Class of 2017. He was formally inducted on July 30, 2017.\nIn 2016, Selig was honored with the \"Lombardi Award of Excellence\" from the Vince Lombardi Cancer Foundation. The award was created to honor Coach Lombardi's legacy, and is awarded annually to an individual who exemplifies the spirit of the Coach."}
{"id": "4583", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4583", "title": "Bison", "text": "A bison (: bison) is a large bovine in the genus Bison (Greek: \"wild ox\" (bison)) within the tribe Bovini. Two extant and numerous extinct species are recognised.\nOf the two surviving species, the American bison, \"B.\u00a0bison\", found only in North America, is the more numerous. Although colloquially referred to as a buffalo in the United States and Canada, it is only distantly related to the true buffalo. The North American species is composed of two subspecies, the Plains bison, \"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0bison\", and the wood bison, \"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0athabascae\", which is the namesake of Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada. A third subspecies, the eastern bison (\"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0pennsylvanicus\") is no longer considered a valid taxon, being a junior synonym of \"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0bison\". References to \"woods bison\" or \"wood bison\" from the Eastern United States refer to this subspecies, not \"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0athabascae\", which was not found in the region. Its European kind \"B.\u00a0bonasus\" or wisent \u2014also 'zubr' or colloquially 'European buffalo'\u2014 is found in Europe and the Caucasus, reintroduced after being extinct in the wild.\nWhile bison species have been traditionally classified in their own genus, modern genetics indicates that they are nested within the genus \"Bos,\" which includes, among others, cattle, yaks and gaur, being most closely related to yaks. Bison are sometimes bred with domestic cattle and produce offspring called beefalo, in North America, or \u017cubro\u0144, in Poland.\nDescription.\nThe American bison and the European bison (wisent) are the largest surviving terrestrial animals in North America and Europe. They are typical artiodactyl (cloven hooved) ungulates, and are similar in appearance to other bovines such as cattle and true buffalo. They are broad and muscular with shaggy coats of long hair. Adults grow up to in height and in length for American bison and up to in height and in length for European bison. American bison can weigh from around and European bison can weigh from . European bison tend to be taller than American bison.\nBison are nomadic grazers and travel in herds. The bulls leave the herds of females at two or three years of age, and join a herd of males, which usually are smaller than female herds. Mature bulls rarely travel alone. Towards the end of the summer, for the reproductive season, the sexes necessarily commingle.\nAmerican bison are known for living in the Great Plains, but formerly had a much larger range, including much of the eastern United States and parts of Mexico. Both species were hunted close to extinction during the 19th and 20th centuries, but have since rebounded. The wisent in part owes its survival to the Chernobyl disaster, as the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone has become a kind of wildlife preserve for wisent and other rare megafauna such as the Przewalski's horse, though poaching has become a threat in the 21st century. The American Plains bison is no longer listed as endangered, but this does not mean the species is secure. Genetically pure \"B.\u00a0b.\u00a0bison\" currently number only about 20,000, separated into fragmented herds\u2014all of which require active conservation measures. The wood bison is on the endangered species list in Canada and is listed as threatened in the United States, though numerous attempts have been made by beefalo ranchers to have it entirely removed from the Endangered Species List.\nAlthough superficially similar, physical and behavioural differences exist between the American and European bison. The American species has 15 ribs, while the European bison has 14. The American bison has four lumbar vertebrae, while the European has five. (The difference in this case is that what would be the first lumbar vertebra has ribs attached to it in American bison and is thus counted as the 15th thoracic vertebra, compared to 14 thoracic vertebrae in wisent.) Adult American bison are less slim in build and have shorter legs. American bison tend to graze more, and browse less than their European relatives. Their anatomies reflect this behavioural difference; the American bison's head hangs lower than the European's. The body of the American bison is typically hairier, though its tail has less hair than that of the European bison. The horns of the European bison point through the plane of their faces, making them more adept at fighting through the interlocking of horns in the same manner as domestic cattle, unlike the American bison, which favours butting. American bison are more easily tamed than their European cousins, and breed with domestic cattle more readily.\nEvolution and genetic history.\nThe bovine tribe (Bovini) split about 5 to 10 million years ago into the buffalos (\"Bubalus\" and \"Syncerus\") and a group leading to bison and taurine cattle. Genetic evidence from nuclear DNA indicates that the closest living relatives of bison are yaks, with bison being nested within the genus \"Bos,\" rendering \"Bos\" without including bison paraphyletic. While nuclear DNA indicates that both extant bison species are each other's closest living relatives, the mitochondrial DNA of European bison is more closely related to that of domestic cattle and aurochs (while the mitochondrial DNA of American bison is closely related to that of yaks). This discrepancy is either suggested to be the result of incomplete lineage sorting or ancient introgression. Bison are widely believed to have evolved from a lineage belonging to the extinct genus \"Leptobos\" during the Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene in Asia. The earliest members of the bison lineage, known from the Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene of the Indian Subcontinent (\"Bison sivalensis\") and China (\"Bison palaeosinensis\"), approximately 3.4-2.6 million years ago (Ma) are placed in the subgenus \"Bison\" (\"Eobison\")\".\" The oldest remains of \"Eobison\" in Europe are those \"Bison georgicus\" found in Dmanisi, Georgia, dated to around 1.76 Ma. More derived members of the genus are placed in the subgenus \"Bison\" (\"Bison\"), which first appeared towards the end of the Early Pleistocene, around 1.2 Ma, with early members of the subgenus including the widespread \"Bison schoetensacki\".\nThe steppe bison (\"Bison priscus\") first appeared during the mid-Middle Pleistocene in eastern Eurasia, and subsequently became widely distributed across Eurasia. During the late Middle Pleistocene, around 195,000-135,000 years ago, the steppe bison migrated across the Bering land bridge into North America, becoming ancestral to North American bison species, including the large \"Bison latifrons,\" and the smaller \"Bison antiquus,\" which became extinct at the end of the Late Pleistocene. Modern American bison are thought to have evolved from \"B.\u00a0antiquus\" during the Late Pleistocene-Holocene transition via the intermediate form \"Bison occidentalis\". The European bison, \"Bison bonasus,\" first appeared in Europe during the late Middle Pleistocene, where it existed in sympatry with the steppe bison. Its relationship with other extinct bison species is unclear, though it appears to be only distantly related to the steppe and American bisons, with possibly some interbreeding between the two lineages during the Middle Pleistocene. The steppe bison survived into the early-mid Holocene in Alaska-Yukon and eastern Siberia, before becoming extinct.\nDuring the population bottleneck caused by the great slaughter of American bison during the 19th century, the number of bison remaining alive in North America declined to as low as 541. During that period, a handful of ranchers gathered remnants of the existing herds to save the species from extinction. These ranchers bred some of the bison with cattle in an effort to produce \"cattleo\" (today called \"beefalo\"). Accidental crossings were also known to occur. Generally, male domestic bulls were crossed with bison cows, producing offspring of which only the females were fertile. The crossbred animals did not demonstrate any form of hybrid vigor, so the practice was abandoned. Wisent-American bison hybrids were briefly experimented with in Germany (and found to be fully fertile) and a herd of such animals is maintained in Russia. A herd of cattle-wisent crossbreeds (zubron) is maintained in Poland. First-generation crosses do not occur naturally, requiring caesarean delivery. First-generation males are infertile. The U.S. National Bison Association has adopted a code of ethics that prohibits its members from deliberately crossbreeding bison with any other species. In the United States, many ranchers are now using DNA testing to cull the residual cattle genetics from their bison herds. The proportion of cattle DNA that has been measured in introgressed individuals and bison herds today is typically quite low, ranging from 0.56 to 1.8%.\nThere are also remnant purebred American bison herds on public lands in North America. Two subspecies of bison exist in North America: the \"plains bison\" and the \"wood bison\". Herds of importance are found in Yellowstone National Park, Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota, Blue Mounds State Park in Minnesota, Elk Island National Park in Alberta, and Grasslands National Park in Saskatchewan. In 2015, a purebred herd of 350 individuals was identified on public lands in the Henry Mountains of southern Utah via genetic testing of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. This study, published in 2015, also showed the Henry Mountains bison herd to be free of brucellosis, a bacterial disease that was imported with non-native domestic cattle to North America.\nIn 2021, the American Society of Mammalogists considered \"Bison\" to be a subgenus, and placed both bison species back into \"Bos\".\nRelationships of bovines based on nuclear DNA, after Sinding, et al. 2021.\nBehavior.\nWallowing is a common behavior of bison. A \"bison wallow\" is a shallow depression in the soil, either wet or dry. Bison roll in these depressions, covering themselves with mud or dust. Possible explanations suggested for wallowing behavior include grooming behavior associated with moulting, male-male interaction (typically rutting behavior), social behavior for group cohesion, play behavior, relief from skin irritation due to biting insects, reduction of ectoparasite load (ticks and lice), and thermoregulation. In the process of wallowing, bison may become infected by the fatal disease anthrax, which may occur naturally in the soil.\nBison temperament is often unpredictable. They usually appear peaceful, unconcerned, or even lazy, but they may attack without warning or apparent reason. They can move at speeds up to and cover long distances at a lumbering gallop.\nTheir most obvious weapons are the horns borne by both males and females, but their massive heads can be used as battering rams, effectively using the momentum produced by what is a typical weight of moving at . The hind legs can also be used to kill or maim with devastating effect. In the words of early naturalists, they were dangerous, savage animals that feared no other animal and in prime condition could best any foe except for a brown bear or a pack of wolves.\nThe rutting, or mating, season lasts from June through September, with peak activity in July and August. At this time, the older bulls rejoin the herd, and fights often take place between bulls. The herd exhibits much restlessness during breeding season. The animals are belligerent, unpredictable, and most dangerous.\nHabitat.\nAmerican bison live in river valleys and on prairies and plains. Typical habitat is open or semiopen grasslands, as well as sagebrush, semiarid lands, and scrublands. Some lightly wooded areas are also known historically to have supported bison. They also graze in hilly or mountainous areas where the slopes are not steep. Although not particularly known as high-altitude animals, bison in the Yellowstone Park bison herd are frequently found at elevations above . The Henry Mountains bison herd is found on the plains around the Henry Mountains, Utah, as well as in mountain valleys of the Henry Mountains to an altitude of .\nEuropean bison most commonly live in lightly wooded to fully wooded areas as well as areas with increased shrubs and bushes. European bison can sometimes be found living on grasslands and plains as well.\nRestrictions.\nThroughout most of their historical range, landowners have sought restrictions on free-ranging bison. Herds on private land are required to be fenced in.\nIn the state of Montana, free-ranging bison on public land are legally shot, due to transmission of disease to cattle and damage to public property.\nIn 2013, Montana legislative measures concerning the bison were proposed and passed, but opposed by Native American tribes as they impinged on sovereign tribal rights. Three such bills were vetoed by Steve Bullock, the governor of Montana. The bison's circumstances remain an issue of contention between Native American tribes and private landowners.\nDiet.\nBison are ruminants, able to ferment cellulose in a specialized stomach prior to digestion. Bison were once thought to almost exclusively consume grasses and sedges, but are now known to consume a wide-variety of plants including woody plants and herbaceous eudicots. Over the course of the year, bison shift which plants they select in their diet based on which plants have the highest protein or energy concentrations at a given time and will reliably consume the same species of plants across years. Protein concentrations of the plants they eat tend to be highest in the spring and decline thereafter, reaching their lowest in the winter. In Yellowstone National Park, bison browsed willows and cottonwoods, not only in the winter when few other plants are available, but also in the summer. Bison are thought to migrate to optimize their diet, and will concentrate their feeding on recently burned areas due to the higher quality forage that regrows after the burn. Wisent tend to browse on shrubs and low-hanging trees more often than do the American bison, which prefer grass to shrubbery and trees.\nReproduction.\nFemale bison (\"cows\") typically reproduce after three years of age and can continue beyond 19 years of age. Cows produce calves annually as long as their nutrition is sufficient, but not after years when weight gain is low. Reproduction is dependent on a cow's mass and age. Heavier cows produce heavier calves (weighed in the fall at weaning), and weights of calves are lower for older cows (after age 8).\nPredators.\nOwing to their size, bison have few predators. Five exceptions are humans, grey wolves, cougars, grizzly bears, and coyotes. Wolves generally take down a bison while in a pack, but cases of a single wolf killing bison have been reported. Grizzly bears also consume bison, often by driving off the pack and consuming the wolves' kill. Grizzly bears and coyotes also prey on bison calves. Historically and prehistorically, lions, cave lions, tigers, dire wolves, \"Smilodon\", \"Homotherium\", cave hyenas, and Neanderthals posed threats to bison.\nInfections and illness.\nFor American bison, a main illness is malignant catarrhal fever, though brucellosis is a serious concern in the Yellowstone Park bison herd.&lt;ref name=\"billingsgazette/carcasses-yellowstone\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Bison in the Antelope Island bison herd are regularly inoculated against brucellosis, parasites, \"Clostridium\" infection, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, and bovine vibriosis.\nThe major illnesses in European bison are foot-and-mouth disease and balanoposthitis. Inbreeding of a small population plays a role in a number of genetic defects and lowers immunity to disease; that poses greater risk to the population.\nName.\nThe name 'bison' was first used for the European species\u2014 ancient Greek authors Pausanias and Oppian in 2nd-century AD wrote about them in Greek as \"bis\u014dn\"; so did Roman authors Pliny the Elder and Gaius Julius Solinus (as Latin ). The Germanic name 'wisent' is a cognate, meaning that the two words share a common origin. The Latin was made into a genus name by Charles Hamilton Smith in 1827.\nAlthough called \"buffalo\" in American English, they are only distantly related to two \"true buffalo\", the Asian water buffalo and the African buffalo. Samuel de Champlain applied the French term \"buffle\" to the bison in 1616 (published 1619), after seeing skins and a drawing shown to him by members of the Nipissing First Nation, who said they travelled 40 days (from east of Lake Huron) to trade with another nation who hunted the animals. Though \"bison\" might be considered more scientifically correct, \"buffalo\" is also considered correct as a result of standard usage in American English, and is listed in many dictionaries as an acceptable name for American buffalo or bison. \"Buffalo\" has a much longer history than \"bison\", which was first recorded in 1774.\nBison and human culture.\nBison was a significant resource for indigenous peoples of North America for food and raw materials until near extinction in the late 19th century. For the indigenous peoples of the Plains, it was their principal food source. Native Americans highly valued their relationship with the bison and saw them as sacred, treating them respectfully to ensure their abundance and longevity. In his biography, Lakota teacher and elder John Fire Lame Deer describes the relationship as such:\nEuropean colonials were almost exclusively accountable for the near-extinction of the American bison in the 1800s. At the beginning of the century, tens of millions of bison roamed North America. Colonists slaughtered an estimated 50 million bison during the 19th century, although the causes of decline and the numbers killed are disputed and debated. Railroads were advertising \"hunting by rail\", where trains encountered large herds alongside or crossing the tracks. Men aboard fired from the train's roof or windows, leaving countless animals to rot where they died. This overhunting was in part motivated by the U.S. government's desire to limit the range and power of indigenous plains Indians whose diets and cultures depended on the buffalo herds. The overhunting of the bison reduced their population to hundreds.\nThe American bison's nadir came in 1889, with an estimated population of only 1,091 animals (both wild and captive). Repopulation attempts via enforced protection of government herds and extensive ranching began in 1910 and have continued (with excellent success) to the present day, with some caveats. Extensive farming has increased the bison's population to nearly 150,000, and it is officially no longer considered an endangered species. However, from a genetic standpoint, most of these animals are actually hybrids with domestic cattle and only two populations in Yellowstone National Park in the United States and Elk Island National Park in Canada remain as genetically pure bison. These genetically pure animals account for only ~5% of the currently extant American bison population, reflecting the loss of most of the species' genetic diversity.\nAs of July 2015, an estimated 4,900 bison lived in Yellowstone National Park, the largest U.S. bison population on public land. During 1983\u20131985 visitors experienced 33 bison-related injuries (range = 10\u201313/year), so the park implemented education campaigns. After years of success, five injuries associated with bison encounters occurred in 2015, because visitors did not maintain the required distance of 75\u00a0ft (23 m) from bison while hiking or taking pictures.\nNutrition.\nBison is an excellent source of complete protein and a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of multiple vitamins, including riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12, and is also a rich source of minerals, including iron, phosphorus, and zinc. Additionally, bison is a good source (10% or more of the DV) of thiamine. \nLivestock.\nThe earliest plausible accounts of captive bison are those of the zoo at Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, which held an animal the Spaniards called \"the Mexican bull\". In 1552, Francisco Lopez de Gomara described Plains Indians herding and leading bison like cattle in his controversial book, \"Historia general de las Indias\". Gomara, having never visited the Americas himself, likely misinterpreted early ethnographic accounts as the more familiar pastoralist relationship of the Old World. Today, bison are increasingly raised for meat, hides, wool, and dairy products. The majority of bison in the world are raised for human consumption or fur clothing. Bison meat is generally considered to taste very similar to beef, but is lower in fat and cholesterol, yet higher in protein than beef, which has led to the development of beefalo, a fertile hybrid of bison and domestic cattle. A market even exists for kosher bison meat; these bison are slaughtered at one of the few kosher mammal slaughterhouses in the U.S. and Canada, and the meat is then distributed worldwide.\nIn America, the commercial industry for bison has been slow to develop despite individuals, such as Ted Turner, who have long marketed bison meat. In the 1990s, Turner found limited success with restaurants for high-quality cuts of meat, which include bison steaks and tenderloin. Lower-quality cuts suitable for hamburger and hot dogs have been described as \"almost nonexistent\". This created a marketing problem for commercial farming because the majority of usable meat, about 400 pounds for each bison, is suitable for these products. In 2003, the United States Department of Agriculture purchased $10 million worth of frozen overstock to save the industry, which would later recover through better use of consumer marketing. Restaurants have played a role in popularizing bison meat, like Ted's Montana Grill, which added bison to their menus. Ruby Tuesday first offered bison on their menus in 2005.\nIn Canada, commercial bison farming began in the mid-1980s, concerning an unknown number of animals then. The first census of the bison occurred in 1996, which recorded 45,235 bison on 745 farms, and grew to 195,728 bison on 1,898 farms for the 2006 census.\nSeveral pet food companies use bison as a red meat alternative in dog foods. The companies producing these formulas include Natural Balance Pet Foods, Freshpet, the Blue Buffalo Company, Solid Gold, Canidae, and Taste of the Wild (made by Diamond Pet Foods, Inc., owned by Schell and Kampeter, Inc.)."}
{"id": "4584", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4584", "title": "Baryon", "text": "In particle physics, a baryon is a type of composite subatomic particle that contains an odd number of valence quarks, conventionally three. Protons and neutrons are examples of baryons; because baryons are composed of quarks, they belong to the hadron family of particles. Baryons are also classified as fermions because they have half-integer spin.\nThe name \"baryon\", introduced by Abraham Pais, comes from the Greek word for \"heavy\" (\u03b2\u03b1\u03c1\u03cd\u03c2, \"bar\u00fds\"), because, at the time of their naming, most known elementary particles had lower masses than the baryons. Each baryon has a corresponding antiparticle (antibaryon) where their corresponding antiquarks replace quarks. For example, a proton is made of two up quarks and one down quark; and its corresponding antiparticle, the antiproton, is made of two up antiquarks and one down antiquark.\nBaryons participate in the residual strong force, which is mediated by particles known as mesons. The most familiar baryons are protons and neutrons, both of which contain three quarks, and for this reason they are sometimes called \"triquarks\". These particles make up most of the mass of the visible matter in the universe and compose the nucleus of every atom (electrons, the other major component of the atom, are members of a different family of particles called leptons; leptons do not interact via the strong force). Exotic baryons containing five quarks, called pentaquarks, have also been discovered and studied.\nA census of the Universe's baryons indicates that 10% of them could be found inside galaxies, 50 to 60% in the circumgalactic medium, and the remaining 30 to 40% could be located in the warm\u2013hot intergalactic medium (WHIM).\nBackground.\nBaryons are strongly interacting fermions; that is, they are acted on by the strong nuclear force and are described by Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics, which apply to all particles obeying the Pauli exclusion principle. This is in contrast to the bosons, which do not obey the exclusion principle.\nBaryons, alongside mesons, are hadrons, composite particles composed of quarks. Quarks have baryon numbers of \"B\"\u00a0=\u00a0 and antiquarks have baryon numbers of \"B\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212. The term \"baryon\" usually refers to \"triquarks\"\u2014baryons made of three quarks (\"B\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0=\u00a01).\nOther exotic baryons have been proposed, such as pentaquarks\u2014baryons made of four quarks and one antiquark (\"B\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\u00a0=\u00a01), but their existence is not generally accepted. The particle physics community as a whole did not view their existence as likely in 2006, and in 2008, considered evidence to be overwhelmingly against the existence of the reported pentaquarks. However, in July 2015, the LHCb experiment observed two resonances consistent with pentaquark states in the \u039b \u2192 J/\u03c8Kp decay, with a combined statistical significance of 15\u03c3.\nIn theory, heptaquarks (5 quarks, 2 antiquarks), nonaquarks (6 quarks, 3 antiquarks), etc. could also exist.\nBaryonic matter.\nNearly all matter that may be encountered or experienced in everyday life is baryonic matter, which includes atoms of any sort, and provides them with the property of mass. Non-baryonic matter, as implied by the name, is any sort of matter that is not composed primarily of baryons. This might include neutrinos and free electrons, dark matter, supersymmetric particles, axions, and black holes.\nThe very existence of baryons is also a significant issue in cosmology because it is assumed that the Big Bang produced a state with equal amounts of baryons and antibaryons. The process by which baryons came to outnumber their antiparticles is called baryogenesis.\nBaryogenesis.\nExperiments are consistent with the number of quarks in the universe being conserved alongside the total baryon number, with antibaryons being counted as negative quantities. Within the prevailing Standard Model of particle physics, the number of baryons may change in multiples of three due to the action of sphalerons, although this is rare and has not been observed under experiment. Some grand unified theories of particle physics also predict that a single proton can decay, changing the baryon number by one; however, this has not yet been observed under experiment. The excess of baryons over antibaryons in the present universe is thought to be due to non-conservation of baryon number in the very early universe, though this is not well understood.\nProperties.\nIsospin and charge.\nThe concept of isospin was first proposed by Werner Heisenberg in 1932 to explain the similarities between protons and neutrons under the strong interaction. Although they had different electric charges, their masses were so similar that physicists believed they were the same particle. The different electric charges were explained as being the result of some unknown excitation similar to spin. This unknown excitation was later dubbed \"isospin\" by Eugene Wigner in 1937.\nThis belief lasted until Murray Gell-Mann proposed the quark model in 1964 (containing originally only the u, d, and s quarks). The success of the isospin model is now understood to be the result of the similar masses of u and d quarks. Since u and d quarks have similar masses, particles made of the same number then also have similar masses. The exact specific u and d quark composition determines the charge, as u quarks carry charge + while d quarks carry charge \u2212. For example, the four Deltas all have different charges ( (uuu), (uud), (udd), (ddd)), but have similar masses (~1,232\u00a0MeV/c2) as they are each made of a combination of three u or d quarks. Under the isospin model, they were considered to be a single particle in different charged states.\nThe mathematics of isospin was modeled after that of spin. Isospin projections varied in increments of 1 just like those of spin, and to each projection was associated a \"charged state\". Since the \"Delta particle\" had four \"charged states\", it was said to be of isospin \"I\"\u00a0=\u00a0. Its \"charged states\" , , , and , corresponded to the isospin projections \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0+, \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0+, \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212, and \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212, respectively. Another example is the \"nucleon particle\". As there were two nucleon \"charged states\", it was said to be of isospin . The positive nucleon (proton) was identified with \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0+ and the neutral nucleon (neutron) with \"I\"3\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212. It was later noted that the isospin projections were related to the up and down quark content of particles by the relation:\nwhere the \"n\"'s are the number of up and down quarks and antiquarks.\nIn the \"isospin picture\", the four Deltas and the two nucleons were thought to be the different states of two particles. However, in the quark model, Deltas are different states of nucleons (the N++ or N\u2212 are forbidden by Pauli's exclusion principle). Isospin, although conveying an inaccurate picture of things, is still used to classify baryons, leading to unnatural and often confusing nomenclature.\nFlavour quantum numbers.\nThe strangeness flavour quantum number \"S\" (not to be confused with spin) was noticed to go up and down along with particle mass. The higher the mass, the lower the strangeness (the more s quarks). Particles could be described with isospin projections (related to charge) and strangeness (mass) (see the uds octet and decuplet figures on the right). As other quarks were discovered, new quantum numbers were made to have similar description of udc and udb octets and decuplets. Since only the u and d mass are similar, this description of particle mass and charge in terms of isospin and flavour quantum numbers works well only for octet and decuplet made of one u, one d, and one other quark, and breaks down for the other octets and decuplets (for example, ucb octet and decuplet). If the quarks all had the same mass, their behaviour would be called \"symmetric\", as they would all behave in the same way to the strong interaction. Since quarks do not have the same mass, they do not interact in the same way (exactly like an electron placed in an electric field will accelerate more than a proton placed in the same field because of its lighter mass), and the symmetry is said to be broken.\nIt was noted that charge (\"Q\") was related to the isospin projection (\"I\"3), the baryon number (\"B\") and flavour quantum numbers (\"S\", \"C\", \"B\"\u2032, \"T\") by the Gell-Mann\u2013Nishijima formula:\nwhere \"S\", \"C\", \"B\"\u2032, and \"T\" represent the strangeness, charm, bottomness and topness flavour quantum numbers, respectively. They are related to the number of strange, charm, bottom, and top quarks and antiquark according to the relations:\nmeaning that the Gell-Mann\u2013Nishijima formula is equivalent to the expression of charge in terms of quark content:\nSpin, orbital angular momentum, and total angular momentum.\nSpin (quantum number \"S\") is a vector quantity that represents the \"intrinsic\" angular momentum of a particle. It comes in increments of \u00a0\u0127 (pronounced \"h-bar\"). The \u0127 is often dropped because it is the \"fundamental\" unit of spin, and it is implied that \"spin 1\" means \"spin 1\u00a0\u0127\". In some systems of natural units, \u0127 is chosen to be 1, and therefore does not appear anywhere.\nQuarks are fermionic particles of spin (\"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0). Because spin projections vary in increments of 1 (that is 1\u00a0\u0127), a single quark has a spin vector of length , and has two spin projections (\"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0+ and \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212). Two quarks can have their spins aligned, in which case the two spin vectors add to make a vector of length \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a01 and three spin projections (\"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0+1, \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a00, and \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121). If two quarks have unaligned spins, the spin vectors add up to make a vector of length \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00 and has only one spin projection (\"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a00), etc. Since baryons are made of three quarks, their spin vectors can add to make a vector of length \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0, which has four spin projections (\"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0+, \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0+, \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212, and \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212), or a vector of length \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0 with two spin projections (\"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0+, and \"S\"z\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212).\nThere is another quantity of angular momentum, called the orbital angular momentum (azimuthal quantum number \"L\"), that comes in increments of 1\u00a0\u0127, which represent the angular moment due to quarks orbiting around each other. The total angular momentum (total angular momentum quantum number \"J\") of a particle is therefore the combination of intrinsic angular momentum (spin) and orbital angular momentum. It can take any value from to , in increments of 1.\nParticle physicists are most interested in baryons with no orbital angular momentum (\"L\"\u00a0=\u00a00), as they correspond to ground states\u2014states of minimal energy. Therefore, the two groups of baryons most studied are the \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0; \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a00 and \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0; \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a00, which corresponds to \"J\"\u00a0=\u00a0+ and \"J\"\u00a0=\u00a0+, respectively, although they are not the only ones. It is also possible to obtain \"J\"\u00a0=\u00a0+ particles from \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0 and \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a02, as well as \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a0 and \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a02. This phenomenon of having multiple particles in the same total angular momentum configuration is called \"degeneracy\". How to distinguish between these degenerate baryons is an active area of research in baryon spectroscopy.\nParity.\nIf the universe were reflected in a mirror, most of the laws of physics would be identical\u2014things would behave the same way regardless of what we call \"left\" and what we call \"right\". This concept of mirror reflection is called \"intrinsic parity\" or simply \"parity\" (\"P\"). Gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the strong interaction all behave in the same way regardless of whether or not the universe is reflected in a mirror, and thus are said to conserve parity (P-symmetry). However, the weak interaction does distinguish \"left\" from \"right\", a phenomenon called parity violation (P-violation).\nBased on this, if the wavefunction for each particle (in more precise terms, the quantum field for each particle type) were simultaneously mirror-reversed, then the new set of wavefunctions would perfectly satisfy the laws of physics (apart from the weak interaction). It turns out that this is not quite true: for the equations to be satisfied, the wavefunctions of certain types of particles have to be multiplied by \u22121, in addition to being mirror-reversed. Such particle types are said to have negative or odd parity (\"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121, or alternatively \"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u2013), while the other particles are said to have positive or even parity (\"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0+1, or alternatively \"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0+).\nFor baryons, the parity is related to the orbital angular momentum by the relation:\nAs a consequence, baryons with no orbital angular momentum (\"L\"\u00a0=\u00a00) all have even parity (\"P\"\u00a0=\u00a0+).\nNomenclature.\nBaryons are classified into groups according to their isospin (\"I\") values and quark (\"q\") content. There are six groups of baryons: nucleon (), Delta (), Lambda (), Sigma (), Xi (), and Omega (). The rules for classification are defined by the Particle Data Group. These rules consider the up (), down () and strange () quarks to be \"light\" and the charm (), bottom (), and top () quarks to be \"heavy\". The rules cover all the particles that can be made from three of each of the six quarks, even though baryons made of top quarks are not expected to exist because of the top quark's short lifetime. The rules do not cover pentaquarks.\nIt is also a widespread (but not universal) practice to follow some additional rules when distinguishing between some states that would otherwise have the same symbol.\nQuarks carry a charge, so knowing the charge of a particle indirectly gives the quark content. For example, the rules above say that a contains a c quark and some combination of two u and/or d quarks. The c quark has a charge of (\"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a0+), therefore the other two must be a u quark (\"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a0+), and a d quark (\"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212) to have the correct total charge (\"Q\"\u00a0=\u00a0+1)."}
{"id": "4586", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4586", "title": "Byzantine fire", "text": ""}
{"id": "4589", "revid": "47459449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4589", "title": "Braille embosser", "text": "A braille embosser is an impact printer that renders text as tactile braille cells. Using braille translation software, a document or digital text can be embossed with relative ease. This makes braille production efficient and cost-effective. Braille translation software may be free and open-sourced or paid. Braille embossers can emboss single-sided or double-sided (called interpoint) and can produce 6- or 8-dot braille.\nBlind users tend to call other printers \"ink printers,\" to distinguish them from their braille counterparts. This is often the case regardless of the type of printer being discussed (e.g., thermal printers being called \"ink printers\" even though they use no ink).\nAs with ink printers and presses, embossers range from those intended for consumers to those used by large publishers. The price of embossers increase with the volume of braille it produces .\nTypes.\nThe fastest industrial braille embosser is probably the $92,000 Belgian-made NV Interpoint 55, first produced in 1991, which uses a separate air compressor to drive the embossing head and can output up to 800 braille characters per second. Adoption was slow at first; in 2000 the National Federation of the Blind said there were only three of these in the US, one owned by the NFB itself and the other two by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. As of 2008, there are more than 60 in use across the world.\nSmaller desktop braille embossers are more common and can be found in libraries, universities, and specialist education centers, as well as being privately owned by blind individuals. It may be necessary to use an acoustic cabinet or hood to dampen the noise level.\nBraille embossers usually need special braille paper which is thicker and more expensive than normal paper. Some high-end embossers are capable of printing on normal paper. Embossers can be either one-sided or two-sided. Two-sided embossing requires lining up the dots so they do not overlap (called \"interpoint\" because the points on the other side are placed in between the points on the first side). Two-sided embossing uses less paper and reduces the size of the output.\nOnce one copy of a document has been produced, printing further copies is often quicker by means of a device called a thermoform, which produces copies on soft plastic. However, the resulting braille is not as easily readable as braille that has been freshly embossed, in much the same way that a poor-quality photocopy is not as readable as the original. Hence large publishers do not generally use thermoforms.\nSome embossers can produce \"dotty Moon\", i.e., Moon type shapes formed by dots."}
{"id": "4590", "revid": "901231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4590", "title": "Brachycephalic", "text": ""}
{"id": "4592", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4592", "title": "Basic Role-Playing", "text": "Basic Role-Playing (BRP) is a tabletop role-playing game which originated in the \"RuneQuest\" fantasy role-playing game. Chaosium released the \"BRP\" standalone booklet in 1980 in the boxed set release of the second edition of \"RuneQuest\". Greg Stafford and Lynn Willis are credited as the authors. Chaosium used the percentile skill-based system as the basis for most of their games, including \"Call of Cthulhu\", \"Stormbringer\", and \"Elfquest\".\nHistory.\nThe core rules were written by Steve Perrin as part of his game \"RuneQuest\". It was Greg Stafford's idea to simplify the rules (eliminating such mechanics as Strike Ranks and Hit Locations) and issue them in a 16-page booklet called \"Basic Role-Playing\". Since the first \"BRP\" release, designers including Sandy Petersen, Lynn Willis, and Steve Henderson, have contributed to the system.\nThe system was notable for being the first role-playing game system to introduce a full skill system to characters regardless of their profession. This was developed in \"RuneQuest\" but was also later adopted by the more skill-oriented \"Call of Cthulhu\" RPG.\n\"BRP\" was conceived of as a generic system. Specific rule systems for support differing genres could be added to the core rules in a modular fashion. In order to underscore this, in 1982 Chaosium released the \"Worlds of Wonder\" box set, which contained a revised main booklet and several booklets providing the additional rules for playing in specific genres. The superhero-themed \"Superworld\" originated as part of this set. A third edition of the core booklet, now entitled \"Basic Roleplaying: The Chaosium System\", was released in 2002.\nIn 2004, Chaosium began publishing the \"Basic Roleplaying\" monographs, a series of paperback booklets. The first four monographs (\"Players Book\", \"Magic Book\", \"Creatures Book\", and \"Gamemaster Book\") was the same as \"RuneQuest\" 3rd Edition, but with trademarked elements removed, as Chaosium had lost the rights to the name but retained copyright to the rules text. Additional monographs allowing for new mechanics, thereby extending the system to other genres, were released in the following years. Many of these monographs reproduced rules from other Chaosium-published \"BRP\" games that had gone out of print.\nJason Durall and Sam Johnson gathered up previous works and updated them to a new edition. published in 2008. This comprehensive book, \"Basic Roleplaying: The Chaosium System\" nicknamed the \"Big Gold Book\". It allowed game masters to build their own game out of the included subsystems. A quickstart booklet for new players accompanied it. In 2011, it was updated to a second edition.\nIn 2020, Chaosium released \"Basic Roleplaying\" as a System Reference Document (SRD).\nA new edition, entitled \"Basic Roleplaying: Universal Game Engine\", appeared in 2023, initially as a PDF and later as a hardbound book.\nLicensed adaptations.\nPreexisting RPG and fiction settings converted to the system by Chaosium using the \"BRP\" ruleset include \"Ringworld\", \"Hawkmoon\", and an adaptation of the French RPG \"Nephilim\".\nRules system.\n\"BRP\" is similar to other generic systems such as \"GURPS\", \"Hero System\", or \"Savage Worlds\" in that it uses a simple resolution method which can be broadly applied. It uses a core set of seven characteristics: Size, Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Power, and Appearance or Charisma. From these, a character derives scores in various skills, expressed as percentages. These skill scores are the basis of play. When attempting an action, the player rolls percentile dice to attempt to get a result equal to or lower than the character's skill score. Each incarnation of the \"BRP\" rules changed or added to the core ideas and mechanics, so that games are not identical. For example, in \"Call of Cthulhu\", skills may never be over 100%, while in \"Stormbringer\" skills in excess of 100% are within reach for all characters. Scores can increase through experience checks, the mechanics of which vary in an individual game.\nThe system treats armor and defense as separate: the act of parrying is a defensive skill that reduces an opponent's chance to successfully land an attack, and the purpose of armor is to absorb damage.\nIn most \"BRP\" games there is no difference between the player character race systems and that of monsters or other opponents. By varying ability scores, the same system is used for a human hero as a troll villain. This approach allows for players to play a variety of nonhuman species.\nAdaptations of the system.\nChaosium was an early adopter of licensing out its \"BRP\" system to other companies, something that was unique at the time they began but commonplace now thanks to the d20 licenses. This places \"BRP\" in the notable position of being one of the first products to allow other game companies to develop games or game aids for their work. For example, \"Other Suns\", published by Fantasy Games Unlimited, used them under license. \"BRP\" was also used as the base for the Swedish game \"Drakar och Demoner\" from Target Games.\nReception.\nIn the July 1981 edition of \"The Space Gamer\" (Issue No. 41), Ronald Pehr commented that \"\"Basic Role-Playing\" is too little too late. \"RuneQuest\" is long established, does an adequate job of teaching role-playing, and there are now even more games to choose from. If you want to teach role-playing to a very young, but literate, child, \"Basic Role-Playing\" is excellent. Otherwise, for all its charm, it's not much use.\".\nIn the August 1981 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 52), John Sapienza noted that \"Basic Roleplaying\" was \"not a fantasy role-playing game as such, but a handbook on how to role-play and a simple combat system to help the beginner get into the act.\" Despite this, Sapienza called it \"one of the best introductions to the practical social interactions in gaming that I have read, and will give beginning gamers the kind of guidance they typically do not get in the full-scale games they will graduate to, since game writers usually spend their time on mechanics instead of on the proper relationships between player and player, player and referee, or player and character.\" He concluded, \"\"Basic Role-Playing\" is a truly universal introduction to the hobby \u2014 highly recommended.\"\nAwards.\nThe \"BRP\" itself has been the recipient, via its games, of many awards. Most notable was the 1981 Origins Award for \"Best Roleplaying Rules of 1981\" for \"Call of Cthulhu\". Other editions of \"Call of Cthulhu\" have also won Origins Awards including the Hall of Fame award. The \"BRP\" Character Generation software has also won awards for its design."}
{"id": "4593", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4593", "title": "Battleship game", "text": ""}
{"id": "4594", "revid": "47573241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4594", "title": "Block cipher", "text": "In cryptography, a block cipher is a deterministic algorithm that operates on fixed-length groups of bits, called \"blocks\". Block ciphers are the elementary building blocks of many cryptographic protocols. They are ubiquitous in the storage and exchange of data, where such data is secured and authenticated via encryption.\nA block cipher uses blocks as an unvarying transformation. Even a secure block cipher is suitable for the encryption of only a single block of data at a time, using a fixed key. A multitude of modes of operation have been designed to allow their repeated use in a secure way to achieve the security goals of confidentiality and authenticity. However, block ciphers may also feature as building blocks in other cryptographic protocols, such as universal hash functions and pseudorandom number generators.\nDefinition.\nA block cipher consists of two paired algorithms, one for encryption, , and the other for decryption, . Both algorithms accept two inputs: an input block of size bits and a key of size bits; and both yield an -bit output block. The decryption algorithm is defined to be the inverse function of encryption, i.e., . More formally, a block cipher is specified by an encryption function\nwhich takes as input a key , of bit length (called the \"key size\"), and a bit string , of length (called the \"block size\"), and returns a string of bits. is called the plaintext, and is termed the ciphertext. For each , the function () is required to be an invertible mapping on . The inverse for is defined as a function\ntaking a key and a ciphertext to return a plaintext value , such that\nFor example, a block cipher encryption algorithm might take a 128-bit block of plaintext as input, and output a corresponding 128-bit block of ciphertext. The exact transformation is controlled using a second input \u2013\u00a0the secret key. Decryption is similar: the decryption algorithm takes, in this example, a 128-bit block of ciphertext together with the secret key, and yields the original 128-bit block of plain text.\nFor each key \"K\", \"EK\" is a permutation (a bijective mapping) over the set of input blocks. Each key selects one permutation from the set of formula_4 possible permutations.\nHistory.\nThe modern design of block ciphers is based on the concept of an iterated product cipher. In his seminal 1949 publication, \"Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems\", Claude Shannon analyzed product ciphers and suggested them as a means of effectively improving security by combining simple operations such as substitutions and permutations. Iterated product ciphers carry out encryption in multiple rounds, each of which uses a different subkey derived from the original key. One widespread implementation of such ciphers named a Feistel network after Horst Feistel is notably implemented in the DES cipher. Many other realizations of block ciphers, such as the AES, are classified as substitution\u2013permutation networks.\nThe root of all cryptographic block formats used within the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) and American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards lies with the Atalla Key Block (AKB), which was a key innovation of the Atalla Box, the first hardware security module (HSM). It was developed in 1972 by Mohamed M. Atalla, founder of Atalla Corporation (now Utimaco Atalla), and released in 1973. The AKB was a key block, which is required to securely interchange symmetric keys or PINs with other actors in the banking industry. This secure interchange is performed using the AKB format. The Atalla Box protected over 90% of all ATM networks in operation as of 1998, and Atalla products still secure the majority of the world's ATM transactions as of 2014.\nThe publication of the DES cipher by the United States National Bureau of Standards (subsequently the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST) in 1977 was fundamental in the public understanding of modern block cipher design. It also influenced the academic development of cryptanalytic attacks. Both differential and linear cryptanalysis arose out of studies on DES design. , there is a palette of attack techniques against which a block cipher must be secure, in addition to being robust against brute-force attacks.\nDesign.\nIterated block ciphers.\nMost block cipher algorithms are classified as \"iterated block ciphers\" which means that they transform fixed-size blocks of plaintext into identically sized blocks of ciphertext, via the repeated application of an invertible transformation known as the \"round function\", with each iteration referred to as a \"round\".\nUsually, the round function \"R\" takes different \"round keys\" \"Ki\" as a second input, which is derived from the original key:\nwhere formula_6 is the plaintext and formula_7 the ciphertext, with \"r\" being the number of rounds.\nFrequently, key whitening is used in addition to this. At the beginning and the end, the data is modified with key material (often with XOR):\nGiven one of the standard iterated block cipher design schemes, it is fairly easy to construct a block cipher that is cryptographically secure, simply by using a large number of rounds. However, this will make the cipher inefficient. Thus, efficiency is the most important additional design criterion for professional ciphers. Further, a good block cipher is designed to avoid side-channel attacks, such as branch prediction and input-dependent memory accesses that might leak secret data via the cache state or the execution time. In addition, the cipher should be concise, for small hardware and software implementations.\nSubstitution\u2013permutation networks.\nOne important type of iterated block cipher known as a \"substitution\u2013permutation network (SPN)\" takes a block of the plaintext and the key as inputs and applies several alternating rounds consisting of a substitution stage followed by a permutation stage\u2014to produce each block of ciphertext output. The non-linear substitution stage mixes the key bits with those of the plaintext, creating Shannon's \"confusion\". The linear permutation stage then dissipates redundancies, creating \"diffusion\".\nA \"substitution box (S-box)\" substitutes a small block of input bits with another block of output bits. This substitution must be one-to-one, to ensure invertibility (hence decryption). A secure S-box will have the property that changing one input bit will change about half of the output bits on average, exhibiting what is known as the avalanche effect\u2014i.e. it has the property that each output bit will depend on every input bit.\nA \"permutation box (P-box)\" is a permutation of all the bits: it takes the outputs of all the S-boxes of one round, permutes the bits, and feeds them into the S-boxes of the next round. A good P-box has the property that the output bits of any S-box are distributed to as many S-box inputs as possible.\nAt each round, the round key (obtained from the key with some simple operations, for instance, using S-boxes and P-boxes) is combined using some group operation, typically XOR.\nDecryption is done by simply reversing the process (using the inverses of the S-boxes and P-boxes and applying the round keys in reversed order).\nFeistel ciphers.\nIn a \"Feistel cipher\", the block of plain text to be encrypted is split into two equal-sized halves. The round function is applied to one half, using a subkey, and then the output is XORed with the other half. The two halves are then swapped.\nLet formula_11 be the round function and let\nformula_12 be the sub-keys for the rounds formula_13 respectively.\nThen the basic operation is as follows:\nSplit the plaintext block into two equal pieces, (formula_14, formula_15)\nFor each round formula_16, compute\nThen the ciphertext is formula_19.\nThe decryption of a ciphertext formula_19 is accomplished by computing for formula_21\nThen formula_24 is the plaintext again.\nOne advantage of the Feistel model compared to a substitution\u2013permutation network is that the round function formula_11 does not have to be invertible.\nLai\u2013Massey ciphers.\nThe Lai\u2013Massey scheme offers security properties similar to those of the Feistel structure. It also shares the advantage that the round function formula_26 does not have to be invertible. Another similarity is that it also splits the input block into two equal pieces. However, the round function is applied to the difference between the two, and the result is then added to both half blocks.\nLet formula_26 be the round function and formula_28 a half-round function and let formula_29 be the sub-keys for the rounds formula_13 respectively.\nThen the basic operation is as follows:\nSplit the plaintext block into two equal pieces, (formula_14, formula_15)\nFor each round formula_16, compute\nwhere formula_35 and formula_36\nThen the ciphertext is formula_37.\nThe decryption of a ciphertext formula_38 is accomplished by computing for formula_21\nwhere formula_41 and formula_42\nThen formula_43 is the plaintext again.\nOperations.\nARX (add\u2013rotate\u2013XOR).\nMany modern block ciphers and hashes are ARX algorithms\u2014their round function involves only three operations: (A) modular addition, (R) rotation with fixed rotation amounts, and (X) XOR. Examples include ChaCha20, Speck, XXTEA, and BLAKE. Many authors draw an ARX network, a kind of data flow diagram, to illustrate such a round function.\nThese ARX operations are popular because they are relatively fast and cheap in hardware and software, their implementation can be made extremely simple, and also because they run in constant time, and therefore are immune to timing attacks. The rotational cryptanalysis technique attempts to attack such round functions.\nOther operations.\nOther operations often used in block ciphers include data-dependent rotations as in RC5 and RC6, a substitution box implemented as a lookup table as in Data Encryption Standard and Advanced Encryption Standard, a permutation box, and multiplication as in IDEA.\nModes of operation.\nA block cipher by itself allows encryption only of a single data block of the cipher's block length. For a variable-length message, the data must first be partitioned into separate cipher blocks. In the simplest case, known as electronic codebook (ECB) mode, a message is first split into separate blocks of the cipher's block size (possibly extending the last block with padding bits), and then each block is encrypted and decrypted independently. However, such a naive method is generally insecure because equal plaintext blocks will always generate equal ciphertext blocks (for the same key), so patterns in the plaintext message become evident in the ciphertext output.\nTo overcome this limitation, several so-called block cipher modes of operation have been designed and specified in national recommendations such as NIST 800-38A and BSI TR-02102 and international standards such as ISO/IEC 10116. The general concept is to use randomization of the plaintext data based on an additional input value, frequently called an initialization vector, to create what is termed probabilistic encryption. In the popular cipher block chaining (CBC) mode, for encryption to be secure the initialization vector passed along with the plaintext message must be a random or pseudo-random value, which is added in an exclusive-or manner to the first plaintext block before it is encrypted. The resultant ciphertext block is then used as the new initialization vector for the next plaintext block. In the cipher feedback (CFB) mode, which emulates a self-synchronizing stream cipher, the initialization vector is first encrypted and then added to the plaintext block. The output feedback (OFB) mode repeatedly encrypts the initialization vector to create a key stream for the emulation of a synchronous stream cipher. The newer counter (CTR) mode similarly creates a key stream, but has the advantage of only needing unique and not (pseudo-)random values as initialization vectors; the needed randomness is derived internally by using the initialization vector as a block counter and encrypting this counter for each block.\nFrom a security-theoretic point of view, modes of operation must provide what is known as semantic security. Informally, it means that given some ciphertext under an unknown key one cannot practically derive any information from the ciphertext (other than the length of the message) over what one would have known without seeing the ciphertext. It has been shown that all of the modes discussed above, with the exception of the ECB mode, provide this property under so-called chosen plaintext attacks.\nPadding.\nSome modes such as the CBC mode only operate on complete plaintext blocks. Simply extending the last block of a message with zero bits is insufficient since it does not allow a receiver to easily distinguish messages that differ only in the number of padding bits. More importantly, such a simple solution gives rise to very efficient padding oracle attacks. A suitable padding scheme is therefore needed to extend the last plaintext block to the cipher's block size. While many popular schemes described in standards and in the literature have been shown to be vulnerable to padding oracle attacks, a solution that adds a one-bit and then extends the last block with zero-bits, standardized as \"padding method 2\" in ISO/IEC 9797-1, has been proven secure against these attacks.\nCryptanalysis.\nBrute-force attacks.\n This property results in the cipher's security degrading quadratically, and needs to be taken into account when selecting a block size. There is a trade-off though as large block sizes can result in the algorithm becoming inefficient to operate. Earlier block ciphers such as the DES have typically selected a 64-bit block size, while newer designs such as the AES support block sizes of 128 bits or more, with some ciphers supporting a range of different block sizes.\nLinear cryptanalysis.\n\"A linear cryptanalysis\" is a form of cryptanalysis based on finding affine approximations to the action of a cipher. Linear cryptanalysis is one of the two most widely used attacks on block ciphers; the other being differential cryptanalysis.\nThe discovery is attributed to Mitsuru Matsui, who first applied the technique to the FEAL cipher (Matsui and Yamagishi, 1992).\nIntegral cryptanalysis.\n\"Integral cryptanalysis\" is a cryptanalytic attack that is particularly applicable to block ciphers based on substitution\u2013permutation networks. Unlike differential cryptanalysis, which uses pairs of chosen plaintexts with a fixed XOR difference, integral cryptanalysis uses sets or even multisets of chosen plaintexts of which part is held constant and another part varies through all possibilities. For example, an attack might use 256 chosen plaintexts that have all but 8 of their bits the same, but all differ in those 8 bits. Such a set necessarily has an XOR sum of 0, and the XOR sums of the corresponding sets of ciphertexts provide information about the cipher's operation. This contrast between the differences between pairs of texts and the sums of larger sets of texts inspired the name \"integral cryptanalysis\", borrowing the terminology of calculus.\nOther techniques.\nIn addition to linear and differential cryptanalysis, there is a growing catalog of attacks: truncated differential cryptanalysis, partial differential cryptanalysis, integral cryptanalysis, which encompasses square and integral attacks, slide attacks, boomerang attacks, the XSL attack, impossible differential cryptanalysis, and algebraic attacks. For a new block cipher design to have any credibility, it must demonstrate evidence of security against known attacks.\nProvable security.\nWhen a block cipher is used in a given mode of operation, the resulting algorithm should ideally be about as secure as the block cipher itself. ECB (discussed above) emphatically lacks this property: regardless of how secure the underlying block cipher is, ECB mode can easily be attacked. On the other hand, CBC mode can be proven to be secure under the assumption that the underlying block cipher is likewise secure. Note, however, that making statements like this requires formal mathematical definitions for what it means for an encryption algorithm or a block cipher to \"be secure\". This section describes two common notions for what properties a block cipher should have. Each corresponds to a mathematical model that can be used to prove properties of higher-level algorithms, such as CBC.\nThis general approach to cryptography \u2013 proving higher-level algorithms (such as CBC) are secure under explicitly stated assumptions regarding their components (such as a block cipher) \u2013 is known as \"provable security\".\nStandard model.\nInformally, a block cipher is secure in the standard model if an attacker cannot tell the difference between the block cipher (equipped with a random key) and a random permutation.\nTo be a bit more precise, let \"E\" be an \"n\"-bit block cipher. We imagine the following game:\nThe attacker, which we can model as an algorithm, is called an \"adversary\". The function \"f\" (which the adversary was able to query) is called an \"oracle\".\nNote that an adversary can trivially ensure a 50% chance of winning simply by guessing at random (or even by, for example, always guessing \"heads\"). Therefore, let \"P\"\"E\"(\"A\") denote the probability that adversary \"A\" wins this game against \"E\", and define the \"advantage\" of \"A\" as 2(\"P\"\"E\"(\"A\")\u00a0\u2212\u00a01/2). It follows that if \"A\" guesses randomly, its advantage will be 0; on the other hand, if \"A\" always wins, then its advantage is 1. The block cipher \"E\" is a \"pseudo-random permutation\" (PRP) if no adversary has an advantage significantly greater than 0, given specified restrictions on \"q\" and the adversary's running time. If in Step 2 above adversaries have the option of learning \"f\"\u22121(\"X\") instead of \"f\"(\"X\") (but still have only small advantages) then \"E\" is a \"strong\" PRP (SPRP). An adversary is \"non-adaptive\" if it chooses all \"q\" values for \"X\" before the game begins (that is, it does not use any information gleaned from previous queries to choose each \"X\" as it goes).\nThese definitions have proven useful for analyzing various modes of operation. For example, one can define a similar game for measuring the security of a block cipher-based encryption algorithm, and then try to show (through a reduction argument) that the probability of an adversary winning this new game is not much more than \"P\"\"E\"(\"A\") for some \"A\". (The reduction typically provides limits on \"q\" and the running time of \"A\".) Equivalently, if \"P\"\"E\"(\"A\") is small for all relevant \"A\", then no attacker has a significant probability of winning the new game. This formalizes the idea that the higher-level algorithm inherits the block cipher's security.\nPractical evaluation.\nBlock ciphers may be evaluated according to multiple criteria in practice. Common factors include:\nNotable block ciphers.\nLucifer / DES.\nLucifer is generally considered to be the first civilian block cipher, developed at IBM in the 1970s based on work done by Horst Feistel. A revised version of the algorithm was adopted as a U.S. government Federal Information Processing Standard: FIPS PUB 46 Data Encryption Standard (DES). It was chosen by the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (NBS) after a public invitation for submissions and some internal changes by NBS (and, potentially, the NSA). DES was publicly released in 1976 and has been widely used.\nDES was designed to, among other things, resist a certain cryptanalytic attack known to the NSA and rediscovered by IBM, though unknown publicly until rediscovered again and published by Eli Biham and Adi Shamir in the late 1980s. The technique is called differential cryptanalysis and remains one of the few general attacks against block ciphers; linear cryptanalysis is another but may have been unknown even to the NSA, prior to its publication by Mitsuru Matsui. DES prompted a large amount of other work and publications in cryptography and cryptanalysis in the open community and it inspired many new cipher designs.\nDES has a block size of 64 bits and a key size of 56 bits. 64-bit blocks became common in block cipher designs after DES. Key length depended on several factors, including government regulation. Many observers in the 1970s commented that the 56-bit key length used for DES was too short. As time went on, its inadequacy became apparent, especially after a special-purpose machine designed to break DES was demonstrated in 1998 by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. An extension to DES, Triple DES, triple-encrypts each block with either two independent keys (112-bit key and 80-bit security) or three independent keys (168-bit key and 112-bit security). It was widely adopted as a replacement. As of 2011, the three-key version is still considered secure, though the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standards no longer permit the use of the two-key version in new applications, due to its 80-bit security level.\nIDEA.\nThe \"International Data Encryption Algorithm\" (\"IDEA\") is a block cipher designed by James Massey of ETH Zurich and Xuejia Lai; it was first described in 1991, as an intended replacement for DES.\nIDEA operates on 64-bit blocks using a 128-bit key and consists of a series of eight identical transformations (a \"round\") and an output transformation (the \"half-round\"). The processes for encryption and decryption are similar. IDEA derives much of its security by interleaving operations from different groups \u2013 modular addition and multiplication, and bitwise \"exclusive or (XOR)\" \u2013 which are algebraically \"incompatible\" in some sense.\nThe designers analysed IDEA to measure its strength against differential cryptanalysis and concluded that it is immune under certain assumptions. No successful linear or algebraic weaknesses have been reported. , the best attack which applies to all keys can break a full 8.5-round IDEA using a narrow-bicliques attack about four times faster than brute force.\nRC5.\nRC5 is a block cipher designed by Ronald Rivest in 1994 which, unlike many other ciphers, has a variable block size (32, 64, or 128 bits), key size (0 to 2040 bits), and a number of rounds (0 to 255). The original suggested choice of parameters was a block size of 64 bits, a 128-bit key, and 12 rounds.\nA key feature of RC5 is the use of data-dependent rotations; one of the goals of RC5 was to prompt the study and evaluation of such operations as a cryptographic primitive. RC5 also consists of a number of modular additions and XORs. The general structure of the algorithm is a Feistel-like a network. The encryption and decryption routines can be specified in a few lines of code. The key schedule, however, is more complex, expanding the key using an essentially one-way function with the binary expansions of both e and the golden ratio as sources of \"nothing up my sleeve numbers\". The tantalizing simplicity of the algorithm together with the novelty of the data-dependent rotations has made RC5 an attractive object of study for cryptanalysts.\n12-round RC5 (with 64-bit blocks) is susceptible to a differential attack using 244 chosen plaintexts. 18\u201320 rounds are suggested as sufficient protection.\nRijndael / AES.\nThe \"Rijndael\" cipher developed by Belgian cryptographers, Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen was one of the competing designs to replace DES. It won the 5-year public competition to become the AES (Advanced Encryption Standard).\nAdopted by NIST in 2001, AES has a fixed block size of 128 bits and a key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits, whereas Rijndael can be specified with block and key sizes in any multiple of 32 bits, with a minimum of 128 bits. The block size has a maximum of 256 bits, but the key size has no theoretical maximum. AES operates on a 4\u00d74 column-major order matrix of bytes, termed the \"state\" (versions of Rijndael with a larger block size have additional columns in the state).\nBlowfish.\n\"Blowfish\" is a block cipher, designed in 1993 by Bruce Schneier and included in a large number of cipher suites and encryption products. Blowfish has a 64-bit block size and a variable key length from 1 bit up to 448 bits. It is a 16-round Feistel cipher and uses large key-dependent S-boxes. Notable features of the design include the key-dependent S-boxes and a highly complex key schedule.\nIt was designed as a general-purpose algorithm, intended as an alternative to the aging DES and free of the problems and constraints associated with other algorithms. At the time Blowfish was released, many other designs were proprietary, encumbered by patents, or were commercial/government secrets. Schneier has stated that \"Blowfish is unpatented, and will remain so in all countries. The algorithm is hereby placed in the public domain, and can be freely used by anyone.\" The same applies to Twofish, a successor algorithm from Schneier.\nGeneralizations.\nTweakable block ciphers.\nM. Liskov, R. Rivest, and D. Wagner have described a generalized version of block ciphers called \"tweakable\" block ciphers. A tweakable block cipher accepts a second input called the \"tweak\" along with its usual plaintext or ciphertext input. The tweak, along with the key, selects the permutation computed by the cipher. If changing tweaks is sufficiently lightweight (compared with a usually fairly expensive key setup operation), then some interesting new operation modes become possible. The disk encryption theory article describes some of these modes.\nFormat-preserving encryption.\nBlock ciphers traditionally work over a binary alphabet. That is, both the input and the output are binary strings, consisting of \"n\" zeroes and ones. In some situations, however, one may wish to have a block cipher that works over some other alphabet; for example, encrypting 16-digit credit card numbers in such a way that the ciphertext is also a 16-digit number might facilitate adding an encryption layer to legacy software. This is an example of \"format-preserving encryption\". More generally, format-preserving encryption requires a keyed permutation on some finite language. This makes format-preserving encryption schemes a natural generalization of (tweakable) block ciphers. In contrast, traditional encryption schemes, such as CBC, are not permutations because the same plaintext can encrypt multiple different ciphertexts, even when using a fixed key.\nRelation to other cryptographic primitives.\nBlock ciphers can be used to build other cryptographic primitives, such as those below. For these other primitives to be cryptographically secure, care has to be taken to build them the right way.\nJust as block ciphers can be used to build hash functions, like SHA-1 and SHA-2 are based on block ciphers which are also used independently as SHACAL, hash functions can be used to build block ciphers. Examples of such block ciphers are BEAR and LION."}
{"id": "4595", "revid": "6032993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4595", "title": "Wireless broadband", "text": "Wireless broadband is a telecommunications technology that provides high-speed wireless Internet access or computer networking access over a wide area. The term encompasses both fixed and mobile broadband.\nThe term broadband.\nOriginally the word \"broadband\" had a technical meaning, but became a marketing term for any kind of relatively high-speed computer network or Internet access technology.\nAccording to the 802.16-2004 standard, broadband means \"having instantaneous bandwidths greater than 1 MHz and supporting data rates greater than about 1.5 Mbit/s.\"\nThe Federal Communications Commission (FCC) recently re-defined the word to mean download speeds of at least 25 Mbit/s and upload speeds of at least 3 Mbit/s.\nTechnology and speeds.\nA wireless broadband network is an outdoor fixed and/or mobile wireless network providing point-to-multipoint or point-to-point terrestrial wireless links for broadband services.\nWireless networks can feature data rates exceeding 1\u00a0Gbit/s. Many fixed wireless networks are exclusively half-duplex (HDX), however, some licensed and unlicensed systems can also operate at full-duplex (FDX) allowing communication in both directions simultaneously.\nOutdoor fixed wireless broadband networks commonly use a priority TDMA based protocol in order to divide communication into timeslots. This timeslot technique eliminates many of the issues common to 802.11 Wi-Fi protocol in outdoor networks such as the hidden node problem.\nFew wireless Internet service providers (WISPs) provide download speeds of over 100\u00a0Mbit/s; most broadband wireless access (BWA) services are estimated to have a range of from a tower. Technologies used include Local Multipoint Distribution Service (LMDS) and Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service (MMDS), as well as heavy use of the industrial, scientific and medical (ISM) radio bands and one particular access technology was standardized by IEEE 802.16, with products known as WiMAX.\nWiMAX is highly popular in Europe but has not been fully accepted in the United States because cost of deployment. In 2005 the Federal Communications Commission adopted a Report and Order that revised the FCC's rules to open the 3650\u00a0MHz band for terrestrial wireless broadband operations.\nAnother system that is popular with cable internet service providers uses point-to-multipoint wireless links that extend the existing wired network using a transparent radio connection. This allows the same DOCSIS modems to be used for both wired and wireless customers.\nDevelopment in the United States.\nOn November 14, 2007, the Commission released Public Notice DA 07\u20134605 in which the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau announced the start date for licensing and registration process for the 3650\u20133700 MHz band.\nIn 2010 the FCC adopted the TV White Space Rules (TVWS) and allowed some of the better no line of sight frequency (700\u00a0MHz) into the FCC Part-15 Rules. The Wireless Internet Service Providers Association, a national association of WISPs, petitioned the FCC and won.\nInitially, WISPs were found only in rural areas not covered by cable or DSL. These early WISPs would employ a high-capacity T-carrier, such as a T1 or DS3 connection, and then broadcast the signal from a high elevation, such as at the top of a water tower. To receive this type of Internet connection, consumers mount a small dish to the roof of their home or office and point it to the transmitter. Line of sight is usually necessary for WISPs operating in the 2.4 and 5 GHz bands with 900\u00a0MHz offering better NLOS (non-line-of-sight) performance.\nResidential Wireless Internet.\nProviders of fixed wireless broadband services typically provide equipment to customers and install a small antenna or dish somewhere on the roof. This equipment is usually deployed as a service and maintained by the company providing that service. Fixed wireless services have become particularly popular in many rural areas where cable, DSL or other typical home internet services are not available.\nBusiness Wireless Internet.\nMany companies in the US and worldwide have started using wireless alternatives to incumbent and local providers for internet and voice service. These providers tend to offer competitive services and options in areas where there is a difficulty getting affordable Ethernet connections from terrestrial providers such as ATT, Comcast, Verizon and others. Also, companies looking for full diversity between carriers for critical uptime requirements may seek wireless alternatives to local options.\nDemand for spectrum.\nTo cope with increased demand for wireless broadband, increased spectrum would be needed. Studies began in 2009, and while some unused spectrum was available, it appeared broadcasters would have to give up at least some spectrum. This led to strong objections from the broadcasting community. In 2013, auctions were planned, and for now any action by broadcasters is voluntary.\nMobile wireless broadband.\nIn the United States, mobile broadband technologies include services from providers such as Verizon, AT&amp;T Mobility, and T-Mobile which allow a more mobile version of Internet access. Consumers can purchase a PC card, laptop card, USB equipment, or mobile broadband modem, to connect their PC or laptop to the Internet via cell phone towers. This type of connection would be stable in almost any area that could also receive a strong cell phone connection. These connections can cost more for portable convenience as well as having speed limitations in all but urban environments.\nOn June 2, 2010, after months of discussion, AT&amp;T became the first wireless Internet provider in the US to announce plans to charge according to usage. As the only iPhone service in the United States, AT&amp;T experienced the problem of heavy Internet use more than other providers. About 3 percent of AT&amp;T smart phone customers account for 40 percent of the technology's use. 98 percent of the company's customers use less than 2 gigabytes (4000 page views, 10,000 emails or 200 minutes of streaming video), the limit under the $25 monthly plan, and 65 percent use less than 200 megabytes, the limit for the $15 plan. For each gigabyte in excess of the limit, customers would be charged $10 a month starting June 7, 2010, though existing customers would not be required to change from the $30 a month unlimited service plan. The new plan would become a requirement for those upgrading to the new iPhone technology later in the summer.\nLicensing.\nA wireless connection can be either licensed or unlicensed. In the US, licensed connections use a private spectrum the user has secured rights to from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The unlicensed mobile wireless broadband, in US operates on CBRS Which has three tiers. Tier 1 \u2013 Incumbent Access, reserved for US Federals Government, Tier 2 \u2013 Priority Access, a paid access with priority on the spectrum, Tier 3 \u2013 General Authorized Access (GAA), a shared spectrum. In other countries, spectrum is licensed from the country's national radio communications authority (such as the ACMA in Australia or Nigerian Communications Commission in Nigeria (NCC)). Licensing is usually expensive and often reserved for large companies who wish to guarantee private access to spectrum for use in point to point communication. Because of this, most wireless ISP's use unlicensed spectrum which is publicly shared.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "4597", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4597", "title": "Beryllium aluminium meta-silicate", "text": ""}
{"id": "4599", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4599", "title": "Boleslav I", "text": ""}
{"id": "4600", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4600", "title": "Boleslaw III", "text": ""}
{"id": "4601", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4601", "title": "Bj\u00f6rn Borg", "text": "Bj\u00f6rn Rune Borg (; born 6 June 1956) is a Swedish former world No. 1 tennis player. He won 66 singles titles during his career, including 11 major singles titles (six at the French Open and five consecutively at Wimbledon). Borg was ATP Player of the Year from 1976 to 1980, the year-end No. 1 in the ATP rankings in 1979 and 1980, and the ITF World Champion from 1978 to 1980.\nA teenage sensation at the start of his career, Borg experienced unprecedented stardom and consistent success that helped propel the rising popularity of tennis during the 1970s. Between 1974 and 1981, Borg claimed 11 major singles titles, the most by any man in the Open Era up to that point. His rivalries with Jimmy Connors and John McEnroe became cultural touchstones beyond the world of tennis, with the latter rivalry peaking at the 1980 Wimbledon final, considered one of the greatest matches ever played. Following defeats to McEnroe in the 1981 Wimbledon and US Open finals, Borg unexpectedly retired from tennis at the age of 25. He made a brief and unsuccessful comeback in 1991.\nBorg won four consecutive French Open titles (1978\u201381) and is 6\u20130 in French Open finals. He was the first man since 1886 to contest six consecutive Wimbledon finals. He is the only man to achieve the Channel Slam three times. Borg contested the French Open, Wimbledon and US Open finals in the same year three times (1978, 1980\u201381). He won three major titles without dropping a set during those tournaments. However, he never won the US Open despite four runner-up finishes.\nBorg also won three year-end championships, four pro majors (the now defunct Pro Slam tournaments US Pro [3] and Wembley Pro [1]), and 16 Grand Prix Super Series titles. In 1979, Borg became the first player to earn more than US$1 million in prize money in a single season. Overall, he set numerous records that still stand. \nBorg is widely considered one of the all-time greats of the sport. He was ranked by \"Tennis\" magazine as the sixth-greatest male player of the Open Era.\nEarly life.\nBj\u00f6rn Borg was born in Stockholm, Sweden, on 6 June 1956, the only child of Rune (1932\u20132008), an electrician, and Margaretha Borg (b. 1934). He grew up in nearby S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje. As a child, Borg became fascinated with a golden tennis racket that his father won at a table-tennis tournament. His father gave him the racket, beginning his tennis career.\nA player of great athleticism and endurance, he had a distinctive style and appearance\u2014bowlegged and very fast. His muscularity allowed him to put heavy topspin on both his forehand and two-handed backhand. He followed Jimmy Connors in using the two-handed backhand. By the time he was 13, he was beating the best of Sweden's under-18 players, and Davis Cup captain Lennart Bergelin (who served as Borg's primary coach throughout his professional career) cautioned against anyone trying to change Borg's rough-looking, jerky strokes.\nCareer.\n1972\u201373 \u2013 Davis Cup debut and first year on the tour.\nAt the age of 15, Borg represented Sweden in the 1972 Davis Cup and won his debut singles rubber in five sets against veteran Onny Parun of New Zealand. Later that year, he won the Wimbledon junior singles title, recovering from a 5\u20132 deficit in the final set to overcome Britain's Buster Mottram. Then in December, he won the Orange Bowl Junior Championship for boys 18 and under after a straight-sets victory in the final over Vitas Gerulaitis. Borg joined the professional circuit in 1973, and reached his first singles final in April at the Monte Carlo Open, which he lost to Ilie N\u0103stase. He was unseeded at his first French Open and reached the fourth round where he lost in four sets to eighth-seeded Adriano Panatta. Borg was seeded sixth at his first Wimbledon Championships, in large part due to a boycott by the ATP, and reached the quarterfinal, where he was defeated in a five-set match by Roger Taylor. In the second half of 1973, he was runner-up in San Francisco, Stockholm and Buenos Aires and finished the year ranked No. 18.\n1974 \u2013 First French Open title.\nBorg made his only appearance at the Australian Open at the age of 17, and reached the third round, where he lost in straight sets to eventual finalist Phil Dent. In January, he won his first career singles title at the New Zealand Open, followed by titles in London and S\u00e3o Paulo in February and March respectively. Just before his 18th birthday in June 1974, Borg won his first top-level singles title at the Italian Open, defeating defending champion and top-seeded Ilie N\u0103stase in the final and becoming its youngest winner. Two weeks later, he won the singles title at the French Open, his first Grand Slam tournament title, defeating Manuel Orantes in the final in five sets. Barely 18, Borg was the youngest-ever male French Open champion up to that point.\n1975 \u2013 Retained French Open title.\nIn early 1975, Borg defeated Rod Laver, then 36 years old, in a semifinal of the World Championship Tennis (WCT) finals in Dallas, Texas, in five sets. Borg subsequently lost to Arthur Ashe in the final.\nBorg retained his French Open title in 1975, beating Guillermo Vilas in the final in straight sets. Borg then reached the Wimbledon quarterfinals, where he lost to eventual champion Ashe. Borg did not lose another match at Wimbledon until 1981. Borg won two singles and one doubles rubber in the 1975 Davis Cup final, as Sweden beat Czechoslovakia 3\u20132. With these singles wins, Borg had won 19 consecutive Davis Cup singles rubbers since 1973. That was already a record at the time. However, Borg never lost another Davis Cup singles rubber, and, by the end of his career, he had stretched that winning streak to 33.\n1976 \u2013 First Wimbledon title.\nIn early 1976, Borg won the World Championship Tennis year-end WCT Finals in Dallas, Texas, with a four-set victory over Guillermo Vilas in the final. At the 1976 French Open, Borg lost to the Italian Adriano Panatta, who remains the only player to defeat Borg at this tournament. Panatta did it twice: in the fourth round in 1973, and in the 1976 quarterfinals. Borg won Wimbledon in 1976 without losing a set, defeating the favored Ilie N\u0103stase in the final. Borg became the youngest male Wimbledon singles champion since Sidney Wood in 1931 at 20 years and 1 month (a record subsequently broken by Boris Becker, who won Wimbledon aged 17 in 1985). N\u0103stase later said, \"We're playing tennis and he's playing something else.\" Borg also reached the final of the 1976 U.S. Open, which was then being played on clay courts. Borg lost in four sets to world no. 1 Jimmy Connors. Borg was awarded the ATP Player of the Year award and ranked world No. 1 by \"Tennis Magazine\" (France).\n1977 \u2013 Second Wimbledon title and world No.1 ranking.\nIn February 1977 World Championship Tennis (WCT) sued Borg and his management company IMG claiming that Borg had committed a breach of contract by electing to participate in the competing 1977 Grand Prix circuit instead of the WCT circuit. Borg eventually played, and won, a single WCT event, the Monte Carlo WCT. An out-of-court settlement was reached whereby Borg committed to play six or eight WCT events in 1978 which were then part of the Grand Prix circuit.\nBorg skipped the French Open in 1977 because he was under contract with WTT, but he repeated his Wimbledon triumph, although this time he was pushed much harder. He defeated his good friend Vitas Gerulaitis in a semifinal in five sets. His match with Gerulaitis was deemed by Wimbledon itself as \"probably the greatest gentlemen's singles match played at Wimbledon\". In the 1977 final Borg was pushed to five sets for the third time in the tournament, this time by Connors. The win propelled Borg to the No. 1 ranking in the ATP point system, albeit for just one week in August. Prior to the 1977 US Open, Borg aggravated a shoulder injury while waterskiing with Vitas Gerulaitis. This injury ultimately forced him to retire from the Open during a Round of 16 match vs Dick Stockton. Borg was rated number one for 1977 by \"Tennis Magazine\" (France), \"Tennis Magazine\" (U.S.), Barry Lorge, Lance Tingay, Rino Tommasi, Judith Elian and Rod Laver. Borg was also named \"ATP Player of the Year\". Through 1977, he had never lost to a player younger than himself.\n1978 \u2013 French and Wimbledon titles.\nBorg was at the height of his career from 1978 through 1980, completing the French Open-Wimbledon double all three years. In 1978, Borg won the French Open with a win over Vilas in the final. Borg did not drop a set during the tournament, a feat only he, N\u0103stase (in 1973), and Rafael Nadal (in 2008, 2010, 2017 and 2020) have accomplished at the French Open during the open era. Borg defeated Connors in straight sets in the 1978 Wimbledon final. At the 1978 US Open, now held on hard courts in Flushing Meadow, New York, he lost the final in straight sets to Connors. Borg was suffering from a bad blister on his thumb that required pre-match injections. That autumn, Borg faced John McEnroe for the first time in a semifinal of the Stockholm Open, and lost. Borg was named ATP Player of the Year and was the first ITF World Champion.\n1979 \u2013 French and Wimbledon titles and year-end No. 1 ranking.\nBorg lost to McEnroe again in four sets in the final of the 1979 WCT Finals but was now overtaking Connors for the top ranking. Borg established himself firmly in the top spot with his fourth French Open singles title and fourth straight Wimbledon singles title, defeating Connors in a straight-set semifinal at the latter tournament. At the 1979 French Open, Borg defeated big-serving V\u00edctor Pecci in a four-set final, and in the 1979 Wimbledon final Borg came from behind to overcome an even bigger server, Roscoe Tanner. Borg was upset by Tanner at the US Open, in a four-set quarterfinal played under the lights. At the season-ending Masters tournament in January 1980, Borg survived a close semifinal against McEnroe. He then beat Gerulaitis in straight sets, winning his first Masters and first title in New York. Borg finished the year at No. 1 in the ATP Point rankings and was considered the No. 1 player in the world by most authorities.\n1980 \u2013 French and fifth consecutive Wimbledon title.\nIn June, Borg overcame Gerulaitis, again in straight sets, for his fifth French Open title. Again, he did not drop a set during the tournament.\nBorg then won his fifth consecutive Wimbledon singles title, defeating McEnroe in a five-set final, often cited as the best Wimbledon final ever played. Having lost the opening set to an all-out McEnroe assault, Borg took the next two and had two championship points at 5\u20134 in the fourth. However, McEnroe averted disaster and went on to level the match in Wimbledon's most memorable tiebreaker, which McEnroe won 18\u201316. In the fourth-set tiebreak, McEnroe saved five match points, and Borg six set points, before McEnroe won the set. Bj\u00f6rn served first to begin the 5th set and fell behind 0\u201330. Borg then won 19 straight points on serve in the deciding set and prevailed after 3 hours, 53 minutes. Borg himself commented years later that this was the first time that he was afraid that he would lose, as well as feeling that it was the beginning of the end of his dominance.\nIn September, 1980 Borg reached the final of the U.S. Open for the third time, losing to John McEnroe in five sets in a match that cemented what had become the greatest contemporary rivalry, albeit short-lived, in men's tennis.\nHe defeated McEnroe in the final of the 1980 Stockholm Open, and faced him one more time that year, in the round-robin portion of the year-end Masters, actually played in January 1981. With 19,103 fans in attendance, Borg won a deciding third-set tie-break for the second year in a row. Borg then defeated Ivan Lendl for his second Masters title. Borg again finished the year at No. 1 in the ATP Point Rankings and was considered the No. 1 player in the world by most tennis authorities.\n1981 \u2013 Sixth and final French Open title.\nBorg won his last Grand Slam title at the French Open in 1981, defeating Lendl in a five-set final. Borg's six French Open Grand Slam titles was a record bettered only by Rafael Nadal in 2012.\nIn reaching the Wimbledon final in 1981, Borg stretched his winning streak at the All England Club to a record 41 matches. In a semifinal, Borg was down to Connors by two sets to love, before coming back to win the match. However, Borg's streak was brought to an end by McEnroe, who defeated him in four sets. Years afterward, Borg remarked \"And when I lost what shocked me was I wasn't even upset. That was not me: losing a Wimbledon final and not upset. I hate to lose.\" Borg around that time felt that his desire to play was gone, despite McEnroe's desperate efforts to persuade him not to retire and continue their rivalry.\nBorg went on to lose to McEnroe at the 1981 US Open. After that defeat, Borg walked off the court and out of the stadium before the ceremonies and press conference had begun, and headed straight for the airport. There are reports that Borg received threats after his semifinal win over Connors. In later years, Borg apologized to McEnroe. The 1981 US Open would be the Swede's last Grand Slam final. Major tournaments and tour organizers were enforcing a new rule; by 1982, that players had to play at least 10 official tournaments per year. However, Borg wanted to curtail his schedule after many years of winning so often. Although he felt in good condition physically, he recognized that the relentless drive to win and defy tour organizers had begun to fade.\nBorg failed to win the US Open in nine tries, losing four finals, 1976 (the surface was clay that year) and 1978 to Jimmy Connors, and 1980 and 1981 to John McEnroe. The surface was hard court from 1978 onward and Borg reached the final there on hard court on three occasions, in 1978, 1980 and 1981. He led 3\u20132 in the fifth set of the 1980 final, before losing. That match followed Borg's classic encounter with McEnroe at the 1980 Wimbledon. In 1978, 1979 and 1980, Borg was halfway to a Grand Slam after victories at the French and Wimbledon (the Australian Open being the last Grand Slam tournament of each year at the time) only to falter at Flushing Meadows, the left-handed Roscoe Tanner being his conqueror in 1979.\n1982\u201391: Retirement.\nIn 1982, Borg played only two tournaments. He lost to Yannick Noah in the quarterfinals of Monte Carlo in April and in the same month he lost to Dick Stockton in the second round of qualifying at the Alan King Tennis Classic in Las Vegas. Nevertheless, Borg's announcement in January 1983 that he was retiring from the game at the age of 26 was a shock to the tennis world. McEnroe tried unsuccessfully to persuade Borg to continue. He did, however, play Monte Carlo again in March 1983, reaching the second round, and Stuttgart in July 1984, losing to Henri Leconte in both occasions.\nUpon retirement, Borg had three residences: a penthouse in Monte Carlo, not far from his pro shop; a mansion on Long Island, New York and a small island off the Swedish coast.\nBorg later bounced back as the owner of the Bj\u00f6rn Borg fashion label. In Sweden, his label has become very successful, second only to Calvin Klein.\nAttempted comeback.\nIn 1991\u20131993, Borg attempted a comeback on the men's professional tennis tour, coached by Welsh karate expert Ron Thatcher. Before his 1991 return, Borg grew his hair out as it had been during his previous professional tennis career and he returned to using a wooden racket; he had kept his hair cut and used modern graphite rackets in exhibitions he played during the late 1980s. Borg, however, failed to win a single match. He faced Jordi Arrese in his first match back, again at Monte Carlo but without practising or playing any exhibition matches and lost in two sets. In his first nine matches, played in 1991 and 1992, Borg failed to win a single set. He fared slightly better in 1993, taking a set off his opponent in each of the three matches he played. He came closest to getting a win in what turned out to be his final tour match, falling to second seed Alexander Volkov 6\u20134, 3\u20136, 6\u20137(7\u20139) at the 1993 Kremlin Cup in Moscow.\nIn 1992 Borg, aged 35, using a graphite racket, defeated John Lloyd, 37, at the Inglewood Forum Tennis Challenge. Borg later joined the Champions tour, using modern rackets.\nPlaying style.\nBorg had one of the most distinctive playing styles in the Open Era. He played from the baseline, with powerful ground-strokes. His highly unorthodox backhand involved taking his racket back with both hands but actually generating his power with his dominant right hand, letting go of the grip with his left hand around point of contact, and following through with his swing as a one-hander. He hit the ball hard and high from the back of the court and brought it down with considerable topspin, which made his ground strokes very consistent. There had been other players, particularly Rod Laver and Arthur Ashe, who played with topspin on both the forehand and backhand, yet Laver and Ashe used topspin only as a way to mix up their shots to pass their opponents at the net easily. Borg was one of the first top players to use heavy topspin on his shots consistently.\nComplementing his consistent ground-strokes was his fitness. Both of these factors allowed Borg to be dominant at the French Open.\nOne of the factors that made Borg unique was his dominance on the grass courts of Wimbledon, where, since World War II, baseliners did not usually succeed. Some experts attributed his dominance on this surface to his consistency, an underrated serve, equally underrated volleys, and his adaptation to grass courts. Against the best players, he almost always served-and-volleyed on his first serves, while he naturally played from the baseline after his second serves.\nAnother trait usually associated with Borg was his grace under pressure. His calm court demeanor earned him the nickname of the \"Ice Man\" or \"Ice-Borg\".\nBorg's physical conditioning was unrivalled by contemporaries. He could outlast most of his opponents under the most grueling conditions. Contrary to popular belief, however, this was not due to his exceptionally low resting heart rate, often reported to be near 35 beats per minute. In his introduction to Borg's autobiography \"My Life and Game\", Eugene Scott relates that this rumor arose from a medical exam the 18-year-old Borg once took for military service, where his pulse was recorded as 38. Scott goes on to reveal Borg's true pulse rate as \"about 50 when he wakes up and around 60 in the afternoon\". Borg is credited with helping to develop the style of play that has come to dominate the game today.\nMental approach.\nBorg's first wife has said that he was \"always very placid and calm, except if he lost a match \u2013 he wouldn't talk for at least three days. He couldn't stand losing.\" This mental approach changed by 1981, when he has said that when he lost the Wimbledon final \"what shocked me was I wasn't even upset\".\nPersonal life.\nBorg and Romanian tennis pro Mariana Simionescu began their relationship in 1976 and married in Bucharest on 24 July 1980. The marriage ended in divorce in 1984. He fathered a son named Robin in 1985 with the Swedish model ; Robin had a daughter in 2014. Borg was married to the Italian singer Loredana Bert\u00e8 from 1989 to 1993. On 8 June 2002, he married his third wife, Patricia \u00d6stfeld. Together they have a son, Leo, born in 2003, who is also a professional tennis player.\nHe narrowly avoided personal bankruptcy when business ventures failed. After selling his mansion Astaholm at Ingar\u00f6 in the Stockholm archipelago in 2019, Borg moved to an apartment in Norrmalm, central Stockholm.\nFilm.\nIn 2017, \"Borg vs McEnroe\", a biographical film focusing on the rivalry between Borg and McEnroe and the 1980 Wimbledon final, was released. In 2022, interviews about this friendship and rivalry were also featured in \"McEnroe,\" a Showtime documentary.\nMemorabilia preserved.\nIn March 2006, Bonhams Auction House in London announced that it would auction Borg's Wimbledon trophies and two of his winning rackets on 21 June 2006. Several players then called Borg in an attempt to make him reconsider, including Jimmy Connors and Andre Agassi, who volunteered to buy them to keep them together. According to \u2013 who had talked to Borg \u2013 McEnroe called Borg from New York and asked, \"What's up? Have you gone mad?\" and said \"What the hell are you doing?\" The conversation with McEnroe, paired with pleas from Connors and Agassi, eventually persuaded Borg to buy out the trophies from Bonhams for an undisclosed amount.\nRecognition.\nWith 11 Grand Slam titles, Borg ranks sixth in the list of male tennis players who have won the most Grand Slam singles titles behind Novak Djokovic (24), Rafael Nadal (22), Roger Federer (20), Pete Sampras (14) and Roy Emerson (12). The French Open\u2014Wimbledon double he achieved three times consecutively was described by Wimbledon officials as \"the most difficult double in tennis\". Only Nadal (in 2008 and 2010), Federer (in 2009), Djokovic (in 2021) and Alcaraz (in 2024) have managed to achieve this double since, and Agassi, Nadal, Federer, Djokovic and Carlos Alcaraz are the only male players since Borg to have won the French Open and Wimbledon men's singles titles over their career. Ilie N\u0103stase once said about Borg, \"We're playing tennis, and he's playing something else\".\nBorg is widely considered to be one of the greatest players in the history of the sport.\nIn his 1979 autobiography, Jack Kramer, the long-time tennis promoter and great player himself, had already included Borg in his list of the 21 greatest players of all time. And in 2003, Bud Collins chose Borg as one of his top-five male players of all time. In 1983 Fred Perry listed his greatest male players of all time and listed them in two categories, before World War 2 and after. Perry's modern best behind Laver: \"Borg, McEnroe, Connors, Hoad, Jack Kramer, John Newcombe, Ken Rosewall, Manuel Santana\". In 1988, a panel consisting of Bud Collins, Cliff Drysdale, and Butch Buchholz ranked their top five male tennis players of all time. Buchholz and Drysdale both listed Borg number two on their lists, behind Rod Laver. Collins listed Borg number five behind Laver, McEnroe, Rosewall and Gonzales.\nIn 2008, ESPN.com asked tennis analysts, writers, and former players to build the perfect open-era player. Borg was the only player mentioned in four categories: defense, footwork, intangibles, and mental toughness\u2014with his mental game and footwork singled out as the best in open-era history.\nBorg never won the US Open, losing in the final four times. Borg also did not win the Australian Open, which he only played once in 1974 as a 17-year-old. The only players to defeat Borg in a Grand Slam final were fellow World No. 1 tennis players John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors. Even though it was then played on grass, a surface where he enjoyed much success, Borg chose to play the Australian Open only once, in 1974, where he lost in the third round. Phil Dent, a contemporary of Borg, has pointed out that skipping Grand Slam tournaments\u2014especially the Australian Open\u2014was not unusual then, before counting Grand Slam titles became the norm. Additionally, another contemporary Arthur Ashe told \"Sports Illustrated\", \"I think Bjorn could have won the US Open. I think he could have won the Grand Slam, but by the time he left, the historical challenge didn't mean anything. He was bigger than the game. He was like Elvis or Liz Taylor or somebody.\"\nLaver Cup.\nFrom 22 to 24 September 2017, Borg was the victorious captain of Team Europe in the first-ever edition of the Laver Cup, held in Prague, Czech Republic. Borg's Team Europe defeated a rest of the world team, known as Team World, who were coached by Borg's old rival, John McEnroe. Europe won the contest 15 points to 9, with Roger Federer achieving a narrow vital victory over Nick Kyrgios in the last match played.\nBorg returned as the coach of Team Europe for the second edition in Chicago, Illinois from 21 to 23 September 2018. McEnroe also returned as the coach for Team World. Borg again led Europe to victory as Alexander Zverev defeated Kevin Anderson to secure the title 13\u20138, after trailing Anderson in the match tiebreak until the last few points.\nIn the tournament's third edition, held in Geneva, Switzerland, from 20 to 22 September 2019, Borg captained Team Europe to a third consecutive victory, defeating McEnroe's Team World 13 points to 11, with Zverev again winning the deciding match.\nThe fourth edition was held in Boston from 24 to 26 September 2021, having had its original September 2020 date postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Borg once again returned as captain of Team Europe, which had a resounding win over Team World, defeating McEnroe's players 14 to 1."}
{"id": "4603", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4603", "title": "Booch method", "text": "The Booch method is a method for object-oriented software development. It is composed of an object modeling language, an iterative object-oriented development process, and a set of recommended practices.\nThe method was authored by Grady Booch when he was working for Rational Software (acquired by IBM), published in 1992 and revised in 1994. It was widely used in software engineering for object-oriented analysis and design and benefited from ample documentation and support tools.\nThe notation aspect of the Booch methodology was superseded by the Unified Modeling Language (UML), which features graphical elements from the Booch method along with elements from the object-modeling technique (OMT) and object-oriented software engineering (OOSE). Methodological aspects of the Booch method have been incorporated into several methodologies and processes, the primary such methodology being the Rational Unified Process (RUP).\nContent of the method.\nThe Booch notation is characterized by cloud shapes to represent classes and distinguishes the following diagrams:\n \nThe process is organized around a macro and a micro process.\nThe macro process identifies the following activities cycle: \nThe micro process is applied to new classes, structures or behaviors that emerge during the macro process. It is made of the following cycle: "}
{"id": "4605", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4605", "title": "Battle of Aboukir Bay", "text": ""}
{"id": "4606", "revid": "35351935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4606", "title": "Battle of the Nile", "text": "The Battle of the Nile (also known as the Battle of Aboukir Bay; ) was a major naval battle fought between Britain's Royal Navy and the French Republic Navy at Aboukir Bay on the Mediterranean coast off the Nile Delta of Egypt between 1\u20133 August 1798. The battle was the climax of a naval campaign that had raged across the Mediterranean during the previous three months, as a large French convoy sailed from Toulon to Alexandria carrying an expeditionary force under General Napoleon Bonaparte. The British fleet was led in the battle by Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson; they decisively defeated the French under Vice-Admiral Fran\u00e7ois-Paul Brueys d'Aigalliers, destroying the best of the French navy, which was weakened for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars.\nBonaparte sought to invade Egypt as the first step in a campaign against British India, as part of a greater effort to drive Britain out of the French Revolutionary Wars. As Bonaparte's fleet crossed the Mediterranean, it was pursued by a British force under Nelson who had been sent from the British fleet in the Tagus to learn the purpose of the French expedition and to defeat it. He chased the French for more than two months, on several occasions missing them only by a matter of hours. Bonaparte was aware of Nelson's pursuit and enforced absolute secrecy about his destination. He was able to capture Malta and then land in Egypt without interception by the British naval forces.\nWith the French army ashore, the French fleet anchored in Aboukir Bay, northeast of Alexandria. Commander Vice-Admiral Fran\u00e7ois-Paul Brueys d'Aigalliers believed that he had established a formidable defensive position. The British fleet arrived off Egypt on 1 August and discovered Brueys's dispositions, and Nelson ordered an immediate attack. His ships advanced on the French line and split into two divisions as they approached. One cut across the head of the line and passed between the anchored French and the shore, while the other engaged the seaward side of the French fleet. Trapped in a crossfire, the leading French warships were battered into surrender during a fierce three-hour battle, although the centre of the line held out for a while until more British ships were able to join the attack. At 22:00, the French flagship exploded which prompted the rear division of the French fleet to attempt to break out of the bay. With Brueys dead and his vanguard and centre defeated, only two ships of the line and two frigates escaped from a total of 17 ships engaged.\nThe battle reversed the strategic situation between the two nations' forces in the Mediterranean and entrenched the Royal Navy in the dominant position that it retained for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars. It also encouraged other European countries to turn against France, and was a factor in the outbreak of the War of the Second Coalition. Bonaparte's army was trapped in Egypt, and Royal Navy dominance off the Syrian coast contributed significantly to the French defeat at the siege of Acre in 1799 which preceded Bonaparte's abandonment of Egypt and return to Europe. Nelson was wounded in the battle, and he was proclaimed a hero across Europe and was subsequently made Baron Nelson\u2014although he was privately dissatisfied with his rewards. His captains were also highly praised and went on to form the nucleus of the legendary Nelson's Band of Brothers. The legend of the battle has remained prominent in the popular consciousness, with perhaps the best-known representation being Felicia Hemans' 1826 poem \"Casabianca\".\nBackground.\nNapoleon Bonaparte's victories in northern Italy over the Austrian Empire helped secure victory for the French in the War of the First Coalition in 1797, and Great Britain remained the only major European power still at war with the French Republic. The French Directory investigated a number of strategic options to counter British opposition, including projected invasions of Ireland and Britain and the expansion of the French Navy to challenge the Royal Navy at sea. Despite significant efforts, British control of Northern European waters rendered these ambitions impractical in the short term, and the Royal Navy remained firmly in control of the Atlantic Ocean. However, the French navy was dominant in the Mediterranean, following the withdrawal of the British fleet after the outbreak of war between Britain and Spain in 1796. This allowed Bonaparte to propose an invasion of Egypt as an alternative to confronting Britain directly, believing that the British would be too distracted by an imminent Irish uprising to intervene in the Mediterranean.\nBonaparte believed that, by establishing a permanent presence in Egypt (nominally part of the neutral Ottoman Empire), the French would obtain a staging point for future operations against British India, possibly by means of an alliance with the Tipu Sultan of Seringapatam, that might successfully drive the British out of the war. The campaign would sever the chain of communication that connected Britain with India, an essential part of the British Empire whose trade generated the wealth that Britain required to prosecute the war successfully. The French Directory agreed with Bonaparte's plans, although a major factor in their decision was a desire to see the politically ambitious Bonaparte and the fiercely loyal veterans of his Italian campaigns travel as far from France as possible. During the spring of 1798, Bonaparte assembled more than 35,000 soldiers in Mediterranean France and Italy and developed a powerful fleet at Toulon. He also formed the \"Commission des Sciences et des Arts\", a body of scientists and engineers intended to establish a French colony in Egypt. Napoleon kept the destination of the expedition top secret\u2014most of the army's officers did not know of its target, and Bonaparte did not publicly reveal his goal until the first stage of the expedition was complete.\nMediterranean campaign.\nBonaparte's armada sailed from Toulon on 19 May, making rapid progress through the Ligurian Sea and collecting more ships at Genoa, before sailing southwards along the Sardinian coast and passing Sicily on 7 June. On 9 June, the fleet arrived off Malta, then under the ownership of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, ruled by Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim. Bonaparte demanded that his fleet be permitted entry to the fortified harbour of Valletta. When the Knights refused, the French general responded by ordering a large scale invasion of the Maltese Islands, overrunning the defenders after 24 hours of skirmishing. The Knights formally surrendered on 12 June and, in exchange for substantial financial compensation, handed the islands and all of their resources over to Bonaparte, including the extensive property of the Roman Catholic Church on Malta. Within a week, Bonaparte had resupplied his ships, and on 19 June, his fleet departed for Alexandria in the direction of Crete, leaving 4,000 men at Valletta under General Claude-Henri Vaubois to ensure French control of the islands.\nWhile Bonaparte was sailing to Malta, the Royal Navy re-entered the Mediterranean for the first time in more than a year. Alarmed by reports of French preparations on the Mediterranean coast, Lord Spencer at the Admiralty sent a message to Vice-Admiral Earl St. Vincent, commander of the Mediterranean Fleet based in the Tagus, to despatch a squadron to investigate. This squadron, consisting of three ships of the line and three frigates, was entrusted to Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson.\nNelson was a highly experienced officer who had been blinded in one eye during fighting in Corsica in 1794 and subsequently commended for his capture of two Spanish ships of the line at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent in February 1797. In July 1797, he lost an arm at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and had been forced to return to Britain to recuperate. Returning to the fleet at the Tagus in late April 1798, he was ordered to collect the squadron stationed at Gibraltar and sail for the Ligurian Sea. On 21 May, as Nelson's squadron approached Toulon, it was struck by a fierce gale and Nelson's flagship, , lost its topmasts and was almost wrecked on the Corsican coast. The remainder of the squadron was scattered. The ships of the line sheltered at San Pietro Island off Sardinia; the frigates were blown to the west and failed to return.\nOn 7 June, following hasty repairs to his flagship, a fleet consisting of ten ships of the line and a fourth-rate joined Nelson off Toulon. The fleet, under the command of Captain Thomas Troubridge, had been sent by Earl St. Vincent to reinforce Nelson, with orders that he was to pursue and intercept the Toulon convoy. Although he now had enough ships to challenge the French fleet, Nelson suffered two great disadvantages: He had no intelligence regarding the destination of the French, and no frigates to scout ahead of his force. Striking southwards in the hope of collecting information about French movements, Nelson's ships stopped at Elba and Naples, where the British ambassador, Sir William Hamilton, reported that the French fleet had passed Sicily headed in the direction of Malta. Despite pleas from Nelson and Hamilton, King Ferdinand of Naples refused to lend his frigates to the British fleet, fearing French reprisals. On 22 June, a brig sailing from Ragusa brought Nelson the news that the French had sailed eastwards from Malta on 16 June. After conferring with his captains, the admiral decided that the French target must be Egypt and set off in pursuit. Incorrectly believing the French to be five days ahead rather than two, Nelson insisted on a direct route to Alexandria without deviation.\nOn the evening of 22 June, Nelson's fleet passed the French in the darkness, overtaking the slow invasion convoy without realising how close they were to their target. Making rapid time on a direct route, Nelson reached Alexandria on 28 June and discovered that the French were not there. After a meeting with the suspicious Ottoman commander, Sayyid Muhammad Kurayyim, Nelson ordered the British fleet northwards, reaching the coast of Anatolia on 4 July and turning westwards back towards Sicily. Nelson had missed the French by less than a day\u2014the scouts of the French fleet arrived off Alexandria in the evening of 29 June.\nConcerned by his near encounter with Nelson, Bonaparte ordered an immediate invasion, his troops coming ashore in a poorly managed amphibious operation in which at least 20 drowned. Marching along the coast, the French army stormed Alexandria and captured the city, after which Bonaparte led the main force of his army inland. He instructed his naval commander, Vice-Admiral Fran\u00e7ois-Paul Brueys D'Aigalliers, to anchor in Alexandria harbour, but naval surveyors reported that the channel into the harbour was too shallow and narrow for the larger ships of the French fleet. As a result, the French selected an alternative anchorage at Aboukir Bay, northeast of Alexandria.\nNelson's fleet reached Syracuse in Sicily on 19 July and took on essential supplies. There the admiral wrote letters describing the events of the previous months: \"It is an old saying, 'the Devil's children have the Devil's luck.' I cannot find, or at this moment learn, beyond vague conjecture where the French fleet are gone to. All my ill fortune, hitherto, has proceeded from want of frigates.\" Meanwhile, the French were securing Egypt by the Battle of the Pyramids. By 24 July, the British fleet was resupplied and, having determined that the French must be somewhere in the Eastern Mediterranean, Nelson sailed again in the direction of the Morea. On 28 July, at Coron, Nelson finally obtained intelligence describing the French attack on Egypt and turned south across the Mediterranean. His scouts, and , sighted the French transport fleet at Alexandria on the afternoon of 1 August.\nAboukir Bay.\nWhen Alexandria harbour had proved inadequate for his fleet, Brueys had gathered his captains and discussed their options. Bonaparte had ordered the fleet to anchor in Aboukir Bay, a shallow and exposed anchorage, but had supplemented the orders with the suggestion that, if Aboukir Bay was too dangerous, Brueys could sail north to Corfu, leaving only the transports and a handful of lighter warships at Alexandria. Brueys refused, in the belief that his squadron could provide essential support to the French army on shore, and called his captains aboard his 120-gun flagship to discuss their response should Nelson discover the fleet in its anchorage. Despite vocal opposition from Contre-amiral Armand Blanquet, who insisted that the fleet would be best able to respond in open water, the rest of the captains agreed that anchoring in a line of battle inside the bay presented the strongest tactic for confronting Nelson. It is possible that Bonaparte envisaged Aboukir Bay as a temporary anchorage: on 27 July, he expressed the expectation that Brueys had already transferred his ships to Alexandria, and three days later, he issued orders for the fleet to make for Corfu in preparation for naval operations against the Ottoman territories in the Balkans, although Bedouin partisans intercepted and killed the courier carrying the instructions.\nAboukir Bay is a coastal indentation across, stretching from the village of Abu Qir in the west to the town of Rosetta to the east, where one of the mouths of the River Nile empties into the Mediterranean. In 1798, the bay was protected at its western end by extensive rocky shoals which ran into the bay from a promontory guarded by Aboukir Castle. A small fort situated on an island among the rocks protected the shoals. The fort was garrisoned by French soldiers and armed with at least four cannon and two heavy mortars. Brueys had augmented the fort with his bomb vessels and gunboats, anchored among the rocks to the west of the island in a position to give support to the head of the French line. Further shoals ran unevenly to the south of the island and extended across the bay in a rough semicircle approximately from the shore. These shoals were too shallow to permit the passage of larger warships, and so Brueys ordered his thirteen ships of the line to form up in a line of battle following the northeastern edge of the shoals to the south of the island, a position that allowed the ships to disembark supplies from their port sides while covering the landings with their starboard batteries. Orders were issued for each ship to attach strong cables to the bow and stern of their neighbours, which would effectively turn the line into a long battery forming a theoretically impregnable barrier. Brueys positioned a second, inner line of four frigates approximately west of the main line, roughly halfway between the line and the shoal. The van of the French line was led by , positioned southeast of Aboukir Island and about from the edge of the shoals that surrounded the island. The line stretched southeast, with the centre bowed seawards away from the shoal. The French ships were spaced at intervals of and the whole line was long, with the flagship \"Orient\" at the centre and two large 80-gun ships anchored on either side. The rear division of the line was under the command of Contre-amiral Pierre-Charles Villeneuve in .\nIn deploying his ships in this way, Brueys hoped that the British would be forced by the shoals to attack his strong centre and rear, allowing his van to use the prevailing northeasterly wind to counterattack the British once they were engaged. However, he had made a serious misjudgement: he had left enough room between \"Guerrier\" and the shoals for an enemy ship to cut across the head of the French line and proceed between the shoals and the French ships, allowing the unsupported vanguard to be caught in a crossfire by two divisions of enemy ships. Compounding this error, the French only prepared their ships for battle on their starboard (seaward) sides, from which they expected the attack would have to come; their landward port sides were unprepared.\nThe port side gun ports were closed, and the decks on that side were uncleared, with various stored items blocking access to the guns. Brueys' dispositions had a second significant flaw: The 160-yard gaps between ships were large enough for a British ship to push through and break the French line. Furthermore, not all of the French captains had followed Brueys' orders to attach cables to their neighbours' bow and stern, which would have prevented such a manoeuvre. The problem was exacerbated by orders to only anchor at the bow, which allowed the ships to swing with the wind and widened the gaps. It also created areas within the French line not covered by the broadside of any ship. British vessels could anchor in those spaces and engage the French without reply. In addition, the deployment of Brueys' fleet prevented the rear from effectively supporting the van due to the prevailing winds.\nA more pressing problem for Brueys was a lack of food and water for the fleet: Bonaparte had unloaded almost all of the provisions carried aboard and no supplies were reaching the ships from the shore. To remedy this, Brueys sent foraging parties of 25 men from each ship along the coast to requisition food, dig wells, and collect water. Constant attacks by Bedouin partisans, however, required escorts of heavily armed guards for each party. Hence, up to a third of the fleet's sailors were away from their ships at any one time. Brueys wrote a letter describing the situation to Minister of Marine \u00c9tienne Eustache Bruix, reporting that \"Our crews are weak, both in number and quality. Our rigging, in general, out of repair, and I am sure it requires no little courage to undertake the management of a fleet furnished with such tools.\"\nBattle.\nNelson's arrival.\nAlthough initially disappointed that the main French fleet was not at Alexandria, Nelson knew from the presence of the transports that they must be nearby. At 14:00 on 1 August, lookouts on reported the French anchored in Aboukir Bay, its signal lieutenant just beating the lieutenant on with the signal, but inaccurately describing 16 French ships of the line instead of 13. At the same time, French lookouts on , the ninth ship in the French line, sighted the British fleet approximately nine nautical miles off the mouth of Aboukir Bay. The French initially reported just 11 British ships \u2013 \"Swiftsure\" and \"Alexander\" were still returning from their scouting operations at Alexandria, and so were to the west of the main fleet, out of sight. Troubridge's ship, , was also some distance from the main body, towing a captured merchant ship. At the sight of the French, Troubridge abandoned the vessel and made strenuous efforts to rejoin Nelson. Due to the need for so many sailors to work onshore, Brueys had not deployed any of his lighter warships as scouts, which left him unable to react swiftly to the sudden appearance of the British.\nAs his ships readied for action, Brueys ordered his captains to gather for a conference on \"Orient\" and hastily recalled his shore parties, although most had still not returned by the start of the battle. To replace them, large numbers of men were taken out of the frigates and distributed among the ships of the line. Brueys also hoped to lure the British fleet onto the shoals at Aboukir Island, sending the brigs and \"Railleur\" to act as decoys in the shallow waters. By 16:00, \"Alexander\" and \"Swiftsure\" were also in sight, although some distance from the main British fleet. Brueys gave orders to abandon the plan to remain at anchor and instead for his line to set sail. Blanquet protested the order on the grounds that there were not enough men aboard the French ships to both sail the ships and man the guns. Nelson gave orders for his leading ships to slow down, to allow the British fleet to approach in a more organised formation. This convinced Brueys that rather than risk an evening battle in confined waters, the British were planning to wait for the following day. He rescinded his earlier order to sail. Brueys may have been hoping that the delay would allow him to slip past the British during the night and thus follow Bonaparte's orders not to engage the British fleet directly if he could avoid it.\nNelson ordered the fleet to slow down at 16:00 to allow his ships to rig \"springs\" on their anchor cables, a system of attaching the bow anchor that increased stability and allowed his ships to swing their broadsides to face an enemy while stationary. It also increased manoeuvrability and therefore reduced the risk of coming under raking fire. Nelson's plan, shaped through discussion with his senior captains during the return voyage to Alexandria, was to advance on the French and pass down the seaward side of the van and centre of the French line, so that each French ship would face two British ships and the massive \"Orient\" would be fighting against three. The direction of the wind meant that the French rear division would be unable to join the battle easily and would be cut off from the front portions of the line. To ensure that in the smoke and confusion of a night battle his ships would not accidentally open fire on one another, Nelson ordered that each ship prepare four horizontal lights at the head of their mizzen mast and hoist an illuminated White Ensign, which was different enough from the French tricolour that it would not be mistaken in poor visibility, reducing the risk that British ships might fire on one another in the darkness. As his ship was readied for battle, Nelson held a final dinner with \"Vanguard\"s officers, announcing as he rose: \"Before this time tomorrow I shall have gained a peerage or Westminster Abbey,\" in reference to the rewards of victory or the traditional burial place of British military heroes.\nShortly after the French order to set sail was abandoned, the British fleet began rapidly approaching once more. Brueys, now expecting to come under attack that night, ordered each of his ships to place springs on their anchor cables and prepare for action. He sent the \"Alerte\" ahead, which passed close to the leading British ships and then steered sharply to the west over the shoal, in the hope that the ships of the line might follow and become grounded. None of Nelson's captains fell for the ruse and the British fleet continued undeterred. At 17:30, Nelson hailed one of his two leading ships, HMS \"Zealous\" under Captain Samuel Hood, which had been racing \"Goliath\" to be the first to fire on the French. The admiral ordered Hood to establish the safest course into the harbour. The British had no charts of the depth or shape of the bay, except a rough sketch map \"Swiftsure\" had obtained from a merchant captain, an inaccurate British atlas on \"Zealous\", and a 35-year-old French map aboard \"Goliath\". Hood replied that he would take careful soundings as he advanced to test the depth of the water, and that, \"If you will allow the honour of leading you into battle, I will keep the lead going.\" Shortly afterwards, Nelson paused to speak with the brig , whose commander, Lieutenant Thomas Hardy, had seized some maritime pilots from a small Alexandrine vessel. As \"Vanguard\" came to a stop, the following ships slowed. This caused a gap to open up between \"Zealous\" and \"Goliath\" and the rest of the fleet. To counter this effect, Nelson ordered under Captain Ralph Miller to pass his flagship and join \"Zealous\" and \"Goliath\" in the vanguard. By 18:00, the British fleet was again under full sail, \"Vanguard\" sixth in the line of ten ships as \"Culloden\" trailed behind to the north and \"Alexander\" and \"Swiftsure\" hastened to catch up to the west. Following the rapid change from a loose formation to a rigid line of battle, both fleets raised their colours; each British ship hoisted additional Union Flags in its rigging in case its main flag was shot away. At 18:20, as \"Goliath\" and \"Zealous\" rapidly bore down on them, the leading French ships \"Guerrier\" and opened fire.\nTen minutes after the French opened fire, \"Goliath\", ignoring fire from the fort to starboard and from \"Guerrier\" to port, most of which was too high to trouble the ship, crossed the head of the French line. Captain Thomas Foley had noticed as he approached that there was an unexpected gap between \"Guerrier\" and the shallow water of the shoal. On his own initiative, Foley decided to exploit this tactical error and changed his angle of approach to sail through the gap. As the bow of \"Guerrier\" came within range, \"Goliath\" opened fire, inflicting severe damage with a double-shotted raking broadside as the British ship turned to port and passed down the unprepared port side of \"Guerrier.\" Foley's Royal Marines and a company of Austrian grenadiers joined the attack, firing their muskets. Foley had intended to anchor alongside the French ship and engage it closely, but his anchor took too long to descend and his ship passed \"Guerrier\" entirely. \"Goliath\" eventually stopped close to the bow of \"Conqu\u00e9rant\", opening fire on the new opponent and using the unengaged starboard guns to exchange occasional shots with the frigate and bomb vessel \"Hercule\", which were anchored inshore of the battle line.\nFoley's attack was followed by Hood in \"Zealous\", who also crossed the French line and successfully anchored next to \"Guerrier\" in the space Foley had intended, engaging the lead ship's bow from close range. Within five minutes \"Guerrier\"s foremast had fallen, to cheers from the crews of the approaching British ships. The speed of the British advance took the French captains by surprise; they were still aboard \"Orient\" in conference with the admiral when the firing started. Hastily launching their boats, they returned to their vessels. Captain Jean-Fran\u00e7ois-Timoth\u00e9e Trullet of \"Guerrier\" shouted orders from his barge for his men to return fire on \"Zealous\".\nThe third British ship into action was under Captain Sir James Saumarez, which rounded the engagement at the head of the battle line and passed between the French main line and the frigates that lay closer inshore. As he did so, the frigate \"S\u00e9rieuse\" opened fire on \"Orion\", wounding two men. The convention in naval warfare of the time was that ships of the line did not attack frigates when there were ships of equal size to engage, but in firing first French Captain Claude-Jean Martin had negated the rule. Saumarez waited until the frigate was at close range before replying. \"Orion\" needed just one broadside to reduce the frigate to a wreck, and Martin's disabled ship drifted away over the shoal. During the delay this detour caused, two other British ships joined the battle: \"Theseus\", which had been disguised as a first-rate ship, followed Foley's track across \"Guerrier\"s bow. Miller steered his ship through the middle of the melee between the anchored British and French ships until he encountered the third French ship, . Anchoring to port, Miller's ship opened fire at close range. under Captain Davidge Gould crossed the French line between \"Guerrier\" and \"Conqu\u00e9rant\", anchoring between the ships and raking them both. \"Orion\" then rejoined the action further south than intended, firing on the fifth French ship, \"Peuple Souverain\", and Admiral Blanquet's flagship, .\nThe next three British ships, \"Vanguard\" in the lead followed by and , remained in line of battle formation and anchored on the starboard side of the French line at 18:40. Nelson focused his flagship's fire on \"Spartiate\", while Captain Thomas Louis in \"Minotaur\" attacked the unengaged and Captain John Peyton in \"Defence\" joined the attack on \"Peuple Souverain\". With the French vanguard now heavily outnumbered, the following British ships, and , passed by the melee and advanced on the so far unengaged French centre. Both ships were soon fighting enemies much more powerful than they and began to take severe damage. Captain Henry Darby on \"Bellerophon\" missed his intended anchor near \"Franklin\" and instead found his ship underneath the main battery of the French flagship. Captain George Blagdon Westcott on \"Majestic\" also missed his station and almost collided with \"Heureux\", coming under heavy fire from . Unable to stop in time, Westcott's jib boom became entangled with \"Tonnant\"s shroud.\nThe French suffered too, Admiral Brueys on \"Orient\" was severely wounded in the face and hand by flying debris during the opening exchange of fire with \"Bellerophon\". The final ship of the British line, \"Culloden\" under Troubridge, sailed too close to Aboukir Island in the growing darkness and became stuck fast on the shoal. Despite strenuous efforts from the \"Culloden\"s boats, the brig \"Mutine\" and the 50-gun under Captain Thomas Thompson, the ship of the line could not be moved, and the waves drove \"Culloden\" further onto the shoal, inflicting severe damage to the ship's hull.\nSurrender of the French vanguard.\nAt 19:00 the identifying lights in the mizzenmasts of the British fleet were lit. By this time, \"Guerrier\" had been completely dismasted and heavily battered. \"Zealous\" by contrast was barely touched: Hood had situated \"Zealous\" outside the arc of most of the French ship's broadsides, and in any case \"Guerrier\" was not prepared for an engagement on both sides simultaneously, with its port guns blocked by stores. Although their ship was a wreck, the crew of \"Guerrier\" refused to surrender, continuing to fire the few functional guns whenever possible despite heavy answering fire from \"Zealous\". In addition to his cannon fire, Hood called up his marines and ordered them to fire volleys of musket shot at the deck of the French ship, driving the crew out of sight but still failing to secure the surrender from Captain Trullet. It was not until 21:00, when Hood sent a small boat to \"Guerrier\" with a boarding party, that the French ship finally surrendered. \"Conqu\u00e9rant\" was defeated more rapidly, after heavy broadsides from passing British ships and the close attentions of \"Audacious\" and \"Goliath\" brought down all three masts before 19:00. With his ship immobile and badly damaged, the mortally wounded Captain Etienne Dalbarade struck his colours and a boarding party seized control. Unlike \"Zealous\", these British ships suffered relatively severe damage in the engagement. \"Goliath\" lost most of its rigging, suffered damage to all three masts and suffered more than 60 casualties. With his opponents defeated, Captain Gould on \"Audacious\" used the spring on his cable to transfer fire to \"Spartiate\", the next French ship in line. To the west of the battle the battered \"S\u00e9rieuse\" sank over the shoal. Her masts protruded from the water as survivors scrambled into boats and rowed for the shore.\nThe transfer of \"Audacious\"s broadside to \"Spartiate\" meant that Captain Maurice-Julien Emeriau now faced three opponents. Within minutes all three of his ship's masts had fallen, but the battle around \"Spartiate\" continued until 21:00, when the badly wounded Emeriau ordered his colours struck. Although \"Spartiate\" was outnumbered, it had been supported by the next in line, \"Aquilon\", which was the only ship of the French van squadron fighting a single opponent, \"Minotaur\". Captain Antoine Ren\u00e9 Th\u00e9venard used the spring on his anchor cable to angle his broadside into a raking position across the bow of Nelson's flagship, which consequently suffered more than 100 casualties, including the admiral. At approximately 20:30, an iron splinter fired in a langrage shot from \"Spartiate \"struck Nelson over his blinded right eye. The wound caused a flap of skin to fall across his face, rendering him temporarily completely blind. Nelson collapsed into the arms of Captain Edward Berry and was carried below. Certain that his wound was fatal, he cried out \"I am killed, remember me to my wife\", and called for his chaplain, Stephen Comyn. The wound was immediately inspected by \"Vanguard\"s surgeon Michael Jefferson, who informed the admiral that it was a simple flesh wound and stitched the skin together. Nelson subsequently ignored Jefferson's instructions to remain inactive, returning to the quarterdeck shortly before the explosion on \"Orient\" to oversee the closing stages of the battle. Although Th\u00e9venard's manoeuvre was successful, it placed his own bow under \"Minotaur\"s guns and by 21:25 the French ship was dismasted and battered, Captain Th\u00e9venard killed and his junior officers forced to surrender. With his opponent defeated, Captain Thomas Louis then took \"Minotaur\" south to join the attack on \"Franklin\".\n\"Defence\" and \"Orion \"attacked the fifth French ship, \"Peuple Souverain\", from either side and the ship rapidly lost the fore and main masts. Aboard the \"Orion\", a wooden block was smashed off one of the ship's masts, killing two men before wounding Captain Saumarez in the thigh. On \"Peuple Souverain\", Captain Pierre-Paul Raccord was badly wounded and ordered his ship's anchor cable cut in an effort to escape the bombardment. \"Peuple Souverain\" drifted south towards the flagship \"Orient\", which mistakenly opened fire on the darkened vessel. \"Orion\" and \"Defence\" were unable to immediately pursue. \"Defence\" had lost its fore topmast and an improvised fireship that drifted through the battle narrowly missed \"Orion\". The origin of this vessel, an abandoned and burning ship's boat laden with highly flammable material, is uncertain, but it may have been launched from \"Guerrier\" as the battle began. \"Peuple Souverain\" anchored not far from \"Orient\", but took no further part in the fighting. The wrecked ship surrendered during the night. \"Franklin\" remained in combat, but Blanquet had suffered a severe head wound and Captain Gillet had been carried below unconscious with severe wounds. Shortly afterwards, a fire broke out on the quarterdeck after an arms locker exploded, which was eventually extinguished with difficulty by the crew.\nTo the south, HMS \"Bellerophon\" was in serious trouble as the huge broadside of \"Orient\" pounded the ship. At 19:50 the mizzenmast and main mast both collapsed and fires broke out simultaneously at several points. Although the blazes were extinguished, the ship had suffered more than 200 casualties. Captain Darby recognised that his position was untenable and ordered the anchor cables cut at 20:20. The battered ship drifted away from the battle under continued fire from \"Tonnant\" as the foremast collapsed as well. \"Orient\" had also suffered significant damage and Admiral Brueys had been struck in the midriff by a cannonball that almost cut him in half. He died fifteen minutes later, remaining on deck and refusing to be carried below. \"Orient\"s captain, Luc-Julien-Joseph Casabianca, was also wounded, struck in the face by flying debris and knocked unconscious, while his twelve-year-old son had a leg torn off by a cannonball as he stood beside his father. The most southerly British ship, \"Majestic\", had become briefly entangled with the 80-gun \"Tonnant\", and in the resulting battle, suffered heavy casualties. Captain George Blagdon Westcott was among the dead, killed by French musket fire. Lieutenant Robert Cuthbert assumed command and successfully disentangled his ship, allowing the badly damaged \"Majestic\" to drift further southwards so that by 20:30 it was stationed between \"Tonnant\" and the next in line, \"Heureux\", engaging both. To support the centre, Captain Thompson of \"Leander\" abandoned the futile efforts to drag the stranded \"Culloden\" off the shoal and sailed down the embattled French line, entering the gap created by the drifting \"Peuple Souverain\" and opening a fierce raking fire on \"Franklin\" and \"Orient\".\nWhile the battle raged in the bay, the two straggling British ships made strenuous efforts to join the engagement, focusing on the flashes of gunfire in the darkness. Warned away from the Aboukir shoals by the grounded \"Culloden\", Captain Benjamin Hallowell in \"Swiftsure\" passed the melee at the head of the line and aimed his ship at the French centre. Shortly after 20:00, a dismasted hulk was spotted drifting in front of \"Swiftsure\" and Hallowell initially ordered his men to fire before rescinding the order, concerned for the identity of the strange vessel. Hailing the battered ship, Hallowell received the reply \"\"Bellerophon\", going out of action disabled.\" Relieved that he had not accidentally attacked one of his own ships in the darkness, Hallowell pulled up between \"Orient\" and \"Franklin\" and opened fire on them both. \"Alexander\", the final unengaged British ship, which had followed \"Swiftsure\", pulled up close to \"Tonnant\", which had begun to drift away from the embattled French flagship. Captain Alexander Ball then joined the attack on \"Orient\".\nDestruction of \"L'Orient\".\nAt 21:00, the British observed a fire on the lower decks of the \"Orient\", the French flagship. Identifying the danger this posed to the \"Orient\", Captain Hallowell directed his gun crews to fire their guns directly into the blaze. Sustained British gun fire spread the flames throughout the ship's stern and prevented all efforts to extinguish them. Within minutes the fire had ascended the rigging and set the vast sails alight. The nearest British ships, \"Swiftsure\", \"Alexander\", and \"Orion\", all stopped firing, closed their gunports, and began edging away from the burning ship in anticipation of the detonation of the enormous ammunition supplies stored on board. In addition, they took crews away from the guns to form fire parties and to soak the sails and decks in seawater to help contain any resulting fires. Likewise the French ships \"Tonnant\", \"Heureux\", and all cut their anchor cables and drifted southwards away from the burning ship. At 22:00 the fire reached the magazines, and the \"Orient\" was destroyed by a massive explosion. The concussion of the blast was powerful enough to rip open the seams of the nearest ships, and flaming wreckage landed in a huge circle, much of it flying directly over the surrounding ships into the sea beyond. Falling wreckage started fires on \"Swiftsure\", \"Alexander\", and \"Franklin\", although in each case teams of sailors with water buckets succeeded in extinguishing the flames, despite a secondary explosion on \"Franklin\".\nIt has never been firmly established how the fire on \"Orient\" broke out, but one common account is that jars of oil and paint had been left on the poop deck, instead of being properly stowed after painting of the ship's hull had been completed shortly before the battle. Burning wadding from one of the British ships is believed to have floated onto the poop deck and ignited the paint. The fire rapidly spread through the admiral's cabin and into a ready magazine that stored carcass ammunition, which was designed to burn more fiercely in water than in air. Alternatively, Fleet Captain Honor\u00e9 Ganteaume later reported the cause as an explosion on the quarterdeck, preceded by a series of minor fires on the main deck among the ship's boats. Whatever its origin, the fire spread rapidly through the ship's rigging, unchecked by the fire pumps aboard, which had been smashed by British shot. A second blaze then began at the bow, trapping hundreds of sailors in the ship's waist. Subsequent archaeological investigation found debris scattered over of seabed and evidence that the ship was wracked by two explosions. Hundreds of men dived into the sea to escape the flames, but fewer than 100 survived the blast. British boats picked up approximately 70 survivors, including the wounded staff officer L\u00e9onard-Bernard Motard. A few others, including Ganteaume, managed to reach the shore on rafts. The remainder of the crew, numbering more than 1,000 men, were killed, including Captain Casabianca and his son, Giocante.\nFor ten minutes after the explosion there was no firing; sailors from both sides were either too shocked by the blast or desperately extinguishing fires aboard their own ships to continue the fight. During the lull, Nelson gave orders that boats be sent to pull survivors from the water around the remains of \"Orient\". At 22:10, \"Franklin\" restarted the engagement by firing on \"Swiftsure\". Isolated and battered, Blanquet's ship was soon dismasted and the admiral, suffering a severe head wound, was forced to surrender by the combined firepower of \"Swiftsure\" and \"Defence\". More than half of \"Franklin\"s crew had been killed or wounded.\nBy midnight only \"Tonnant\" remained engaged, as Commodore Aristide Aubert Du Petit Thouars continued his fight with \"Majestic\" and fired on \"Swiftsure\" when the British ship moved within range. By 03:00, after more than three hours of close quarter combat, \"Majestic\" had lost its main and mizzen masts while \"Tonnant\" was a dismasted hulk. Although Captain Du Petit Thouars had lost both legs and an arm he remained in command, insisting on having the tricolour nailed to the mast to prevent it from being struck and giving orders from his position propped up on deck in a bucket of wheat. Under his guidance, the battered \"Tonnant\" gradually drifted southwards away from the action to join the southern division under Villeneuve, who failed to bring these ships into effective action. Throughout the engagement the French rear had kept up an arbitrary fire on the battling ships ahead. The only noticeable effect was the smashing of s rudder by misdirected fire from the neighbouring .\nMorning.\nAs the sun rose at 04:00 on 2 August, firing broke out once again between the French southern division of \"Guillaume Tell\", \"Tonnant\", \"G\u00e9n\u00e9reux\" and \"Timol\u00e9on\" and the battered \"Alexander\" and \"Majestic\". Although briefly outmatched, the British ships were soon joined by \"Goliath\" and \"Theseus\". As Captain Miller manoeuvred his ship into position, \"Theseus\" briefly came under fire from the frigate . Miller turned his ship towards \"Art\u00e9mise\", but Captain Pierre-Jean Standelet struck his flag and ordered his men to abandon the frigate. Miller sent a boat under Lieutenant William Hoste to take possession of the empty vessel, but Standelet had set fire to his ship as he left and \"Art\u00e9mise\" blew up shortly afterwards. The surviving French ships of the line, covering their retreat with gunfire, gradually pulled to the east away from the shore at 06:00. \"Zealous\" pursued, and was able to prevent the frigate from boarding \"Bellerophon\", which was anchored at the southern point of the bay undergoing hasty repairs.\nTwo other French ships still flew the tricolour, but neither was in a position to either retreat or fight. When \"Heureux\" and \"Mercure\" had cut their anchor cables to escape the exploding \"Orient\", their crews had panicked and neither captain (both of whom were wounded) had managed to regain control of his ship. As a result, both vessels had drifted onto the shoal. \"Alexander\", \"Goliath\", \"Theseus\" and \"Leander\" attacked the stranded and defenceless ships, and both surrendered within minutes. The distractions provided by \"Heureux\", \"Mercure\" and \"Justice\" allowed Villeneuve to bring most of the surviving French ships to the mouth of the bay at 11:00. On the dismasted \"Tonnant\", Commodore Du Petit Thouars was now dead from his wounds and thrown overboard at his own request. As the ship was unable to make the required speed it was driven ashore by its crew. \"Timol\u00e9on\" was too far south to escape with Villeneuve and, in attempting to join the survivors, had also grounded on the shoal. The force of the impact dislodged the ship's foremast. The remaining French vessels\u2014the ships of the line \"Guillaume Tell\" and \"G\u00e9n\u00e9reux\" and the frigates \"Justice\" and \u2014formed up and stood out to sea, pursued by \"Zealous\". Despite strenuous efforts, Captain Hood's isolated ship came under heavy fire and was unable to cut off the trailing \"Justice\" as the French survivors escaped seawards. \"Zealous\" was struck by a number of French shot and lost one man killed.\nFor the remainder of 2 August Nelson's ships made improvised repairs and boarded and consolidated their prizes. \"Culloden\" especially required assistance. Troubridge, having finally dragged his ship off the shoal at 02:00, found that he had lost his rudder and was taking on more than of water an hour. Emergency repairs to the hull and fashioning a replacement rudder from a spare topmast took most of the next two days. On the morning of 3 August, Nelson sent \"Theseus\" and \"Leander\" to force the surrender of the grounded \"Tonnant\" and \"Timol\u00e9on\". The \"Tonnant\", its decks crowded with 1,600 survivors from other French vessels, surrendered as the British ships approached while \"Timol\u00e9on\" was set on fire by its remaining crew who then escaped to the shore in small boats. \"Timol\u00e9on\" exploded shortly after midday, the eleventh and final French ship of the line destroyed or captured during the battle.\nAftermath.\nBritish casualties in the battle were recorded with some accuracy in the immediate aftermath as 218 killed and approximately 677 wounded, although the number of wounded who subsequently died is not known. The ships that suffered most were \"Bellerophon\" with 201 casualties and \"Majestic\" with 193. Other than \"Culloden\" the lightest loss was on \"Zealous\", which had one man killed and seven wounded.\nThe casualty list included Captain Westcott, five lieutenants and ten junior officers among the dead, and Admiral Nelson, Captains Saumarez, Ball and Darby, and six lieutenants wounded. Other than \"Culloden\", the only British ships seriously damaged in their hulls were \"Bellerophon\", \"Majestic,\" and \"Vanguard\". \"Bellerophon\" and \"Majestic\" were the only ships to lose masts: \"Majestic\" the main and mizzen and \"Bellerophon\" all three.\nFrench casualties are harder to calculate but were significantly higher. Estimates of French losses range from 2,000 to 5,000, with a suggested median point of 3,500, which includes more than 1,000 captured wounded and nearly 2,000 killed, half of whom died on \"Orient\". In addition to Admiral Brueys killed and Admiral Blanquet wounded, four captains died and seven others were seriously wounded. The French ships suffered severe damage: Two ships of the line and two frigates were destroyed (as well as a bomb vessel scuttled by its crew), and three other captured ships were too battered ever to sail again. Of the remaining prizes, only three were ever sufficiently repaired for frontline service. For weeks after the battle, bodies washed up along the Egyptian coast, decaying slowly in the intense, dry heat.\nNelson, who on surveying the bay on the morning of 2 August said, \"Victory is not a name strong enough for such a scene\", remained at anchor in Aboukir Bay for the next two weeks, preoccupied with recovering from his wound, writing dispatches, and assessing the military situation in Egypt using documents captured on board one of the prizes. Nelson's head wound was recorded as being \"three inches long\" with \"the cranium exposed for one inch\". He suffered pain from the injury for the rest of his life and was badly scarred, styling his hair to disguise it as much as possible. As their commander recovered, his men stripped the wrecks of useful supplies and made repairs to their ships and prizes.\nThroughout the week, Aboukir Bay was surrounded by bonfires lit by Bedouin tribesmen in celebration of the British victory. On 5 August, \"Leander\" was despatched to Cadiz with messages for Earl St. Vincent carried by Captain Edward Berry. Over the next few days the British landed all but 200 of the captured prisoners on shore under strict terms of parole, although Bonaparte later ordered them to be formed into an infantry unit and added to his army. The wounded officers taken prisoner were held on board \"Vanguard\", where Nelson regularly entertained them at dinner. Historian Joseph Allen recounts that on one occasion Nelson, whose eyesight was still suffering following his wound, offered toothpicks to an officer who had lost his teeth and then passed a snuff-box to an officer whose nose had been torn off, causing much embarrassment. On 8 August the fleet's boats stormed Aboukir Island, which surrendered without a fight. The landing party removed four of the guns and destroyed the rest along with the fort they were mounted in, renaming the island \"Nelson's Island\".\nOn 10 August, Nelson sent Lieutenant Thomas Duval from \"Zealous\" with messages to the government in India. Duval travelled across the Middle East overland via camel train to Aleppo and took the East India Company ship \"Fly\" from Basra to Bombay, acquainting Governor-General of India Viscount Wellesley with the situation in Egypt. On 12 August the frigates under Captain Thomas Moutray Waller and under Captain George Johnstone Hope, and the sloop under Captain Robert Retalick, arrived off Alexandria. Initially the British mistook the frigate squadron for French warships and \"Swiftsure\" chased them away. They returned the following day once the error had been realised. The same day as the frigates arrived, Nelson sent \"Mutine\" to Britain with dispatches, under the command of Lieutenant Thomas Bladen Capel, who had replaced Hardy after the latter's promotion to captain of \"Vanguard\". On 14 August, Nelson sent \"Orion\", \"Majestic\", \"Bellerophon\", \"Minotaur\", \"Defence\", \"Audacious\", \"Theseus\", \"Franklin\", \"Tonnant\", \"Aquilon\", \"Conqu\u00e9rant\", \"Peuple Souverain,\" and \"Spartiate\" to sea under the command of Saumarez. Many ships had only jury masts and it took a full day for the convoy to reach the mouth of the bay, finally sailing into open water on 15 August. On 16 August the British burned and destroyed the grounded prize \"Heureux\" as no longer fit for service and on 18 August also burned \"Guerrier\" and \"Mercure\". On 19 August, Nelson sailed for Naples with \"Vanguard\", \"Culloden,\" and \"Alexander\", leaving Hood in command of \"Zealous\", \"Goliath\", \"Swiftsure,\" and the recently joined frigates to watch over French activities at Alexandria.\nThe first message to reach Bonaparte regarding the disaster that had overtaken his fleet arrived on 14 August at his camp on the road between Salahieh and Cairo. The messenger was a staff officer sent by the Governor of Alexandria General Jean Baptiste Kl\u00e9ber, and the report had been hastily written by Admiral Ganteaume, who had subsequently rejoined Villeneuve's ships at sea. One account reports that when he was handed the message, Bonaparte read it without emotion before calling the messenger to him and demanding further details. When the messenger had finished, the French general reportedly announced \"Nous n'avons plus de flotte: eh bien. Il faut rester en ces contr\u00e9es, ou en sortir grands comme les anciens\" (\"We no longer have a fleet: well, we must either remain in this country or quit it as great as the ancients\"). Another story, as told by the general's secretary, Bourienne, claims that Bonaparte was almost overcome by the news and exclaimed \"Unfortunate Brueys, what have you done!\" Bonaparte later placed much of the blame for the defeat on the wounded Admiral Blanquet, falsely accusing him of surrendering \"Franklin\" while his ship was undamaged. Protestations from Ganteaume and Minister \u00c9tienne Eustache Bruix later reduced the degree of criticism Blanquet faced, but he never again served in a command capacity. Bonaparte's most immediate concern however was with his own officers, who began to question the wisdom of the entire expedition. Inviting his most senior officers to dinner, Bonaparte asked them how they were. When they replied that they were \"marvellous,\" Bonaparte responded that it was just as well, since he would have them shot if they continued \"fostering mutinies and preaching revolt.\" To quell any uprising among the native inhabitants, Egyptians overheard discussing the battle were threatened with having their tongues cut out.\nReaction.\nNelson's first set of dispatches were captured when \"Leander\" was intercepted and defeated by \"G\u00e9n\u00e9reux\" in a fierce engagement off the western shore of Crete on 18 August 1798. As a result, reports of the battle did not reach Britain until Capel arrived in \"Mutine\" on 2 October, entering the Admiralty at 11:15 and personally delivering the news to Lord Spencer, who collapsed unconscious when he heard the report. Although Nelson had previously been castigated in the press for failing to intercept the French fleet, rumours of the battle had begun to arrive in Britain from the continent in late September and the news Capel brought was greeted with celebrations right across the country. Within four days Nelson had been elevated to Baron Nelson of the Nile and Burnham Thorpe, a title with which he was privately dissatisfied, believing his actions deserved better reward. King George III addressed the Houses of Parliament on 20 November with the words:\nSaumarez's convoy of prizes stopped first at Malta, where Saumarez provided assistance to a rebellion on the island among the Maltese population. It then sailed to Gibraltar, arriving on 18 October to the cheers of the garrison. Saumarez wrote that, \"We can never do justice to the warmth of their applause, and the praises they all bestowed on our squadron.\" On 23 October, following the transfer of the wounded to the military hospital and provision of basic supplies, the convoy sailed on towards Lisbon, leaving \"Bellerophon\" and \"Majestic\" behind for more extensive repairs. \"Peuple Souverain\" also remained at Gibraltar: The ship was deemed too badly damaged for the Atlantic voyage to Britain and so was converted to a guardship under the name of HMS \"Guerrier\". The remaining prizes underwent basic repairs and then sailed for Britain, spending some months at the Tagus and joining with the annual merchant convoy from Portugal in June 1799 under the escort of a squadron commanded by Admiral Sir Alan Gardner, before eventually arriving at Plymouth. Their age and battered state meant that neither \"Conqu\u00e9rant\" nor \"Aquilon\" were considered fit for active service in the Royal Navy and both were subsequently hulked, although they had been bought into the service for \u00a320,000 (the equivalent of \u00a3 million as of ) each as HMS \"Conquerant\" and HMS \"Aboukir\" to provide a financial reward to the crews that had captured them. Similar sums were also paid out for \"Guerrier\", \"Mercure\", \"Heureux\" and \"Peuple Souverain\", while the other captured ships were worth considerably more. Constructed of Adriatic oak, \"Tonnant\" had been built in 1792 and \"Franklin\" and \"Spartiate\" were less than a year old. \"Tonnant\" and \"Spartiate\", both of which later fought at the Battle of Trafalgar, joined the Royal Navy under their old names while \"Franklin\", considered to be \"the finest two-decked ship in the world\", was renamed HMS \"Canopus\". The total value of the prizes captured at the Nile and subsequently bought into the Royal Navy was estimated at just over \u00a3130,000 (the equivalent of \u00a3 million as of ).\nAdditional awards were presented to the British fleet: Nelson was awarded \u00a32,000 (\u00a3 as of ) a year for life by the Parliament of Great Britain and \u00a31,000 per annum by the Parliament of Ireland, although the latter was inadvertently discontinued after the Act of Union dissolved the Irish Parliament. Both parliaments gave unanimous votes of thanks, each captain who served in the battle was presented with a specially minted gold medal and the first lieutenant of every ship engaged in the battle was promoted to commander. Troubridge and his men, initially excluded, received equal shares in the awards after Nelson personally interceded for the crew of the stranded \"Culloden, \"even though they did not directly participate in the engagement. The Honourable East India Company presented Nelson with \u00a310,000 (\u00a3 as of ) in recognition of the benefit his action had on their holdings and the cities of London, Liverpool and other municipal and corporate bodies made similar awards. Nelson's own captains presented him with a sword and a portrait as \"proof of their esteem.\" Nelson publicly encouraged this close bond with his officers and on 29 September 1798 described them as \"We few, we happy few, we band of brothers\", echoing William Shakespeare's play \"Henry V\". From this grew the notion of the Nelsonic Band of Brothers, a cadre of high-quality naval officers that served with Nelson for the remainder of his life. Nearly five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal, awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847.\nOther rewards were bestowed by foreign states, particularly the Ottoman Emperor Selim III, who made Nelson the first Knight Commander of the newly created Order of the Crescent, and presented him with a chelengk, a diamond studded rose, a sable fur and numerous other valuable presents. Tsar Paul I of Russia sent, among other rewards, a gold box studded with diamonds, and similar gifts in silver arrived from other European rulers. On his return to Naples, Nelson was greeted with a triumphal procession led by King Ferdinand IV and Sir William Hamilton and was introduced for only the third time to Sir William's wife Emma, Lady Hamilton, who fainted violently at the meeting, and apparently took several weeks to recover from her injuries. Lauded as a hero by the Neapolitan court, Nelson was later to dabble in Neapolitan politics and become the Duke of Bront\u00e9, actions for which he was criticised by his superiors and his reputation suffered. British general John Moore, who met Nelson in Naples at this time, described him as \"covered with stars, medals and ribbons, more like a Prince of Opera than the Conqueror of the Nile.\"\nRumours of a battle first appeared in the French press as early as 7 August, although credible reports did not arrive until 26 August, and even these claimed that Nelson was dead and Bonaparte a British prisoner. When the news became certain, the French press insisted that the defeat was the result both of an overwhelmingly large British force and unspecified \"traitors.\" Among the anti-government journals in France, the defeat was blamed on the incompetence of the French Directory and on supposed lingering Royalist sentiments in the Navy. Villeneuve came under scathing attack on his return to France for his failure to support Brueys during the battle. In his defence, he pleaded that the wind had been against him and that Brueys had not issued orders for him to counterattack the British fleet. Writing many years later, Bonaparte commented that if the French Navy had adopted the same tactical principles as the British:\nBy contrast, the British press were jubilant; many newspapers sought to portray the battle as a victory for Britain over anarchy, and the success was used to attack the supposedly pro-republican Whig politicians Charles James Fox and Richard Brinsley Sheridan.\nIn the United States, the outcome of the battle led President John Adams to pursue diplomacy with France to end the Quasi-War, as the French naval defeat rendered the prospect of an invasion of the United States less likely.\nThere has been extensive historiographical debate over the comparative strengths of the fleets, although they were ostensibly evenly matched in size, each containing 13 ships of the line. However, the loss of \"Culloden\", the relative sizes of \"Orient\" and \"Leander\" and the participation in the action by two of the French frigates and several smaller vessels, as well as the theoretical strength of the French position, leads most historians to the conclusion that the French were marginally more powerful. This is accentuated by the weight of broadside of several of the French ships: \"Spartiate\", \"Franklin\", \"Orient\", \"Tonnant\" and \"Guillaume Tell\" were each significantly larger than any individual British ship in the battle. However inadequate deployment, reduced crews, and the failure of the rear division under Villeneuve to meaningfully participate, all contributed to the French defeat.\nEffects.\nThe Battle of the Nile has been called \"arguably, the most decisive naval engagement of the great age of sail\", and \"the most splendid and glorious success which the British Navy gained.\" Historian and novelist C. S. Forester, writing in 1929, compared the Nile to the great naval actions in history and concluded that \"it still only stands rivalled by Tsu-Shima as an example of the annihilation of one fleet by another of approximately equal material force\". The effect on the strategic situation in the Mediterranean was immediate, reversing the balance of the conflict and giving the British control at sea that they maintained for the remainder of the war. The destruction of the French Mediterranean fleet allowed the Royal Navy to return to the sea in force, as British squadrons set up blockades off French and allied ports. In particular, British ships cut Malta off from France, aided by the rebellion among the native Maltese population that forced the French garrison to retreat to Valletta and shut the gates. The ensuing siege of Malta lasted for two years before the defenders were finally starved into surrender. In 1799, British ships harassed Bonaparte's army as it marched east and north through Palestine, and played a crucial part in Bonaparte's defeat at the siege of Acre, when the barges carrying the siege train were captured and the French storming parties were bombarded by British ships anchored offshore. It was during one of these latter engagements that Captain Miller of \"Theseus\" was killed in an ammunition explosion. The defeat at Acre forced Bonaparte to retreat to Egypt and effectively ended his efforts to carve an empire in the Middle East. The French general returned to France without his army late in the year, leaving Kl\u00e9ber in command of Egypt.\nThe Ottoman Empire, with whom Bonaparte had hoped to conduct an alliance once his control of Egypt was complete, was encouraged by the Battle of the Nile to go to war against France. This led to a series of campaigns that slowly sapped the strength from the French army trapped in Egypt. The British victory also encouraged the Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire, both of whom were mustering armies as part of a Second Coalition, which declared war on France in 1799. With the Mediterranean undefended, an Imperial Russian Navy fleet entered the Ionian Sea, while Austrian armies recaptured much of the Italian territory lost to Bonaparte in the previous war. Without their best general and his veterans, the French suffered a series of defeats and it was not until Bonaparte returned to become First Consul that France once again held a position of strength on Continental Europe. In 1801 a British Expeditionary Force defeated the demoralised remains of the French army in Egypt. The Royal Navy used its dominance in the Mediterranean to invade Egypt without the fear of ambush while anchored off the Egyptian coast.\nIn spite of the overwhelming British victory in the climactic battle, the campaign has sometimes been considered a strategic success for France. Historian Edward Ingram noted that if Nelson had successfully intercepted Bonaparte at sea as ordered, the ensuing battle could have annihilated both the French fleet and the transports. As it was, Bonaparte was free to continue the war in the Middle East and later to return to Europe personally unscathed. The potential of a successful engagement at sea to change the course of history is underscored by the list of French army officers carried aboard the convoy who later formed the core of the generals and marshals under Emperor Napoleon. In addition to Bonaparte himself, Louis-Alexandre Berthier, Auguste de Marmont, Jean Lannes, Joachim Murat, Louis Desaix, Jean Reynier, Antoine-Fran\u00e7ois Andr\u00e9ossy, Jean-Andoche Junot, Louis-Nicolas Davout and Dumas were all passengers on the cramped Mediterranean crossing.\nLegacy.\nThe Battle of the Nile remains one of the Royal Navy's most famous victories, and has remained prominent in the British popular imagination, sustained by its depiction in a large number of cartoons, paintings, poems, and plays. One of the best known poems about the battle is \"Casabianca\", which was written by Felicia Dorothea Hemans in 1826 and gives a fictional account of the actual death of the French Captain Casabianca's son on \"Orient\", i.e. the boy who famously \"stood on the burning deck\" was French.\nMonuments were raised, including Cleopatra's Needle in London. Muhammad Ali of Egypt gave the monument in 1819 in recognition of the battle of 1798 and the campaign of 1801 but Great Britain did not erect it on the Victoria Embankment until 1878. Another memorial, the Nile Clumps near Amesbury, consists of stands of beech trees purportedly planted by Lord Queensbury at the behest of Lady Hamilton and Thomas Hardy after Nelson's death. The trees form a plan of the battle; each clump represents the position of a British or French ship.\nOn the Hall Place estate, Burchetts Green, Berkshire (now Berkshire College of Agriculture), a double line of oak trees, each tree representing a ship of the opposing fleets, was planted by William East, Baronet, in celebration of the victory. He also constructed a scale-sized pyramid and a life-sized statue of Nelson on the highest point of the estate.\nThe composer Joseph Haydn had just completed the Missa in Angustiis (mass for troubled times) after Napoleon Bonaparte had defeated the Austrian army in four major battles. The well received news of France's defeat at the Nile however resulted in the mass gradually acquiring the nickname \"Lord Nelson Mass\". The title became indelible when, in 1800, Nelson himself visited the Palais Esterh\u00e1zy, accompanied by his mistress, Lady Hamilton, and may have heard the mass performed.\nThe Royal Navy commemorated the battle with the ship names , and , and in 1998 commemorated the 200th anniversary of the battle with a visit to Aboukir Bay by the modern frigate , whose crew laid wreaths in memory of those who lost their lives in the battle.\nIn John le Carr\u00e9's novel Smiley's People there is mention of a bar on Battle of the Nile Street named 'The Defeated Frog'.\nArchaeology.\nAlthough Nelson biographer Ernle Bradford assumed in 1977 that the remains of \"Orient\" \"are almost certainly unrecoverable,\" the first archaeological investigation into the battle began in 1983, when a French survey team under Jacques Dumas discovered the wreck of the French flagship. Franck Goddio later took over the work, leading a major project to explore the bay in 1998. He found that material was scattered over an area in diameter. In addition to military and nautical equipment, Goddio recovered a large number of gold and silver coins from countries across the Mediterranean, some from the 17th century. It is likely that these were part of the treasure taken from Malta that was lost in the explosion aboard \"Orient\". In 2000, Italian archaeologist Paolo Gallo led an excavation focusing on ancient ruins on Nelson's Island. It uncovered a number of graves that date from the battle, as well as others buried there during the 1801 invasion. These graves, which included a woman and three children, were relocated in 2005 to a cemetery at Shatby in Alexandria. The reburial was attended by sailors from the modern frigate and a band from the Egyptian Navy, as well as a descendant of the only identified burial, Commander James Russell."}
{"id": "4607", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4607", "title": "Barnabas", "text": "Barnabas (; ; ), born Joseph () or Joses (), was according to tradition an early Christian, one of the prominent Christian disciples in Jerusalem. According to , Barnabas was a Cypriot Levite. Identified as an apostle in Acts 14:14, he and Paul the Apostle undertook missionary journeys together and defended Gentile converts against the Judaizers. They traveled together making more converts ( AD), and participated in the Council of Jerusalem ( AD). Barnabas and Paul successfully evangelized among the \"God-fearing\" Gentiles who attended synagogues in various Hellenized cities of Anatolia.\nBarnabas' story appears in the Acts of the Apostles, and Paul mentions him in some of his epistles. Tertullian named him as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, but this and other attributions are conjecture. The Epistle of Barnabas was ascribed to him by Clement of Alexandria and others in the early church and the epistle is included under his name in Codex Sinaiticus, the earliest extant manuscript of the complete New Testament. A few modern scholars concur with this traditional attribution but it is presently a minority view.\nAlthough the date, place, and circumstances of his death are historically unverifiable, Christian tradition holds that Barnabas was martyred at Salamis, Cyprus. He is traditionally identified as the founder of the Cypriot Orthodox Church. The feast day of Barnabas is celebrated on 11 June.\nBarnabas is usually identified as the cousin of Mark the Evangelist on the basis of the term used in Colossians 4, which carries the connotation of \"cousin\". Orthodox tradition holds that Aristobulus of Britannia, one of the Seventy Disciples, was the brother of Barnabas.\nName and etymologies.\nHis Hellenic Jewish parents called him Joseph (although the Byzantine text-type calls him , , 'Joses', a Greek variant of 'Joseph'), but when recounting the story of how he sold his land and gave the money to the apostles in Jerusalem, the Book of Acts says the apostles called him Barnabas. (The \"s\" at the end is the Greek nominative case ending, and it is not present in the Aramaic form.) The Greek text of explains the name as , , meaning \"son of encouragement\" or \"son of comforter\". One theory is that this is from the Aramaic , , meaning 'son (of) prophet'. Another is that it is related to the Hebrew word (, Aramaic ) meaning \"prophet\". In the Syriac Bible, the phrase \"son of prophet\" is translated .\nBiblical narrative.\nBarnabas appears mainly in Acts, a history of the early Christian church. He also appears in several of Paul's epistles.\nBarnabas, a native of Cyprus and a Levite, is first mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles as a member of the early Christian community in Jerusalem, who sold the land that he owned and gave the proceeds to the community. When the future Paul the Apostle returned to Jerusalem after his conversion, Barnabas introduced him to the apostles. Easton, in his Bible Dictionary, supposes that they had been fellow students in the school of Gamaliel.\nThe successful preaching of Christianity at Antioch to non-Jews led the church at Jerusalem to send Barnabas there to oversee the movement. He found the work so extensive and weighty that he went to Tarsus in search of Paul (still referred to as Saul), \"an admirable colleague\", to assist him. Paul returned with him to Antioch and labored with him for a whole year. At the end of this period, the two were sent up to Jerusalem (44 AD) with contributions from the church at Antioch for the relief of the poorer Christians in Judea.\nThey returned to Antioch taking John Mark with them, the cousin or nephew of Barnabas. Later, they went to Cyprus and some of the principal cities of Pamphylia, Pisidia, and Lycaonia. After recounting what the governor of Cyprus Sergius Paulus believed, Acts 13:9 speaks of Barnabas's spiritual brother no longer as Saul, but as Paul, his Roman name. From that point forward, when Acts refers to the two as a pair, it generally no longer uses \"Barnabas and Saul\", but \"Paul and Barnabas\". Only in Acts 14:14 and Acts 15:12,25 does Barnabas again occupy the first place; in Acts 14:14 with reference to Barnabas being mentioned first two verses earlier in Acts 14:12, and in Acts 15:12,25, because Barnabas stood in closer relation to the Jerusalem church than Paul. Paul appears as the more eloquent missionary, whence the Lystrans regarded him as Hermes and Barnabas as Zeus.\nActs 14:14 is also the only biblical verse where Barnabas is referred to using the Greek word for Apostle.\nReturning from this first missionary journey to Antioch, they were again sent up to Jerusalem to consult with the church there regarding the relation of Gentiles to the church. According to Galatians 2:9\u201310, Barnabas was included with Paul in the agreement made between them, on the one hand, and James, Peter, and John, on the other, that the two former should in the future preach to the pagans, not forgetting the poor at Jerusalem. This matter having been settled, they returned again to Antioch, bringing the agreement of the council that Gentiles were to be admitted into the church without having to adopt Jewish practices.\nAfter Paul and Barnabas returned from the Jerusalem council to Antioch, Peter also came to Antioch. Peter associated freely with the Gentiles there, including eating with them, until he was criticized for this by some disciples of James, as doing so was contrary to Mosaic law. Peter then refused to eat any longer with the Gentiles, apparently through fear of displeasing these disciples, and Barnabas followed his example. Paul then stated that Peter and Barnabas \"walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel\" (Galatians 2:14) and upbraided them before the whole church. In Galatians 2:11\u201313, Paul says, \"And when Kephas [Peter] came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face because he clearly was wrong. For, until some people came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles; but when they came, he began to draw back and separated himself, because he was afraid of the circumcised. And the rest of the Jews (also) acted hypocritically along with him, with the result that even Barnabas was carried away by their hypocrisy.\"\nPaul then asked Barnabas to accompany him on another journey. Barnabas wished to take John Mark along, but Paul did not, as John Mark had left them on the earlier journey. The dispute ended by Paul and Barnabas taking separate routes. Paul took Silas as his companion, and journeyed through Syria and Cilicia; while Barnabas took John Mark to visit Cyprus.\nLittle is known of the subsequent career of Barnabas. He was still living and labouring as an Apostle in 56 or 57 AD, when Paul wrote 1 Corinthians (1 Corinthians 9:5\u20136), in which it is stated that he, too, like Paul, earned his own living. The reference indicates also that the friendship between the two was unimpaired. A few years later, when Paul was a prisoner in Rome (61\u201363 AD), John Mark was attached to him as a disciple, which is regarded as an indication that Barnabas was no longer living (Colossians 4:10).\nBarnabas and Antioch.\nAntioch, the third-most important city of the Roman Empire after Rome and Alexandria, then the capital city of Syria province, today Antakya, Turkey, was where Christians were first called thus.\nSome of those who had been scattered by the persecution that arose because of Stephen went to Antioch, which became the site of an early Christian community. A considerable minority of the Antioch church of Barnabas's time belonged to the merchant class, and they provided support to the poorer Jerusalem church.\nMartyrdom.\nChurch tradition developed outside of the canon of the New Testament describes the martyrdom of many saints, including the legend of the martyrdom of Barnabas. It relates that certain Jews coming to Syria and Salamis, where Barnabas was then preaching the gospel, being highly exasperated at his extraordinary success, fell upon him as he was disputing in the synagogue, dragged him out, and stoned him to death. His kinsman, John Mark, privately interred his body.\nAlthough it is believed he was martyred by being stoned, the apocryphal Acts of Barnabas states that he was bound with a rope by the neck, and then being dragged only to the site where he would be burned to death.\nAccording to the \"History of the Cyprus Church\", in 478 Barnabas appeared in a dream to the Archbishop Anthemios of Cyprus and revealed to him the place of his sepulchre beneath a carob-tree. The following day Anthemios found the tomb and inside it the remains of Barnabas with a manuscript of Matthew's Gospel on his breast. Anthemios presented the Gospel to Emperor Zeno at Constantinople and received from him the privileges of the Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus, that is, the purple cloak which the Greek Archbishop of Cyprus wears at festivals of the church, the imperial sceptre and the red ink with which he affixes his signature.\nAnthemios then placed the venerable remains of Barnabas in a church which he founded near the tomb. Excavations near the site of a present-day church and monastery, have revealed an early church with two empty tombs, believed to be that of St. Barnabas and Anthemios.\nSt. Barnabas is venerated as the patron saint of Cyprus. He is also considered a patron saint in many other places in the world, highlighting \nMilan in Italy. On the island of Tenerife (Spain), St. Barnabas was invoked in historical times as patron saint and protector of the island's fields against drought, together with St. Benedict of Nursia.\nBarnabas the Apostle is remembered in the Church of England with a festival on 11 June.\nOther sources.\nAlthough many assume that the biblical Mark the cousin of Barnabas is the same as John Mark and Mark the Evangelist, the traditionally believed author of the Gospel of Mark, they are listed as three distinct people in Pseudo-Hippolytus' \"On the Seventy Apostles of Christ,\" which includes Barnabas himself as one of the Seventy-Two Disciples. There are two people named Barnabas among Hippolytus' list of Seventy Disciples, One (#13) became the bishop of Milan, the other (#25) the bishop of Heraclea. Most likely one of these two is the biblical Barnabas; the first one is more likely, because the numbering by Hippolytus seems to indicate a level of significance, and Barnabas is traditionally credited with founding the apostolic see of Milan. Clement of Alexandria also makes Barnabas one of the Seventy Disciples that are mentioned in the Gospel of Luke.\nOther sources bring Barnabas to Rome and Alexandria. In the \"Clementine Recognitions\" (i, 7) he is depicted as preaching in Rome even during Christ's lifetime.\nCypriots developed the tradition of his later activity and martyrdom no earlier than the 3rd century. The question whether Barnabas was an apostle was often discussed during the Middle Ages.\nAlleged writings.\nTertullian and other Western writers regard Barnabas as the author of the Letter to the Hebrews. This may have been the Roman tradition\u2014which Tertullian usually follows\u2014and in Rome the epistle may have had its first readers. Modern biblical scholarship considers its authorship unknown, though Barnabas amongst others has been proposed as potential authors.\n\"Photius of the ninth century, refers to some in his day who were uncertain whether the Acts was written by Clement of Rome, Barnabas, or Luke. Yet Photius is certain that the work must be ascribed to Luke.\"\nHe is also traditionally associated with the Epistle of Barnabas, although some modern scholars think it more likely that the epistle was written in Alexandria in the 130s.\nThe 5th century \"Decretum Gelasianum\" includes a \"Gospel of Barnabas\" amongst works condemned as apocryphal; but no certain text or quotation from this work has been identified.\nAnother book using that same title, the Gospel of Barnabas, survives in two post-medieval manuscripts in Italian and Spanish. Contrary to the canonical Christian Gospels, and in accordance with the Islamic view of Jesus, this later Gospel of Barnabas states that Jesus was not the son of God, but a prophet and messenger.\nThe Barnabites.\nIn 1538, the Catholic religious order officially known as \"Clerics Regular of St. Paul\" (\"Clerici Regulares Sancti Pauli\"), gained the grand old Monastery of Saint Barnabas by the city wall of Milan as their main seat. The Order was thenceforth known by the popular name of \"Barnabites\".\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "4608", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4608", "title": "Birka", "text": "Birka (\"Birca\" in medieval sources), on the island of Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 (lit. \"Birch Island\") in present-day Sweden, was an important Viking Age trading center which handled goods from Scandinavia as well as many parts of Continental Europe and the Orient. Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 is located in Lake M\u00e4laren, 30 kilometers west of contemporary Stockholm, in the municipality of Eker\u00f6.\nBirka was founded around AD 750 and it flourished for more than 200\u202fyears. It was abandoned c. AD 975, around the same time Sigtuna was founded as a Christian town some 35\u00a0km to the northeast. It has been estimated that the population in Viking Age Birka was between 500 and 1000 people.\nThe archaeological sites of Birka and Hovg\u00e5rden, on the neighbouring island of Adels\u00f6, make up an archaeological complex which illustrates the elaborate trading networks of Viking Scandinavia and their influence on the subsequent history of Europe. Generally regarded as Sweden's oldest town, Birka (along with Hovg\u00e5rden) has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993. Many burial sites have been uncovered at Birka, leading to the finding of many objects including jewelry and many textile fragments. In recent years, objects from Birka have been in the public eye due to ongoing academic research connection Birka to evidence of trade with the Middle East.\nHistory.\nBirka was founded around 750 AD as a trading port by a king or merchants trying to control trade. It is one of the earliest urban settlements in Scandinavia. Birka was the Baltic link in the Dnieper Trade Route through Ladoga (\"Aldeigja\") and Novgorod (\"Holmsgard\") to the Byzantine Empire and the Abbasid Caliphate. Birka is the site of the first known Christian in Sweden, founded in 831 by Saint Ansgar.\nAs a trading center, Birka most likely offered furs, iron goods, and craft products, in exchange for various materials from much of Europe and Western Asia. Furs were obtained from the Sami people, the Finns, and people in Northwestern Russia, as well as from local trappers. Furs included bear, fox, marten, otter, beaver, and other species. Reindeer antlers and objects carved from reindeer antlers like combs were important items of trade. The trade of walrus tusks, amber, and honey is also documented.\nForeign goods found from the graves of Birka include glass and metalware, pottery from the Rhineland, clothing and textiles including Chinese silk, Byzantine embroidery with extremely fine gold thread, brocades with gold passementerie, and plaited cords of high quality. From the ninth century onwards coins minted at Haithabu in Northern Germany and elsewhere in Scandinavia start to appear. However, the vast majority of the coins found at Birka are silver dirhams from the Middle East while English and Carolingian coins are rare.\nWritten accounts.\nSources from Birka are mainly archaeological remains. No texts survive from this area, though the written text \"Vita Ansgari\" (\"The Life of Ansgar\") by Rimbert (c. 865) describes the missionary work of Ansgar around 830 at Birka, and \"Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum\" (Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church) by Adam of Bremen in 1075 describes the Archbishop Unni, who died at Birka in 936. Saint Ansgar's work was the first attempt to convert the people of Birka from the Norse religion to Christianity. It was unsuccessful.\nBoth Rimbert and Adam were German clergymen writing in Latin. There are no known Norse sources mentioning the name of the settlement, or even the settlement itself, and the original Norse name of Birka is unknown. \"Birca\" is the Latinised form given in the written sources by Rimbert and Adam; and \"Birka\" is the contemporary, unhistorical Swedish form. The Latin name is probably derived from an Old Norse word \"birk\" which probably means a market place. Related to this was the \"Bj\u00e4rk\u00f6a law\" (bj\u00e4rk\u00f6ar\u00e4tt) which regulated the life of market places in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Birka and similar spellings are very common in Scandinavian place names still today leading to speculation that all references to Birka, especially those by Adam of Bremen, were not about the same location.\nBoth publications are silent on Birka's size, layout, and appearance. Based on Rimbert's account, Birka was significant because it had a port and it was the location of the regional ting. Adam only mentions the port, but otherwise, Birka seems to have been significant to him because it was the start of Ansgar's Christian mission and because Archbishop Unni was buried there.\n\"Vita Ansgari\" and \"Gesta\" are sometimes ambiguous, which has caused some controversy as to whether Birka and the Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 settlement are the same location. Many other locations have been suggested through the years. However, Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 is the only location that shows remains of a town of Birka's significance, which is why the vast majority of scholars regard Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 as the location of Birka.\nBirka was abandoned during the latter half of the 10th century. Based on the dating of the coins, the city seems to have died out around 960. Roughly around the same time, the nearby settlement of Sigtuna supplanted Birka as the main trading center in the M\u00e4laren area. The reasons for Birka's decline are disputed. The Baltic island of Gotland was also in a better strategic position for Rus'-Byzantine trade and was gaining eminence as a mercantile stronghold. Historian Neil Kent has speculated that the area may have been the victim of an enemy assault.\nThe Varangian trade stations in Russia suffered a serious decline at roughly the same date.\nRimbert's description.\nIn \"Vita Ansgari\" (\"The life of Ansgar\") monk and later archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen Rimbert gives the first known description of Birka. The town was the center of Catholic missionary activities in the 9th century Sweden. Rimbert's interests were in the Christian faith, not so much in the Swedish geopolicy, so his descriptions of Birka remain approximate at best.\nBridgehead of Christian missionaries.\nThis is how it all started in 829:\nMeanwhile it happened that Swedish ambassadors had come to the Emperor Louis the Pious, and, amongst other matters which they had been ordered to bring to the attention of the emperor, they informed him that there were many belonging to their nation who desired to embrace the Christian religion, and that their king so far favoured this suggestion that he would permit God's priests to reside there, provided that they might be deemed worthy of such a favour and that the emperor would send them suitable preachers. (Chapter IX)\nAnsgar then undertook the mission committed to him by the emperor, who desired that he should go to the Swedes and discover whether this people was prepared to accept the faith as their messengers had declared. (Chapter X)\nAnsgar was already experienced in the missionary work in Denmark, and set forth to Sweden. Rimbert describes the trip very generally:\nIt may suffice for me to say that while they were in the midst of their journey they fell into the hands of pirates. The merchants with whom they were travelling, defended themselves vigorously and for a time successfully, but eventually they were conquered and overcome by the pirates, who took from them their ships and all that they possessed, whilst they themselves barely escaped on. foot to land. \u2014With great difficulty they accomplished their long journey on foot, traversing also the intervening seas (maria), where it was possible, by ship, and eventually arrived at the Swedish port called Birka. (Chapters X and XI)\nRimbert does not say where Ansgar sailed off or where he landed. Noteworthy is just his note about several \"seas\" that they had to cross to get to Birka from the place they had landed to. Since Rimbert mentions them to have crossed the seas by ship \"where it was possible\" they clearly had the alternative of going around them as well, meaning that the seas were probably the numerous lakes in southern Sweden. When Ansgar again travelled to Birka from Germany about 852, it went easier:\nAnsgar accomplished the journey on which he had set out, and after spending nearly twenty days in a ship, he arrived at Birka (Chapter XXVI)\nThis might mean that he sailed off from Hamburg or Bremen instead of some port in Baltic Sea, since the later account by Adam of Bremen gives the distance of Scania and Birka to be only five days at sea.\nKings.\nSeveral Swedish kings of the 9th century, Bj\u00f6rn, Anund and Olof, are all mentioned in \"Vita\" to have spent time in Birka. None of them is however said to have had his residence there, as the Swedish king and his retinue periodically moved between the Husbys, parts of the network of royal estates called Uppsala \u00f6d.\nKing Bj\u00f6rn met Ansgar in Birka when he arrived there in 829 (Chapter XI). Later King Olof met him there as well during his last trip in 852 (Chapter XXVI).\nChurch.\nAnsgar's missionary work resulted in first churches to be built in Sweden. Talking about Herigar, the prefect of Birka:\nA little later he built a church on his own ancestral property and served God with the utmost devotion. (Chapter XI)\nHerigar's church was not far from the place where tings were held:\nOn one occasion he himself was sitting in an assembly of people, a stage having been arranged for a council on an open plain. He then summoned his servants and told them to carry him to his church. (Chapter XIX)\nAnother church was also built in Sweden, however location is left open:\nThis Gautbert, who at his consecration received the honoured name of the apostle Simeon, went to Sweden, and was honourably received by the king and the people; and he began, amidst general goodwill and approval, to build a church there (Chapter XIV)\nThe exiled Swedish King Anund Uppsale confirms that either one of the churches was in Birka itself when he ponders if Birka should be plundered:\n\"There are there,\" he said, \"many great and powerful gods, and in former time a church was built there, and there are many Christians there who worship Christ\" (Chapter XIX)\nProbable fortress.\nDanes attacked Birka, accompanied with the deposed king Anund, which caused great distress in the town.\nBeing in great difficulty they fled to a neighbouring city (ad civitatem, qu\u00e6 iuxta erat, confugerunt) and began to promise and offer to their gods\u2014But inasmuch as the city was not strong and there were few to offer resistance, they sent messengers to the Danes and asked for friendship and alliance. \u2014Hergeir, the faithful servant of the Lord, was angry with them and said, \"They will lead away your wives and sons as captives, they will burn our city (urbs) and town (vicus)\" and will destroy you with the sword (Chapter XIX)\nAs the neighbouring \"city\" is not mentioned in any other context than during the Danish attack as a place where people took refuge, it probably meant a nearby fortress. Eventually Danes left, sparing Birka from destruction.\n\"Ting\" assembly.\nWhen Ansgar asked if King Olof would permit him to establish the Christian religion in the kingdom during his second visit in 852, the king said to him:\nOn this account I have not the power, nor do I dare, to approve the objects of your mission until I can consult our gods by the casting of lots and until I can enquire the will of the people in regard to this matter. Let your messenger attend with me the next assembly (Chapter XXVI)\nWhen the day for the assembly which was held in the town of Birka drew near, in accordance with their national custom the king caused a proclamation to be made to the people by the voice of a herald, in order that they might be informed concerning the object of their mission. \u2014The king then rose up from amongst the assembly and forthwith directed one of his own messengers to accompany the bishop's messenger, and to tell him that the people were unanimously inclined to accept his proposal and at the same time to tell him that, whilst their action was entirely agreeable to him, he could not give his full consent until, in another assembly, which was to be held in another part of his kingdom, he could announce this resolution to the people who lived in that district. (Chapter XXVII)\nTings were huge open-air events, which required plenty of space. The more important ting that king Olof talked about was probably the \"Ting of all Swedes\", which was held at the end of February in Uppsala, during the Disting. The king was obliged to obey the common decisions made at this ting, and the most powerful man at this assembly was not the king, but the lawspeaker of Tiundaland. Locally important tings were the Westrogothic \"Ting of all Geats\" in Skara and the Ostrogothic \"Lionga ting\" in the vicinity of today's Link\u00f6ping.\nAdam of Bremen's description.\nIn \"Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum\" (Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church), Adam of Bremen mentions Birka many times, and the book is the main source of information on the city. After its initial release in 1075\u20136, \"Gesta\" was complemented with supplementary \"Scholias\" until the death of Adam in the 1080s. Birca is described as an existing city in the original version, but then as destroyed in \"Scholia 138\".\nOne of Adam's main sources had been the German bishop Adalvard the Younger of Sigtuna and later of Skara as hinted in \"Scholia 119\". He was also very familiar with Rimbert's work. Adam himself never visited Birka.\nLocation and port.\nAdam described Birka as a Geatish port town and had gathered many details about it.\nBirka is the main Geatish town (oppidum Gothorum), situated in the middle of Sweden (Suevoniae), not far (non longe) from the temple called Uppsala (Ubsola) which the Swedes (Sueones) held in the highest esteem when it comes to the worship of the gods; here forms an inlet of the Baltic or the Barbaric Sea a port facing north which welcomes all the wild peoples all around this sea but which is risky for those who are careless or ignorant of such places ... they have therefore blocked this inlet of the troubled sea with hidden masses of rocks along more than 100 stadions (18 km). On this anchorage, being the best sheltered within the maritime region of Sweden (Suevoniae), all the ships belonging to Danes (Danorum) known as Norwegians (Nortmannorum) as well as to Slavs (Sclavorum), Sembrians (Semborum) and other Scythian (Scithiae) peoples use to convene every year for sundry necessary commerce. (I 62)\nTurning from the northern parts to the mouth of the Baltic Sea we first meet the Norwegians (Nortmanni), then the Danish region of Sk\u00e5ne (Sconia) stands out, and beyond these live the Geats (Gothi) for a long stretch all the way to Birka. (IV 14)\nHaving described V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland and Skara, Adam writes:\nBeyond it \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland (Ostrogothia) extends along the sea, that is called the Baltic Sea, all the way to Birka. (IV 23)\nNoteworthy in the following statement is the usage of the term \"not far\" (non longe) which was also used to describe the distance between Birka and the Uppsala temple:\nFurthermore we have been told that there are many more islands in that sea, one of which is called the Great Estland (Aestland) \u2013 And this island is told to be quite close to the Woman Land (terrae feminarum), which is not far (non longe) away from Birka of the Swedes. (IV 17)\nAdam also had travel instructions from Sk\u00e5ne to Sigtuna:\nFrom Sk\u00e5ne (Sconia) of the Danes one reaches Sigtuna (Sictonam) or Birka after five days at sea, for they are indeed alike. But by land from Sk\u00e5ne across the Geatish people (Gothorum populos) and cities Skara (Scaranem), Telgas and Birka, one reaches Sigtuna only after a full month. (IV 28)\n\"Telgas\" is not mentioned anywhere else, and it remains as speculative as Birka. The most popular identification among many telge names in Sweden is S\u00f6dert\u00e4lje. \"Scholia 121\" of IV 20 tells also:\nFor those who sail from Sk\u00e5ne (Sconia) of the Danes to Birka, the journey takes five days, from Birka to Russia (Ruzziam) likewise five days at sea. (Scholia 121)\nThe following definition remains even more mysterious:\nIn pity of their errors, our archbishop ordained as their diocesan capital Birka, which is in the middle of Sweden (Sueoniae) facing Jumne (Iumnem), the capital of the Slavs, and equally distant from all the coasts of the surrounding sea. (IV 20)\nSince it is physically impossible for any Swedish town to face Jumne, the latter being situated along River Oder, Adam's statement is probably a misunderstanding. No place having a similar name to Birka is known to have situated on the opposite shore of Oder, so it may be possible that something similar to Jumne was located opposite to Birka.\nBishop.\nArchbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen that oversaw the missionary work in Scandinavia until 1103, had appointed bishops to Sweden at least from 1014 onwards, the first see being in Skara. Several bishops were appointed for Sweden in 1060s, one also for Birka.\nFor Sweden, six were consecrated: Adalvard the Elder (Adalwardum) and Acilinum, also Adalvard the Younger (Adalwardum) and Tadicum, and furthermore Simeon (Symeonem) and the monk John (Iohannem). (III 70)\n\"Scholia 94\" appends this as follows:\nAdalvard the Elder (Adalwardus senior) was to superintend both lands of the Geats (uterque praefectus est Gothiae), Adalvard the Younger Sigtuna (Sictunam) and Uppsala (Ubsalam), Simeon (Symon) the Sami people (Scritefingos), John (Iohannes) the islands of the Baltic Sea. (Scholia 94)\nFurthermore, the following was said about John's location after talking about Birka:\nFor this city he ordained, as the first among our people, the abbot Hiltin, whom he wanted to call John. (IV 20)\nJohn seems to have been situated in Birka in order to prepare for the missionary work among the many heathen people that flooded to Birca from around the Baltic coasts. This was a logical continuation to Birka's position as the first missionary town in Sweden. Noteworthy here is that the biggest islands in the Baltic Sea, \u00d6land and Gotland, were part of the diocese of Link\u00f6ping in the Middle Ages, covering also \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland and eastern Sm\u00e5land.\nLocation of Unni's tomb.\n\"Scholia 122\" of IV 20 locates the tomb of Hamburg's archbishop Unni in Birka:\nThere is the port of Saint Ansgar and the tomb of the holy Archbishop Unni, and a familiar haven, it is said, for the holy confessors of our diocese. (Scholia 122)\nAccording to \"Gesta\", Unni had died in 936 (I 64).\nDestruction.\nAfter having consistently described Birka as an existing city, \"Scholia 138\" of IV 29 describes Birka's sudden demise. Talking about Adalvard the Younger, the bishop of Sigtuna and later that of Skara, Adam or a later copyist has written:\nDuring his journey he seized the opportunity to make a detour to Birka, which is now reduced to loneliness so that one can hardly find vestiges of the city; therefore impossible to come upon the tomb of the holy Archbishop Unni. (Scholia 138)\nThe remark does not make it clear if Adalvard found the city destroyed or if that had happened after his visit and the later remark was just to warn the future pilgrims not to go there anymore in vain. As Adalvard was back in Bremen already by 1069 and is mentioned as one of Adam's sources of information, it would have been expected that word about Birka's destruction had reached also Adam before he published his work half a decade later.\nBj\u00f6rk\u00f6 archaeological site.\nThe exact location of Birka was also lost during the centuries, leading to speculation from Swedish historians. In 1450, the island of Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 was first claimed to be Birka by the \"Chronicle of Sweden\" (\"Prosaiska kr\u00f6nikan\").\nIn search of Birka, National Antiquarian Johan Hadorph was the first to attempt excavations on Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 in the late 17th century.\nIn the late 19th century, Hjalmar Stolpe, an entomologist by education, arrived on Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 to study fossilized insects found in amber on the island. Stolpe found very large amounts of amber, which is unusual since amber is not normally found in lake M\u00e4laren. Stolpe speculated that the island may have been an important trading post, prompting him to conduct a series of archeological excavations between 1871 and 1895. The excavations soon indicated that a major settlement had been located on the island and eventually Stolpe spent two decades excavating the island. After Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 came to be identified with ancient Birka, it has been assumed that the original name of Birka was simply \"Bierk\u00f8\" (sometimes spelled \"Bj\u00e4rk\u00f6\"), an earlier form of \"Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6\".\nA significant collection of textiles fragments were retrieved during excavations, mostly from chamber graves. Agnes Geijer published the most detailed analysis of this collection in 1938, although her study was based upon only around 5% of the 4800 textile fragments preserved from the site. The collection represents a usual variety of different types of textiles showing high quality textiles manufactured by different techniques like tabby and twill. Mostly made from wool and flax, the quality of the textiles studied by Geijer ranged from very coarse to fine fabrics with high thread counts that required complicated techniques to create. The variety of materials and techniques to make the tablet woven textiles led Geijer to theorize that some of the textiles were imported. Geijer also found remains of the three-end twill textile that has not been found anywhere else in Northern Europe. Geijer theorized that some of the fragments came from the East, possibly China, due the use of gold and silver wire as well as silk.\nOwnership of Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 is today mainly in private hands and is used for farming and management also benefits biodiversity.\nThe archaeological remains are located in the north part of Bj\u00f6rk\u00f6 and span an area of about 7 hectares (17 acres). The remains are both burial-sites and buildings, and in the south part of this area, there is also a hill fort called \"Borgen\" (\"The Fortress\"). The construction technique of the buildings is still unknown, but the main material was wood. An adjacent island holds the remains of Hovg\u00e5rden, an estate that housed the King's retinue during visits.\nApproximately 700 people lived at Birka when it was at its largest, and about 3,000 graves have been found. Its administrative center was supposedly located outside of the settlement itself, on the nearby island of Adels\u00f6.\nThe most recent large excavation was undertaken between 1990 and 1995 in a region of dark earth, believed to be the site of the main settlement.\nShipyard.\nOn 15 June 2022, it was announced that archaeologists from Stockholm University's Archaeological Research Laboratory had found a Viking Age shipyard in Lake M\u00e4laren. It was the first time a site like the shipyard had been found.\n\"The site found consisted of a stone-lined depression in the Viking Age shore zone with a wooden boat slip at the bottom. The finds at the site consist of large quantities of both unused and used boat rivets, whetstones made from slate and woodworking tools.\"\nBj\u00f6rk\u00f6 objects.\n\"Allah\" textile controversy.\nIn 2017, Annika Larsson, a textile researcher, claimed in a press release by Uppsala University to have discovered a textile among the finds from Birka that bore the Arabic words \"Allah\" and \"Ali\". She theorized that some of the Vikings could have been influenced by Islam, leading to widespread media coverage. Stephennie Mulder, a professor of Islamic art at the University of Texas at Austin, replied to Larsson's findings in a Twitter thread. Based on the epigraphy, Mulder argued that the textile bore a simple geometric pattern and not Arabic writing because the dating of the textile was from the 10th century and the style of writing Larsson claimed was on the textile, square Kufic, is not seen until the 15th century. Larsson had also proposed extensions to the tablet weaving that expanded beyond the original drawing by Agnes Geijer in 1938. Textile specialist Carolyn Priest-Dorman argued that the expansions are impossible because the fragment has finished edges called selvages and the band would have shown cut weft threads if the fragment had been narrowed at some point. Larsson's drawings were speculative and not based on evidence that an expansion existed. The backlash following these criticisms led the press release on the Uppsala University website to include a note that Larsson's research was preliminary and a comment regarding the criticisms. In 2020, Larsson published an article reiterating her claim that the textile bore Arabic writing, without addressing these criticisms.\n\"Allah\" ring controversy.\nA ring was found during the archeological excavations at Birka between 1872 and 1895, when archeologist Hjalmar Stolpe discovered it in a 9th-century Viking woman's burial. It is made of high-quality silver alloy and is set with a pink-violet oval glass. The ring, preserved at the Swedish history museum, became known as the \"Allah ring\" because of the pseudo-Kufic inscription found on the ring's glass that resembles the word Allah (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0644\u0647). While other rings were found at the Birka excavations, the \"Allah ring\" was the only one that had this type of inscription. The Arabic historical linguist Marijn van Putten argued that the inscription on the ring was an example of pseudo-Kufic and that it has no meaning in Arabic. Nevertheless, other analysts extrapolated that the pseudo-Kufic engraving was indeed Arabic and that this was sufficient evidence to directly link Vikings to Islamic civilization. In her Twitter thread on the \"Allah\u201d textile, Stephennie Mulder drew on the work of van Putten to argue that like the textile, the ring had been similarly misunderstood. However, she acknowledged that the Arabic language\u2014found on the ring and other objects from Birka\u2014was appreciated by the Vikings as a sign of social status. The inscription could suggest that the ring's owner might have been one of the Viking elites who were in contact with the Islamic world via trade or travel.\nDragonhead.\nThe Birka dragonhead is a 45mm long decorative object made from a tin alloy. Sven Kalmring and Lena Holmquist maintain that the dragonhead was cast from a soapstone mold due to the presence of casting burs on the object and the fact that similar casting molds of dragons have been found in Birka. Stylistically similar dragonheads have been discovered around the Baltic, and scholars like Anne-Sofie Gr\u00e4slund believe they likely functioned as dress pins.\nWearable accessories.\n10 small silver crosses were found in graves at Birka. Missionaries, brought by Rimbert and others, lead to some converts to Christianity. 27 graves contained small pendants of Thor's hammer from around the 10th century. Both traditional Viking religious beliefs and Christianity were present at Birka.\nMany Birka grave excavations produced a number of funerary findings unique to the deceased and the region of the grave. In the excavation of grave Bj 463, a small copper alloy brooch with animal motifs was found alongside the skeletal remains of a young girl from Birka, and similar ones appeared in other excavations around Birka.\nThe brooch is understood to be typically related to female burials and also female jewelry of the Viking period. The surrounding fragments of textiles attached to these brooches, scattered around various graves across Sweden, also give an understanding of what the typical womenswear of the Viking age may have been in the 9th and 10th centuries.\nDirham coins.\nDirham coins have been located all around Scandinavian countries and suggest strong trade relations existed between the medieval Middle East and Northern Europe. A dirham coin was found in the excavation of grave sites in Birka, with Arabic writing and an absence of imagery that would date the coin sometime after the 7th century. Other writing on the coin indicates the location of the mint as well as the names of a caliph and an Amir, which place the coin's origins in al-Shah, modern day Tashkent in Uzbekistan. The coin's inscription in Arabic translates into English:There is no deity but Allah alone he has no equal For God Muhammad is the messenger of God.\nBirka burial sites.\nOver 3,000 grave sites are located in Birka, including both cremations and inhumations in coffins or chamber graves. Skeletal analysis and the presence of gender-specific jewelry and objects in graves has shown that the majority of the deceased are female. Scholar Nancy L. Wicker suggests that the disproportionate number of female graves is due to the fact that female grave goods are easily identifiable, but male graves without objects are difficult to identify.\nMany graves contain objects such as coins, glass, and textiles that originated in foreign countries as far as the Middle East and Eastern Asia. According to Nancy L. Wicker, these objects were either imported to Birka as luxury trade goods, or they belonged to foreign individuals who were buried at Birka.\nGrave Bj 463 contained the skeleton of a girl from the mid-10th century. She was buried in a coffin with grave goods associated with high-status women, including a round brooch, glass beads, and a needle case. By the condition of her teeth, she was 5\u20136 years old at the time of her death, and further analysis determined that her diet was similar to that of male warriors instead of a typical child's diet. Scholar Marianne Hem Eriksen maintains that this girl is an unusual case of a high-status child burial, as children were seldom buried with identifiable grave goods."}
{"id": "4609", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4609", "title": "Beta-lactamase", "text": "Beta-lactamases (\u03b2-lactamases) are enzymes () produced by bacteria that provide multi-resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics such as penicillins, cephalosporins, cephamycins, monobactams and carbapenems (ertapenem), although carbapenems are relatively resistant to beta-lactamase. Beta-lactamase provides antibiotic resistance by breaking the antibiotics' structure. These antibiotics all have a common element in their molecular structure: a four-atom ring known as a beta-lactam (\u03b2-lactam) ring. Through hydrolysis, the enzyme lactamase breaks the \u03b2-lactam ring open, deactivating the molecule's antibacterial properties. \nBeta-lactamases produced by gram-negative bacteria are usually secreted, especially when antibiotics are present in the environment.\nStructure.\nThe structure of a \"Streptomyces\" serine \u03b2-lactamase (SBLs) is given by . The alpha-beta fold () resembles that of a -transpeptidase, from which the enzyme is thought to have evolved. \u03b2-lactam antibiotics bind to -transpeptidases to inhibit bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. Serine \u03b2-lactamases are grouped by sequence similarity into types A, C, and D.\nThe other type of beta-lactamase is of the metallo type (\"type B\"). Metallo-beta-lactamases (MBLs) need metal ion(s) (1 or 2 Zn2+ ions) on their active site for their catalytic activities. The structure of the New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase 1 is given by . It resembles a RNase Z, from which it is thought to have evolved.\nMechanism of action.\nThe two types of beta-lactamases work on the basis of the two basic mechanisms of opening the \u03b2-lactam ring.\nThe SBLs are similar in structure and mechanistically to the \u03b2-lactam target penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) which are necessary for cell wall building and modifying. SBLs and PBPs both covalently change an active site serine residue. The difference between the PBPs and SBLs is that the latter generates free enzyme and inactive antibiotic by the very quick hydrolysis of the acyl-enzyme intermediate.\nThe MBLs use the Zn2+ ions to activate a binding site water molecule for the hydrolysis of the \u03b2-lactam ring. Zinc chelators have recently been investigated as metallo-\u03b2-lactamase inhibitors, as they are often able to restore carbapenem susceptibility.\nPenicillinase.\nPenicillinase is a specific type of \u03b2-lactamase, showing specificity for penicillins, again by hydrolysing the \u03b2-lactam ring. Molecular weights of the various penicillinases tend to cluster near 50 kilodaltons.\nPenicillinase was the first \u03b2-lactamase to be identified. It was first isolated by Abraham and Chain in 1940 from \"E. coli\" (which are gram-negative) even before penicillin entered clinical use, but penicillinase production quickly spread to bacteria that previously did not produce it or produced it only rarely. Penicillinase-resistant beta-lactams such as methicillin were developed, but there is now widespread resistance to even these.\nResistance in gram-negative bacteria.\nAmong gram-negative bacteria, the emergence of resistance to extended-spectrum cephalosporins has been a major concern. It appeared initially in a limited number of bacterial species (\"E. cloacae\", \"C. freundii\", \"S. marcescens\", and \"P. aeruginosa\") that could mutate to hyperproduce their chromosomal class C \u03b2-lactamase. A few years later, resistance appeared in bacterial species not naturally producing AmpC enzymes (\"K. pneumoniae\", \"Salmonella\" spp., \"P. mirabilis\") due to the production of TEM- or SHV-type ESBLs (extended spectrum beta lactamases). Characteristically, such resistance has included oxyimino- (for example ceftizoxime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime, as well as the oxyimino-monobactam aztreonam), but not 7-alpha-methoxy-cephalosporins (cephamycins; in other words, cefoxitin and cefotetan); has been blocked by inhibitors such as clavulanate, sulbactam or tazobactam and did not involve carbapenems and temocillin. Chromosomal-mediated AmpC \u03b2-lactamases represent a new threat, since they confer resistance to 7-alpha-methoxy-cephalosporins (cephamycins) such as cefoxitin or cefotetan but are not affected by commercially available \u03b2-lactamase inhibitors, and can, in strains with loss of outer membrane porins, provide resistance to carbapenems.\nExtended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL).\nMembers of this family commonly express \u03b2-lactamases (e.g., TEM-3, TEM-4, and SHV-2 ) which confer resistance to expanded-spectrum (extended-spectrum) cephalosporins. In the mid-1980s, this new group of enzymes, the extended-spectrum \u03b2-lactamases (ESBLs), was detected (first detected in 1979). The prevalence of ESBL-producing bacteria have been gradually increasing in acute care hospitals. The prevalence in the general population varies between countries, e.g. approximately 6% in Germany and France, 13% in Saudi Arabia, and 63% in Egypt. ESBLs are beta-lactamases that hydrolyze extended-spectrum cephalosporins with an oxyimino side chain. These cephalosporins include cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime, as well as the oxyimino-monobactam aztreonam. Thus ESBLs confer multi-resistance to these antibiotics and related oxyimino-beta lactams. In typical circumstances, they derive from genes for TEM-1, TEM-2, or SHV-1 by mutations that alter the amino acid configuration around the active site of these \u03b2-lactamases. A broader set of \u03b2-lactam antibiotics are susceptible to hydrolysis by these enzymes. An increasing number of ESBLs not of TEM or SHV lineage have recently been described. The ESBLs are frequently plasmid encoded. Plasmids responsible for ESBL production frequently carry genes encoding resistance to other drug classes (for example, aminoglycosides). Therefore, antibiotic options in the treatment of ESBL-producing organisms are extremely limited. Carbapenems are the treatment of choice for serious infections due to ESBL-producing organisms, yet carbapenem-resistant (primarily ertapenem-resistant) isolates have recently been reported. ESBL-producing organisms may appear susceptible to some extended-spectrum cephalosporins. However, treatment with such antibiotics has been associated with high failure rates.\nTypes.\nTEM beta-lactamases (class A).\nTEM-1 is the most commonly encountered beta-lactamase in gram-negative bacteria. Up to 90% of ampicillin resistance in \"E. coli\" is due to the production of TEM-1. Also responsible for the ampicillin and penicillin resistance that is seen in \"H. influenzae\" and \"N. gonorrhoeae\" in increasing numbers. Although TEM-type beta-lactamases are most often found in \"E. coli\" and \"K. pneumoniae\", they are also found in other species of gram-negative bacteria with increasing frequency. The amino acid substitutions responsible for the extended-spectrum beta lactamase (ESBL) phenotype cluster around the active site of the enzyme and change its configuration, allowing access to oxyimino-beta-lactam substrates. Opening the active site to beta-lactam substrates also typically enhances the susceptibility of the enzyme to \u03b2-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid. Single amino acid substitutions at positions 104, 164, 238, and 240 produce the ESBL phenotype, but ESBLs with the broadest spectrum usually have more than a single amino acid substitution. Based upon different combinations of changes, currently 140 TEM-type enzymes have been described. TEM-10, TEM-12, and TEM-26 are among the most common in the United States. The term TEM comes from the name of the Athenian patient (Temoniera) from which the isolate was recovered in 1963.\nSHV beta-lactamases (class A).\nSHV-1 shares 68 percent of its amino acids with TEM-1 and has a similar overall structure. The SHV-1 beta-lactamase is most commonly found in \"K. pneumoniae\" and is responsible for up to 20% of the plasmid-mediated ampicillin resistance in this species. ESBLs in this family also have amino acid changes around the active site, most commonly at positions 238 or 238 and 240. More than 60 SHV varieties are known. SHV-5 and SHV-12 are among the most common. The initials stand for \"sulfhydryl reagent variable\".\nCTX-M beta-lactamases (class A).\nThese enzymes were named for their greater activity against cefotaxime than other oxyimino-beta-lactam substrates (e.g., ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, or cefepime). Rather than arising by mutation, they represent examples of plasmid acquisition of beta-lactamase genes normally found on the chromosome of \"Kluyvera\" species, a group of rarely pathogenic commensal organisms. These enzymes are not very closely related to TEM or SHV beta-lactamases in that they show only approximately 40% identity with these two commonly isolated beta-lactamases. More than 172 CTX-M enzymes are currently known. Despite their name, a few are more active on ceftazidime than cefotaxime. They are widely described among species of Enterobacteriaceae, mainly \"E. coli\" and \"K. pneumoniae\". Detected in the 1980s they have since the early 2000s spread and are the now the predominant ESBL type in the world. They are generally clustred into five groups based on sequencing homologies; CTX-M-1, CTX-M-2, CTX-M-8, CTX-M-9 and CTX-M-25. CTX-M-15 (belonging to the CTX-M-1 cluster) is the most prevalent CTX-M-gene. An example of beta-lactamase CTX-M-15, along with IS\"Ecp1\", has been found to have transposed onto the chromosome of \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" ATCC BAA-2146. The initials stand for \"Cefotaxime-Munich\".\nOXA beta-lactamases (class D).\nOXA beta-lactamases were long recognized as a less common but also plasmid-mediated beta-lactamase variety that could hydrolyze oxacillin and related anti-staphylococcal penicillins. These beta-lactamases differ from the TEM and SHV enzymes in that they belong to molecular class D and functional group 2d. The OXA-type beta-lactamases confer resistance to ampicillin and cephalothin and are characterized by their high hydrolytic activity against oxacillin and cloxacillin and the fact that they are poorly inhibited by clavulanic acid. Amino acid substitutions in OXA enzymes can also give the ESBL phenotype. While most ESBLs have been found in \"E. coli\", \"K. pneumoniae\", and other Enterobacteriaceae, the OXA-type ESBLs have been found mainly in \"P. aeruginosa\". OXA-type ESBLs have been found mainly in \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" isolates from Turkey and France. The OXA beta-lactamase family was originally created as a phenotypic rather than a genotypic group for a few beta-lactamases that had a specific hydrolysis profile. Therefore, there is as little as 20% sequence homology among some of the members of this family. However, recent additions to this family show some degree of homology to one or more of the existing members of the OXA beta-lactamase family. Some confer resistance predominantly to ceftazidime, but OXA-17 confers greater resistance to cefotaxime and cefepime than it does resistance to ceftazidime.\nOthers.\nOther plasmid-mediated ESBLs, such as PER, VEB, GES, and IBC beta-lactamases, have been described but are uncommon and have been found mainly in \"P. aeruginosa\" and at a limited number of geographic sites. PER-1 in isolates in Turkey, France, and Italy; VEB-1 and VEB-2 in strains from Southeast Asia; and GES-1, GES-2, and IBC-2 in isolates from South Africa, France, and Greece. PER-1 is also common in multiresistant acinetobacter species in Korea and Turkey. Some of these enzymes are found in Enterobacteriaceae as well, whereas other uncommon ESBLs (such as BES-1, IBC-1, SFO-1, and TLA-1) have been found only in Enterobacteriaceae.\nTreatment.\nWhile ESBL-producing organisms were previously associated with hospitals and institutional care, these organisms are now increasingly found in the community. CTX-M-15-positive E. coli are a cause of community-acquired urinary infections in the UK, and tend to be resistant to all oral \u03b2-lactam antibiotics, as well as quinolones and sulfonamides. Treatment options may include nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, mecillinam and chloramphenicol. In desperation, once-daily ertapenem or gentamicin injections may also be used.\nInhibitor-resistant \u03b2-lactamases.\nAlthough the inhibitor-resistant \u03b2-lactamases are not ESBLs, they are often discussed with ESBLs because they are also derivatives of the classical TEM- or SHV-type enzymes. These enzymes were at first given the designation IRT for inhibitor-resistant TEM \u03b2-lactamase; however, all have subsequently been renamed with numerical TEM designations. There are at least 19 distinct inhibitor-resistant TEM \u03b2-lactamases. Inhibitor-resistant TEM \u03b2-lactamases have been found mainly in clinical isolates of \"E. coli\", but also some strains of \"K. pneumoniae\", \"Klebsiella oxytoca\", \"P. mirabilis\", and \"Citrobacter freundii\". Although the inhibitor-resistant TEM variants are resistant to inhibition by clavulanic acid and sulbactam, thereby showing clinical resistance to the beta-lactam\u2014lactamase inhibitor combinations of amoxicillin-clavulanate (co-amoxiclav), ticarcillin-clavulanate (co-ticarclav), and ampicillin/sulbactam, they normally remain susceptible to inhibition by tazobactam and subsequently the combination of piperacillin/tazobactam, although resistance has been described. This is no longer a primarily European epidemiology, it is found in northern parts of America often and should be tested for with complex UTI's.\nAmpC-type \u03b2-lactamases (class C).\nAmpC type \u03b2-lactamases are commonly isolated from extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant gram-negative bacteria. AmpC \u03b2-lactamases (also termed class C or group 1) are typically encoded on the chromosome of many gram-negative bacteria including \"Citrobacter\", \"Serratia\" and \"Enterobacter\" species where its expression is usually inducible; it may also occur on \"Escherichia coli\" but is not usually inducible, although it can be hyperexpressed. AmpC type \u03b2-lactamases may also be carried on plasmids. AmpC \u03b2-lactamases, in contrast to ESBLs, hydrolyse broad and extended-spectrum cephalosporins (cephamycins as well as to oxyimino-\u03b2-lactams) but are not typically inhibited by the \u03b2-lactamase inhibitors clavulanic acid and tazobactam, whereas avibactam can maintain inhibitory activity against this class of \u03b2-lactamases. AmpC-type \u03b2-lactamase organisms are often clinically grouped through the acronym, \"SPACE\": \"Serratia, Pseudomonas\" or \"Proteus, Acinetobacter, Citrobacter\", and \"Enterobacter\".\nCarbapenemases.\nCarbapenems are famously stable to AmpC \u03b2-lactamases and extended-spectrum-\u03b2-lactamases. Carbapenemases are a diverse group of \u03b2-lactamases that are active not only against the oxyimino-cephalosporins and cephamycins but also against the carbapenems. Aztreonam is stable to the metallo-\u03b2-lactamases,\nbut many IMP and VIM producers are resistant, owing to other mechanisms. Carbapenemases were formerly believed to derive only from classes A, B, and D, but a class C carbapenemase has been described.\nIMP-type carbapenemases (metallo-\u03b2-lactamases) (class B).\nPlasmid-mediated IMP-type carbapenemases (IMP stands for active-on-imipenem), 19 varieties of which are currently known, became established in Japan in the 1990s both in enteric gram-negative organisms and in \"Pseudomonas\" and \"Acinetobacter\" species. IMP enzymes spread slowly to other countries in the Far East, were reported from Europe in 1997, and have been found in Canada and Brazil.\nVIM (Verona integron-encoded metallo-\u03b2-lactamase) (Class B).\nA second growing family of carbapenemases, the VIM family, was reported from Italy in 1999 and now includes 10 members, which have a wide geographic distribution in Europe, South America, and the Far East and have been found in the United States. VIM-1 was discovered in \"P. aeruginosa\" in Italy in 1996; since then, VIM-2 - now the predominant variant - was found repeatedly in Europe and the Far East; VIM-3 and -4 are minor variants of VIM-2 and -1, respectively.\nAmino acid sequence diversity is up to 10% in the VIM family, 15% in the IMP family, and 70% between VIM and IMP. Enzymes of both the families, nevertheless, are similar. Both are integron-associated, sometimes within plasmids. Both hydrolyse all \u03b2-lactams except monobactams, and evade all \u03b2-lactam inhibitors. The VIM enzymes are among the most widely distributed MBLs, with &gt;40 VIM variants having been reported. Biochemical and biophysical studies revealed that VIM variants have only small variations in their kinetic parameters but substantial differences in their thermal stabilities and inhibition profiles.\nOXA (oxacillinase) group of \u03b2-lactamases (class D).\nThe OXA group of \u03b2-lactamases occur mainly in Acinetobacter species and are divided into two clusters. OXA carbapenemases hydrolyse carbapenems very slowly \"in vitro\", and the high MICs seen for some Acinetobacter hosts (&gt;64\u00a0mg/L) may reflect secondary mechanisms. They are sometimes augmented in clinical isolates by additional resistance mechanisms, such as impermeability or efflux. OXA carbapenemases also tend to have a reduced hydrolytic efficiency towards penicillins and cephalosporins.\nKPC (\"K. pneumoniae\" carbapenemase) (class A).\nA few class A enzymes, most noted the plasmid-mediated KPC enzymes, are effective carbapenemases as well. Ten variants, KPC-2 through KPC-11 are known, and they are distinguished by one or two amino acid substitutions (KPC-1 was re-sequenced in 2008 and found to be 100% homologous to published sequences of KPC-2). KPC-1 was found in North Carolina, KPC-2 in Baltimore and KPC-3 in New York. They have only 45% homology with SME and NMC/IMI enzymes and, unlike them, can be encoded by self-transmissible plasmids.\n, the class A \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" carbapenemase (KPC) globally has been the most common carbapenemase, and was first detected in 1996 in North Carolina, USA. A 2010 publication indicated that KPC producing Enterobacteriaceae were becoming common in the United States.\nCMY (class C).\nThe first class C carbapenemase was described in 2006 and was isolated from a virulent strain of \"Enterobacter aerogenes\". It is carried on a plasmid, pYMG-1, and is therefore transmissible to other bacterial strains.\nSME (Serratia marcescens enzymes), IMI (IMIpenem-hydrolysing \u03b2-lactamase), NMC and CcrA.\nIn general, these are of little clinical significance.\nCcrA (CfiA). Its gene occurs in ca. 1\u20133% of \"B. fragilis\" isolates, but fewer produce the enzyme since expression demands appropriate migration of an insertion sequence. CcrA was known before imipenem was introduced, and producers have shown little subsequent increase.\nNDM-1 (New Delhi metallo-\u03b2-lactamase) (class B).\nOriginally described from New Delhi in 2009, this gene is now widespread in \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" from India and Pakistan. As of mid-2010, NDM-1 carrying bacteria have been introduced to other countries (including the United States and UK), most probably due to the large number of tourists travelling the globe, who may have picked up the strain from the environment, as strains containing the NDM-1 gene have been found in environmental samples in India. NDM have several variants which share different properties.\nTreatment of ESBL/AmpC/carbapenemases.\nGeneral overview.\nIn general, an isolate is suspected to be an ESBL producer when it shows \"in vitro\" susceptibility to the cephamycins (cefoxitin, cefotetan) but resistance to the third-generation cephalosporins and to aztreonam. Moreover, one should suspect these strains when treatment with these agents for gram-negative infections fails despite reported \"in vitro\" susceptibility. Once an ESBL-producing strain is detected, the laboratory should report it as \"resistant\" to all penicillins, cephalosporins, and aztreonam, even if it is tested (in vitro) as susceptible. Associated resistance to aminoglycosides and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, as well as high frequency of co-existence of fluoroquinolone resistance, creates problems. Beta-lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanate, sulbactam, and tazobactam \"in vitro\" inhibit most ESBLs, but the clinical effectiveness of beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations cannot be relied on consistently for therapy. Cephamycins (cefoxitin and cefotetan) are not hydrolyzed by majority of ESBLs, but are hydrolyzed by associated AmpC-type \u03b2-lactamase. Also, \u03b2-lactam/\u03b2-lactamase inhibitor combinations may not be effective against organisms that produce AmpC-type \u03b2-lactamase. Sometimes these strains decrease the expression of outer membrane proteins, rendering them resistant to cephamycins. \"In vivo\" studies have yielded mixed results against ESBL-producing \"K. pneumoniae\". (Cefepime, a fourth-generation cephalosporin, has demonstrated \"in vitro\" stability in the presence of many ESBL/AmpC strains.) Currently, carbapenems are, in general, regarded as the preferred agent for treatment of infections due to ESBL-producing organisms. Carbapenems are resistant to ESBL-mediated hydrolysis and exhibit excellent \"in vitro\" activity against strains of Enterobacteriaceae expressing ESBLs.\nAccording to genes.\nESBLs.\nStrains producing only ESBLs are susceptible to cephamycins and carbapenems \"in vitro\" and show little if any inoculum effect with these agents.\nFor organisms producing TEM and SHV type ESBLs, apparent \"in vitro\" sensitivity to cefepime and to piperacillin/tazobactam is common, but both drugs show an inoculum effect, with diminished susceptibility as the size of the inoculum is increased from 105 to 107 organisms.\nStrains with some CTX-M\u2013type and OXA-type ESBLs are resistant to cefepime on testing, despite the use of a standard inoculum.\nInhibitor-resistant \u03b2-lactamases.\nAlthough the inhibitor-resistant TEM variants are resistant to inhibition by clavulanic acid and sulbactam, thereby showing clinical resistance to the beta-lactam\u2014beta lactamase inhibitor combinations of amoxicillin-clavulanate (Co-amoxiclav), ticarcillin-clavulanate, and ampicillin/sulbactam, they remain susceptible to inhibition by tazobactam and subsequently the combination of piperacillin/tazobactam.\nAmpC.\nAmpC-producing strains are typically resistant to oxyimino-beta lactams and to cephamycins and are susceptible to carbapenems; however, diminished porin expression can make such a strain carbapenem-resistant as well.\nCarbapenemases.\nStrains with IMP-, VIM-, and OXA-type carbapenemases usually remain susceptible. Resistance to non-beta-lactam antibiotics is common in strains making any of these enzymes, such that alternative options for non-beta-lactam therapy need to be determined by direct susceptibility testing. Resistance to fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides is especially high.\nAccording to species.\n\"Escherichia coli\" or \"Klebsiella\".\nFor infections caused by ESBL-producing \"Escherichia coli\" or \"Klebsiella\" species, treatment with imipenem or meropenem has been associated with the best outcomes in terms of survival and bacteriologic clearance. Cefepime and piperacillin/tazobactam have been less successful. Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, and ceftazidime have failed even more often, despite the organism's susceptibility to the antibiotic \"in vitro\". Several reports have documented failure of cephamycin therapy as a result of resistance due to porin loss. Some patients have responded to aminoglycoside or quinolone therapy, but, in a recent comparison of ciprofloxacin and imipenem for bacteremia involving an ESBL-producing \"K. pneumoniae\", imipenem produced the better outcome\n\"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\".\nThere have been few clinical studies to define the optimal therapy for infections caused by ESBL producing \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" strains.\nUse as a pharmaceutical.\nIn 1957, amid concern about allergic reactions to penicillin-containing antibiotics, a beta-lactamase was sold as an antidote under the brand name neutrapen. It was theorized that the breakdown of penicillin by the enzyme would treat the allergic reaction. While it was not useful in acute anaphylactic shock, it showed positive results in cases of urticaria and joint pain suspected to be caused by penicillin allergy. Its use was proposed in pediatric cases where penicillin allergy was discovered upon administration of the polio vaccine, which used penicillin as a preservative. However, some patients developed allergies to neutrapen. The Albany Hospital removed it from its formulary in 1960, only two years after adding it, citing lack of use. Some researchers continued to use it in experiments on penicillin resistance as late as 1972. It was voluntarily withdrawn from the American market by 3M Pharmaceuticals in 1997.\nDetection.\nBeta-lactamase enzymatic activity can be detected using nitrocefin, a chromogenic cephalosporin substrate which changes color from yellow to red upon beta-lactamase mediated hydrolysis.\nExtended spectrum beta lactamase (ESBL) screening can be performed using disk-diffusion. Cefpodoxime, ceftazidime, aztreonam, cefotaxime, and/or ceftriaxone discs are used. \nEvolution.\nBeta-lactamases are ancient bacterial enzymes. Metallo \u03b2-lactamases (\"class B\") are all structurally similar to RNase Z and may have evolved from it. Of the three subclasses B1, B2, and B3, B1 and B2 are theorized to have evolved about one billion years ago, while B3 seems to have arisen independently, possibly before the divergence of the gram-positive and gram-negative eubacteria about two billion years ago. PNGM-1 (Papua New Guinea Metallo-\u03b2-lactamase-1) has both metallo-\u03b2-lactamase (MBL) and tRNase Z activities, suggesting that PNGM-1 is thought to have evolved from a tRNase Z, and that the B3 MBL activity of PNGM-1 is a promiscuous activity and subclass B3 MBLs are thought to have evolved through PNGM-1 activity. Subclasses B1 and B3 has been further subdivided.\nSerine beta-lactamases (classes A, C, and D) appear to have evolved from -transpeptidases, which are penicillin-binding proteins involved in cell wall biosynthesis, and as such are one of the main targets of beta-lactam antibiotics. These three classes show undetectable sequence similarity with each other, but can still be compared using structural homology. Groups A and D are sister taxa and group C diverged before A and D. These serine-based enzymes, like the group B betalactamases, are of ancient origin and are theorized to have evolved about two billion years ago.\nThe OXA group (in class D) in particular is theorized to have evolved on chromosomes and moved to plasmids on at least two separate occasions.\nEtymology.\nThe \"\u03b2\" (beta) refers to the nitrogen's position on the second carbon in the ring. \"Lactam\" is a blend of \"lactone\" (from the Latin \"lactis\", \"milk\", since lactic acid was isolated from soured milk) and \"amide\". The suffix \"-ase\", indicating an enzyme, is derived from \"diastase\" (from the Greek \"diastasis\", \"separation\"), the first enzyme discovered in 1833 by Payen and Persoz."}
{"id": "4611", "revid": "46613301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4611", "title": "Burhanuddin Rabbani", "text": "Burh\u0101nudd\u012bn Rabb\u0101n\u012b (; 20 September 1940 \u2013 20 September 2011) was an Afghan politician and teacher who served as the sixth president of Afghanistan from 1992 to 1996, and again from November to December 2001 (in exile from 1996 to 2001).\nBorn in the Badakhshan Province, Rabbani studied at Kabul University and worked there as a professor of Islamic theology. He formed the Jamiat-e Islami (\"Islamic Society\") at the university which attracted then-students Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and Ahmad Shah Massoud, both would eventually become the two leading commanders of the Afghan mujahideen in the Soviet\u2013Afghan War from 1979. Rabbani was chosen to be the President of Afghanistan after the end of the former communist regime in 1992. Rabbani and his Islamic State of Afghanistan government was later forced into exile by the Taliban, and he then served as the political head of the Northern Alliance, an alliance of various political groups who fought against the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. During his time in the office, there were a lot of internal clashes between different fighting groups.\nAfter the Taliban government was toppled during Operation Enduring Freedom, Rabbani returned to Kabul and served briefly as president from 13 November to 22 December 2001, when Hamid Karzai was chosen as his succeeding interim leader at the Bonn International Conference. In later years he became head of Afghanistan National Front (known in the media as United National Front), the largest political opposition to Karzai's government.\nOn 20 September 2011, Rabbani was assassinated by a suicide bomber entering his home in Kabul. As suggested by the Afghan parliament, Afghanistan's President Hamid Karzai gave him the title of \"Martyr of Peace\". His son Salahuddin Rabbani was chosen in April 2012 to lead efforts to forge peace in Afghanistan with the Taliban.\nEarly life and education.\nRabbani, son of Muhammed Yousuf, was born on 20 September 1940 in the northern province of Badakhshan. He was a Persian-speaking ethnic Tajik. After finishing school in his native province, he went to Darul-uloom-e-Sharia (Abu-Hanifa), a religious school in Kabul. When he graduated from Abu-Hanifa, he attended Kabul University to study Islamic Law and Theology, graduating in 1963.\nSoon after his graduation in 1963, he was hired as a professor at Kabul University. In order to enhance himself, Rabbani went to Egypt in 1966, and he entered the Al-Azhar University in Cairo where he developed close ties to the Muslim Brotherhood leadership. In two years, he received his master's degree in Islamic Philosophy. He resumed his position at the university and became closely associated with his fellow professor, Gholam Mohammad Niazi, whom he served as secretary in 1969 and 1970. Rabbani was one of the first Afghans to translate the works of Sayyid Qutb into Persian. Later he returned to Egypt to complete his PhD in Islamic philosophy and his thesis was titled \"The Philosophy and Teachings of Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jami.\" In 2004 he received Afghanistan's highest academic and scientific title \"Academician\" from the Academy of Sciences of Afghanistan.\nPolitical career.\nRabbani returned to Afghanistan in 1968, where the High Council of Jamiat-e Islami gave him the duty of organizing the university students. Due to his knowledge, reputation, and active support for the cause of Islam, in 1972, a 15-member council selected him as head of Jamiat-e Islami of Afghanistan; the founder of Jamiat-e Islami of Afghanistan, Gholam Mohammad Niazi was also present. Jamiat-e Islami was primarily composed of Tajiks.\nIn the spring of 1974, the police came to Kabul University to arrest Rabbani for his pro-Islamic stance, but with the help of his students the police were unable to capture him, and he managed to escape to the countryside. In Pakistan, Rabbani gathered important people and established the party. Sayed Noorullah Emad, who was then a young Muslim in the University of Kabul, became the General Secretary of the party and, later, its deputy chief. Rabbani alongside Ahmad Shah Massoud and others planned to take action either against the Daoud government or people who they deemed communist in 1975, but failed.\nWhen the Soviets intervened in 1979, Rabbani helped lead Jamiat-e Islami in resistance to the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan regime. Rabbani's forces were the first Mujahideen elements to enter Kabul in 1992 when the PDPA government fell from power. He took over as president from 1992 in accordance to the Peshawar Accords. Rabbani was the third ethnic Tajik leader of modern Afghanistan after Habibullah Kalakani in 1929 and Abdul Qadir in 1978 (and possibly including Babrak Karmal, whose ethnicity was disputed). His rule was limited since the country was fractured by civil war between different sides. Rabbani was forced to flee following the Taliban's conquest of Kabul in 1996. Rabbani operated his government in exile, following the establishment of the Taliban rule of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. In this period between 1996 and 2001, the Rabbani government of the Islamic State of Afghanistan remained the internationally recognized government, despite only controlling about 10% of Afghan territory. For the next five years, he and the Northern Alliance, commanded by Ahmad Shah Massoud and others, were fighting the Taliban until the 2001 US-led Operation Enduring Freedom toppled the Taliban government. Rabbani was head of Afghanistan's High Peace Council, which had been formed in 2010 to initiate peace talks with the Taliban and other groups in the insurgency, until his death.\nAssassination.\nRabbani was killed in a suicide bombing at his home in Kabul on 20 September 2011, his 71st birthday. Two men posing as Taliban representatives approached him to offer a hug and detonated their explosives. At least one of them had hidden the explosives in his turban. The suicide bomber claimed to be a Taliban commander, said he bore a \"very important and positive message\" from Taliban leaders in Pakistan, and said he wanted to \"discuss peace\" with Rabbani. Four other members of Afghanistan's High Peace Council were also killed in the blast. Rabbani was buried in the Wazir Akbar Khan cemetery.\nAfghan officials blamed the Quetta Shura, which was the leadership of the Afghan Taliban allegedly hiding in the affluent Satellite Town of Quetta in Pakistan. The Pakistani government confirmed that Rabbani's assassination was linked to Afghan refugees in Pakistan. A senior Pakistani official stated that over 90% of terrorist attacks in Pakistan were traced back to Afghan elements and that their presence in the country was \"an important issue for [peace in] Pakistan\" and \"a problem for Afghanistan\". Pakistani foreign minister Hina Rabbani Khar stated that Pakistan was \"not responsible if Afghan refugees crossed the border and entered Kabul, stayed in a guest house and attacked Professor Rabbani\".\nIn 2011, just days before he died, Rabbani was trying to persuade Islamic scholars to issue a religious edict denouncing suicide bombings. The former president's 28-year-old daughter said in an interview that her father died shortly after he spoke at a conference on \"Islamic Awakening\" in Tehran. \"Right before he was assassinated, he talked about the suicide bombing issue,\" Fatima Rabbani told Reuters. \"He called on all Islamic scholars in the conference to release a fatwa\" against the tactic.\nGovernment minister Nematullah Shahrani said Rabbani is irreplaceable because \"he had relations with all these tribes.\"\nUnited States President Barack Obama and several NATO military leaders condemned the assassination. Japan also offered its condolences at the Sixty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. Afghan President Hamid Karzai cut short his trip for the General debate of the sixty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly following Rabbani's assassination. Rabbani's son Salahuddin then took over chairmanship of the High Peace Council from his father."}
{"id": "4612", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4612", "title": "Birds", "text": ""}
