{"id": "6138", "revid": "45091103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6138", "title": "Conjecture", "text": "In mathematics, a conjecture is a conclusion or a proposition that is proffered on a tentative basis without proof. Some conjectures, such as the Riemann hypothesis or Fermat's conjecture (now a theorem, proven in 1995 by Andrew Wiles), have shaped much of mathematical history as new areas of mathematics are developed in order to prove them.\nResolution of conjectures.\nProof.\nFormal mathematics is based on \"provable\" truth. In mathematics, any number of cases supporting a universally quantified conjecture, no matter how large, is insufficient for establishing the conjecture's veracity, since a single counterexample could immediately bring down the conjecture. Mathematical journals sometimes publish the minor results of research teams having extended the search for a counterexample farther than previously done. For instance, the Collatz conjecture, which concerns whether or not certain sequences of integers terminate, has been tested for all integers up to 1.2 \u00d7 1012 (1.2 trillion). However, the failure to find a counterexample after extensive search does not constitute a proof that the conjecture is true\u2014because the conjecture might be false but with a very large minimal counterexample.\nNevertheless, mathematicians often regard a conjecture as strongly supported by evidence even though not yet proved. That evidence may be of various kinds, such as verification of consequences of it or strong interconnections with known results.\nA conjecture is considered proven only when it has been shown that it is logically impossible for it to be false. There are various methods of doing so; see methods of mathematical proof for more details.\nOne method of proof, applicable when there are only a finite number of cases that could lead to counterexamples, is known as \"brute force\": in this approach, all possible cases are considered and shown not to give counterexamples. In some occasions, the number of cases is quite large, in which case a brute-force proof may require as a practical matter the use of a computer algorithm to check all the cases. For example, the validity of the 1976 and 1997 brute-force proofs of the four color theorem by computer was initially doubted, but was eventually confirmed in 2005 by theorem-proving software.\nWhen a conjecture has been proven, it is no longer a conjecture but a theorem. Many important theorems were once conjectures, such as the Geometrization theorem (which resolved the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture), Fermat's Last Theorem, and others.\nDisproof.\nConjectures disproven through counterexample are sometimes referred to as \"false conjectures\" (cf. the P\u00f3lya conjecture and Euler's sum of powers conjecture). In the case of the latter, the first counterexample found for the n=4 case involved numbers in the millions, although it has been subsequently found that the minimal counterexample is actually smaller.\nIndependent conjectures.\nNot every conjecture ends up being proven true or false. The continuum hypothesis, which tries to ascertain the relative cardinality of certain infinite sets, was eventually shown to be independent from the generally accepted set of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms of set theory. It is therefore possible to adopt this statement, or its negation, as a new axiom in a consistent manner (much as Euclid's parallel postulate can be taken either as true or false in an axiomatic system for geometry).\nIn this case, if a proof uses this statement, researchers will often look for a new proof that \"does not\" require the hypothesis (in the same way that it is desirable that statements in Euclidean geometry be proved using only the axioms of neutral geometry, i.e. without the parallel postulate). The one major exception to this in practice is the axiom of choice, as the majority of researchers usually do not worry whether a result requires it\u2014unless they are studying this axiom in particular.\nConditional proofs.\nSometimes, a conjecture is called a \"hypothesis\" when it is used frequently and repeatedly as an assumption in proofs of other results. For example, the Riemann hypothesis is a conjecture from number theory that \u2014 amongst other things \u2014 makes predictions about the distribution of prime numbers. Few number theorists doubt that the Riemann hypothesis is true. In fact, in anticipation of its eventual proof, some have even proceeded to develop further proofs which are contingent on the truth of this conjecture. These are called \"conditional proofs\": the conjectures assumed appear in the hypotheses of the theorem, for the time being.\nThese \"proofs\", however, would fall apart if it turned out that the hypothesis was false, so there is considerable interest in verifying the truth or falsity of conjectures of this type.\nImportant examples.\nFermat's Last Theorem.\nIn number theory, Fermat's Last Theorem (sometimes called Fermat's conjecture, especially in older texts) states that no three positive integers formula_1, \"formula_2\", and \"formula_3\" can satisfy the equation \"formula_4\" for any integer value of \"formula_5\" greater than two.\nThis theorem was first conjectured by Pierre de Fermat in 1637 in the margin of a copy of \"Arithmetica\", where he claimed that he had a proof that was too large to fit in the margin. The first successful proof was released in 1994 by Andrew Wiles, and formally published in 1995, after 358 years of effort by mathematicians. The unsolved problem stimulated the development of algebraic number theory in the 19th century, and the proof of the modularity theorem in the 20th century. It is among the most notable theorems in the history of mathematics, and prior to its proof it was in the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" for \"most difficult mathematical problems\".\nFour color theorem.\nIn mathematics, the four color theorem, or the four color map theorem, states that given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions, producing a figure called a \"map\", no more than four colors are required to color the regions of the map\u2014so that no two adjacent regions have the same color. Two regions are called \"adjacent\" if they share a common boundary that is not a corner, where corners are the points shared by three or more regions. For example, in the map of the United States of America, Utah and Arizona are adjacent, but Utah and New Mexico, which only share a point that also belongs to Arizona and Colorado, are not.\nM\u00f6bius mentioned the problem in his lectures as early as 1840. The conjecture was first proposed on October 23, 1852 when Francis Guthrie, while trying to color the map of counties of England, noticed that only four different colors were needed. The five color theorem, which has a short elementary proof, states that five colors suffice to color a map and was proven in the late 19th century; however, proving that four colors suffice turned out to be significantly harder. A number of false proofs and false counterexamples have appeared since the first statement of the four color theorem in 1852.\nThe four color theorem was ultimately proven in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken. It was the first major theorem to be proved using a computer. Appel and Haken's approach started by showing that there is a particular set of 1,936 maps, each of which cannot be part of a smallest-sized counterexample to the four color theorem (i.e., if they did appear, one could make a smaller counter-example). Appel and Haken used a special-purpose computer program to confirm that each of these maps had this property. Additionally, any map that could potentially be a counterexample must have a portion that looks like one of these 1,936 maps. Showing this with hundreds of pages of hand analysis, Appel and Haken concluded that no smallest counterexample exists because any must contain, yet do not contain, one of these 1,936 maps. This contradiction means there are no counterexamples at all and that the theorem is therefore true. Initially, their proof was not accepted by mathematicians at all because the computer-assisted proof was infeasible for a human to check by hand. However, the proof has since then gained wider acceptance, although doubts still remain.\nHauptvermutung.\nThe Hauptvermutung (German for main conjecture) of geometric topology is the conjecture that any two triangulations of a triangulable space have a common refinement, a single triangulation that is a subdivision of both of them. It was originally formulated in 1908, by Steinitz and Tietze.\nThis conjecture is now known to be false. The non-manifold version was disproved by John Milnor in 1961 using Reidemeister torsion.\nThe manifold version is true in dimensions . The cases were proved by Tibor Rad\u00f3 and Edwin E. Moise in the 1920s and 1950s, respectively.\nWeil conjectures.\nIn mathematics, the Weil conjectures were some highly influential proposals by on the generating functions (known as local zeta-functions) derived from counting the number of points on algebraic varieties over finite fields.\nA variety \"V\" over a finite field with \"q\" elements has a finite number of rational points, as well as points over every finite field with \"q\"\"k\" elements containing that field. The generating function has coefficients derived from the numbers \"N\"\"k\" of points over the (essentially unique) field with \"q\"\"k\" elements.\nWeil conjectured that such \"zeta-functions\" should be rational functions, should satisfy a form of functional equation, and should have their zeroes in restricted places. The last two parts were quite consciously modeled on the Riemann zeta function and Riemann hypothesis. The rationality was proved by , the functional equation by , and the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis was proved by .\nPoincar\u00e9 conjecture.\nIn mathematics, the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture is a theorem about the characterization of the 3-sphere, which is the hypersphere that bounds the unit ball in four-dimensional space. The conjecture states that: An equivalent form of the conjecture involves a coarser form of equivalence than homeomorphism called homotopy equivalence: if a 3-manifold is \"homotopy equivalent\" to the 3-sphere, then it is necessarily \"homeomorphic\" to it.\nOriginally conjectured by Henri Poincar\u00e9 in 1904, the theorem concerns a space that locally looks like ordinary three-dimensional space but is connected, finite in size, and lacks any boundary (a closed 3-manifold). The Poincar\u00e9 conjecture claims that if such a space has the additional property that each loop in the space can be continuously tightened to a point, then it is necessarily a three-dimensional sphere. An analogous result has been known in higher dimensions for some time.\nAfter nearly a century of effort by mathematicians, Grigori Perelman presented a proof of the conjecture in three papers made available in 2002 and 2003 on arXiv. The proof followed on from the program of Richard S. Hamilton to use the Ricci flow to attempt to solve the problem. Hamilton later introduced a modification of the standard Ricci flow, called \"Ricci flow with surgery\" to systematically excise singular regions as they develop, in a controlled way, but was unable to prove this method \"converged\" in three dimensions. Perelman completed this portion of the proof. Several teams of mathematicians have verified that Perelman's proof is correct.\nThe Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, before being proven, was one of the most important open questions in topology.\nRiemann hypothesis.\nIn mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis, proposed by , is a conjecture that the non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function all have real part 1/2. The name is also used for some closely related analogues, such as the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields.\nThe Riemann hypothesis implies results about the distribution of prime numbers. Along with suitable generalizations, some mathematicians consider it the most important unresolved problem in pure mathematics. The Riemann hypothesis, along with the Goldbach conjecture, is part of Hilbert's eighth problem in David Hilbert's list of 23 unsolved problems; it is also one of the Clay Mathematics Institute Millennium Prize Problems.\nP versus NP problem.\nThe P versus NP problem is a major unsolved problem in computer science. Informally, it asks whether every problem whose solution can be quickly verified by a computer can also be quickly solved by a computer; it is widely conjectured that the answer is no. It was essentially first mentioned in a 1956 letter written by Kurt G\u00f6del to John von Neumann. G\u00f6del asked whether a certain NP-complete problem could be solved in quadratic or linear time. The precise statement of the P=NP problem was introduced in 1971 by Stephen Cook in his seminal paper \"The complexity of theorem proving procedures\" and is considered by many to be the most important open problem in the field. It is one of the seven Millennium Prize Problems selected by the Clay Mathematics Institute to carry a US$1,000,000 prize for the first correct solution.\nIn other sciences.\nKarl Popper pioneered the use of the term \"conjecture\" in scientific philosophy. Conjecture is related to hypothesis, which in science refers to a testable conjecture."}
{"id": "6139", "revid": "1005449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6139", "title": "Christoph Ludwig Agricola", "text": "Christoph Ludwig Agricola (5 November 1665 \u2013 8 August 1724) was a German landscape painter and etcher. He was born and died in Regensburg (Ratisbon).\nLife and career.\nChristoph Ludwig Agricola was born on 5 November 1665 in Regensburg in Germany. He trained, as many painters of the period did, by studying nature.\nHe spent a great part of his life in travel visiting England, the Netherlands and France, and residing for a considerable period in Naples, where he may have been influenced by Nicolas Poussin. He also stayed in Venice for several years around 1712, where he painted many works for Zaccaria Sagredo.\nHe died in Regensburg in 1724.\nWork.\nAlthough he primarily worked in gouache and oils, documentary sources show that he also produced a small number of etchings. He was a good draughtsman, used warm lighting and exhibited a warm, masterly brushstroke.\nHis numerous landscapes, chiefly cabinet pictures, are remarkable for their fidelity to nature, and especially for their skilful representation of varied phases of climate, especially nocturnal scenes and weather phenomena like thunderstorms. In composition, his style shows the influence of Nicolas Poussin: Agricola's work often displays idealistic scenes like Poussin's work. In light and colour Agricola's work resembles that of Claude Lorrain. His compositions often include ruins of ancient buildings in the foreground, but his favourite foreground figures were men dressed in Oriental attire. He also produced a series of etchings of birds.\nHis pictures can be found in Dresden, Braunschweig, Vienna, Florence, Naples and many other locations in Germany and Italy.\nLegacy.\nHe probably tutored the artist Johann Theile and had a strong influence on him. Art historians have also noted that the work of the landscape painter Christian Johann Bendeler (1699\u20131728) was influenced by Agricola."}
{"id": "6140", "revid": "24335687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6140", "title": "Claudius", "text": "Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus ( , ; 1 August 10 BC \u2013 13 October AD 54), or Claudius, was a Roman emperor, ruling from AD 41 to 54. A member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, Claudius was born to Drusus and Antonia Minor at Lugdunum in Roman Gaul, where his father was stationed as a military legate. He was the first Roman emperor to be born outside Italy.\nAs he had a limp and slight deafness due to an illness he suffered when young, he was ostracised by his family and was excluded from public office until his consulship (which was shared with his nephew, Caligula, in 37). Claudius's infirmity probably saved him from the fate of many other nobles during the purges throughout the reigns of Tiberius and Caligula, as potential enemies did not see him as a serious threat. His survival led to his being declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard after Caligula's assassination, at which point he was the last adult male of his family.\nDespite his lack of experience, Claudius was an able and efficient administrator. He expanded the imperial bureaucracy to include freedmen, and helped restore the empire's finances after the excesses of Caligula's reign. He was also an ambitious builder, constructing new roads, aqueducts, and canals across the Empire. During his reign, the Empire started its successful conquest of Britain. Having a personal interest in law, he presided at public trials, and issued edicts daily. He was seen as vulnerable throughout his reign, particularly by elements of the nobility. Claudius was constantly forced to shore up his position, which resulted in the deaths of many senators. Those events damaged his reputation among the ancient writers, though more recent historians have revised that opinion. Many authors contend that he was murdered by his own wife, Agrippina the Younger. After his death at the age of 63, his grandnephew and legally adopted step-son, Nero, succeeded him as emperor.\nName.\nAs a consequence of Roman customs, society, and personal preference, Claudius' full name varied throughout his life:\nFamily and youth.\nEarly life.\nClaudius was born on 1 August 10\u00a0BC at Lugdunum (modern Lyon, France). He had two older siblings, Germanicus and Livilla. His mother, Antonia Minor, may have had two other children who died young. Claudius's maternal grandparents were Mark Antony and Octavia Minor, Augustus's sister, and he was therefore the great-great-grandnephew of Gaius Julius Caesar. His paternal grandparents were Livia, Augustus's third wife, and Tiberius Claudius Nero. During his reign, Claudius revived the rumour that his father Nero Claudius Drusus was actually the illegitimate son of Augustus, to give the appearance that Augustus was Claudius's paternal grandfather.\nIn 9\u00a0BC, Claudius's father Drusus died on campaign in Germania from a fall from a horse. Claudius was then raised by his mother, who never remarried. When his disability became evident, the relationship with his family turned sour. Antonia referred to him as a monster, and used him as a standard for stupidity. She seems to have passed her son off to his grandmother Livia for a number of years.\nLivia was a little kinder, but nevertheless sent Claudius short, angry letters of reproof. He was put under the care of a former mule-driver to keep him disciplined, under the logic that his condition was due to laziness and a lack of willpower. However, by the time he reached his teenage years, his symptoms apparently waned and his family began to take some notice of his scholarly interests. In AD\u00a07, Livy was hired to tutor Claudius in history, with the assistance of Sulpicius Flavus. He spent a lot of his time with the latter, as well as the philosopher Athenodorus. Augustus, according to a letter, was surprised at the clarity of Claudius's oratory.\nPublic life.\nClaudius' work as a historian damaged his prospects for advancement in public life. According to Vincent Scramuzza and others, he began work on a history of the Civil Wars that was either too truthful or too critical of Octavian, then reigning as Caesar Augustus. In either case, it was far too early for such an account, and may have only served to remind Augustus that Claudius was Antony's descendant. His mother and grandmother quickly put a stop to it, and this may have convinced them that Claudius was not fit for public office, since he could not be trusted to toe the existing party line.\nWhen Claudius returned to the narrative later in life, he skipped over the wars of the Second Triumvirate altogether; but the damage was done, and his family pushed him into the background. When the Arch of Pavia was erected to honour the Imperial clan in AD 8, Claudius's name (now Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus after his elevation to \"pater familias\" of the Claudii Nerones on the adoption of his brother) was inscribed on the edge, past the deceased princes, Gaius and Lucius, and Germanicus's children. There is some speculation that the inscription was added by Claudius himself decades later, and that he originally did not appear at all.\nWhen Augustus died in AD\u00a014, Claudius \u2013 then aged 23 \u2013 appealed to his uncle Tiberius to allow him to begin the \"cursus honorum\". Tiberius, the new Emperor, responded by granting Claudius consular ornaments. Claudius requested office once more and was snubbed. Since the new emperor was no more generous than the old, Claudius gave up hope of public office and retired to a scholarly, private life.\nDespite the disdain of the Imperial family, it seems that from very early on the general public respected Claudius. At Augustus's death, the \"equites\", or knights, chose Claudius to head their delegation. When his house burned down, the Senate demanded it be rebuilt at public expense. They also requested that Claudius be allowed to debate in the Senate. Tiberius turned down both motions, but the sentiment remained.\nDuring the period immediately after the death of Tiberius's son, Drusus, Claudius was pushed by some quarters as a potential heir to the throne. This again suggests the political nature of his exclusion from public life. However, as this was also the period during which the power and terror of the commander of the Praetorian Guard, Sejanus, was at its peak, Claudius chose to downplay this possibility. After the death of Tiberius, the new emperor Caligula (the son of Claudius's brother Germanicus) recognized Claudius to be of some use. He appointed Claudius his co-consul in 37 to emphasize the memory of Caligula's deceased father Germanicus.\nDespite this, Caligula tormented his uncle: playing practical jokes, charging him enormous sums of money, humiliating him before the Senate, and the like. According to Cassius Dio, Claudius became sickly and thin by the end of Caligula's reign, most likely due to stress. A possible surviving portrait of Claudius from this period may support this.\nAssassination of Caligula (AD\u00a041).\nOn 24 January 41, Caligula was assassinated in a conspiracy involving Cassius Chaerea \u2013 a military tribune in the Praetorian Guard \u2013 and several senators. There is no evidence that Claudius had a direct hand in the assassination, although it has been argued that he knew about the plot \u2013 particularly since he left the scene of the crime shortly before his nephew was murdered. However, after the deaths of Caligula's wife and daughter, it became apparent that Cassius intended to go beyond the terms of the conspiracy and wipe out the Imperial family.\nIn the chaos following the murder, Claudius witnessed the German guard cut down several uninvolved noblemen, including many of his friends. He fled to the palace to hide. According to tradition, a Praetorian named Gratus found him hiding behind a curtain and suddenly declared him \"princeps\". Claudius was spirited away to the Praetorian camp and put under their protection.\nThe Senate met and debated a change of government, but this devolved into an argument over which of them would be the new \"princeps\". When they heard of the Praetorians' claim, they demanded that Claudius be delivered to them for approval, but he refused, sensing the danger that would come with complying. Some historians, particularly Josephus, claim that Claudius was directed in his actions by the Judaean King Herod Agrippa. However, an earlier version of events by the same ancient author downplays Agrippa's role so it remains uncertain. Eventually the Senate was forced to give in. In return, Claudius granted a general amnesty, although he executed a few junior officers involved in the conspiracy. The actual assassins, including Cassius Chaerea and Julius Lupus, the murderer of Caligula's wife and daughter, were put to death to ensure Claudius's own safety and as a future deterrent.\nEmperor.\nClaudius took several steps to legitimize his rule against potential usurpers, most of them emphasizing his place within the Julio-Claudian family. He adopted the name \"Caesar\" as a cognomen, as the name still carried great weight with the populace. To do so, he dropped the cognomen \"Nero\", which he had adopted as \"pater familias\" of the Claudii Nerones when his brother Germanicus was adopted. As Pharaoh of Egypt, Claudius adopted the royal titulary \"Tiberios Klaudios, Autokrator Heqaheqau Meryasetptah, Kanakht Djediakhshuemakhet\" (\"Tiberius Claudius, Emperor and ruler of rulers, beloved of Isis and Ptah, the strong bull of the stable moon on the horizon\").\nWhile Claudius had never been formally adopted either by Augustus or his successors, he was nevertheless the grandson of Augustus's sister Octavia, and so he felt that he had the right of family. He also adopted the name \"Augustus\" as the two previous emperors had done at their accessions. He kept the honorific \"Germanicus\" to display the connection with his heroic brother. He deified his paternal grandmother Livia to highlight her position as wife of the divine Augustus. Claudius frequently used the term \"filius Drusi\" (son of Drusus) in his titles, to remind the people of his legendary father and lay claim to his reputation.\nSince Claudius was the first emperor proclaimed on the initiative of the Praetorian Guard instead of the Senate, his repute suffered at the hands of commentators (such as Seneca). Moreover, he was the first emperor who resorted to bribery as a means to secure army loyalty and rewarded the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard that had elevated him with 15,000 sesterces. Tiberius and Augustus had both left gifts to the army and guard in their wills, and upon Caligula's death the same would have been expected, even if no will existed. Claudius remained grateful to the guard, issuing coins with tributes to the Praetorians in the early part of his reign.\nPliny the Elder noted, according to the 1938 Loeb Classical Library translation by Harris Rackham, \"...\u00a0many people do not allow any gems in a signet-ring, and seal with the gold itself; this was a fashion invented when Claudius C\u00e6sar was emperor.\"\nClaudius restored the status of the peaceful Imperial Roman provinces of Macedonia and Achaea as senatorial provinces.\nExpansion of the Empire.\nUnder Claudius, the Empire underwent its first major expansion since the reign of Augustus. The provinces of Thrace, Noricum, Lycia, and Judea were annexed (or put under direct rule) under various circumstances during his term. The annexation of Mauretania, begun under Caligula, was completed after the defeat of rebel forces, as well as the official division of the former client kingdom into two Imperial provinces. The most far-reaching conquest was that of Britannia.\nIn 43, Claudius sent Aulus Plautius with four legions to Britain (\"Britannia\") after an appeal from an ousted tribal ally. Britain was an attractive target for Rome because of its material wealth: mines and the potential of slave labor, as well as being a haven for Gallic rebels. Claudius himself traveled to the island after the completion of initial offensives, bringing with him reinforcements and elephants. The Roman \"colonia\" of \"Colonia Claudia Victricensis\" was established as the provincial capital of the newly established province of Britannia at Camulodunum, where a large temple was dedicated in his honour.\nHe left Britain after 16 days, but remained in the provinces for some time. The Senate granted him a triumph for his efforts. Only members of the Imperial family were allowed such honours, but Claudius subsequently lifted this restriction for some of his conquering generals. He was granted the honorific \"Britannicus\" but only accepted it on behalf of his son, never using the title himself. When the British general Caractacus was captured in 50, Claudius granted him clemency. Caractacus lived out his days on land provided by the Roman state, an unusual end for an enemy commander.\nClaudius conducted a census in 48 that found 5,984,072 (adult male) Roman citizens (women, children, slaves, and free adult males without Roman citizenship were not counted), an increase of around a million since the census conducted at Augustus's death. He had helped increase this number through the foundation of Roman colonies that were granted blanket citizenship. These colonies were often made out of existing communities, especially those with elites who could rally the populace to the Roman cause. Several colonies were placed in new provinces or on the border of the Empire to secure Roman holdings as quickly as possible.\nJudicial and legislative affairs.\nClaudius personally judged many of the legal cases tried during his reign. Ancient historians have many complaints about this, stating that his judgments were variable and sometimes did not follow the law. He was also easily swayed. Nevertheless, Claudius paid detailed attention to the operation of the judicial system. He extended the summer court session, as well as the winter term, by shortening the traditional breaks. Claudius also made a law requiring plaintiffs to remain in the city while their cases were pending, as defendants had previously been required to do. These measures had the effect of clearing out the docket. The minimum age for jurors was also raised to 25 to ensure a more experienced jury pool.\nClaudius also settled disputes in the provinces. He freed the island of Rhodes from Roman rule for their good faith and exempted Ilium (Troy) from taxes. Early in his reign, the Greeks and Jews of Alexandria each sent him embassies after riots broke out between the two communities. This resulted in the famous \"Letter to the Alexandrians\", which reaffirmed Jewish rights in the city but forbade them to move in more families en masse. According to Josephus, he then reaffirmed the rights and freedoms of all the Jews in the Empire. However, Claudius also expelled Jews from the city of Rome, following disturbances allegedly instigated by Christians. This expulsion is attested to in Acts of the Apostles (), and by Roman historians Suetonius and Cassius Dio along with the fifth-century Christian author Paulus Orosius.\nOne of Claudius's investigators discovered that many old Roman citizens based in the city of Tridentum (modern Trento) were not in fact citizens. The Emperor issued a declaration, contained in the \"Tabula clesiana\", that they would be allowed to hold citizenship from then on, since to strip them of their status would cause major problems. However, in individual cases, Claudius punished the false assumption of citizenship harshly, making it a capital offense. Similarly, any freedmen found to be laying false claim to membership of the Roman equestrian order were sold back into slavery.\nNumerous edicts were issued throughout Claudius's reign. These were on a number of topics, everything from medical advice to moral judgments. A famous medical example is one promoting yew juice as a cure for snakebite. Suetonius wrote that he is even said to have thought of an edict allowing public flatulence for good health. One of the more famous edicts concerned the status of sick slaves. Masters had been abandoning ailing slaves at the temple of Aesculapius on Tiber Island to die instead of providing them with medical assistance and care, and then reclaiming them if they lived. Claudius ruled that slaves who were thus abandoned and recovered after such treatment would be free. Furthermore, masters who chose to kill slaves rather than take care of them were liable to be charged with murder.\nPublic works.\nClaudius embarked on many public works throughout his reign, both in the capital and in the provinces. He built or finished two aqueducts, the Aqua Claudia, begun by Caligula, and the Aqua Anio Novus. These entered the city in 52 and met at the Porta Maggiore. He also restored a third, the Aqua Virgo.\nHe paid special attention to transportation. Throughout Italy and the provinces he built roads and canals. Among these was a large canal leading from the Rhine to the sea, as well as a road from Italy to Germany \u2013 both begun by his father, Drusus. Closer to Rome, he built a navigable canal on the Tiber, leading to Portus, his new port just north of Ostia. This port was constructed in a semicircle with two moles and a lighthouse at its mouth, reducing flooding in Rome.\nThe port at Ostia was part of Claudius's solution to the constant grain shortages that occurred in winter, after the Roman shipping season. The other part of his solution was to insure the ships of grain merchants who were willing to risk travelling to Egypt in the off-season. He also granted their sailors special privileges, including citizenship and exemption from the Lex Papia Poppaea, a law that regulated marriage. In addition, he repealed the taxes that Caligula had instituted on food, and further reduced taxes on communities suffering drought or famine.\nThe last part of Claudius's plan to avoid famine was to increase the amount of arable land in Italy. This was to be achieved by draining the Fucine lake, also making the nearby river navigable year-round. A serious famine is mentioned in the book of Acts as taking place during Claudius' reign, and had been prophesied by a Christian called Agabus while visiting Antioch.\nA tunnel was dug through the lake bed, but the plan was a failure. The tunnel was crooked and not large enough to carry the water, which caused it to back up when opened. The resultant flood washed out a large gladiatorial exhibition held to commemorate the opening, causing Claudius to run for his life along with the other spectators. The draining of the lake continued to present a problem well into the Middle Ages. It was finally achieved by the Prince Torlonia in the 19th century, producing over of new arable land. He expanded the Claudian tunnel to three times its original size.\nSenate.\nBecause of the circumstances of his accession, Claudius took great pains to please the Senate. During regular sessions, the Emperor sat among the Senate body, speaking in turn. When introducing a law, he sat on a bench between the consuls in his position as holder of the power of Tribune, (the Emperor could not officially serve as a Tribune of the Plebes since he was a patrician, but this was a power taken by previous rulers, which he continued). He refused to accept all his predecessors' titles (including Imperator) at the beginning of his reign, preferring to earn them in due course. He allowed the Senate to issue its own bronze coinage for the first time since Augustus. He also put the Imperial provinces of Macedonia and Achaea back under Senate control.\nClaudius set about remodeling the Senate into a more efficient, representative body. He chided the senators about their reluctance to debate bills introduced by himself, as noted in the fragments of a surviving speech:\nIn 47, he assumed the office of \"censor\" with Lucius Vitellius, which had been allowed to lapse for some time. He struck out the names of many senators and \"equites\" who no longer met qualifications, but showed respect by allowing them to resign in advance. At the same time, he sought to admit to the senate eligible men from the provinces. The Lyon Tablet preserves his speech on the admittance of Gallic senators, in which he addresses the Senate with reverence but also with criticism for their disdain of these men. He even joked about how the Senate had admitted members from beyond Gallia Narbonensis (Lyons), i.e. himself. He also increased the number of patricians by adding new families to the dwindling number of noble lines. Here he followed the precedent of Lucius Junius Brutus and Julius Caesar.\nNevertheless, many in the Senate remained hostile to Claudius, and many plots were made on his life. This hostility carried over into the historical accounts. As a result, Claudius reduced the Senate's power for the sake of efficiency. The administration of Ostia was turned over to an Imperial procurator after construction of the port. Administration of many of the empire's financial concerns was turned over to Imperial appointees and freedmen. This led to further resentment and suggestions that these same freedmen were ruling the Emperor.\nPlots and coup attempts.\nSeveral coup attempts were made during Claudius's reign, resulting in the deaths of many senators. Appius Silanus was executed early in Claudius's reign under questionable circumstances. Shortly after this, a large rebellion was undertaken by the Senator Vinicianus and Scribonianus - governor of Dalmatia - and gained quite a few senatorial supporters. It ultimately failed because of the reluctance of Scribonianus' troops, which led to the suicide of the main conspirators.\nMany other senators tried different conspiracies and were condemned. Claudius's son-in-law Pompeius Magnus was executed for his part in a conspiracy with his father Crassus Frugi. Another plot involved the consulars Lusius Saturninus, Cornelius Lupus, and Pompeius Pedo.\nIn 46, Asinius Gallus, grandson of Asinius Pollio, and Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus were exiled for a plot hatched with several of Claudius's own freedmen. Valerius Asiaticus was executed without public trial for unknown reasons. Ancient sources say the charge was adultery, and that Claudius was tricked into issuing the punishment. However, Claudius singles out Asiaticus for special damnation in his speech on the Gauls, which dates over a year later, suggesting that the charge must have been much more serious.\nAsiaticus had been a claimant to the throne in the chaos following Caligula's death and a co-consul with Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus. Most of these conspiracies took place before Claudius's term as Censor, and may have induced him to review the Senatorial rolls. The conspiracy of Gaius Silius in the year after his Censorship, 48, is detailed in book 11 of Tacitus' Annals. This section of Tacitus' history narrates the alleged conspiracy of Claudius's third wife, Messalina. Suetonius states that a total of 35 senators and 300 knights were executed for offenses during Claudius's reign. Needless to say, the responses to these conspiracies could not have helped Senate\u2013emperor relations.\nSecretariat and centralization of powers.\nClaudius was hardly the first emperor to use freedmen to help with the day-to-day running of the Empire. He was, however, forced to increase their role as the powers of the \"princeps\" became more centralized and the burden of running the government became larger. Claudius did not want free-born magistrates to serve under him as if they were not peers.\nThe secretariat was divided into bureaus, with each being placed under the leadership of one freedman. Narcissus was the secretary of correspondence. Pallas became the secretary of the treasury. Callistus became secretary of justice. There was a fourth bureau for miscellaneous issues, which was put under Polybius until his execution for treason. The freedmen could also officially speak for the Emperor, as when Narcissus addressed the troops in Claudius's stead before the conquest of Britain.\nSince these were important positions, the senators were aghast at their being placed in the hands of former slaves and \"well-known eunuchs\". If freedmen had total control of money, letters and law, it seemed it would not be hard for them to manipulate the Emperor. This is exactly the accusation put forth by ancient sources. However, these same sources admit that the freedmen were loyal to Claudius.\nHe was similarly appreciative of them and gave them due credit for policies where he had used their advice. However, if they showed treasonous inclinations, the Emperor punished them with just force, as in the case of Polybius and Pallas's brother, Felix. There is no evidence that the character of Claudius's policies and edicts changed with the rise and fall of the various freedmen, suggesting that he was firmly in control throughout.\nRegardless of the extent of their political power, the freedmen did manage to amass wealth through their positions. Pliny the Elder notes that several of them were richer than Crassus, the richest man of the Republican era.\nReligious reforms.\nClaudius, as the author of a treatise on Augustus's religious reforms, felt himself in a good position to institute some of his own. He had strong opinions about the proper form for state religion. He refused the request of Alexandrian Greeks to dedicate a temple to his divinity, saying that only gods may choose new gods. He restored lost days to festivals and got rid of many extraneous celebrations added by Caligula. He re-instituted old observances and archaic language.\nClaudius was concerned with the spread of eastern mysteries within the city and searched for more Roman replacements. He emphasized the Eleusinian Mysteries, which had been practiced by so many during the Republic. He expelled foreign astrologers, and at the same time rehabilitated the old Roman soothsayers (known as haruspices) as a replacement. He was especially hard on Druidism, because of its incompatibility with the Roman state religion and its proselytizing activities.\nPublic games and entertainments.\nAccording to Suetonius, Claudius was extraordinarily fond of games. He is said to have risen with the crowd after gladiatorial matches and given unrestrained praise to the fighters. Claudius also presided over many new and original events. Soon after coming into power, Claudius instituted games to be held in honor of his father on the latter's birthday. Annual games were also held in honour of his accession, and took place at the Praetorian camp where Claudius had first been proclaimed Emperor.\nClaudius organised a performance of the Secular Games, marking the 800th anniversary of the founding of Rome. Augustus had performed the same games less than a century prior. Augustus's excuse was that the interval for the games was 110 years, not 100, but his date actually did not qualify under either reasoning. Claudius also presented staged naval battles to mark the attempted draining of the Fucine Lake, as well as many other public games and shows.\nAt Ostia, in front of a crowd of spectators, Claudius fought an orca which was trapped in the harbour. The event was witnessed by Pliny the Elder:\nClaudius also restored and adorned many public venues in Rome. At the Circus Maximus, the turning posts and starting stalls were replaced in marble and embellished, and an embankment was probably added to prevent flooding of the track. Claudius also reinforced or extended the seating rules that reserved front seating at the Circus for senators. He rebuilt Pompey's Theatre after it had been destroyed by fire, organising special fights at the re-dedication, which he observed from a special platform in the orchestra box.\nMarriages and personal life.\nSuetonius and the other ancient authors accused Claudius of being dominated by women and wives, and of being a womanizer.\nClaudius married four times, after two failed betrothals. The first betrothal was to his distant cousin Aemilia Lepida, but was broken for political reasons. The second was to Livia Medullina Camilla, which ended with Medullina's sudden death on their wedding day.\nPlautia Urgulanilla.\nPlautia Urgulanilla was the granddaughter of Livia's confidant Urgulania. During their marriage she gave birth to a son, Claudius Drusus. Drusus died of asphyxiation in his early teens, shortly after becoming engaged to Junilla, daughter of Sejanus.\nClaudius later divorced Urgulanilla for adultery and on suspicion of murdering her sister-in-law Apronia. When Urgulanilla gave birth after the divorce, Claudius repudiated the baby girl, Claudia, as the father was allegedly one of his own freedmen. Later, this action made him the target of criticism by his enemies.\nAelia Paetina.\nSoon after, (possibly in 28) Claudius married Aelia Paetina, a relative of Sejanus, if not Sejanus's adoptive sister. During their marriage, Claudius and Paetina had a daughter, Claudia Antonia. He later divorced her after the marriage became a political liability. One version suggests that it may have been due to emotional and mental abuse by Paetina.\nValeria Messalina.\nSome years after divorcing Aelia Paetina, in 38 or early 39, Claudius married Valeria Messalina, who was his first cousin once removed (Claudius's grandmother, Octavia the Younger, was Valeria's great-grandmother on both her mother and father's side) and closely allied with Caligula's circle. Shortly thereafter, she gave birth to a daughter, Claudia Octavia. A son, first named Tiberius Claudius Germanicus, and later known as Britannicus, was born just after Claudius's accession.\nThis marriage ended in tragedy. The ancient historians allege that Messalina was a nymphomaniac who was regularly unfaithful to Claudius\u2014Tacitus states she went so far as to compete with a prostitute to see who could have more sexual partners in a nightand manipulated his policies to amass wealth. In 48, Messalina married her lover Gaius Silius in a public ceremony while Claudius was at Ostia.\nSources disagree as to whether or not she divorced the Emperor first, and whether the intention was to usurp the throne. Under Roman law, the spouse needed to be informed that he or she had been divorced before a new marriage could take place; the sources state that Claudius was in total ignorance until after the marriage. Scramuzza, in his biography, suggests that Silius may have convinced Messalina that Claudius was doomed, and the union was her only hope of retaining her rank and protecting her children. The historian Tacitus suggests that Claudius's ongoing term as Censor may have prevented him from noticing the affair before it reached such a critical point, after which she was executed.\nAgrippina the Younger.\nClaudius married once more. Ancient sources tell that his freedmen put forward three candidates, Caligula's third wife Lollia Paulina, Claudius's divorced second wife Aelia Paetina and Claudius's niece Agrippina the Younger. According to Suetonius, Agrippina won out through her feminine wiles. She gradually seized power from Claudius and successfully conspired to eliminate his son's rivals, opening the way for her son to become emperor.\nThe truth is probably more political. The attempted coup d'\u00e9tat by Silius and Messalina probably made Claudius realize the weakness of his position as a member of the Claudian (but not the Julian) family. This weakness was compounded by the fact that he did not yet have an obvious adult heir, Britannicus being just a boy. Agrippina was one of the few remaining descendants of Augustus, and her son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the future Nero) was one of the last males of the Imperial family. Coup attempts might rally around the pair and Agrippina was already showing such ambition. It has been suggested that the Senate may have pushed for the marriage, an attempt to end the feud between the Julian and Claudian branches. This feud dated back to Agrippina's mother's actions against Tiberius after the death of her husband Germanicus (Claudius's brother), actions that Tiberius had punished. \nAnother reason was to bring in Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus as a candidate for the succession. His prestige as the descendent of Augustus and Germanicus made him popular, and marking him as an heir would have helped the survival of Claudius' regime. In any case, Claudius accepted Agrippina and later adopted the mature Ahenobarbus as his son, renaming him as 'Nero Claudius Caesar'.\nNero was married to Claudius's daughter Octavia, made joint heir with the underage Britannicus, and promoted; Augustus had similarly named his grandson Postumus Agrippa and his stepson Tiberius as joint heirs, and Tiberius had named Caligula as his joint heir with his grandson Tiberius Gemellus. Adoption of adults or near adults was an old tradition in Rome when a suitable natural adult heir was unavailable, as was the case during Britannicus's minority. Claudius may have previously looked to adopt one of his sons-in-law to protect his own reign.\nFaustus Cornelius Sulla Felix, who was married to Claudius's daughter Claudia Antonia, was only descended from Octavia and Antony on one side\u00a0\u2013 not close enough to the Imperial family to ensure his right to be Emperor (although that did not stop others from making him the object of a coup attempt against Nero a few years later), besides being the half-brother of Valeria Messalina, which told against him. Nero was more popular with the general public as both the grandson of Germanicus and the direct descendant of Augustus.\nAffliction and personality.\nThe historian Suetonius describes the physical manifestations of Claudius's condition. His knees were weak and gave way under him and his head shook. He stammered and his speech was confused. He slobbered and his nose ran when he was excited. The Stoic Seneca states in his \"Apocolocyntosis\" that Claudius's voice belonged to no land animal, and that his hands were weak as well.\nHowever, he showed no physical deformity, as Suetonius notes that when calm and seated he was a tall, well-built figure of \"dignitas\". When angered or stressed, his symptoms became worse. Historians agree that this condition improved upon his accession to the throne. Claudius himself claimed that he had exaggerated his ailments to save his life.\nModern assessments of his health have changed several times in the past century. Prior to World War II, infantile paralysis (or polio) was widely accepted as the cause. This is the diagnosis used in Robert Graves's Claudius novels, first published in the 1930s. \"The New York Times\" wrote in 1934 that Claudius suffered from infantile paralysis (which led to his limp state) and measles (which made him deaf) at seven months of age, among several other ailments. Polio does not explain many of the described symptoms, however, and a more recent theory implicates cerebral palsy as the cause. Tourette syndrome has also been considered a possibility.\nAs a person, ancient historians described Claudius as generous and lowbrow, a man who sometimes lunched with the plebeians. They also paint him as bloodthirsty and cruel, over-fond of gladiatorial combat and executions, and very quick to anger; Claudius himself acknowledged the latter trait, and apologized publicly for his temper. According to the ancient historians he was also excessively trusting, and easily manipulated by his wives and freedmen, but at the same time they portray him as paranoid and apathetic, dull and easily confused.\nScholarly works and their impact.\nClaudius wrote copiously throughout his life. Arnaldo Momigliano states that during the reign of Tiberius, which covers the peak of Claudius's literary career, it became impolitic to speak of republican Rome. The trend among the young historians was either to write about the new empire or about obscure antiquarian topics. Claudius was the rare scholar who covered both.\nBesides his history of Augustus' reign that caused him so much grief, his major works included \"Tyrrhenika\", a twenty-book Etruscan history, and \"Carchedonica\", an eight-volume history of Carthage, as well as an Etruscan dictionary. He also wrote a book on dice-playing. Despite the general avoidance of the topic of the Republican era, he penned a defense of Cicero against the charges of Asinius Gallus. Modern historians have used this to determine the nature of his politics and of the aborted chapters of his civil war history.\nHe proposed a reform of the Latin alphabet by the addition of three new letters; he officially instituted the change during his censorship but they did not survive his reign. Claudius also tried to revive the old custom of putting dots between successive words (Classical Latin was written with no spacing). Finally, he wrote an eight-volume autobiography that Suetonius describes as lacking in taste. Claudius (like most of the members of his dynasty) harshly criticized his predecessors and relatives in surviving speeches.\nNone of the works survived, but other sources' reference to him provide material for the surviving histories of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Suetonius quotes Claudius's autobiography once and must have used it as a source numerous times. Tacitus uses Claudius's arguments for the orthographical innovations mentioned above and may have used him for some of the more antiquarian passages in his annals. Claudius is the source for numerous passages of Pliny's \"Natural History\".\nThe influence of historical study on Claudius is obvious. In his speech on Gallic senators, he uses a version of the founding of Rome identical to that of Livy, his tutor in adolescence. Many of the public works instituted in his reign were based on plans first suggested by Julius Caesar. Levick believes this emulation of Caesar may have spread to all aspects of his policies.\nHis censorship seems to have been based on those of his ancestors, particularly Appius Claudius Caecus, and he used the office to put into place many policies based on those of Republican times. This is when many of his religious reforms took effect; also, his building efforts greatly increased during his tenure. In fact, his assumption of the office of Censor may have been motivated by a desire to see his academic labors bear fruit. For example, he believed (as most Romans did) that Caecus had used the power of the censorship office to introduce the letter \"R\" and so used his own term to introduce his new letters.\nDeath.\nAncient historians agree that Claudius was murdered by poison \u2013 possibly contained in mushrooms or on a feather (ostensibly put down his throat to induce vomiting) \u2013 and died in the early hours of 13 October 54.\nNearly all implicate his final and powerful wife, Agrippina, as the instigator. Agrippina and Claudius had become more combative in the months leading up to his death. This carried on to the point where Claudius openly lamented his bad wives, and began to comment on Britannicus' approaching manhood with an eye towards restoring his status within the imperial family. Agrippina had motive in ensuring the succession of Nero before Britannicus could gain power.\nSome implicate either his taster Halotus, his doctor Xenophon, or the infamous poisoner Locusta as the administrator of the fatal substance. Some say he died after prolonged suffering following a single dose at dinner, and some have him recovering only to be poisoned again. Among his contemporary sources, Seneca the Younger ascribed the emperor's death to natural causes, while Josephus only spoke of rumors of his poisoning.\nSome historians have cast doubt on whether Claudius was murdered or merely died from illness or old age. Evidence against his murder include his serious illnesses in his last years, his unhealthy lifestyle and the fact that his taster Halotus continued to serve in the same position under Nero. Claudius had been so ill the year before that Nero vowed games for his recovery and the year of 54 seems to have been such an unhealthy year that one sitting member of each magistracy died within the span of a few months. He may even have died by eating a naturally poisonous mushroom, possibly \"Amanita muscaria\". On the other hand, some modern scholars claim the near universality of the accusations in ancient texts lends credence to the crime. Claudius's ashes were interred in the Mausoleum of Augustus on 24 October 54, after a funeral similar to that of his great-uncle Augustus 40 years earlier.\nLegacy.\nDivine honours.\nAlready, while alive, he received the widespread private worship of a living \"princeps\" and was worshipped in Britannia in his own temple in Camulodunum.\nClaudius was deified by Nero and the Senate almost immediately.\nViews of the new regime.\nAgrippina had sent Narcissus away shortly before Claudius's death, and now had the freedman murdered.\nThe last act of this secretary of letters was to burn all of Claudius's correspondence \u2013 most likely so it could not be used against him and others in an already hostile new regime. Thus Claudius's private words about his own policies and motives were lost to history. Just as Claudius had criticized his predecessors in official edicts, Nero often criticized the deceased Emperor, and many Claudian laws and edicts were disregarded under the reasoning that he was too stupid and senile to have meant them.\nSeneca's Apocolocyntosis mocks the deification of Claudius and reinforces the view of Claudius as an unpleasant fool; this remained the official view for the duration of Nero's reign. Eventually Nero stopped referring to his deified adoptive father at all. Claudius's temple was left unfinished after only some of the foundation had been laid down. Eventually the site was overtaken by Nero's Golden House.\nFlavian and later perspectives.\nThe Flavians, who had risen to prominence under Claudius, took a different tack. They needed to shore up their legitimacy, but also justify the fall of the Julio-Claudians. They reached back to Claudius in contrast with Nero, to show that they were associated with a good regime. Commemorative coins were issued of Claudius and his son Britannicus, who had been a friend of Emperor Titus (Titus was born in 39, Britannicus was born in 41). When Nero's Golden House was burned, the Temple of Claudius was finally completed on the Caelian Hill.\nHowever, as the Flavians became established, they needed to emphasize their own credentials more, and their references to Claudius ceased. Instead, he was lumped with the other emperors of the fallen dynasty. His state-cult in Rome probably continued until the abolition of all cults of dead Emperors by Maximinus Thrax in 237\u2013238. The \"Feriale Duranum\", probably identical to the festival calendars of every regular army unit, assigns him a sacrifice of a steer on his birthday, the Kalends of August. And such commemoration (and consequent feasting) probably continued until the Christianization and disintegration of the army in the late 4th century.\nViews of ancient historians.\nThe ancient historians Tacitus, Suetonius (in \"The Twelve Caesars\"), and Cassius Dio all wrote after the last of the Flavians had gone. All three were senators or \"equites\". They took the side of the Senate in most conflicts with the Princeps, invariably viewing him as being in the wrong. This resulted in biases, both conscious and unconscious. Suetonius lost access to the official archives shortly after beginning his work. He was forced to rely on second-hand accounts when it came to Claudius (with the exception of Augustus's letters, which had been gathered earlier). Suetonius painted Claudius as a ridiculous figure, belittling many of his acts and crediting his good works to his retinue.\nTacitus wrote a narrative for his fellow senators and fitted each of the emperors into a simple mold of his choosing. He wrote of Claudius as a passive pawn and an idiot in affairs relating to the palace and public life. During his Censorship of 47\u201348 Tacitus allows the reader a glimpse of a Claudius who is more statesmanlike (XI.23\u201325), but it is a mere glimpse. Tacitus is usually held to have 'hidden' his use of Claudius's writings and to have omitted Claudius's character from his works. Even his version of Claudius's Lyons tablet speech is edited to be devoid of the emperor's personality. Dio was less biased, but seems to have used Suetonius and Tacitus as sources. Thus, the conception of Claudius as a weak fool, controlled by those he supposedly ruled, was preserved for the ages.\nAs time passed, Claudius was mostly forgotten outside of the historians' accounts. His books were lost first, as their antiquarian subjects became unfashionable. In the 2nd century, Pertinax, who shared his birthday, became emperor, overshadowing commemoration of Claudius.\nIn modern media.\nIn literature, Claudius and his contemporaries appear in the historical novel \"The Roman\" by Mika Waltari. Canadian-born science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt reimagined Robert Graves's Claudius story, in his two novels, \"Empire of the Atom\" and \"The Wizard of Linn\".\nThe historical novel\u00a0\"Chariot of the Soul\" by\u00a0Linda Proud\u00a0features Claudius as host and mentor of the young Togidubnus, son of King Verica of the Atrebates, during his ten-year stay in Rome. When Togidubnus returns to Britain in advance of the Roman army, it is with a mission given to him by Claudius."}
{"id": "6141", "revid": "38198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6141", "title": "Cardinal", "text": "Cardinal or The Cardinal most commonly refers to\nCardinal or The Cardinal may also refer to:\nAnimals.\nBirds.\nIn addition to the aforementioned cardinalids:"}
{"id": "6142", "revid": "43827844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6142", "title": "Cardinal numbers", "text": ""}
{"id": "6150", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6150", "title": "Cooking/Blanching", "text": ""}
{"id": "6172", "revid": "1272896296", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6172", "title": "Cantor set", "text": "In mathematics, the Cantor set is a set of points lying on a single line segment that has a number of unintuitive properties. It was discovered in 1874 by Henry John Stephen Smith and mentioned by German mathematician Georg Cantor in 1883.\nThrough consideration of this set, Cantor and others helped lay the foundations of modern point-set topology. The most common construction is the Cantor ternary set, built by removing the middle third of a line segment and then repeating the process with the remaining shorter segments. Cantor mentioned this ternary construction only in passing, as an example of a perfect set that is nowhere dense.\nMore generally, in topology, \"a\" Cantor space is a topological space homeomorphic to the Cantor ternary set (equipped with its subspace topology). The Cantor set is naturally homeomorphic to the countable product formula_1 of the discrete two point space formula_2. By a theorem of L. E. J. Brouwer, this is equivalent to being perfect, nonempty, compact, metrizable and zero dimensional.\nConstruction and formula of the ternary set.\nThe Cantor ternary set formula_3 is created by iteratively deleting the \"open\" middle third from a set of line segments. One starts by deleting the open middle third formula_4 from the interval formula_5, leaving two line segments: formula_6. Next, the open middle third of each of these remaining segments is deleted, leaving four line segments: formula_7.\nThe Cantor ternary set contains all points in the interval formula_8 that are not deleted at any step in this infinite process. The same facts can be described recursively by setting\nand\nfor formula_11, so that\nThe first six steps of this process are illustrated below.\nUsing the idea of self-similar transformations, formula_16 formula_17 and formula_18 the explicit closed formulas for the Cantor set are\nwhere every middle third is removed as the open interval formula_20 from the closed interval formula_21 surrounding it, or\nwhere the middle third formula_23 of the foregoing closed interval formula_24 is removed by intersecting with formula_25\nThis process of removing middle thirds is a simple example of a finite subdivision rule. The complement of the Cantor ternary set is an example of a fractal string.\nIn arithmetical terms, the Cantor set consists of all real numbers of the unit interval formula_8 that do not require the digit 1 in order to be expressed as a ternary (base 3) fraction. As the above diagram illustrates, each point in the Cantor set is uniquely located by a path through an infinitely deep binary tree, where the path turns left or right at each level according to which side of a deleted segment the point lies on. Representing each left turn with 0 and each right turn with 2 yields the ternary fraction for a point.\nMandelbrot's construction by \"curdling\".\nIn The Fractal Geometry of Nature, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot provides a whimsical thought experiment to assist non-mathematical readers in imagining the construction of formula_3. His narrative begins with imagining a bar, perhaps of lightweight metal, in which the bar's matter \"curdles\" by iteratively shifting towards its extremities. As the bar's segments become smaller, they become thin, dense slugs that eventually grow too small and faint to see.CURDLING: The construction of the Cantor bar results from the process I call curdling. It begins with a round bar. It is best to think of it as having a very low density. Then matter \"curdles\" out of this bar's middle third into the end thirds, so that the positions of the latter remain unchanged. Next matter curdles out of the middle third of each end third into its end thirds, and so on ad infinitum until one is left with an infinitely large number of infinitely thin slugs of infinitely high density. These slugs are spaced along the line in the very specific fashion induced by the generating process. In this illustration, curdling (which eventually requires hammering!) stops when both the printer's press and our eye cease to follow; the last line is indistinguishable from the last but one: each of its ultimate parts is seen as a gray slug rather than two parallel black slugs.\nComposition.\nSince the Cantor set is defined as the set of points not excluded, the proportion (i.e., measure) of the unit interval remaining can be found by total length removed. This total is the geometric progression\nSo that the proportion left is 1 \u2212 1 = 0.\nThis calculation suggests that the Cantor set cannot contain any interval of non-zero length. It may seem surprising that there should be anything left\u2014after all, the sum of the lengths of the removed intervals is equal to the length of the original interval. However, a closer look at the process reveals that there must be something left, since removing the \"middle third\" of each interval involved removing open sets (sets that do not include their endpoints). So removing the line segment (, ) from the original interval [0,\u20091] leaves behind the points and . Subsequent steps do not remove these (or other) endpoints, since the intervals removed are always internal to the intervals remaining. So the Cantor set is not empty, and in fact contains an uncountably infinite number of points (as follows from the above description in terms of paths in an infinite binary tree).\nIt may appear that \"only\" the endpoints of the construction segments are left, but that is not the case either. The number , for example, has the unique ternary form 0.020202... = . It is in the bottom third, and the top third of that third, and the bottom third of that top third, and so on. Since it is never in one of the middle segments, it is never removed. Yet it is also not an endpoint of any middle segment, because it is not a multiple of any power of 1/3.\nAll endpoints of segments are \"terminating\" ternary fractions and are contained in the set\nwhich is a countably infinite set.\nAs to cardinality, almost all elements of the Cantor set are not endpoints of intervals, nor rational points like 1/4. The whole Cantor set is in fact not countable.\nProperties.\nCardinality.\nIt can be shown that there are as many points left behind in this process as there were to begin with, and that therefore, the Cantor set is uncountable. To see this, we show that there is a function \"f\" from the Cantor set formula_3 to the closed interval [0,1] that is surjective (i.e. \"f\" maps from formula_3 onto [0,1]) so that the cardinality of formula_3 is no less than that of [0,1]. Since formula_3 is a subset of [0,1], its cardinality is also no greater, so the two cardinalities must in fact be equal, by the Cantor\u2013Bernstein\u2013Schr\u00f6der theorem.\nTo construct this function, consider the points in the [0,\u20091] interval in terms of base 3 (or ternary) notation. Recall that the proper ternary fractions, more precisely: the elements of formula_34, admit more than one representation in this notation, as for example , that can be written as 0.13 = 3, but also as 0.0222...3 = 3, and , that can be written as 0.23 = 3 but also as 0.1222...3 = 3.\nWhen we remove the middle third, this contains the numbers with ternary numerals of the form 0.1xxxxx...3 where xxxxx...3 is strictly between 00000...3 and 22222...3. So the numbers remaining after the first step consist of\nThis can be summarized by saying that those numbers with a ternary representation such that the first digit after the radix point is not 1 are the ones remaining after the first step.\nThe second step removes numbers of the form 0.01xxxx...3 and 0.21xxxx...3, and (with appropriate care for the endpoints) it can be concluded that the remaining numbers are those with a ternary numeral where neither of the first \"two\" digits is 1.\nContinuing in this way, for a number not to be excluded at step \"n\", it must have a ternary representation whose \"n\"th digit is not 1. For a number to be in the Cantor set, it must not be excluded at any step, it must admit a numeral representation consisting entirely of 0s and 2s.\nIt is worth emphasizing that numbers like 1, = 0.13 and = 0.213 are in the Cantor set, as they have ternary numerals consisting entirely of 0s and 2s: 1 = 0.222...3 = 3, = 0.0222...3 = 3 and = 0.20222...3 = 3.\nAll the latter numbers are \"endpoints\", and these examples are right limit points of formula_3. The same is true for the left limit points of formula_3, e.g. = 0.1222...3 = 3 = 3 and = 0.21222...3 = 3 = 3. All these endpoints are \"proper ternary\" fractions (elements of formula_37) of the form , where denominator \"q\" is a power of 3 when the fraction is in its irreducible form. The ternary representation of these fractions terminates (i.e., is finite) or \u2014 recall from above that proper ternary fractions each have 2 representations \u2014 is infinite and \"ends\" in either infinitely many recurring 0s or infinitely many recurring 2s. Such a fraction is a left limit point of formula_3 if its ternary representation contains no 1's and \"ends\" in infinitely many recurring 0s. Similarly, a proper ternary fraction is a right limit point of formula_3 if it again its ternary expansion contains no 1's and \"ends\" in infinitely many recurring 2s.\nThis set of endpoints is dense in formula_3 (but not dense in [0,\u20091]) and makes up a countably infinite set. The numbers in formula_3 which are \"not\" endpoints also have only 0s and 2s in their ternary representation, but they cannot end in an infinite repetition of the digit 0, nor of the digit 2, because then it would be an endpoint.\nThe function from formula_3 to [0,1] is defined by taking the ternary numerals that do consist entirely of 0s and 2s, replacing all the 2s by 1s, and interpreting the sequence as a binary representation of a real number. In a formula,\nFor any number \"y\" in [0,1], its binary representation can be translated into a ternary representation of a number \"x\" in formula_3 by replacing all the 1s by 2s. With this, \"f\"(\"x\") = \"y\" so that \"y\" is in the range of \"f\". For instance if \"y\" = = 0.100110011001...2 = , we write \"x\" = = 0.200220022002...3 = . Consequently, \"f\" is surjective. However, \"f\" is \"not\" injective \u2014 the values for which \"f\"(\"x\") coincides are those at opposing ends of one of the \"middle thirds\" removed. For instance, take\nso\nThus there are as many points in the Cantor set as there are in the interval [0,\u00a01] (which has the uncountable cardinality However, the set of endpoints of the removed intervals is countable, so there must be uncountably many numbers in the Cantor set which are not interval endpoints. As noted above, one example of such a number is , which can be written as 0.020202...3 = in ternary notation. In fact, given any formula_49, there exist formula_50 such that formula_51. This was first demonstrated by Steinhaus in 1917, who proved, via a geometric argument, the equivalent assertion that formula_52 for every formula_49. Since this construction provides an injection from formula_54 to formula_55, we have formula_56 as an immediate corollary. Assuming that formula_57 for any infinite set formula_58 (a statement shown to be equivalent to the axiom of choice by Tarski), this provides another demonstration that formula_59.\nThe Cantor set contains as many points as the interval from which it is taken, yet itself contains no interval of nonzero length. The irrational numbers have the same property, but the Cantor set has the additional property of being closed, so it is not even dense in any interval, unlike the irrational numbers which are dense in every interval.\nIt has been conjectured that all algebraic irrational numbers are normal. Since members of the Cantor set are not normal in base 3, this would imply that all members of the Cantor set are either rational or transcendental.\nSelf-similarity.\nThe Cantor set is the prototype of a fractal. It is self-similar, because it is equal to two copies of itself, if each copy is shrunk by a factor of 3 and translated. More precisely, the Cantor set is equal to the union of two functions, the left and right self-similarity transformations of itself, formula_60 and formula_17, which leave the Cantor set invariant up to homeomorphism: formula_62\nRepeated iteration of formula_63 and formula_64 can be visualized as an infinite binary tree. That is, at each node of the tree, one may consider the subtree to the left or to the right. Taking the set formula_65 together with function composition forms a monoid, the dyadic monoid.\nThe automorphisms of the binary tree are its hyperbolic rotations, and are given by the modular group. Thus, the Cantor set is a homogeneous space in the sense that for any two points formula_66 and formula_67 in the Cantor set formula_3, there exists a homeomorphism formula_69 with formula_70. An explicit construction of formula_71 can be described more easily if we see the Cantor set as a product space of countably many copies of the discrete space formula_72. Then the map formula_73 defined by formula_74 is an involutive homeomorphism exchanging formula_66 and formula_67.\nConservation law.\nIt has been found that some form of conservation law is always responsible behind scaling and self-similarity. In the case of Cantor set it can be seen that the formula_77th moment (where formula_78 is the fractal dimension) of all the surviving intervals at any stage of the construction process is equal to a constant which is one in the case of the Cantor set.\nWe know that there are formula_79 intervals of size formula_80 present in the system at the formula_81th step of its construction. Then if we label the surviving intervals as formula_82 then the formula_77th moment is formula_84 since formula_85.\nThe Hausdorff dimension of the Cantor set is equal to ln(2)/ln(3)\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.631.\nTopological and analytical properties.\nAlthough \"the\" Cantor set typically refers to the original, middle-thirds Cantor set described above, topologists often talk about \"a\" Cantor set, which means any topological space that is homeomorphic (topologically equivalent) to it.\nAs the above summation argument shows, the Cantor set is uncountable but has Lebesgue measure 0. Since the Cantor set is the complement of a union of open sets, it itself is a closed subset of the reals, and therefore a complete metric space. Since it is also totally bounded, the Heine\u2013Borel theorem says that it must be compact.\nFor any point in the Cantor set and any arbitrarily small neighborhood of the point, there is some other number with a ternary numeral of only 0s and 2s, as well as numbers whose ternary numerals contain 1s. Hence, every point in the Cantor set is an accumulation point (also called a cluster point or limit point) of the Cantor set, but none is an interior point. A closed set in which every point is an accumulation point is also called a perfect set in topology, while a closed subset of the interval with no interior points is nowhere dense in the interval.\nEvery point of the Cantor set is also an accumulation point of the complement of the Cantor set.\nFor any two points in the Cantor set, there will be some ternary digit where they differ \u2014 one will have 0 and the other 2. By splitting the Cantor set into \"halves\" depending on the value of this digit, one obtains a partition of the Cantor set into two closed sets that separate the original two points. In the relative topology on the Cantor set, the points have been separated by a clopen set. Consequently, the Cantor set is totally disconnected. As a compact totally disconnected Hausdorff space, the Cantor set is an example of a Stone space.\nAs a topological space, the Cantor set is naturally homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the space formula_86, where each copy carries the discrete topology. This is the space of all sequences in two digits \nwhich can also be identified with the set of 2-adic integers. The basis for the open sets of the product topology are cylinder sets; the homeomorphism maps these to the subspace topology that the Cantor set inherits from the natural topology on the real line. This characterization of the Cantor space as a product of compact spaces gives a second proof that Cantor space is compact, via Tychonoff's theorem.\nFrom the above characterization, the Cantor set is homeomorphic to the \"p\"-adic integers, and, if one point is removed from it, to the \"p\"-adic numbers.\nThe Cantor set is a subset of the reals, which are a metric space with respect to the ordinary distance metric; therefore the Cantor set itself is a metric space, by using that same metric. Alternatively, one can use the \"p\"-adic metric on formula_88: given two sequences formula_89, the distance between them is formula_90, where formula_91 is the smallest index such that formula_92; if there is no such index, then the two sequences are the same, and one defines the distance to be zero. These two metrics generate the same topology on the Cantor set.\nWe have seen above that the Cantor set is a totally disconnected perfect compact metric space. Indeed, in a sense it is the only one: every nonempty totally disconnected perfect compact metric space is homeomorphic to the Cantor set. See Cantor space for more on spaces homeomorphic to the Cantor set.\nThe Cantor set is sometimes regarded as \"universal\" in the category of compact metric spaces, since any compact metric space is a continuous image of the Cantor set; however this construction is not unique and so the Cantor set is not universal in the precise categorical sense. The \"universal\" property has important applications in functional analysis, where it is sometimes known as the \"representation theorem for compact metric spaces\".\nFor any integer \"q\" \u2265 2, the topology on the group G = Z\"q\"\u03c9 (the countable direct sum) is discrete. Although the Pontrjagin dual \u0393 is also Z\"q\"\u03c9, the topology of \u0393 is compact. One can see that \u0393 is totally disconnected and perfect - thus it is homeomorphic to the Cantor set. It is easiest to write out the homeomorphism explicitly in the case \"q\" = 2. (See Rudin 1962 p 40.)\nMeasure and probability.\nThe Cantor set can be seen as the compact group of binary sequences, and as such, it is endowed with a natural Haar measure. When normalized so that the measure of the set is 1, it is a model of an infinite sequence of coin tosses. Furthermore, one can show that the usual Lebesgue measure on the interval is an image of the Haar measure on the Cantor set, while the natural injection into the ternary set is a canonical example of a singular measure. It can also be shown that the Haar measure is an image of any probability, making the Cantor set a universal probability space in some ways.\nIn Lebesgue measure theory, the Cantor set is an example of a set which is uncountable and has zero measure. In contrast, the set has a Hausdorff measure of 1 in its dimension of log\u20092 / log\u20093.\nCantor numbers.\nIf we define a Cantor number as a member of the Cantor set, then\nDescriptive set theory.\nThe Cantor set is a meagre set (or a set of first category) as a subset of [0,1] (although not as a subset of itself, since it is a Baire space). The Cantor set thus demonstrates that notions of \"size\" in terms of cardinality, measure, and (Baire) category need not coincide. Like the set formula_93, the Cantor set formula_3 is \"small\" in the sense that it is a null set (a set of measure zero) and it is a meagre subset of [0,1]. However, unlike formula_93, which is countable and has a \"small\" cardinality, formula_96, the cardinality of formula_3 is the same as that of [0,1], the continuum formula_98, and is \"large\" in the sense of cardinality. In fact, it is also possible to construct a subset of [0,1] that is meagre but of positive measure and a subset that is non-meagre but of measure zero: By taking the countable union of \"fat\" Cantor sets formula_99 of measure formula_100 (see Smith\u2013Volterra\u2013Cantor set below for the construction), we obtain a set formula_101which has a positive measure (equal to 1) but is meagre in [0,1], since each formula_99 is nowhere dense. Then consider the set formula_103. Since formula_104, formula_105 cannot be meagre, but since formula_106, formula_105 must have measure zero.\nVariants.\nSmith\u2013Volterra\u2013Cantor set.\nInstead of repeatedly removing the middle third of every piece as in the Cantor set, we could also keep removing any other fixed percentage (other than 0% and 100%) from the middle. In the case where the middle of the interval is removed, we get a remarkably accessible case \u2014 the set consists of all numbers in [0,1] that can be written as a decimal consisting entirely of 0s and 9s. If a fixed percentage is removed at each stage, then the limiting set will have measure zero, since the length of the remainder formula_108 as formula_109 for any formula_110 such that formula_111.\nOn the other hand, \"fat Cantor sets\" of positive measure can be generated by removal of smaller fractions of the middle of the segment in each iteration. Thus, one can construct sets homeomorphic to the Cantor set that have positive Lebesgue measure while still being nowhere dense. If an interval of length formula_112 (formula_113) is removed from the middle of each segment at the \"n\"th iteration, then the total length removed is formula_114, and the limiting set will have a Lebesgue measure of formula_115. Thus, in a sense, the middle-thirds Cantor set is a limiting case with formula_116. If formula_117, then the remainder will have positive measure with formula_118. The case formula_119 is known as the Smith\u2013Volterra\u2013Cantor set, which has a Lebesgue measure of formula_120.\nStochastic Cantor set.\nOne can modify the construction of the Cantor set by dividing randomly instead of equally. Besides, to incorporate time we can divide only one of the available intervals at each step instead of dividing all the available intervals. In the case of stochastic triadic Cantor set the resulting process can be described by the following rate equation\nand for the stochastic dyadic Cantor set\nwhere formula_123 is the number of intervals of size between formula_66 and formula_125. In the case of triadic Cantor set the fractal dimension is formula_126 which is \nless than its deterministic counterpart formula_127. In the case of stochastic dyadic Cantor set\nthe fractal dimension is formula_128 which is again less than that of its deterministic counterpart formula_129. In the case of stochastic dyadic Cantor set the solution for formula_130 exhibits dynamic scaling as its solution in the long-time limit is formula_131 where the fractal dimension of the stochastic dyadic Cantor set formula_132. In either case, like triadic Cantor set, the formula_77th moment (formula_134) of stochastic triadic and dyadic Cantor set too are conserved quantities.\nCantor dust.\nCantor dust is a multi-dimensional version of the Cantor set. It can be formed by taking a finite Cartesian product of the Cantor set with itself, making it a Cantor space. Like the Cantor set, Cantor dust has zero measure.\nA different 2D analogue of the Cantor set is the Sierpinski carpet, where a square is divided up into nine smaller squares, and the middle one removed. The remaining squares are then further divided into nine each and the middle removed, and so on ad infinitum. One 3D analogue of this is the Menger sponge.\nHistorical remarks.\nCantor introduced what we call today the Cantor ternary set formula_135 as an example \"of a perfect point-set, which is not everywhere-dense in any interval, however small.\" Cantor described formula_135 in terms of ternary expansions, as \"the set of all real numbers given by the formula: formula_137where the coefficients formula_138 arbitrarily take the two values 0 and 2, and the series can consist of a finite number or an infinite number of elements.\"\nA topological space formula_139 is perfect if all its points are limit points or, equivalently, if it coincides with its derived set formula_140. Subsets of the real line, like formula_135, can be seen as topological spaces under the induced subspace topology.\nCantor was led to the study of derived sets by his results on uniqueness of trigonometric series. The latter did much to set him on the course for developing an abstract, general theory of infinite sets.\nBenoit Mandelbrot wrote much on Cantor dusts and their relation to natural fractals and statistical physics. He further reflected on the puzzling or even upsetting nature of such structures to those in the mathematics and physics community. In The Fractal geometry of Nature, he described how \"When I started on this topic in 1962, everyone was agreeing that Cantor dusts are at least as monstrous as the Koch and Peano curves,\" and added that \"every self-respecting physicist was automatically turned off by a mention of Cantor, ready to run a mile from anyone claiming formula_135 to be interesting in science.\""}
{"id": "6173", "revid": "1026643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6173", "title": "Cardinal number", "text": "In mathematics, a cardinal number, or cardinal for short, is what is commonly called the number of elements of a set. In the case of a finite set, its cardinal number, or cardinality is therefore a natural number. For dealing with the case of infinite sets, the infinite cardinal numbers have been introduced, which are often denoted with the Hebrew letter formula_1 (aleph) marked with subscript indicating their rank among the infinite cardinals.\nCardinality is defined in terms of bijective functions. Two sets have the same cardinality if, and only if, there is a one-to-one correspondence (bijection) between the elements of the two sets. In the case of finite sets, this agrees with the intuitive notion of number of elements. In the case of infinite sets, the behavior is more complex. A fundamental theorem due to Georg Cantor shows that it is possible for infinite sets to have different cardinalities, and in particular the cardinality of the set of real numbers is greater than the cardinality of the set of natural numbers. It is also possible for a proper subset of an infinite set to have the same cardinality as the original set\u2014something that cannot happen with proper subsets of finite sets.\nThere is a transfinite sequence of cardinal numbers:\nThis sequence starts with the natural numbers including zero (finite cardinals), which are followed by the aleph numbers. The aleph numbers are indexed by ordinal numbers. If the axiom of choice is true, this transfinite sequence includes every cardinal number. If the axiom of choice is not true (see ), there are infinite cardinals that are not aleph numbers.\nCardinality is studied for its own sake as part of set theory. It is also a tool used in branches of mathematics including model theory, combinatorics, abstract algebra and mathematical analysis. In category theory, the cardinal numbers form a skeleton of the category of sets.\nHistory.\nThe notion of cardinality, as now understood, was formulated by Georg Cantor, the originator of set theory, in 1874\u20131884. Cardinality can be used to compare an aspect of finite sets. For example, the sets {1,2,3} and {4,5,6} are not \"equal\", but have the \"same cardinality\", namely three. This is established by the existence of a bijection (i.e., a one-to-one correspondence) between the two sets, such as the correspondence {1\u21924, 2\u21925, 3\u21926}.\nCantor applied his concept of bijection to infinite sets (for example the set of natural numbers N = {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}). Thus, he called all sets having a bijection with N \"denumerable (countably infinite) sets\", which all share the same cardinal number. This cardinal number is called formula_3, aleph-null. He called the cardinal numbers of infinite sets transfinite cardinal numbers.\nCantor proved that any unbounded subset of N has the same cardinality as N, even though this might appear to run contrary to intuition. He also proved that the set of all ordered pairs of natural numbers is denumerable; this implies that the set of all rational numbers is also denumerable, since every rational can be represented by a pair of integers. He later proved that the set of all real algebraic numbers is also denumerable. Each real algebraic number \"z\" may be encoded as a finite sequence of integers, which are the coefficients in the polynomial equation of which it is a solution, i.e. the ordered n-tuple (\"a\"0, \"a\"1, ..., \"an\"), \"ai\" \u2208 Z together with a pair of rationals (\"b\"0, \"b\"1) such that \"z\" is the unique root of the polynomial with coefficients (\"a\"0, \"a\"1, ..., \"an\") that lies in the interval (\"b\"0, \"b\"1).\nIn his 1874 paper \"On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers\", Cantor proved that there exist higher-order cardinal numbers, by showing that the set of real numbers has cardinality greater than that of N. His proof used an argument with nested intervals, but in an 1891 paper, he proved the same result using his ingenious and much simpler diagonal argument. The new cardinal number of the set of real numbers is called the cardinality of the continuum and Cantor used the symbol formula_4 for it.\nCantor also developed a large portion of the general theory of cardinal numbers; he proved that there is a smallest transfinite cardinal number (formula_3, aleph-null), and that for every cardinal number there is a next-larger cardinal\nHis continuum hypothesis is the proposition that the cardinality formula_4 of the set of real numbers is the same as formula_8. This hypothesis is independent of the standard axioms of mathematical set theory, that is, it can neither be proved nor disproved from them. This was shown in 1963 by Paul Cohen, complementing earlier work by Kurt G\u00f6del in 1940.\nMotivation.\nIn informal use, a cardinal number is what is normally referred to as a \"counting number\", provided that 0 is included: 0, 1, 2, ... They may be identified with the natural numbers beginning with 0. The counting numbers are exactly what can be defined formally as the finite cardinal numbers. Infinite cardinals only occur in higher-level mathematics and logic.\nMore formally, a non-zero number can be used for two purposes: to describe the size of a set, or to describe the position of an element in a sequence. For finite sets and sequences it is easy to see that these two notions coincide, since for every number describing a position in a sequence we can construct a set that has exactly the right size. For example, 3 describes the position of 'c' in the sequence &lt;'a','b','c','d'...&gt;, and we can construct the set {a,b,c}, which has 3 elements.\nHowever, when dealing with infinite sets, it is essential to distinguish between the two, since the two notions are in fact different for infinite sets. Considering the position aspect leads to ordinal numbers, while the size aspect is generalized by the cardinal numbers described here.\nThe intuition behind the formal definition of cardinal is the construction of a notion of the relative size or \"bigness\" of a set, without reference to the kind of members which it has. For finite sets this is easy; one simply counts the number of elements a set has. In order to compare the sizes of larger sets, it is necessary to appeal to more refined notions.\nA set \"Y\" is at least as big as a set \"X\" if there is an injective mapping from the elements of \"X\" to the elements of \"Y\". An injective mapping identifies each element of the set \"X\" with a unique element of the set \"Y\". This is most easily understood by an example; suppose we have the sets \"X\" = {1,2,3} and \"Y\" = {a,b,c,d}, then using this notion of size, we would observe that there is a mapping:\nwhich is injective, and hence conclude that \"Y\" has cardinality greater than or equal to \"X\". The element d has no element mapping to it, but this is permitted as we only require an injective mapping, and not necessarily a bijective mapping. The advantage of this notion is that it can be extended to infinite sets.\nWe can then extend this to an equality-style relation. Two sets \"X\" and \"Y\" are said to have the same \"cardinality\" if there exists a bijection between \"X\" and \"Y\". By the Schroeder\u2013Bernstein theorem, this is equivalent to there being \"both\" an injective mapping from \"X\" to \"Y\", \"and\" an injective mapping from \"Y\" to \"X\". We then write |\"X\"| = |\"Y\"|. The cardinal number of \"X\" itself is often defined as the least ordinal \"a\" with |\"a\"| = |\"X\"|. This is called the von Neumann cardinal assignment; for this definition to make sense, it must be proved that every set has the same cardinality as \"some\" ordinal; this statement is the well-ordering principle. It is however possible to discuss the relative cardinality of sets without explicitly assigning names to objects.\nThe classic example used is that of the infinite hotel paradox, also called Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel. Supposing there is an innkeeper at a hotel with an infinite number of rooms. The hotel is full, and then a new guest arrives. It is possible to fit the extra guest in by asking the guest who was in room 1 to move to room 2, the guest in room 2 to move to room 3, and so on, leaving room 1 vacant. We can explicitly write a segment of this mapping:\nWith this assignment, we can see that the set {1,2,3...} has the same cardinality as the set {2,3,4...}, since a bijection between the first and the second has been shown. This motivates the definition of an infinite set being any set that has a proper subset of the same cardinality (i.e., a Dedekind-infinite set); in this case {2,3,4...} is a proper subset of {1,2,3...}.\nWhen considering these large objects, one might also want to see if the notion of counting order coincides with that of cardinal defined above for these infinite sets. It happens that it does not; by considering the above example we can see that if some object \"one greater than infinity\" exists, then it must have the same cardinality as the infinite set we started out with. It is possible to use a different formal notion for number, called ordinals, based on the ideas of counting and considering each number in turn, and we discover that the notions of cardinality and ordinality are divergent once we move out of the finite numbers.\nIt can be proved that the cardinality of the real numbers is greater than that of the natural numbers just described. This can be visualized using Cantor's diagonal argument; classic questions of cardinality (for instance the continuum hypothesis) are concerned with discovering whether there is some cardinal between some pair of other infinite cardinals. In more recent times, mathematicians have been describing the properties of larger and larger cardinals.\nSince cardinality is such a common concept in mathematics, a variety of names are in use. Sameness of cardinality is sometimes referred to as \"equipotence\", \"equipollence\", or \"equinumerosity\". It is thus said that two sets with the same cardinality are, respectively, \"equipotent\", \"equipollent\", or \"equinumerous\".\nFormal definition.\nFormally, assuming the axiom of choice, the cardinality of a set \"X\" is the least ordinal number \u03b1 such that there is a bijection between \"X\" and \u03b1. This definition is known as the von Neumann cardinal assignment. If the axiom of choice is not assumed, then a different approach is needed. The oldest definition of the cardinality of a set \"X\" (implicit in Cantor and explicit in Frege and \"Principia Mathematica\") is as the class [\"X\"] of all sets that are equinumerous with \"X\". This does not work in ZFC or other related systems of axiomatic set theory because if \"X\" is non-empty, this collection is too large to be a set. In fact, for \"X\" \u2260 \u2205 there is an injection from the universe into [\"X\"] by mapping a set \"m\" to {\"m\"} \u00d7 \"X\", and so by the axiom of limitation of size, [\"X\"] is a proper class. The definition does work however in type theory and in New Foundations and related systems. However, if we restrict from this class to those equinumerous with \"X\" that have the least rank, then it will work (this is a trick due to Dana Scott: it works because the collection of objects with any given rank is a set).\nVon Neumann cardinal assignment implies that the cardinal number of a finite set is the common ordinal number of all possible well-orderings of that set, and cardinal and ordinal arithmetic (addition, multiplication, power, proper subtraction) then give the same answers for finite numbers. However, they differ for infinite numbers. For example, formula_9 in ordinal arithmetic while formula_10 in cardinal arithmetic, although the von Neumann assignment puts formula_11. On the other hand, Scott's trick implies that the cardinal number 0 is formula_12, which is also the ordinal number 1, and this may be confusing. A possible compromise (to take advantage of the alignment in finite arithmetic while avoiding reliance on the axiom of choice and confusion in infinite arithmetic) is to apply von Neumann assignment to the cardinal numbers of finite sets (those which can be well ordered and are not equipotent to proper subsets) and to use Scott's trick for the cardinal numbers of other sets.\nFormally, the order among cardinal numbers is defined as follows: |\"X\"| \u2264 |\"Y\"| means that there exists an injective function from \"X\" to \"Y\". The Cantor\u2013Bernstein\u2013Schroeder theorem states that if |\"X\"| \u2264 |\"Y\"| and |\"Y\"| \u2264 |\"X\"| then |\"X\"| = |\"Y\"|. The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that given two sets \"X\" and \"Y\", either |\"X\"| \u2264 |\"Y\"| or |\"Y\"| \u2264 |\"X\"|.\nA set \"X\" is Dedekind-infinite if there exists a proper subset \"Y\" of \"X\" with |\"X\"| = |\"Y\"|, and Dedekind-finite if such a subset does not exist. The finite cardinals are just the natural numbers, in the sense that a set \"X\" is finite if and only if |\"X\"| = |\"n\"| = \"n\" for some natural number \"n\". Any other set is infinite.\nAssuming the axiom of choice, it can be proved that the Dedekind notions correspond to the standard ones. It can also be proved that the cardinal formula_3 (aleph null or aleph-0, where aleph is the first letter in the Hebrew alphabet, represented formula_1) of the set of natural numbers is the smallest infinite cardinal (i.e., any infinite set has a subset of cardinality formula_3). The next larger cardinal is denoted by formula_8, and so on. For every ordinal \u03b1, there is a cardinal number formula_17 and this list exhausts all infinite cardinal numbers.\nCardinal arithmetic.\nWe can define arithmetic operations on cardinal numbers that generalize the ordinary operations for natural numbers. It can be shown that for finite cardinals, these operations coincide with the usual operations for natural numbers. Furthermore, these operations share many properties with ordinary arithmetic.\nSuccessor cardinal.\nIf the axiom of choice holds, then every cardinal \u03ba has a successor, denoted \u03ba+, where \u03ba+ &gt; \u03ba and there are no cardinals between \u03ba and its successor. (Without the axiom of choice, using Hartogs' theorem, it can be shown that for any cardinal number \u03ba, there is a minimal cardinal \u03ba+ such that formula_18) For finite cardinals, the successor is simply \u03ba + 1. For infinite cardinals, the successor cardinal differs from the successor ordinal.\nCardinal addition.\nIf \"X\" and \"Y\" are disjoint, addition is given by the union of \"X\" and \"Y\". If the two sets are not already disjoint, then they can be replaced by disjoint sets of the same cardinality (e.g., replace \"X\" by \"X\"\u00d7{0} and \"Y\" by \"Y\"\u00d7{1}).\nZero is an additive identity \"\u03ba\" + 0 = 0 + \"\u03ba\" = \"\u03ba\".\nAddition is associative (\"\u03ba\" + \"\u03bc\") + \"\u03bd\" = \"\u03ba\" + (\"\u03bc\" + \"\u03bd\").\nAddition is commutative \"\u03ba\" + \"\u03bc\" = \"\u03bc\" + \"\u03ba\".\nAddition is non-decreasing in both arguments:\nAssuming the axiom of choice, addition of infinite cardinal numbers is easy. If either \"\u03ba\" or \"\u03bc\" is infinite, then\nSubtraction.\nAssuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal \"\u03c3\" and a cardinal \"\u03bc\", there exists a cardinal \"\u03ba\" such that \"\u03bc\" + \"\u03ba\" = \"\u03c3\" if and only if \"\u03bc\" \u2264 \"\u03c3\". It will be unique (and equal to \"\u03c3\") if and only if \"\u03bc\" &lt; \"\u03c3\".\nCardinal multiplication.\nThe product of cardinals comes from the Cartesian product.\n\"\u03ba\"\u00b70 = 0\u00b7\"\u03ba\" = 0.\n\"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bc\" = 0 \u2192 (\"\u03ba\" = 0 or \"\u03bc\" = 0).\nOne is a multiplicative identity \"\u03ba\"\u00b71 = 1\u00b7\"\u03ba\" = \"\u03ba\".\nMultiplication is associative (\"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bc\")\u00b7\"\u03bd\" = \"\u03ba\"\u00b7(\"\u03bc\"\u00b7\"\u03bd\").\nMultiplication is commutative \"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bc\" = \"\u03bc\"\u00b7\"\u03ba\".\nMultiplication is non-decreasing in both arguments:\n\"\u03ba\" \u2264 \"\u03bc\" \u2192 (\"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bd\" \u2264 \"\u03bc\"\u00b7\"\u03bd\" and \"\u03bd\"\u00b7\"\u03ba\" \u2264 \"\u03bd\"\u00b7\"\u03bc\").\nMultiplication distributes over addition:\n\"\u03ba\"\u00b7(\"\u03bc\" + \"\u03bd\") = \"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bc\" + \"\u03ba\"\u00b7\"\u03bd\" and\n(\"\u03bc\" + \"\u03bd\")\u00b7\"\u03ba\" = \"\u03bc\"\u00b7\"\u03ba\" + \"\u03bd\"\u00b7\"\u03ba\".\nAssuming the axiom of choice, multiplication of infinite cardinal numbers is also easy. If either \"\u03ba\" or \"\u03bc\" is infinite and both are non-zero, then\nThus the product of two infinite cardinal numbers is equal to their sum.\nDivision.\nAssuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal \"\u03c0\" and a non-zero cardinal \"\u03bc\", there exists a cardinal \"\u03ba\" such that \"\u03bc\" \u00b7 \"\u03ba\" = \"\u03c0\" if and only if \"\u03bc\" \u2264 \"\u03c0\". It will be unique (and equal to \"\u03c0\") if and only if \"\u03bc\" &lt; \"\u03c0\".\nCardinal exponentiation.\nExponentiation is given by\nwhere \"XY\" is the set of all functions from \"Y\" to \"X\". It is easy to check that the right-hand side depends only on formula_25 and formula_25.\nExponentiation is non-decreasing in both arguments:\n2|\"X\"| is the cardinality of the power set of the set \"X\" and Cantor's diagonal argument shows that 2|\"X\"| &gt; |\"X\"| for any set \"X\". This proves that no largest cardinal exists (because for any cardinal \"\u03ba\", we can always find a larger cardinal 2\"\u03ba\"). In fact, the class of cardinals is a proper class. (This proof fails in some set theories, notably New Foundations.)\nAll the remaining propositions in this section assume the axiom of choice:\nIf 2 \u2264 \"\u03ba\" and 1 \u2264 \"\u03bc\" and at least one of them is infinite, then:\nUsing K\u00f6nig's theorem, one can prove \"\u03ba\" &lt; \"\u03ba\"cf(\"\u03ba\") and \"\u03ba\" &lt; cf(2\"\u03ba\") for any infinite cardinal \"\u03ba\", where cf(\"\u03ba\") is the cofinality of \"\u03ba\".\nRoots.\nAssuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal \"\u03ba\" and a finite cardinal \"\u03bc\" greater than 0, the cardinal \"\u03bd\" satisfying formula_27 will be formula_28.\nLogarithms.\nAssuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal \"\u03ba\" and a finite cardinal \"\u03bc\" greater than 1, there may or may not be a cardinal \"\u03bb\" satisfying formula_29. However, if such a cardinal exists, it is infinite and less than \"\u03ba\", and any finite cardinality \"\u03bd\" greater than 1 will also satisfy formula_30.\nThe logarithm of an infinite cardinal number \"\u03ba\" is defined as the least cardinal number \"\u03bc\" such that \"\u03ba\" \u2264 2\"\u03bc\". Logarithms of infinite cardinals are useful in some fields of mathematics, for example in the study of cardinal invariants of topological spaces, though they lack some of the properties that logarithms of positive real numbers possess.\nThe continuum hypothesis.\nThe continuum hypothesis (CH) states that there are no cardinals strictly between formula_3 and formula_32 The latter cardinal number is also often denoted by formula_4; it is the cardinality of the continuum (the set of real numbers). In this case formula_34\nSimilarly, the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) states that for every infinite cardinal formula_28, there are no cardinals strictly between formula_28 and formula_37. Both the continuum hypothesis and the generalized continuum hypothesis have been proved to be independent of the usual axioms of set theory, the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms together with the axiom of choice (ZFC).\nIndeed, Easton's theorem shows that, for regular cardinals formula_28, the only restrictions ZFC places on the cardinality of formula_37 are that formula_40, and that the exponential function is non-decreasing.\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "6174", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6174", "title": "Cardinality", "text": "In mathematics, cardinality describes a relationship between sets which compares their relative size. For example, the sets formula_1 and formula_2 are the same size as they each contain 3 elements. Beginning in the late 19th century, this concept was generalized to infinite sets, which allows one to distinguish between different types of infinity, and to perform arithmetic on them. There are two notions often used when referring to cardinality: one which compares sets directly using bijections and injections, and another which uses cardinal numbers.\nThe cardinality of a set may also be called its size, when no confusion with other notions of size is possible.\nWhen two sets, and , have the same cardinality, it is usually written as formula_3; however, if referring to the \"cardinal number\" of an individual set formula_4, it is simply denoted formula_5, with a vertical bar on each side; this is the same notation as absolute value, and the meaning depends on context. The cardinal number of a set formula_4 may alternatively be denoted by formula_7, formula_4, formula_9, or formula_10.\nHistory.\nA crude sense of cardinality, an awareness that groups of things or events compare with other groups by containing more, fewer, or the same number of instances, is observed in a variety of present-day animal species, suggesting an origin millions of years ago. Human expression of cardinality is seen as early as years ago, with equating the size of a group with a group of recorded notches, or a representative collection of other things, such as sticks and shells. The abstraction of cardinality as a number is evident by 3000 BCE, in Sumerian mathematics and the manipulation of numbers without reference to a specific group of things or events.\nFrom the 6th century BCE, the writings of Greek philosophers show hints of the cardinality of infinite sets. While they considered the notion of infinity as an endless series of actions, such as adding 1 to a number repeatedly, they did not consider the size of an infinite set of numbers to be a thing. The ancient Greek notion of infinity also considered the division of things into parts repeated without limit. In Euclid's \"Elements\", commensurability was described as the ability to compare the length of two line segments, \"a\" and \"b\", as a ratio, as long as there were a third segment, no matter how small, that could be laid end-to-end a whole number of times into both \"a\" and \"b\". But with the discovery of irrational numbers, it was seen that even the infinite set of all rational numbers was not enough to describe the length of every possible line segment. Still, there was no concept of infinite sets as something that had cardinality.\nTo better understand infinite sets, a notion of cardinality was formulated by Georg Cantor, the originator of set theory. He examined the process of equating two sets with bijection, a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of two sets based on a unique relationship. In 1891, with the publication of Cantor's diagonal argument, he demonstrated that there are sets of numbers that cannot be placed in one-to-one correspondence with the set of natural numbers, i.e. uncountable sets that contain more elements than there are in the infinite set of natural numbers.\nComparing sets.\nWhile the cardinality of a finite set is simply comparable to its number of elements, extending the notion to infinite sets usually starts with defining the notion of comparison of arbitrary sets (some of which are possibly infinite).\nDefinition 1: =.\nTwo sets have the same cardinality if there exists a bijection (a.k.a., one-to-one correspondence) from to , that is, a function from to that is both injective and surjective. Such sets are said to be \"equipotent\", \"equipollent\", or \"equinumerous\". \nFor example, the set formula_11 of non-negative even numbers has the same cardinality as the set formula_12 of natural numbers, since the function formula_13 is a bijection from to (see picture).\nFor finite sets and , if \"some\" bijection exists from to , then \"each\" injective or surjective function from to is a bijection. This is no longer true for infinite and . For example, the function from to , defined by formula_14 is injective, but not surjective since 2, for instance, is not mapped to, and from to , defined by formula_15 (see: modulo operation) is surjective, but not injective, since 0 and 1 for instance both map to 0. Neither nor can challenge formula_16, which was established by the existence of .\nDefinition 2: \u2264.\n has cardinality less than or equal to the cardinality of , if there exists an injective function from into .\nIf formula_17 and formula_18, then formula_3 (a fact known as Schr\u00f6der\u2013Bernstein theorem). The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that formula_17 or formula_18 for every and .\nDefinition 3: &lt;.\n has cardinality strictly less than the cardinality of , if there is an injective function, but no bijective function, from to .\nFor example, the set of all natural numbers has cardinality strictly less than its power set , because formula_22 is an injective function from to , and it can be shown that no function from to can be bijective (see picture). By a similar argument, has cardinality strictly less than the cardinality of the set of all real numbers. For proofs, see Cantor's diagonal argument or Cantor's first uncountability proof.\nCardinal numbers.\nIn the above section, \"cardinality\" of a set was defined functionally. In other words, it was not defined as a specific object itself. However, such an object can be defined as follows.\nThe relation of having the same cardinality is called equinumerosity, and this is an equivalence relation on the class of all sets. The equivalence class of a set \"A\" under this relation, then, consists of all those sets which have the same cardinality as \"A\". There are two ways to define the \"cardinality of a set\":\nAssuming the axiom of choice, the cardinalities of the infinite sets are denoted\nFor each ordinal formula_24, formula_25 is the least cardinal number greater than formula_26.\nThe cardinality of the natural numbers is denoted aleph-null (formula_27), while the cardinality of the real numbers is denoted by \"formula_28\" (a lowercase fraktur script \"c\"), and is also referred to as the cardinality of the continuum. Cantor showed, using the diagonal argument, that formula_29. We can show that formula_30, this also being the cardinality of the set of all subsets of the natural numbers.\nThe continuum hypothesis says that formula_31, i.e. formula_32 is the smallest cardinal number bigger than formula_27, i.e. there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of the integers and that of the real numbers. The continuum hypothesis is independent of ZFC, a standard axiomatization of set theory; that is, it is impossible to prove the continuum hypothesis or its negation from ZFC\u2014provided that ZFC is consistent. For more detail, see \u00a7 Cardinality of the continuum below.\nFinite, countable and uncountable sets.\nIf the axiom of choice holds, the law of trichotomy holds for cardinality. Thus we can make the following definitions:\nInfinite sets.\nOur intuition gained from finite sets breaks down when dealing with infinite sets. In the late 19th century Georg Cantor, Gottlob Frege, Richard Dedekind and others rejected the view that the whole cannot be the same size as the part. One example of this is Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel.\nIndeed, Dedekind defined an infinite set as one that can be placed into a one-to-one correspondence with a strict subset (that is, having the same size in Cantor's sense); this notion of infinity is called Dedekind infinite. Cantor introduced the cardinal numbers, and showed\u2014according to his bijection-based definition of size\u2014that some infinite sets are greater than others. The smallest infinite cardinality is that of the natural numbers (formula_27).\nCardinality of the continuum.\nOne of Cantor's most important results was that the cardinality of the continuum (formula_37) is greater than that of the natural numbers (formula_27); that is, there are more real numbers R than natural numbers N. Namely, Cantor showed that formula_39 (see Beth one) satisfies:\nThe continuum hypothesis states that there is no cardinal number between the cardinality of the reals and the cardinality of the natural numbers, that is,\nHowever, this hypothesis can neither be proved nor disproved within the widely accepted ZFC axiomatic set theory, if ZFC is consistent.\nCardinal arithmetic can be used to show not only that the number of points in a real number line is equal to the number of points in any segment of that line, but that this is equal to the number of points on a plane and, indeed, in any finite-dimensional space. These results are highly counterintuitive, because they imply that there exist proper subsets and proper supersets of an infinite set \"S\" that have the same size as \"S\", although \"S\" contains elements that do not belong to its subsets, and the supersets of \"S\" contain elements that are not included in it.\nThe first of these results is apparent by considering, for instance, the tangent function, which provides a one-to-one correspondence between the interval (\u2212\u00bd\u03c0, \u00bd\u03c0) and R (see also Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel).\nThe second result was first demonstrated by Cantor in 1878, but it became more apparent in 1890, when Giuseppe Peano introduced the space-filling curves, curved lines that twist and turn enough to fill the whole of any square, or cube, or hypercube, or finite-dimensional space. These curves are not a direct proof that a line has the same number of points as a finite-dimensional space, but they can be used to obtain such a proof.\nCantor also showed that sets with cardinality strictly greater than formula_28 exist (see his generalized diagonal argument and theorem). They include, for instance:\nBoth have cardinality\nThe cardinal equalities formula_44 formula_45 and formula_46 can be demonstrated using cardinal arithmetic:\nUnion and intersection.\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are disjoint sets, then\nFrom this, one can show that in general, the cardinalities of unions and intersections are related by the following equation:\nDefinition of cardinality in class theory (NBG or MK).\nHere formula_53 denote a class of all sets, and formula_54 denotes the class of all ordinal numbers.\nWe use the intersection of a class which is defined by formula_56, therefore formula_57.\nIn this case \nThis definition allows also obtain a cardinality of any proper class formula_59, in particular\nThis definition is natural since it agrees with the axiom of limitation of size which implies bijection between formula_53 and any proper class."}
{"id": "6176", "revid": "34434225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6176", "title": "Cecil B. DeMille", "text": "Cecil Blount DeMille (; August 12, 1881January 21, 1959) was an American filmmaker and actor. Between 1914 and 1958, he made 70 features, both silent and sound films. He is acknowledged as a founding father of American cinema and the most commercially successful producer-director in film history, with many films dominating the box office three or four at a time. His films were distinguished by their epic scale and by his cinematic showmanship. His silent films included social dramas, comedies, Westerns, farces, morality plays, and historical pageants. He was an active Freemason and member of Prince of Orange Lodge #16 in New York City.\nDeMille was born in Ashfield, Massachusetts, where his parents were vacationing for the summer. He grew up in New York City. He began his career as a stage actor in 1900. He later began to write and direct stage plays, a few with his older brother William de Mille, and some with Jesse L. Lasky, who was then a vaudeville producer. \nDeMille's first film, \"The Squaw Man\" (1914), was the first full-length feature film shot in Hollywood. Its interracial love story was commercially successful, and the film marked Hollywood as the new home of the U.S. film industry. It had previously been based in New York and New Jersey. Based on continued film successes, DeMille founded Paramount Pictures with Lasky and Adolph Zukor. His first biblical epic, \"The Ten Commandments\" (1923), was both a critical and commercial success; it held the Paramount revenue record for 25 years.\nDeMille directed \"The King of Kings\" (1927), a biography of Jesus, which gained approval for its sensitivity and reached more than 800\u00a0million viewers. \"The Sign of the Cross\" (1932) is said to be the first sound film to integrate all aspects of cinematic technique. \"Cleopatra\" (1934) was his first film to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. \nAfter more than 30 years in film production, DeMille reached a pinnacle in his career with \"Samson and Delilah\" (1949), a biblical epic that became the highest-grossing film of 1950. Along with biblical and historical narratives, he also directed films oriented toward \"neo-naturalism\", which tried to portray the laws of man fighting the forces of nature.\nDeMille received his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director for his circus drama \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" (1952), which won both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama. His last and best-known film, \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956), also a Best Picture Academy Award nominee, and it is the eighth-highest-grossing film of all time, adjusted for inflation. \nIn addition to his Best Picture Awards, DeMille received an Academy Honorary Award for his film contributions, the Palme d'Or (posthumously) for \"Union Pacific\" (1939), a DGA Award for Lifetime Achievement, and the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award. He was the first recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, which was named in his honor. DeMille's reputation had a renaissance in the 2010s, and his work has influenced numerous other films and directors.\nBiography.\n1881\u20131899: early years.\nCecil Blount DeMille was of paternal Dutch ancestry. His surname was spelled de Mil before his grandfather William added an \"le\" for \"visual symmetry\". \nAs an adult, Cecil De Mille adopted the spelling \"DeMille\" because he believed it would look better on a marquee, but continued to use \"de Mille\" in private life. The family name \"de Mille\" was used by his children Cecilia, John, Richard, and Katherine. Cecil's brother, William, and his daughters, Margaret and Agnes, as well as DeMille's granddaughter, Cecilia de Mille Presley, also used the \"de Mille\" spelling.\nDeMille was born on August 12, 1881, in a boarding house on Main Street in Ashfield, Massachusetts, where his parents had been vacationing for the summer. On September 1, 1881, the family returned with the newborn DeMille to their flat in New York. DeMille was named after his grandmothers Cecelia Wolff and Margarete Blount. He was the second of three children of Henry Churchill de Mille (September 4, 1853 \u2013 February 10, 1893) and his wife, Matilda Beatrice deMille (n\u00e9e Samuel; January 30, 1853 \u2013 October 8, 1923), known as Beatrice. His older brother, William C. deMille, was born on July 25, 1878. \nHenry de Mille, whose ancestors were of English and Dutch-Belgian descent, was a North Carolina-born dramatist, actor, and lay reader in the Episcopal Church. In New York, Henry also taught English at Columbia College (now Columbia University). He worked as a playwright, administrator, and faculty member during the early years of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, established in New York City in 1884. Henry de Mille frequently collaborated with David Belasco in playwriting; their best-known collaborations included \"The Wife\", \"Lord Chumley\", \"The Charity Ball\", and \"Men and Women\".\nCecil B. DeMille's mother, Beatrice, a literary agent and scriptwriter, was the daughter of German Jews. She had emigrated from England with her parents in 1871 when she was 18; the newly arrived family settled in Brooklyn, New York, where they maintained a middle-class, English-speaking household.\nDeMille's parents met as members of a music and literary society in New York. Henry was a tall, red-headed student. Beatrice was intelligent, educated, forthright, and strong-willed. They married on July 1, 1876, despite Beatrice's parents' objections because of the young couple's differing religions; Beatrice converted to Episcopalianism.\nDeMille was a brave and confident child. He gained his love of theater while watching his father and Belasco rehearse their plays. A lasting memory for DeMille was a lunch with his father and actor Edwin Booth. As a child, DeMille created an alter ego, Champion Driver, a Robin Hood-like character, evidence of his creativity and imagination. \nHis father and his family had lived in Washington, North Carolina, until Henry built a three-story Victorian-style house for his family in Pompton Lakes, New Jersey; they named this estate \"Pamlico\". John Philip Sousa was a friend of the family, and DeMille recalled throwing mud balls in the air so neighbor Annie Oakley could practice her shooting. DeMille's sister, Agnes, was born on April 23, 1891; his mother nearly did not survive the birth. Agnes died on February 11, 1894, from spinal meningitis. \nDeMille's parents operated a private school in Pompton Lakes and attended Christ Episcopal Church. DeMille recalled that this church was the place where he visualized the story of his 1923 version of \"The Ten Commandments\".\nOn January 8, 1893, at age 40, Henry de Mille died suddenly from typhoid fever, leaving Beatrice with three children. To provide for her family, she opened the Henry C. de Mille School for Girls in her home in February 1893. The aim of the school was to teach young women to properly understand and fulfill the women's duty to themselves, their home, and their country. Beatrice had \"enthusiastically supported\" Henry's theatrical aspirations. She later became the second female play broker on Broadway. On Henry's deathbed, he told his wife that he did not want his sons to become playwrights. DeMille's mother sent him to Pennsylvania Military College (now Widener University) in Chester, Pennsylvania, at age 15. He fled the school to join the Spanish\u2013American War, but failed to meet the age requirement. At the military college, even though his grades were average, he reportedly excelled in personal conduct. \nDeMille attended the American Academy of Dramatic Arts (tuition-free due to his father's service to the academy). He graduated in 1900, and for graduation, his performance was the play \"The Arcady Trail\". In the audience was Charles Frohman, who cast DeMille in his play \"Hearts are Trumps\", DeMille's Broadway debut.\n1900\u20131912: theater.\nCharles Frohman, Constance Adams, and David Belasco.\nCecil B. DeMille began his career as an actor on stage in 1900 in the theatrical company of Charles Frohman. He debuted on February 21, 1900, in the play \"Hearts Are Trumps\" at New York's Garden Theater. In 1901, DeMille starred in productions of \"A Repentance\", \"To Have and to Hold\", and \"Are You a Mason?\" At age 21, he married Constance Adams on August 16, 1902, at Adams's father's home in East Orange, New Jersey. The wedding party was small. Beatrice DeMille's family did not attend. Simon Louvish suggests that this was to conceal DeMille's Jewish heritage. Adams was 29 years old at the time of the marriage. They had met in a theater in Washington D.C. while they were both acting in \"Hearts Are Trumps\".\nThey were sexually incompatible; according to DeMille, Adams was too \"pure\" to \"feel such violent and evil passions\" as he. DeMille had more violent sexual preferences and fetishes than his wife. Adams allowed DeMille to have several long-term mistresses during their marriage as an outlet while maintaining an appearance of a faithful marriage. One of DeMille's affairs was with his screenwriter Jeanie MacPherson. Despite his reputation for extramarital affairs, DeMille did not like to have affairs with his stars, as he believed it would cause him to lose control as a director. He once said he maintained his self-control when Gloria Swanson sat on his lap, and refused to touch her.\nIn 1902, he played a small part in \"Hamlet\". Publicists wrote that he became an actor in order to learn how to direct and produce, but DeMille admitted that he became an actor in order to pay the bills. From 1904 to 1905, he attempted to make a living as a stock theater actor with his wife, Constance. DeMille made a 1905 reprise in \"Hamlet\" as Osric. In the summer of 1905, DeMille joined the stock cast at the Elitch Theatre in Denver, Colorado. He appeared in 11 of the 15 plays presented that season, all in minor roles. Maude Fealy was the featured actress in several productions that summer and developed a lasting friendship with DeMille. (He later cast her in \"The Ten Commandments\".)\nHis brother, William, was establishing himself as a playwright and sometimes invited DeMille to collaborate. DeMille and William collaborated on \"The Genius\", \"The Royal Mounted\", and \"After Five\". None of these was very successful. William de Mille was most successful when he worked alone. \nDeMille and his brother at times worked with the legendary impresario David Belasco, who had been a friend and collaborator of their father. DeMille later adapted Belasco's \"The Girl of the Golden West\", \"Rose of the Rancho\", and \"The Warrens of Virginia\" into films. He was credited with the conception of Belasco's \"The Return of Peter Grimm\". \"The Return of Peter Grimm\" sparked controversy, because Belasco had taken DeMille's unnamed screenplay, changed the characters, and named it \"The Return of Peter Grimm\", producing and presenting it as his own work. DeMille was credited in small print as \"based on an idea by Cecil DeMille\". The play was successful, and DeMille was distraught that his childhood idol had plagiarized his work.\nLosing interest in theater.\nDeMille performed on stage with actors he later directed in films: Charlotte Walker, Mary Pickford, and Pedro de Cordoba. He also produced and directed plays. His 1905 performance in \"The Prince Chap\" as the Earl of Huntington was well received by audiences. \nDeMille wrote a few of his own plays in between stage performances, but his playwriting was less successful. His first play was \"The Pretender-A Play in a Prologue and 4 Acts\" set in 17th-century Russia. Another unperformed play he wrote was \"Son of the Winds\", a mythological Native American story. Life was difficult for DeMille and his wife as traveling actors, but travel allowed him to experience parts of the United States he had not yet seen. DeMille sometimes worked with the director E. H. Sothern, who influenced DeMille's later perfectionism. In 1907, due to a scandal with one of Beatrice's students, Evelyn Nesbit, the Henry de Mille School lost students. The school closed, and Beatrice filed for bankruptcy. DeMille wrote another play originally called \"Sergeant Devil May Care\" and renamed \"The Royal Mounted\". He also toured with the Standard Opera Company, but there are few records of his singing ability. \nOn November 5, 1908, Constance and DeMille had a daughter, Cecilia, their only biological child. In the 1910s, DeMille began directing and producing other writers' plays.\nDeMille was poor and struggled to find work. Consequently, his mother hired him for her agency, The DeMille Play Company, and taught him how to be an agent and a playwright. He became the agency's manager and later a junior partner with his mother. In 1911, DeMille became acquainted with vaudeville producer Jesse Lasky when Lasky was searching for a writer for his new musical. He initially sought out William deMille. William had been a successful playwright, but DeMille was suffering from the failure of his plays \"The Royal Mounted\" and \"The Genius\". \nBeatrice introduced Lasky to Cecil DeMille instead. The collaboration of DeMille and Lasky produced a successful musical, \"California\", which opened in New York in January 1912. Another DeMille-Lasky production that opened in January 1912 was \"The Antique Girl\". In the spring of 1913, DeMille found success producing \"Reckless Age\" by Lee Wilson, a play about a high-society girl wrongly accused of manslaughter, starring Frederick Burton and Sydney Shields. But changes in the theater rendered DeMille's melodramas obsolete before they were produced, and true theatrical success eluded him. He produced many flops. Having become uninterested in working in theater, DeMille became ignited by passion for film when he watched the 1912 French film \"Les Amours de la reine \u00c9lisabeth\".\n1913\u20131914: entering films.\nDesiring a change of scene, DeMille, Lasky, Sam Goldfish (later Samuel Goldwyn), and a group of East Coast businessmen created the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company in 1913, of which DeMille became director-general. Lasky and DeMille were said to have sketched out the organization of the company on the back of a restaurant menu. As director-general, DeMille's job was to make the films. In addition to directing, he was the supervisor and consultant for the first year of films the company made. Sometimes, he directed scenes for other directors at the company in order to release films on time. Moreover, he co-authored other Lasky Company scripts and created screen adaptations that others directed.\nThe Lasky Play Company tried to recruit William de Mille, but he rejected the offer because he did not believe there was any promise in a film career. When William found out that DeMille had begun working in the motion picture industry, he wrote his brother a letter, saying that he was disappointed that Cecil was willing \"to throw away [his] future\" when he was \"born and raised in the finest traditions of the theater\". \nThe Lasky Company wanted to attract high-class audiences to their films, so it began producing films from literary works. The company bought the rights to Edwin Milton Royle's play \"The Squaw Man\" and cast Dustin Farnum in the lead role. It offered Farnum a choice between a quarter stock in the company or $250 in weekly salary. Farnum chose the salary. Already $15,000 in debt to Royle for the screenplay of \"The Squaw Man\", Lasky's relatives bought the $5,000 stock to save the Lasky Company from bankruptcy. With no knowledge of filmmaking, DeMille was introduced to observe the process at film studios. He was eventually introduced to Oscar Apfel, a stage director who had been a director with the Edison Company.\nOn December 12, 1913, DeMille, his cast, and crew boarded a Southern Pacific train bound for Flagstaff via New Orleans. His tentative plan was to shoot a film in Arizona, but he felt that Arizona lacked the Western look they were searching for. They also learned that other filmmakers were successfully shooting in Los Angeles, even in winter. He continued to Los Angeles. Once there, he chose not to shoot in Edendale, where many studios were, but in Hollywood. DeMille rented a barn to function as their film studio. Filming began on December 29, 1913, and lasted three weeks. Apfel filmed most of \"The Squaw Man\" due to DeMille's inexperience, but DeMille learned quickly and was particularly adept at impromptu screenwriting as necessary. He made his first film run 60 minutes, as long as a short play. \"The Squaw Man\" (1914), co-directed by Apfel, was a sensation, and it established the Lasky Company. It was the first feature-length film made in Hollywood. There were problems with the perforation of the film stock, and it was discovered the DeMille had brought a cheap British film perforator that had punched in 65 holes per foot instead of the industry standard of 64. Lasky and DeMille convinced film pioneer Siegmund Lubin of the Lubin Manufacturing Company to have his experienced technicians reperforate the film \nThis was the first American feature film, according to its release date. D. W. Griffith's \"Judith of Bethulia\" was filmed earlier than \"The Squaw Man\", but released later. This as the only film in which DeMille shared director's credit with Apfel.\n\"The Squaw Man\" was a success, which led to the eventual founding of Paramount Pictures and Hollywood becoming the \"film capital of the world\". The film grossed more than ten times its budget after its New York premiere in February 1914. DeMille's next project was to aid Apfel in directing \"Brewster's Millions\", which was wildly successful. In December 1914, Constance Adams brought home John DeMille, a 15-month-old boy, whom the couple legally adopted three years later. Biographer Scott Eyman suggested that she may have decided to adopt after recently having had a miscarriage.\n1915\u20131928: silent era.\nWesterns, Paradise, and World War I.\nCecil B. DeMille's second film, credited exclusively to him, was \"The Virginian\". It is the earliest of DeMille's films available in a quality, color-tinted video format, but that version is actually a 1918 rerelease. The Lasky Company's first few years were spent making films nonstop. DeMille directed 20 films by 1915. The most successful films during this period were \"Brewster's Millions\" (co-directed by DeMille), \"Rose of the Rancho\", and \"The Ghost Breaker\". DeMille adapted Belasco's dramatic lighting techniques to film technology, mimicking moonlight with U.S. cinema's first attempts at \"motivated lighting\" in \"The Warrens of Virginia\". This was the first of a few film collaborations with his brother William. They struggled to adapt the play from the stage to the set. After the film was shown, viewers complained that the shadows and lighting prevented the audience from seeing the actors' full faces and said they would pay only half price. Sam Goldwyn suggested that if they called it \"Rembrandt\" lighting, the audience would pay double the price. Additionally, because of DeMille's cordiality after the \"Peter Grimm\" incident, DeMille was able to rekindle his partnership with Belasco. He adapted several of Belasco's screenplays into film.\nDeMille's most successful film was \"The Cheat\"; his direction in the film was acclaimed. In 1916, exhausted from three years of nonstop filmmaking, DeMille purchased land in the Angeles National Forest for a ranch that would become his getaway. He called this place \"Paradise\", declaring it a wildlife sanctuary; no shooting of animals besides snakes was allowed. His wife did not like Paradise, so DeMille often brought his mistresses there with him, including actress Julia Faye. In 1921, DeMille purchased a yacht he called \"The Seaward\".\nWhile filming \"The Captive\" in 1915, an extra, Bob Fleming, died on set when another extra failed to heed DeMille's orders to unload all guns for rehearsal. DeMille instructed the guilty man to leave town and never revealed his name. Lasky and DeMille maintained Fleming's widow on the payroll and, according to leading actor House Peters Sr., DeMille refused to stop production for Fleming's funeral. Peters said that he encouraged the cast to attend the funeral with him anyway since DeMille would not be able to shoot the film without him. On July 19, 1916, the Jesse Lasky Feature Play Company merged with Adolph Zukor's Famous Players Film Company, becoming Famous Players\u2013Lasky. Zukor became president, Lasky vice president, DeMille director-general, and Goldwyn chairman of the board. Famous Players\u2013Lasky later fired Goldwyn for frequent clashes with Lasky, DeMille, and Zukor. While on a European vacation in 1921, DeMille contracted rheumatic fever in Paris. He was confined to bed and unable to eat. His poor physical condition upon his return home affected the production of his 1922 film \"Manslaughter\". According to Richard Birchard, DeMille's weakened state during production may have led to the film being received as uncharacteristically substandard.\nDuring World War I, the Famous Players\u2013Lasky organized a military company underneath the National Guard, the Home Guard, made up of film studio employees, with DeMille as captain. Eventually, the Guard was enlarged to a battalion and recruited soldiers from other film studios. They took time off weekly to practice military drills. Additionally, during the war, DeMille volunteered for the Justice Department's Intelligence Office, investigating friends, neighbors, and others he came in contact with in connection with the Famous Players\u2013Lasky. He also volunteered for the Intelligence Office during World War II. DeMille considered enlisting in World War I, but stayed in the U.S. and made films. He did take a few months to set up a movie theater for the French front. Famous Players\u2013Lasky donated the films. DeMille and Adams adopted Katherine Lester in 1920, whom Adams had found in the orphanage she directed. In 1922, the couple adopted Richard deMille.\nScandalous dramas, Biblical epics, and departure from Paramount.\nFilm started becoming more sophisticated and the Lasky company's subsequent films were criticized for primitive and unrealistic set design. Consequently, Beatrice deMille introduced the Famous Players\u2013Lasky to Wilfred Buckland, whom DeMille knew from his time at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, and he became DeMille's art director. William deMille reluctantly became a story editor. William later converted from theater to Hollywood and spent the rest of his career as a film director. DeMille frequently remade his own films. In 1917, he remade \"The Squaw Man\" (1918), only four years after the original. Despite its quick turnaround, the film was fairly successful. DeMille's second remake at MGM in 1931 was a failure.\nAfter five years and 30 hit films, DeMille became the American film industry's most successful director. In the silent era, he was renowned for \"Male and Female\" (1919), \"Manslaughter\" (1922), \"The Volga Boatman\" (1926), and \"The Godless Girl\" (1928). His trademark scenes included bathtubs, lion attacks, and Roman orgies. Many of his films featured scenes in two-color Technicolor. In 1923, DeMille released the modern melodrama \"The Ten Commandments\", a significant change from his previous irreligious films. The film was produced on a budget of $600,000, Paramount's most expensive production. This concerned Paramount executives, but the film was the studio's highest-grossing film. It held the Paramount record for 25 years until DeMille broke the record again.\nIn the early 1920s, scandal surrounded Paramount; religious groups and the media opposed portrayals of immorality in films. A censorship board called the Hays Code was established. DeMille's film \"The Affairs of Anatol\" came under fire. Furthermore, DeMille argued with Zukor over his extravagant and over-budget production costs. Consequently, DeMille left Paramount in 1924 despite having helped establish it. He joined the Producers Distributing Corporation. His first film in the new production company, DeMille Pictures Corporation, was \"The Road to Yesterday\" in 1925. He directed and produced four films on his own, working with Producers Distributing Corporation because he found front office supervision too restricting. Aside from \"The King of Kings,\" none of DeMille's films away from Paramount were successful. \"The King of Kings\" established DeMille as \"master of the grandiose and of biblical sagas\". Considered at the time the most successful Christian film of the silent era, DeMille calculated that it had been viewed over 800 million times around the world. After the release of DeMille's \"The Godless Girl\", silent films in America became obsolete, and DeMille was forced to shoot a shoddy final reel with the new sound production technique. Although this final reel looked so different from the first 11 reels that it appeared to be from another movie, according to Simon Louvish, the film is one of DeMille's strangest and most \"DeMillean\" film.\nThe immense popularity of DeMille's silent films enabled him to branch out into other areas. The Roaring Twenties were the boom years and DeMille took full advantage, opening the Mercury Aviation Company, one of America's first commercial airlines. He was also a real estate speculator, an underwriter of political campaigns, vice president of Bank of America, and vice president of the Commercial National Trust and Savings Bank in Los Angeles, where he approved loans for other filmmakers. In 1916, DeMille purchased a mansion in Hollywood. Charlie Chaplin lived next door for a time, and after he moved, DeMille purchased the other house and combined the estates.\n1929\u20131956: sound era.\nMGM and return to Paramount.\nWhen \"talking pictures\" were invented in 1928, DeMille made a successful transition, offering his own innovations to the painful process; he devised a microphone boom and a soundproof camera blimp. He also popularized the camera crane. His first three sound films, \"Dynamite\", \"Madame Satan\", and his 1931 remake of \"The Squaw Man\", were produced at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. These films were critically and financially unsuccessful. He had completely adapted to the production of sound film despite the film's poor dialogue. After his contract ended at MGM, he left, but no production studios would hire him. He attempted to create a guild of a half a dozen directors with the same creative desires called the Director's Guild, but the idea failed due to lack of funding and commitment. Moreover, the Internal Revenue Service audited DeMille due to issues with his production company. This was, according to DeMille, the lowest point of his career. He traveled abroad to find employment until he was offered a deal at Paramount.\nIn 1932, DeMille returned to Paramount at Lasky's request, bringing with him his own production unit. His first film back at Paramount, \"The Sign of the Cross\", was also his first success since leaving Paramount besides \"The King of Kings\". Zukor approved DeMille's return on the condition that DeMille not exceed his production budget of $650,000 for \"The Sign of the Cross\". Produced in eight weeks without exceeding budget, the film was financially successful. \"The Sign of the Cross\" was the first film to integrate all cinematic techniques. The film was considered a \"masterpiece\" and surpassed the quality of other sound films of the time. DeMille followed this epic with two dramas released in 1933 and 1934, \"This Day and Age\" and \"Four Frightened People\". These were box-office disappointments, though \"Four Frightened People\" received good reviews. DeMille stuck to large-budget spectaculars for the rest of his career.\nPolitics and \"Lux Radio Theatre\".\nDeMille was outspoken about his Episcopalian integrity, but his private life included mistresses and adultery. He was a conservative Republican activist, becoming more conservative as he aged. He was known as anti-union and worked to prevent the unionization of film production studios. But according to DeMille himself, he was not anti-union and belonged to a few unions. He said he was rather against union leaders such as Walter Reuther and Harry Bridges, whom he compared to dictators. He supported Herbert Hoover and in 1928 made his largest campaign donation to Hoover. But DeMille also liked Franklin D. Roosevelt, finding him charismatic, tenacious, and intelligent, and agreeing with Roosevelt's abhorrence of Prohibition. DeMille lent Roosevelt a car for his 1932 United States presidential election campaign and voted for him. He never again voted for a Democratic candidate in a presidential election.\nFrom June 1, 1936, until January 22, 1945, DeMille hosted and directed \"Lux Radio Theatre\", a weekly digest of current feature films. Broadcast on the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) from 1935 to 1954, \"Lux Radio\" was one of the most popular weekly shows in radio history. While DeMille was host, the show had 40 million weekly listeners and DeMille had an annual salary of $100,000. From 1936 to 1945, he produced, hosted, and directed every show, with the occasional exception of a guest director. He resigned from \"Lux Radio\" because he refused to pay a dollar to the American Federation of Radio Artists (AFRA), on the principle that no organization had the right to \"levy a compulsory assessment upon any member\".\nDeMille sued the union for reinstatement but lost. He appealed to the California Supreme Court and lost again. When the AFRA expanded to television, DeMille was banned from television appearances. Consequently, he formed the DeMille Foundation for Political Freedom to campaign for the right to work. He gave speeches across the nation for the next few years. DeMille's primary criticism was of closed shops, but later included criticism of communism and unions in general. The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review his case, but DeMille lobbied for the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, which passed. It prohibited denying anyone the right to work if they refuse to pay a political assessment. But the law did not apply retroactively, so DeMille's television and radio appearance ban lasted the rest of his life, though he was permitted to appear on radio or television to publicize a movie. William Keighley replaced him. DeMille never worked in radio again. \nAdventure films and dramatic spectacles.\nIn 1939, DeMille's \"Union Pacific\" was successful through DeMille's collaboration with the Union Pacific Railroad. The Union Pacific gave DeMille access to historical data, early period trains, and expert crews, adding to the film's authenticity. During pre-production, DeMille was dealing with his first serious health issue. In March 1938, he underwent a major emergency prostatectomy. He had a post-surgery infection from which he nearly did not recover, citing streptomycin as his saving grace. The surgery caused him to suffer from sexual dysfunction for the rest of his life, according to some family members. After his surgery and the success of \"Union Pacific\", DeMille first used three-strip Technicolor in 1940, in \"North West Mounted Police\". DeMille wanted to film in Canada, but due to budget constraints, the film was instead shot in Oregon and Hollywood. Critics were impressed with the visuals but found the scripts dull, calling it DeMille's \"poorest Western\". Despite the criticism, it was Paramount's highest-grossing film of the year. Audiences liked its highly saturated color, so DeMille made no further black-and-white features. DeMille was anti-communist and abandoned a project in 1940 to film Ernest Hemingway's \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" due to its communist themes, even though he had already paid $100,000 for the rights to the novel. He was so eager to produce the film that he hadn't yet read it. He claimed he abandoned the project in order to complete a different project, but it was actually to preserve his reputation and avoid appearing reactionary. While concurrently filmmaking, he served during World War II at age 60 as his neighborhood air-raid warden.\nIn 1942, DeMille worked with Jeanie MacPherson and William deMille to produce a film, \"Queen of Queens\", that was intended to be about Mary, mother of Jesus. After reading the screenplay, Daniel A. Lord warned DeMille that Catholics would find the film too irreverent while non-Catholics would consider it Catholic propaganda. Consequently, the film was never made. MacPherson worked as a scriptwriter on many of DeMille's films. In 1938, DeMille supervised the film compilation \"Land of Liberty\" as the American film industry's contribution to the 1939 New York World's Fair. He used clips from his own films in it. \"Land of Liberty\" was not high-grossing, but it was well-received, and DeMille was asked to shorten its running time to allow for more showings per day. MGM distributed the film in 1941 and donated profits to World War II relief charities.\nIn 1942, DeMille released Paramount's most successful film, \"Reap the Wild Wind\". It had a large budget and many special effects, including an electronically operated giant squid. After working on it, DeMille was the master of ceremonies at a rally organized by David O. Selznick in the Los Angeles Coliseum in support of the Dewey\u2013Bricker presidential ticket as well as Governor Earl Warren of California. DeMille's 1947 film \"Unconquered\" had the longest running time (146 minutes), longest filming schedule (102 days), and largest budget ($5\u00a0million). Its sets and effects were so realistic that 30 extras needed to be hospitalized due to a scene with fireballs and flaming arrows. It was commercially very successful.\nDeMille's next film, \"Samson and Delilah\" (1949), was Paramount's highest-grossing film up to that time. A Biblical epic with sex, it was a characteristically DeMille film. 1952's \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" became Paramount's highest-grossing film to that point and won the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Academy Award for Best Story. It began production in 1949. Ringling Brothers-Barnum and Bailey were paid $250,000 for use of the title and facilities. DeMille toured with the circus while helping write the script. Noisy and bright, the film was not well-liked by critics but was an audience favorite. In 1953, DeMille signed a contract with Prentice Hall to publish an autobiography. He reminisced into a voice recorder, the recording was transcribed, and the information was organized by topic. Art Arthur also interviewed people for the autobiography. DeMille did not like the biography's first draft, saying he thought the person portrayed in it was an egotistical \"SOB\". In the early 1950s, Allen Dulles and Frank Wisner recruited DeMille to serve on the board of the anti-communist National Committee for a Free Europe, the public face of the organization that oversaw Radio Free Europe. In 1954, Secretary of the Air Force Harold E. Talbott asked DeMille for help designing the cadet uniforms at the newly established United States Air Force Academy. DeMille's designs, most notably that of the cadet parade uniform, were praised by Air Force and Academy leadership, adopted, and still worn.\nFinal works and unrealized projects.\nIn 1952, DeMille sought approval for a lavish remake of his 1923 silent film \"The Ten Commandments\". He went before the Paramount board of directors, which was mostly Jewish-American. The board rejected his proposal, even though his last two films, \"Samson and Delilah\" and \"The Greatest Show on Earth\", had been record-breaking hits. Adolph Zukor convinced the board to change its mind on the grounds of morality. DeMille did not have an exact budget proposal for the project, and it promised to be the most costly in U.S. film history. Still, the board unanimously approved it. \"The Ten Commandments\", released in 1956, was DeMille's final film. It was the longest (3 hours, 39 minutes) and most expensive ($13\u00a0million) film in Paramount history. Production began in October 1954. The Exodus scene was filmed on-site in Egypt with four Technicolor-VistaVision cameras filming 12,000 people. Filming continued in 1955 in Paris and Hollywood on 30 different sound stages. They even expanded to RKO sound studios for filming. Post-production lasted a year, and the film premiered in Salt Lake City. Nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture, it grossed over $80\u00a0million, which surpassed the gross of \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" and every other film in history except \"Gone with the Wind\". DeMille offered ten percent of his profit to the crew, a unique practice at the time.\nOn November 7, 1954, while in Egypt filming the Exodus sequence for \"The Ten Commandments\", DeMille (who was 73) climbed a ladder to the top of the set and had a serious heart attack. Despite the urging of his associate producer, DeMille wanted to return to the set right away. He developed a plan with his doctor to allow him to continue directing while reducing his physical stress. DeMille completed the film, but his health was diminished by several more heart attacks. His daughter Cecilia took over as director as DeMille sat behind the camera with Loyal Griggs as the cinematographer. This film was his last. \nDue to his frequent heart attacks, DeMille asked his son-in-law, actor Anthony Quinn, to direct a remake of his 1938 film \"The Buccaneer\". DeMille served as executive producer, overseeing producer Henry Wilcoxon. Despite a cast led by Charlton Heston and Yul Brynner, the 1958 film \"The Buccaneer\" was a disappointment. DeMille attended its Santa Barbara premiere in December 1958. He was unable to attend its Los Angeles premiere. In the months before his death, DeMille was researching a film biography of Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of the Scout Movement. DeMille asked David Niven to star in the film, but it was never made. DeMille also was planning a film about the space race and a biblical epic based on the Book of Revelation. His autobiography was mostly complete when he died, and was published in November 1959.\nDeath.\nDeMille suffered a series of heart attacks from June 1958 to January 1959, and died on January 21, 1959, following an attack. His funeral was held on January 23 at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church. He was entombed at the Hollywood Memorial Cemetery (now known as Hollywood Forever). After his death, news outlets such as \"The New York Times\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", and \"The Guardian\" called DeMille a \"pioneer of movies\", \"the greatest creator and showman of our industry\", and \"the founder of Hollywood\". DeMille left his multi-million dollar estate in Los Feliz, Los Angeles, in Laughlin Park to his daughter Cecilia because his wife had dementia and was unable to care for an estate. She died a year later. His personal will drew a line between Cecilia and his three adopted children, with Cecilia receiving a majority of DeMille's inheritance and estate. The other three children were surprised by this, as DeMille had not treated them differently in life. Cecilia lived in the house until her death in 1984. The house was auctioned by his granddaughter Cecilia DeMille Presley, who also lived there in the late 1980s.\nFilmmaking.\nInfluences.\nDeMille believed his first influences to be his parents, Henry and Beatrice DeMille. His playwright father introduced him to the theater at a young age. Henry was heavily influenced by the work of Charles Kingsley, whose ideas trickled down to DeMille. DeMille noted that his mother had a \"high sense of the dramatic\" and was determined to continue the artistic legacy of her husband after he died. Beatrice became a play broker and author's agent, influencing DeMille's early life and career. DeMille's father worked with David Belasco who was a theatrical producer, impresario, and playwright. Belasco was known for adding realistic elements in his plays such as real flowers, food, and aromas that could transport his audiences into the scenes. While working in theatre, DeMille used real fruit trees in his play \"California\", as influenced by Belasco. Similar to Belasco, DeMille's theatre revolved around entertainment rather than artistry. Generally, Belasco's influence of DeMille's career can be seen in DeMille's showmanship and narration. E. H. Sothern's early influence on DeMille's work can be seen in DeMille's perfectionism. DeMille recalled that one of the most influential plays he saw was \"Hamlet\", directed by Sothern.\nMethod.\nDeMille's filmmaking process always began with extensive research. Next, he would work with writers to develop the story that he was envisioning. Then, he would help writers construct a script. Finally, he would leave the script with artists and allow them to create artistic depictions and renderings of each scene. Plot and dialogue were not a strong point of DeMille's films. Consequently, he focused his efforts on his films' visuals. He worked with visual technicians, editors, art directors, costume designers, cinematographers, and set carpenters in order to perfect the visual aspects of his films. With his editor, Anne Bauchens, DeMille used editing techniques to allow the visual images to bring the plot to climax rather than dialogue. DeMille had large and frequent office conferences to discuss and examine all aspects of the working film including story-boards, props, and special effects.\nDeMille rarely gave direction to actors; he preferred to \"office-direct\", where he would work with actors in his office, going over characters and reading through scripts. Any problems on the set were often fixed by writers in the office rather than on the set. DeMille did not believe a large movie set was the place to discuss minor character or line issues. DeMille was particularly adept at directing and managing large crowds in his films. Martin Scorsese recalled that DeMille had the skill to maintain control of not only the lead actors in a frame but the many extras in the frame as well. DeMille was adept at directing \"thousands of extras\", and many of his pictures include spectacular set pieces: the toppling of the pagan temple in \"Samson and Delilah\"; train wrecks in \"The Road to Yesterday\", \"Union Pacific\" and \"The Greatest Show on Earth\"; the destruction of an airship in \"Madam Satan\"; and the parting of the Red Sea in both versions of \"The Ten Commandments\".\nIn his early films, DeMille experimented with photographic light and shade, which created dramatic shadows instead of glare. His specific use of lighting, influenced by his mentor David Belasco, was for the purpose of creating \"striking images\" and heightening \"dramatic situations\". DeMille was unique in using this technique. In addition to his use of volatile and abrupt film editing, his lighting and composition were innovative for the time period as filmmakers were primarily concerned with a clear, realistic image. Another important aspect of DeMille's editing technique was to put the film away for a week or two after an initial edit in order to re-edit the picture with a fresh mind. This allowed for the rapid production of his films in the early years of the Lasky Company. The cuts were sometimes rough, but the movies were always interesting.\nDeMille often edited in a manner that favored psychological space rather than physical space through his cuts. In this way, the characters' thoughts and desires are the visual focus rather than the circumstances regarding the physical scene. As DeMille's career progressed, he increasingly relied on artist Dan Sayre Groesbeck's concept, costume, and storyboard art. Groesbeck's art was circulated on set to give actors and crew members a better understanding of DeMille's vision. His art was even shown at Paramount meetings when pitching new films. DeMille adored the art of Groesbeck, even hanging it above his fireplace, but film staff found it difficult to convert his art into three-dimensional sets. As DeMille continued to rely on Groesbeck, the nervous energy of his early films transformed into more steady compositions of his later films. While visually appealing, this made the films appear more old-fashioned.\nComposer Elmer Bernstein described DeMille as \"sparing no effort\" when filmmaking. Bernstein recalled that DeMille would scream, yell, or flatter\u2014whatever it took to achieve the perfection he required in his films. DeMille was painstakingly attentive to details on set and was as critical of himself as he was of his crew. Costume designer Dorothy Jeakins, who worked with DeMille on \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956), said that he was skilled in humiliating people. Jeakins admitted that she received quality training from him, but that it was necessary to become a perfectionist on a DeMille set to avoid being fired. DeMille had an authoritarian persona on set; he required absolute attention from the cast and crew. He had a band of assistants who catered to his needs. He would speak to the entire set, sometimes enormous with countless numbers of crew members and extras, via a microphone to maintain control of the set. He was disliked by many inside and outside of the film industry for his cold and controlling reputation.\nDeMille was known for autocratic behavior on the set, singling out and berating extras who were not paying attention. Many of these displays were thought to be staged, however, as an exercise in discipline. He despised actors who were unwilling to take physical risks, especially when he had first demonstrated that the required stunt would not harm them. This occurred with Victor Mature in \"Samson and Delilah\". Mature refused to wrestle Jackie the Lion, even though DeMille had just tussled with the lion, proving that he was tame. DeMille told the actor that he was \"one hundred percent yellow\". Paulette Goddard's refusal to risk personal injury in a scene involving fire in \"Unconquered\" cost her DeMille's favor and a role in \"The Greatest Show on Earth\". DeMille did receive help in his films, notably from Alvin Wyckoff, who shot forty-three of DeMille's films; brother William deMille who would occasionally serve as his screenwriter; and Jeanie Macpherson, who served as DeMille's exclusive screenwriter for fifteen years; and Eddie Salven, DeMille's favorite assistant director.\nDeMille made stars of unknown actors: Gloria Swanson, Bebe Daniels, Rod La Rocque, William Boyd, Claudette Colbert, and Charlton Heston. He also cast established stars such as Gary Cooper, Robert Preston, Paulette Goddard and Fredric March in multiple pictures. DeMille cast some of his performers repeatedly, including Henry Wilcoxon, Julia Faye, Joseph Schildkraut, Ian Keith, Charles Bickford, Theodore Roberts, Akim Tamiroff, and William Boyd. DeMille was credited by actor Edward G. Robinson with saving his career following his eclipse in the Hollywood blacklist.\nStyle and themes.\nCecil B. DeMille's film production career evolved from critically significant silent films to financially significant sound films. He began his career with reserved yet brilliant melodramas; from there, his style developed into marital comedies with outrageously melodramatic plots. In order to attract a high-class audience, DeMille based many of his early films on stage melodramas, novels, and short stories. He began the production of epics earlier in his career until they began to solidify his career in the 1920s. By 1930, DeMille had perfected his film style of mass-interest spectacle films with Western, Roman, or Biblical themes. DeMille was often criticized for making his spectacles too colorful and for being too occupied with entertaining the audience rather than accessing the artistic and auteur possibilities that film could provide. However, others interpreted DeMille's work as visually impressive, thrilling, and nostalgic. Along the same lines, critics of DeMille often qualify him by his later spectacles and fail to consider several decades of ingenuity and energy that defined him during his generation. Throughout his career, he did not alter his films to better adhere to contemporary or popular styles. Actor Charlton Heston admitted DeMille was, \"terribly unfashionable\" and Sidney Lumet called DeMille, \"the cheap version of D.W. Griffith\", adding that DeMille, \"[didn't have]...an original thought in his head\", though Heston added that DeMille was much more than that.\nAccording to Scott Eyman, DeMille's films were at the same time masculine and feminine due to his thematic adventurousness and his eye for the extravagant. DeMille's distinctive style can be seen through camera and lighting effects as early as \"The Squaw Man\" with the use of daydream images; moonlight and sunset on a mountain; and side-lighting through a tent flap. In the early age of cinema, DeMille differentiated the Lasky Company from other production companies due to the use of dramatic, low-key lighting they called \"Lasky lighting\" and marketed as \"Rembrandt lighting\" to appeal to the public. DeMille achieved international recognition for his unique use of lighting and color tint in his film \"The Cheat\". DeMille's 1956 version of \"The Ten Commandments\", according to director Martin Scorsese, is renowned for its level of production and the care and detail that went into creating the film. He stated that \"The Ten Commandments\" was the final culmination of DeMille's style.\nDeMille was interested in art and his favorite artist was Gustave Dor\u00e9; DeMille based some of his most well-known scenes on the work of Dor\u00e9. DeMille was the first director to connect art to filmmaking; he created the title of \"art director\" on the film set. DeMille was also known for his use of special effects without the use of digital technology. Notably, DeMille had cinematographer John P. Fulton create the parting of the Red Sea scene in his 1956 film \"The Ten Commandments\", which was one of the most expensive special effects in film history, and has been called by Steven Spielberg \"the greatest special effect in film history\". The actual parting of the sea was created by releasing 360,000 gallons of water into a huge water tank split by a U-shaped trough, overlaying it with a film of a giant waterfall that was built on the Paramount backlot, and playing the clip backward.\nAside from his Biblical and historical epics, which are concerned with how man relates to God, some of DeMille's films contained themes of \"neo-naturalism\", which portray the conflict between the laws of man and the laws of nature. Although he is known for his later \"spectacular\" films, his early films are held in high regard by critics and film historians. DeMille discovered the possibilities of the \"bathroom\" or \"boudoir\" in the film without being \"vulgar\" or \"cheap\". DeMille's films \"Male and Female\", \"Why Change Your Wife?\", and \"The Affairs of Anatol\" can be retrospectively described as high camp and are categorized as \"early DeMille films\" due to their particular style of production and costume and set design. However, his earlier films \"The Captive\", \"Kindling\", \"Carmen\", and \"The Whispering Chorus\" are more serious films. It is difficult to typify DeMille's films into one specific genre. His first three films were Westerns, and he filmed many Westerns throughout his career. However, throughout his career, he filmed comedies, periodic and contemporary romances, dramas, fantasies, propaganda, Biblical spectacles, musical comedies, suspense, and war films. At least one DeMille film can represent each film genre. DeMille produced the majority of his films before the 1930s, and by the time sound films were invented, film critics saw DeMille as antiquated, with his best filmmaking years behind him.\nDeMille's films contained many similar themes throughout his career. However, the films of his silent era were often thematically different from the films of his sound era. His silent-era films often included the \"battle of the sexes\" theme due to the era of women's suffrage and the enlarging role of women in society. Moreover, before his religious-themed films, many of his silent era films revolved around \"husband-and-wife-divorce-and-remarry satires\", considerably more adult-themed. According to Simon Louvish, these films reflected DeMille's inner thoughts and opinions about marriage and human sexuality. Religion was a theme that DeMille returned to throughout his career. Of his seventy films, five revolved around stories of the Bible and the New Testament; however many others, while not direct retellings of Biblical stories, had themes of faith and religious fanaticism in films such as \"The Crusades\" and \"The Road to Yesterday\". Western and frontier American were also themes that DeMille returned to throughout his career. His first several films were Westerns, and he produced a chain of westerns during the sound era. Instead of portraying the danger and anarchy of the West, he portrayed the opportunity and redemption found in Western America. Another common theme in DeMille's films is the reversal of fortune and the portrayal of the rich and the poor, including the war of the classes and man versus society conflicts such as in \"The Golden Chance\" and \"The Cheat\". In relation to his own interests and sexual preferences, sadomasochism was a minor theme present in some of his films. Another minor characteristic of DeMille's films include train crashes, which can be found in several of his films.\nLegacy.\nKnown as the father of the Hollywood motion picture industry, Cecil B. DeMille made 70 films including several box-office hits. DeMille is one of the more commercially successful film directors in history, with his films before the release of \"The Ten Commandments\" estimated to have grossed $650\u00a0 million worldwide. Adjusted for inflation, DeMille's remake of \"The Ten Commandments\" is the eighth highest-grossing film in the world.\nAccording to Sam Goldwyn, critics did not like DeMille's films, but the audiences did, and \"they have the final word\". Similarly, scholar David Blanke, argued that DeMille had lost the respect of his colleagues and film critics by his late film career. However, his final films maintained that DeMille was still respected by his audiences. Five of DeMille's films were the highest-grossing films at the year of their release, with only Spielberg topping him with six of his films as the highest-grossing films of the year. DeMille's highest-grossing films include: \"The Sign of the Cross\" (1932), \"Unconquered\" (1947), \"Samson and Delilah\" (1949), \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" (1952), and \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956). Director Ridley Scott has been called \"the Cecil B. DeMille of the digital era\" due to his classical and medieval epics.\nDespite his box-office success, awards, and artistic achievements, DeMille has been dismissed and ignored by critics both during his life and posthumously. He was consistently criticized for producing shallow films without talent or artistic care. Compared to other directors, few film scholars have taken the time to academically analyze his films and style. During the French New Wave, critics began to categorize certain filmmakers as auteurs such as Howard Hawks, John Ford, and Raoul Walsh. DeMille was omitted from the list, thought to be too unsophisticated and antiquated to be considered an auteur. However, Simon Louvish wrote \"he was the complete master and auteur of his films\", and Anton Kozlovic called him the \"unsung American auteur\". Andrew Sarris, a leading proponent of the auteur theory, ranked DeMille highly as an auteur in the \"Far Side of Paradise\", just below the \"Pantheon\". Sarris added that despite the influence of the styles of contemporary directors throughout his career, DeMille's style remained unchanged. Robert Birchard wrote that one could argue the auteurship of DeMille on the basis that DeMille's thematic and visual style remained consistent throughout his career. However, Birchard acknowledged that Sarris's point was more likely that DeMille's style was behind the development of film as an art form. Meanwhile, Sumiko Higashi sees DeMille as \"not only a figure who was shaped and influenced by the forces of his era but as a filmmaker who left his own signature on the culture industry.\" The critic Camille Paglia has called \"The Ten Commandments\" one of the ten greatest films of all time.\nDeMille was one of the first directors to become a celebrity in his own right. He cultivated the image of the omnipotent director, complete with megaphone, riding crop, and jodhpurs. He was known for his unique working wardrobe, which included riding boots, riding pants, and soft, open necked shirts. Joseph Henabery recalled that DeMille looked like \"a king on a throne surrounded by his court\" while directing films on a camera platform.\nDeMille was liked by some of his fellow directors and disliked by others, though his actual films were usually dismissed by his peers as a vapid spectacle. Director John Huston intensely disliked both DeMille and his films. \"He was a thoroughly bad director\", Huston said. \"A dreadful showoff. Terrible. To diseased proportions.\" Said fellow director William Wellman: \"Directorially, I think his pictures were the most horrible things I've ever seen in my life. But he put on pictures that made a fortune. In that respect, he was better than any of us.\" Producer David O. Selznick wrote: \"There has appeared only one Cecil B. DeMille. He is one of the most extraordinarily able showmen of modern times. However much I may dislike some of his pictures, it would be very silly of me, as a producer of commercial motion pictures, to demean for an instant his unparalleled skill as a maker of mass entertainment.\" Salvador Dal\u00ed wrote that DeMille, Walt Disney, and the Marx Brothers were \"the three great American Surrealists\". DeMille appeared as himself in numerous films, including the MGM comedy \"Free and Easy\". He often appeared in his coming-attraction trailers and narrated many of his later films, even stepping on screen to introduce \"The Ten Commandments\". DeMille was immortalized in Billy Wilder's \"Sunset Boulevard\" when Gloria Swanson spoke the line: \"All right, Mr. DeMille. I'm ready for my close-up.\" DeMille plays himself in the film. DeMille's reputation had a renaissance in the 2010s.\nAs a filmmaker, DeMille was the aesthetic inspiration of many directors and films due to his early influence during the crucial development of the film industry. DeMille's early silent comedies influenced the comedies of Ernst Lubitsch and Charlie Chaplin's \"A Woman of Paris\". Additionally, DeMille's epics such as \"The Crusades\" influenced Sergei Eisenstein's \"Alexander Nevsky\". Moreover, DeMille's epics inspired directors such as Howard Hawks, Nicholas Ray, Joseph L. Mankiewicz, and George Stevens to try producing epics. Cecil B. DeMille has influenced the work of several well-known directors. Alfred Hitchcock cited DeMille's 1921 film \"Forbidden Fruit\" as an influence of his work and one of his top ten favorite films. DeMille has influenced the careers of many modern directors. Martin Scorsese cited \"Unconquered\", \"Samson and Delilah\", and \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" as DeMille films that have imparted lasting memories on him. Scorsese said he had viewed \"The Ten Commandments\" forty or fifty times. Famed director Steven Spielberg stated that DeMille's \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" was one of the films that influenced him to become a filmmaker. Furthermore, DeMille influenced about half of Spielberg's films, including \"War of the Worlds\". \"The Ten Commandments\" inspired DreamWorks Animation's later film about Moses, \"The Prince of Egypt\". As one of the establishing members of Paramount Pictures and co-founder of Hollywood, DeMille had a role in the development of the film industry. Consequently, the name \"DeMille\" has become synonymous with filmmaking.\nPublicly Episcopalian, DeMille drew on his Christian and Jewish ancestors to convey a message of tolerance. DeMille received more than a dozen awards from Christian and Jewish religious and cultural groups, including B'nai B'rith. However, not everyone received DeMille's religious films favorably. DeMille was accused of antisemitism after the release of \"The King of Kings\", and director John Ford despised DeMille for what he saw as \"hollow\" biblical epics meant to promote DeMille's reputation during the politically turbulent 1950s. In response to the claims, DeMille donated some of the profits from \"The King of Kings\" to charity. In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, both DeMille's \"Samson and Delilah\" and 1923 version of \"The Ten Commandments\" received votes, but did not make the top 100 films. Although many of DeMille's films are available on DVD and Blu-ray release, only 20 of his silent films are commercially available on DVD \nCommemoration and tributes.\nThe original Lasky-DeMille Barn in which \"The Squaw Man\" was filmed was converted into a museum named the \"Hollywood Heritage Museum\". It opened on December 13, 1985, and features some of DeMille's personal artifacts. The Lasky-DeMille Barn was dedicated as a California historical landmark in a ceremony on December 27, 1956; DeMille was the keynote speaker. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2014. The Dunes Center in Guadalupe, California, contains an exhibition of artifacts uncovered in the desert near Guadalupe from DeMille's set of his 1923 version of \"The Ten Commandments\", known as the \"Lost City of Cecil B. DeMille\". Donated by the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation in 2004, the moving image collection of Cecil B. DeMille is held at the Academy Film Archive and includes home movies, outtakes, and never-before-seen test footage.\nIn summer 2019, The Friends of the Pompton Lakes Library hosted a Cecil B DeMille film festival to celebrate DeMille's achievements and connection to Pompton Lakes. They screened four of his films at Christ Church, where DeMille and his family attended church when they lived there. Two schools have been named after him: Cecil B. DeMille Middle School, in Long Beach, California, which was closed and demolished in 2010 to make way for a new high school; and Cecil B. DeMille Elementary School in Midway City, California. The former film building at Chapman University in Orange, California, is named in honor of DeMille. During the Apollo 11 mission, Buzz Aldrin referred to himself in one instance as \"Cecil B. DeAldrin\", as a humorous nod to DeMille. The title of the 2000 John Waters film \"Cecil B. Demented\" alludes to DeMille.\nDeMille's legacy is maintained by his granddaughter Cecilia DeMille Presley who serves as the president of the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation, which strives to support higher education, child welfare, and film in Southern California. In 1963, the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation donated the \"Paradise\" ranch to the Hathaway Foundation, which cares for emotionally disturbed and abused children. A large collection of DeMille's materials including scripts, storyboards, and films resides at Brigham Young University in L. Tom Perry Special Collections.\nAwards and recognition.\nCecil B. DeMille received many awards and honors, especially later in his career.\nIn August 1941, DeMille was honored with a block in the forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theatre.\nThe American Academy of Dramatic Arts honored DeMille with an Alumni Achievement Award in 1958.\nIn 1957, DeMille gave the commencement address for the graduation ceremony of Brigham Young University, wherein he received an honorary Doctorate of Letter degree. Additionally, in 1958, he received an honorary Doctorate of Law degree from Temple University.\nFrom the film industry, DeMille received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the Academy Awards in 1953, and a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America Award the same year. In the same ceremony, DeMille received a nomination from Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures for \"The Greatest Show on Earth\". In 1952, DeMille was awarded the first Cecil B. DeMille Award at the Golden Globes. An annual award, the Golden Globe's Cecil B. DeMille Award recognizes lifetime achievement in the film industry. For his contribution to the motion picture and radio industry, DeMille has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The first, for radio contributions, is located at 6240 Hollywood Blvd. The second star is located at 1725 Vine Street.\nDeMille received two Academy Awards: an Honorary Award for \"37 years of brilliant showmanship\" in 1950 and a Best Picture award in 1953 for \"The Greatest Show on Earth\". DeMille received a Golden Globe Award for Best Director and was additionally nominated for the Best Director category at the 1953 Academy Awards for the same film. He was further nominated in the Best Picture category for \"The Ten Commandments\" at the 1957 Academy Awards. DeMille's \"Union Pacific\" received a Palme d'Or in retrospect at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival.\nTwo of DeMille's films have been selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress: \"The Cheat\" (1915) and \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956).\nFilmography.\nDeMille made 70 features, 52 of which are silent. The first 24 of his silents were produced during the first three years of his career (1913\u20131916). Eight of his films were \"epics\" with five classified as \"Biblical\". Six of DeMille's films \u2014 \"The Arab\", \"The Wild Goose Chase\", \"The Dream Girl\", \"The Devil-Stone\", \"We Can't Have Everything\", and \"The Squaw Man\" (1918) \u2014 were destroyed by nitrate decomposition, and are considered lost. \"The Ten Commandments\" is broadcast every Saturday at Passover in the United States on the ABC Television Network.\nDirected features.\nFilmography obtained from \"Fifty Hollywood Directors\".\nSilent films\nSound films\nDirecting or producing credit.\nThese films represent those which DeMille produced or assisted in directing, credited or uncredited.\nActing and cameos.\nDeMille frequently made cameos as himself in other Paramount films. Additionally, he often starred in prologues and special trailers that he created for his films, having an opportunity to personally address the audience."}
{"id": "6178", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6178", "title": "Cardinals", "text": ""}
{"id": "6179", "revid": "27822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6179", "title": "Chinese buddhist cuisine", "text": ""}
{"id": "6181", "revid": "1834236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6181", "title": "Chinese Islamic cuisine", "text": "Chinese Islamic cuisine consists of variations of regionally popular foods that are typical of Han Chinese cuisine, in particular to make them halal. Dishes borrow ingredients from Middle Eastern, Turkic, Iranian and South Asian cuisines, notably mutton and spices. Much like other northern Chinese cuisines, Chinese Islamic cuisine uses wheat noodles as the staple, rather than rice. Chinese Islamic dishes include clear-broth beef noodle soup and \"chuanr\".\nThe Hui (ethnic Chinese Muslims), Bonan, Dongxiang, Salar and Uyghurs of China, as well as the Dungans of Central Asia and the Panthays of Burma, collectively contribute to Chinese Islamic cuisine.\nHistory.\nDue to the large Muslim population in Western China, many Chinese restaurants cater to or are run by Muslims. Northern Chinese Islamic cuisine originated in China proper. It is heavily influenced by Beijing cuisine, with nearly all cooking methods identical and differs only in material due to religious restrictions. As a result, northern Islamic cuisine is often included in home Beijing cuisine though seldom in east coast restaurants.\nDuring the Yuan dynasty, halal and kosher methods of slaughtering animals and preparing food was banned and forbidden by the Mongol emperors, starting with Genghis Khan who banned Muslims and Jews from slaughtering their animals their own way and made them follow the Mongol method.\nAmong all the [subject] alien peoples only the Hui-hui say \"we do not eat Mongol food.\" [Cinggis Qa'an replied:] \"By the aid of heaven we have pacified you; you are our slaves. Yet you do not eat our food or drink. How can this be right?\" He thereupon made them eat. \"If you slaughter sheep, you will be considered guilty of a crime.\" He issued a regulation to that effect ... [In 1279/1280 under Qubilai] all the Muslims say: \u201cif someone else slaughters [the animal] we do not eat.\" Because the poor people are upset by this, from now on, Musuluman [Muslim] Huihui and Zhuhu [Jewish] Huihui, no matter who kills [the animal] will eat [it] and must cease slaughtering sheep themselves, and cease the rite of circumcision.\nTraditionally, there is a distinction between Northern and Southern Chinese Islamic cuisine despite both using lamb and mutton. Northern Chinese Islamic cuisine relies heavily on beef, but rarely ducks, geese, shrimp or seafood, while southern Islamic cuisine is the reverse. The reason for this difference is due to availability of the ingredients. Oxen have been long used for farming and Chinese governments have frequently strictly prohibited the slaughter of oxen for food. However, due to the geographic proximity of the northern part of China to minority-dominated regions that were not subjected to such restrictions, beef could be easily purchased and transported to Northern China. At the same time, ducks, geese and shrimp are rare in comparison to Southern China due to the arid climate of Northern China.\nA Chinese Islamic restaurant () can be similar to a Mandarin restaurant with the exception that there is no pork on the menu and the dishes are primarily noodle/soup based.\nIn most major eastern cities in China, there are very limited Islamic/Halal restaurants, which are typically run by migrants from Western China (e.g., Uyghurs). They primarily offer inexpensive noodle soups only. These restaurants are typically decorated with Islamic motifs such as Islamic writing.\nAnother difference is that lamb and mutton dishes are more commonly available than in other Chinese restaurants, due to the greater prevalence of these meats in the cuisine of Western Chinese regions. (Refer to image 1.)\nOther Muslim ethnic minorities like the Bonan, Dongxiang, Salar and Tibetan Muslims have their own cuisines as well. Dongxiang people operate their own restaurants serving their cuisine.\nMany cafeterias (canteens) at Chinese universities have separate sections or dining areas for Muslim students (Hui or Western Chinese minorities), typically labeled \"qingzhen\". Student ID cards sometimes indicate whether a student is Muslim and will allow access to these dining areas or will allow access on special occasions such as the Eid feast following Ramadan.\nSeveral Hui restaurants serving Chinese Islamic cuisine exist in Los Angeles. San Francisco, despite its huge number of Chinese restaurants, appears to have only one whose cuisine would qualify as halal.\nMany Chinese Hui Muslims who moved from Yunnan to Burma (Myanmar) are known as Panthays operate restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic cuisine such as noodles. Chinese Hui Muslims from Yunnan who moved to Thailand are known as Chin Haw and they also own restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic food.\nIn Central Asia, Dungan people, descendants of Hui, operate restaurants serving Chinese Islamic cuisine, which is respectively referred to as \"Dungan cuisine\" there. They cater to Chinese businessmen. Chopsticks are used by Dungans. The cuisine of the Dungan resembles northwestern Chinese cuisine.\nMost Chinese regard Hui halal food as cleaner than food made by non-Muslims so their restaurants are popular in China. Hui who migrated to Northeast China (Manchuria) after the Chuang Guandong opened many new inns and restaurants to cater to travelers, which were regarded as clean.\nThe Hui who migrated to Taiwan operate Qingzhen restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic cuisine in Taipei and other big cities.\nThe Thai Department of Export Promotion claims that \"China's halal food producers are small-scale entrepreneurs whose products have little value added and lack branding and technology to push their goods to international standards\" to encourage Thai private sector halal producers to market their products in China.\nA 1903-started franchise serving Muslim food is Dong Lai Shun in Hankou.\n400 meters have to be kept as a distance from each restaurant serving beef noodles to another of its type if they belong to Hui Muslims, since Hui have a pact between each other in Ningxia, Gansu and Shaanxi.\nHalal restaurants are checked up upon by clerics from mosques.\nHalal food manufacture has been sanctioned by the government of the Ningxia Autonomous Region.\nFamous dishes.\nLamian.\nLamian (, Dungan: \u041b\u0430\u043c\u044f\u043d) is a Chinese dish of hand-made noodles, usually served in a beef or mutton-flavored soup (\u6e6f\u9eaa, \u0434\u0430\u04a3\u043c\u044f\u043d, t\u0101ngmi\u00e0n), but sometimes stir-fried (\u7092\u9eaa, \u0427\u0430\u043e\u043c\u044f\u043d, ch\u01ceomi\u00e0n) and served with a tomato-based sauce. Literally, \u62c9, \u043b\u0430 (l\u0101) means to pull or stretch, while \u9eaa, \u043c\u044f\u043d (mi\u00e0n) means noodle. The hand-making process involves taking a lump of dough and repeatedly stretching it to produce a single very long noodle.\nWords that begin with L are not native to Turkic \u2014 l\u00e4ghm\u00e4n is a loanword as stated by Uyghur linguist Abdlikim: It is of Chinese derivation and not originally Uyghur.\nBeef noodle soup.\nBeef noodle soup is a noodle soup dish composed of stewed beef, beef broth, vegetables and wheat noodles. It exists in various forms throughout East and Southeast Asia. It was created by the Hui people during the Qing dynasty of China.\nIn the west, this food may be served in a small portion as a soup. In China, a large bowl of it is often taken as a whole meal with or without any side dish.\nChuanr.\nChuanr (Chinese: \u4e32\u513f, Dungan: \u0427\u045e\u0430\u043d\u0440, Pinyin: chu\u00e0nr (shortened from \"chuan er\"), \"kebab\"), originating in the Xinjiang (\u65b0\u7586) province of China and in recent years has been disseminated throughout the rest of that country, most notably in Beijing. It is a product of the Chinese Islamic cuisine of the Uyghur (\u7ef4\u543e\u5c14) people and other Chinese Muslims. Yang rou chuan or lamb kebabs, is particularly popular.\nSuan cai.\nSuan cai is a traditional fermented vegetable dish, similar to Korean kimchi and German sauerkraut, used in a variety of ways. It consists of pickled Chinese cabbage. Suan cai is a unique form of pao cai due to the material used and the method of production. Although \"suan cai\" is not exclusive to Chinese Islamic cuisine, it is used in Chinese Islamic cuisine to top off noodle soups, especially beef noodle soup.\nNang.\n\"Nang\" (Chinese: \u9995, Dungan: \u041d\u04d9\u04a3) is a type of round unleavened bread, topped with sesame. It is similar to South and Central Asia naan."}
{"id": "6182", "revid": "46728905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6182", "title": "Cantonese cuisine", "text": "Cantonese or Guangdong cuisine, also known as Yue cuisine ( or ), is the cuisine of Cantonese people, associated with the Guangdong province of China, particularly the provincial capital Guangzhou, and the surrounding regions in the Pearl River Delta including Hong Kong and Macau. Strictly speaking, Cantonese cuisine is the cuisine of Guangzhou or of Cantonese speakers, but it often includes the cooking styles of all the speakers of Yue Chinese languages in Guangdong. \nThe Teochew cuisine and Hakka cuisine of Guangdong are considered their own styles. However, scholars may categorize Guangdong cuisine into three major groups based on the region's dialect: Cantonese, Hakka and Chaozhou cuisines. Neighboring Guangxi's cuisine is also considered separate despite eastern Guangxi being considered culturally Cantonese due to the presence of ethnic Zhuang influences in the rest of the province. \nCantonese cuisine is one of the Eight Great Traditions of Chinese cuisine. Its prominence outside China is due to the large number of Cantonese emigrants. Chefs trained in Cantonese cuisine are highly sought after throughout China. Until the late 20th century, most Chinese restaurants in the West served largely Cantonese dishes.\nBackground.\nGuangzhou (Canton) City, the provincial capital of Guangdong and the centre of Cantonese culture, has long been a trading hub and many imported foods and ingredients are used in Cantonese cuisine. Besides pork, beef and chicken, Cantonese cuisine incorporates almost all edible meats, including offal, chicken feet, duck's tongue, frog legs, snakes and snails. However, lamb and goat are less commonly used than in the cuisines of northern or western China. Many cooking methods are used, with steaming and stir-frying being the most favoured due to their convenience and rapidity. Other techniques include shallow frying, double steaming, braising and deep frying.\nCompared to other Chinese regional cuisines, the flavours of most traditional Cantonese dishes should be well-balanced and not greasy. Apart from that, spices should be used in modest amounts to avoid overwhelming the flavours of the primary ingredients, and these ingredients in turn should be at the peak of their freshness and quality. There is no widespread use of fresh herbs in Cantonese cooking, in contrast with their liberal use in other cuisines such as Sichuanese, Vietnamese, Lao, Thai and European. Garlic chives and coriander leaves are notable exceptions, although the former are often used as a vegetable and the latter are usually used as mere garnish in most dishes.\nFoods.\nSauces and condiments.\nIn Cantonese cuisine, ingredients such as sugar, salt, soy sauce, rice wine, corn starch, vinegar, scallion and sesame oil suffice to enhance flavour, although garlic is heavily used in some dishes, especially those in which internal organs, such as entrails, may emit unpleasant odours. Ginger, chili peppers, five-spice powder, powdered black pepper, star anise and a few other spices are also used, but often sparingly.\nDried and preserved ingredients.\nAlthough Cantonese cooks pay much attention to the freshness of their primary ingredients, Cantonese cuisine also uses a long list of preserved food items to add flavour to a dish. This may be influenced by Hakka cuisine, since the Hakkas were once a dominant group occupying imperial Hong Kong and other southern territories.\nSome items gain very intense flavours during the drying/preservation/oxidation process and some foods are preserved to increase their shelf life. Some chefs combine both dried and fresh varieties of the same items in a dish. Dried items are usually soaked in water to rehydrate before cooking. These ingredients are generally not served \"a la carte\", but rather with vegetables or other Cantonese dishes.\nTraditional dishes.\nA number of dishes have been part of Cantonese cuisine since the earliest territorial establishments of Guangdong. While many of these are on the menus of typical Cantonese restaurants, some simpler ones are more commonly found in Cantonese homes. Home-made Cantonese dishes are usually served with plain white rice.\nDeep fried dishes.\nThere are a small number of deep-fried dishes in Cantonese cuisine, which can often be found as street food. They have been extensively documented in colonial Hong Kong records of the 19th and 20th centuries. A few are synonymous with Cantonese breakfast and lunch, even though these are also part of other cuisines.\nSoups.\nOld fire soup, or \"lou fo tong\" (), is a clear broth prepared by simmering meat and other ingredients over a low heat for several hours. Chinese herbs are often used as ingredients. There are basically two ways to make old fire soup \u2013 put ingredients and water in the pot and heat it directly on fire, which is called \"bou tong\" (); or put the ingredients in a small stew pot, and put it in a bigger pot filled with water, then heat the bigger pot on fire directly, which is called \"dun tong\" (). The latter way can keep the most original taste of the soup.\nSoup chain stores or delivery outlets in cities with significant Cantonese populations, such as Hong Kong, serve this dish due to the long preparation time required of slow-simmered soup.\nSeafood.\nDue to Guangdong's location along the South China Sea coast, fresh seafood is prominent in Cantonese cuisine, and many Cantonese restaurants keep aquariums or seafood tanks on the premises. In Cantonese cuisine, as in cuisines from other parts of Asia, if seafood has a repugnant odour, strong spices and marinating juices are added; the freshest seafood is odourless and, in Cantonese culinary arts, is best cooked by steaming. For instance, in some recipes, only a small amount of soy sauce, ginger and spring onion is added to steamed fish. In Cantonese cuisine, the light seasoning is used only to bring out the natural sweetness of the seafood. As a rule of thumb, the spiciness of a dish is usually negatively correlated to the freshness of the ingredients.\nNoodle dishes.\nNoodles are served either in soup broth or fried. These are available as home-cooked meals, on dim sum side menus, or as street food at dai pai dongs, where they can be served with a variety of toppings such as fish balls, beef balls, or fish slices.\nSiu mei.\n\"Siu mei\" () is essentially the Chinese rotisserie style of cooking. Unlike most other Cantonese dishes, \"siu mei\" solely consists of meat, with no vegetables.\nLou mei.\nLou mei () is the name given to dishes made from internal organs, entrails and other left-over parts of animals. It is widely available in southern Chinese regions.\nSiu laap.\nAll Cantonese-style cooked meats, including siu mei, lou mei and preserved meat can be classified as siu laap (). \"Siu laap\" also includes dishes such as:\nA typical dish may consist of offal and half an order of multiple varieties of roasted meat. The majority of siu laap is white meat.\nLittle pot rice.\nLittle pot rice () are dishes cooked and served in a flat-bottomed pot (as opposed to a round-bottomed wok). Usually this is a saucepan or braising pan (see clay pot cooking). Such dishes are cooked by covering and steaming, making the rice and ingredients very hot and soft. Usually the ingredients are layered on top of the rice with little or no mixing in between. Many standard combinations exist.\nBanquet/dinner dishes.\nA number of dishes are traditionally served in Cantonese restaurants only at dinner time. Dim sum restaurants stop serving bamboo-basket dishes after the yum cha period (equivalent to afternoon tea) and begin offering an entirely different menu in the evening. Some dishes are standard while others are regional. Some are customised for special purposes such as Chinese marriages or banquets. Salt and pepper dishes are one of the few spicy dishes.\nDessert.\nAfter the evening meal, most Cantonese restaurants offer \"tong sui\" (), a sweet soup. Many varieties of \"tong sui\" are also found in other Chinese cuisines. Some desserts are traditional, while others are recent innovations. The more expensive restaurants usually offer their specialty desserts. Sugar water is the general name of dessert in Guangdong province. It is cooked by adding water and sugar to some other cooking ingredients. \nDelicacies.\nCertain Cantonese delicacies consist of parts taken from rare or endangered animals, which raises controversy over animal rights and environmental issues. This is often due to alleged health benefits of certain animal products. For example, the continued spreading of the idea that shark cartilage can cure cancer has led to decreased shark populations even though scientific research has found no evidence to support the credibility of shark cartilage as a cancer cure."}
{"id": "6183", "revid": "46728905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6183", "title": "Teochew cuisine", "text": "Teochew cuisine, also known as Chiuchow cuisine, Chaozhou cuisine or Teo-swa cuisine, originated from the Chaoshan region in the eastern part of China's Guangdong Province, which includes the cities of Chaozhou, Shantou and Jieyang. Teochew cuisine bears more similarities to that of Fujian cuisine, particularly Southern Min cuisine, due to the similarity of Teochew's and Fujian's culture, language, and their geographic proximity to each other. However, Teochew cuisine is also influenced by Cantonese cuisine in its style and technique.\nBackground.\nTeochew cuisine is well known for its seafood and vegetarian dishes. Its use of flavouring is much less heavy-handed than most other Chinese cuisines and depends much on the freshness and quality of the ingredients for taste and flavour. As a delicate cuisine, oil is not often used in large quantities and there is a relatively heavy emphasis on poaching, steaming and braising, as well as the common Chinese method of stir-frying. Teochew cuisine is also known for serving congee (; or \"mue\"), in addition to steamed rice or noodles with meals. The Teochew \"\" is rather different from the Cantonese counterpart, being very watery with the rice sitting loosely at the bottom of the bowl, while the Cantonese dish is more a thin gruel.\nAuthentic Teochew restaurants serve very strong oolong tea called Tieguanyin in very tiny cups before and after the meal. Presented as \"gongfu\" tea, the tea has a thickly bittersweet taste, colloquially known as \"gam gam\" ().\nA condiment that is popular in Fujian and Taiwanese cuisine and commonly associated with cuisine of certain Teochew groups is shacha sauce (). It is made from soybean oil, garlic, shallots, chilies, brill fish and dried shrimp. The paste has a savoury and slightly spicy taste. As an ingredient, it has multiple uses: as a base for soups, as a rub for barbecued meats, as a seasoning for stir-fried dishes, or as a component for dipping sauces.\nIn addition to soy sauce (widely used in all Chinese cuisines), Teochew people also use fish sauce in their cooking.\nTeochew chefs often use a special stock called siang teng (), literally translates from the Teochew dialect as \"superior broth\". This stock remains on the stove and is continuously replenished. Portrayed in popular media, some Hong Kong chefs allegedly use the same superior broth that is preserved for decades. This stock can as well be seen on Chaozhou TV's cooking programmes.\nThere is a notable feast in Teochew cuisine called \"\" (). A myriad of dishes are often served, which include shark fin soup, bird's nest soup, lobster, steamed fish, roasted suckling pig and braised goose.\nTeochew chefs take pride in their skills of vegetable carving, and carved vegetables are used as garnishes on cold dishes and on the banquet table.\nTeochew cuisine is also known for a late night meal known as \"meh siao\" () or \"daa laang\" () among the Cantonese. Teochew people enjoy eating out close to midnight in restaurants or at roadside food stalls. Some dai pai dong-like eateries stay open till dawn.\nUnlike the typical menu selections of many other Chinese cuisines, Teochew restaurant menus often have a dessert section.\nMany people of Teochew origin, also known as Teochiu or Teochew people, have settled in Hong Kong and places in Southeast Asia like Malaysia, Singapore, Cambodia and Thailand. Influences they bring can be noted in Singaporean cuisine and that of other settlements. A large number of Teochew people have also settled in Taiwan, evident in Taiwanese cuisine. Other notable Teochew diaspora communities are in Vietnam, Cambodia and France. A popular noodle soup in both Vietnam and Cambodia, known as hu tieu, originated from the Teochew . There is also a large diaspora of Teochew people (most were from Southeast Asia) in the United States - particularly in California. There is a Teochew Chinese Association in Paris called L'Amicale des Teochews en France."}
{"id": "6184", "revid": "41987223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6184", "title": "Co-NP", "text": "In computational complexity theory, co-NP is a complexity class. A decision problem X is a member of co-NP if and only if its complement is in the complexity class NP. The class can be defined as follows: a decision problem is in co-NP if and only if for every \"no\"-instance we have a polynomial-length \"certificate\" and there is a polynomial-time algorithm that can be used to verify any purported certificate.\nThat is, co-NP is the set of decision problems where there exists a polynomial and a polynomial-time bounded Turing machine \"M\" such that for every instance \"x\", \"x\" is a \"no\"-instance if and only if: for some possible certificate \"c\" of length bounded by , the Turing machine \"M\" accepts the pair .\nComplementary problems.\nWhile an NP problem asks whether a given instance is a \"yes\"-instance, its \"complement\" asks whether an instance is a \"no\"-instance, which means the complement is in co-NP. Any \"yes\"-instance for the original NP problem becomes a \"no\"-instance for its complement, and vice versa.\nUnsatisfiability.\nAn example of an NP-complete problem is the Boolean satisfiability problem: given a Boolean formula, is it \"satisfiable\" (is there a possible input for which the formula outputs true)? The complementary problem asks: \"given a Boolean formula, is it \"unsatisfiable\" (do all possible inputs to the formula output false)?\". Since this is the \"complement\" of the satisfiability problem, a certificate for a \"no\"-instance is the same as for a \"yes\"-instance from the original NP problem: a set of Boolean variable assignments which make the formula true. On the other hand, a certificate of a \"yes\"-instance for the complementary problem (whatever form it might take) would be equally as complex as for the \"no\"-instance of the original NP satisfiability problem.\nco-NP-completeness.\nA problem \"L\" is co-NP-complete if and only if \"L\" is in co-NP and for any problem in co-NP, there exists a polynomial-time reduction from that problem to \"L\".\nTautology reduction.\nDetermining if a formula in propositional logic is a tautology is co-NP-complete: that is, if the formula evaluates to true under every possible assignment to its variables.\nRelationship to other classes.\nP, the class of polynomial time solvable problems, is a subset of both NP and co-NP. P is thought to be a strict subset in both cases. Because P is closed under complementation, and NP and co-NP are complementary, it cannot be strict in one case and not strict in the other: if P equals NP, it must also equal co-NP, and vice versa.\nNP and co-NP are also thought to be unequal. If so, then no NP-complete problem can be in co-NP and no co-NP-complete problem can be in NP. This can be shown as follows. Suppose for the sake of contradiction there exists an NP-complete problem that is in co-NP. Since all problems in NP can be reduced to , it follows that for every problem in NP, we can construct a non-deterministic Turing machine that decides its complement in polynomial time; i.e., . From this, it follows that the set of complements of the problems in NP is a subset of the set of complements of the problems in co-NP; i.e., . Thus . The proof that no co-NP-complete problem can be in NP if is symmetrical.\nco-NP is a subset of PH, which itself is a subset of PSPACE.\nInteger factorization.\nAn example of a problem that is known to belong to both NP and co-NP (but not known to be in P) is Integer factorization: given positive integers \"m\" and \"n\", determine if \"m\" has a factor less than \"n\" and greater than one. Membership in NP is clear; if \"m\" does have such a factor, then the factor itself is a certificate. Membership in co-NP is also straightforward: one can just list the prime factors of \"m\", all greater or equal to \"n\", which the verifier can confirm to be valid by multiplication and the AKS primality test. It is presently not known whether there is a polynomial-time algorithm for factorization, equivalently that integer factorization is in P, and hence this example is interesting as one of the most natural problems known to be in NP and co-NP but not known to be in P."}
{"id": "6185", "revid": "1270172731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6185", "title": "Chuck Yeager", "text": "Brigadier General Charles Elwood Yeager ( , February 13, 1923December 7, 2020) was a United States Air Force officer, flying ace, and record-setting test pilot who in October 1947 became the first pilot in history confirmed to have exceeded the speed of sound in level flight.\nYeager was raised in Hamlin, West Virginia. His career began in World War II as a private in the United States Army, assigned to the Army Air Forces in 1941. After serving as an aircraft mechanic, in September 1942, he entered enlisted pilot training and upon graduation was promoted to the rank of flight officer (the World War II Army Air Force version of the Army's warrant officer), later achieving most of his aerial victories as a P-51 Mustang fighter pilot on the Western Front, where he was credited with shooting down 11.5 enemy aircraft (the half credit is from a second pilot assisting him in a single shootdown). On October 12, 1944, he attained \"ace in a day\" status, shooting down five enemy aircraft in one mission.\nAfter the war, Yeager became a test pilot and flew many types of aircraft, including experimental rocket-powered aircraft for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). Through the NACA program, he became the first human to officially break the sound barrier on October 14, 1947, when he flew the experimental Bell X-1 at Mach 1.05 at an altitude of , for which he won both the Collier and Mackay trophies in 1948. He then went on to break several other speed and altitude records in the following years. In 1962, he became the first commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, which trained and produced astronauts for NASA and the Air Force.\nYeager later commanded fighter squadrons and wings in Germany, as well as in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. In recognition of his achievements and the outstanding performance ratings of those units, he was promoted to brigadier general in 1969 and inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1973, retiring on March 1, 1975 (for its colloquial similarity to \"Mach 1\"). His three-war active-duty flying career spanned more than 30 years and took him to many parts of the world, including the Korean War zone and the Soviet Union during the height of the Cold War.\nYeager is referred to by many as one of the greatest pilots of all time, and was ranked fifth on \"Flying\" list of the 51 Heroes of Aviation in 2013. Throughout his life, he flew more than 360 different types of aircraft over a 70-year period, and continued to fly for two decades after retirement as a consultant pilot for the United States Air Force. In 2020 at the age of 97, Yeager died in a Los Angeles-area hospital.\nEarly life and education.\nYeager was born February 13, 1923, in Myra, West Virginia, to farming parents Albert Hal Yeager (1896\u20131963) and Susie Mae Yeager (; 1898\u20131987). When he was five years old, his family moved to Hamlin, West Virginia. Yeager had two brothers, Roy and Hal Jr., and two sisters, Doris Ann (accidentally killed at age two by four-year-old Roy playing with a firearm) and Pansy Lee.\nHe attended Hamlin High School, where he played basketball and football, receiving his best grades in geometry and typing. He graduated from high school in June 1941.\nHis first experience with the military was as a teen at the Citizens Military Training Camp at Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indianapolis, Indiana, during the summers of 1939 and 1940. On February 26, 1945, Yeager married Glennis Dickhouse, and the couple had four children. Glennis Yeager died in 1990, predeceasing her husband by 30 years.\nHis cousin, Steve Yeager, was a professional baseball catcher.\nCareer.\nWorld War II.\nYeager enlisted as a private in the U.S. Army Air Forces (USAAF) on September 12, 1941, and became an aircraft mechanic at George Air Force Base, Victorville, California. At enlistment, Yeager was not eligible for flight training because of his age and educational background, but the entry of the U.S. into World War II less than three months later prompted the USAAF to alter its recruiting standards. Yeager had unusually sharp vision (a visual acuity rated 20/10), which once enabled him to shoot a deer at .\nAt the time of his flight training acceptance, he was a crew chief on an AT-11. He received his pilot wings and a promotion to flight officer at Luke Field, Arizona, where he graduated from Class 43C on March 10, 1943. Assigned to the 357th Fighter Group at Tonopah, Nevada, he initially trained as a fighter pilot, flying Bell P-39 Airacobras (being grounded for seven days for clipping a farmer's tree during a training flight), and shipped overseas with the group on November 23, 1943.\nStationed in the United Kingdom at RAF Leiston, Yeager flew P-51 Mustangs in combat with the 363d Fighter Squadron. He named his aircraft \"Glamorous Glen\" after his girlfriend, Glennis Faye Dickhouse, who became his wife in February 1945. Yeager had gained one victory before he was shot down over France in his first aircraft (P-51B-5-NA s/n 43-6763) on March 5, 1944, on his eighth mission. He escaped to Spain on March 30, 1944, with the help of the \"Maquis\" (French Resistance) and returned to England on May 15, 1944. During his stay with the \"Maquis\", Yeager assisted the guerrillas in duties that did not involve direct combat; he helped construct bombs for the group, a skill that he had learned from his father. He was awarded the Bronze Star for helping a navigator, Omar M. \"Pat\" Patterson Jr., to cross the Pyrenees.\nDespite a regulation prohibiting \"evaders\" (escaped pilots) from flying over enemy territory again, the purpose of which was to prevent resistance groups from being compromised by giving the enemy a second chance to possibly capture him, Yeager was reinstated to flying combat. He had joined another evader, fellow P-51 pilot 1st Lt Fred Glover, in speaking directly to the Supreme Allied Commander, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, on June 12, 1944. \"I raised so much hell that General Eisenhower finally let me go back to my squadron\" Yeager said. \"He cleared me for combat after D Day, because all the free Frenchmen \u2013 Maquis and people like that \u2013 had surfaced\". Eisenhower, after gaining permission from the War Department to decide the requests, concurred with Yeager and Glover. In the meantime, Yeager shot down his second enemy aircraft, a German Junkers Ju 88 bomber, over the English Channel.\nYeager demonstrated outstanding flying skills and combat leadership. On October 12, 1944, he became the first pilot in his group to make \"ace in a day,\" downing five enemy aircraft in a single mission. Two of these victories were scored without firing a single shot: when he flew into firing position against a Messerschmitt Bf 109, the pilot of the aircraft panicked, breaking to port and colliding with his wingman. Yeager said both pilots bailed out. He finished the war with 11.5 official victories, including one of the first air-to-air victories over a jet fighter, a German Messerschmitt Me 262 that he shot down as it was on final approach for landing.\nIn his 1986 memoirs, Yeager recalled with disgust that \"atrocities were committed by both sides\", and said he went on a mission with orders from the Eighth Air Force to \"strafe anything that moved\". During the mission briefing, he whispered to Major Donald H. Bochkay, \"If we are going to do things like this, we sure as hell better make sure we are on the winning side\". Yeager said, \"I'm certainly not proud of that particular strafing mission against civilians. But it is there, on the record and in my memory\". He also expressed bitterness at his treatment in England during World War II, describing the British as \"arrogant\" and \"nasty\" on Twitter.\nYeager was commissioned a second lieutenant while at Leiston, and was promoted to captain before the end of his tour. He flew his 61st and final mission on January 15, 1945, and returned to the United States in early February 1945. As an evader, he received his choice of assignments and, because his new wife was pregnant, chose Wright Field to be near his home in West Virginia. His high number of flight hours and maintenance experience qualified him to become a functional test pilot of repaired aircraft, which brought him under the command of Colonel Albert Boyd, head of the Aeronautical Systems Flight Test Division.\nPost-World War II.\nTest pilot \u2013 breaking the sound barrier.\nYeager remained in the U.S. Army Air Forces after the war, becoming a test pilot at Muroc Army Air Field (now Edwards Air Force Base), following graduation from Air Materiel Command Flight Performance School (Class 46C). After Bell Aircraft test pilot Chalmers \"Slick\" Goodlin demanded to break the sound \"barrier\", the USAAF selected the 24-year-old Yeager to fly the rocket-powered Bell XS-1 in a NACA program to research high-speed flight. Under the National Security Act of 1947, the USAAF became the United States Air Force (USAF) on September\u00a018.\nSuch was the difficulty, that the answers to many of the inherent challenges were like \"Yeager better have paid-up insurance\". Two nights before the scheduled flight date, Yeager broke two ribs when he fell from a horse. He was worried that the injury would remove him from the mission and reported that he went to a civilian doctor in nearby Rosamond, who taped his ribs. Besides his wife who was riding with him, Yeager told only his friend and fellow project pilot Jack Ridley about the accident. On the day of the flight, Yeager was in such pain that he could not seal the X-1's hatch by himself. Ridley rigged up a device, using the end of a broom handle as an extra lever, to allow Yeager to seal the hatch.\nYeager broke the sound barrier on October 14, 1947, in level flight while piloting the X-1 \"Glamorous Glennis\" at Mach 1.05 at an altitude of over the Rogers Dry Lake of the Mojave Desert in California. The success of the mission was not announced to the public for nearly eight months, until June 10, 1948. Yeager was awarded the Mackay Trophy and the Collier Trophy in 1948 for his mach-transcending flight, and the Harmon International Trophy in 1954. The X-1 he flew that day was later put on permanent display at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. During 1952, he attended the Air Command and Staff College.\nYeager continued to break many speed and altitude records. He was one of the first American pilots to fly a Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15, after its pilot, No Kum-sok, defected to South Korea. Returning to Muroc, during the latter half of 1953, Yeager was involved with the USAF team that was working on the X-1A, an aircraft designed to surpass Mach 2 in level flight. That year, he flew a chase aircraft for the civilian pilot Jackie Cochran as she became the first woman to fly faster than sound.\nOn November 20, 1953, the U.S. Navy program involving the Douglas D-558-II Skyrocket and its pilot, Scott Crossfield, became the first team to reach twice the speed of sound. After they were bested, Ridley and Yeager decided to beat rival Crossfield's speed record in a series of test flights that they dubbed \"Operation NACA Weep\". Not only did they beat Crossfield by setting a new record at Mach 2.44 on December 12, 1953, but they did it in time to spoil a celebration planned for the 50th anniversary of flight in which Crossfield was to be called \"the fastest man alive\".\nThe new record flight, however, did not entirely go to plan, since shortly after reaching Mach 2.44, Yeager lost control of the X-1A at about due to inertia coupling, a phenomenon largely unknown at the time. With the aircraft simultaneously rolling, pitching, and yawing out of control, Yeager dropped in less than a minute before regaining control at around . He then managed to land without further incident. For this feat, Yeager was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal (DSM) in 1954.\nMilitary command.\nYeager was foremost a fighter pilot and held several squadron and wing commands. From 1954 to 1957, he commanded the F-86H Sabre-equipped 417th Fighter-Bomber Squadron (50th Fighter-Bomber Wing) at Hahn AB, West Germany, and Toul-Rosieres Air Base, France; and from 1957 to 1960 the F-100D Super Sabre-equipped 1st Fighter Day Squadron at George Air Force Base, California, and Mor\u00f3n Air Base, Spain.\nHe was a full colonel in 1962, after completion of a year's studies and final thesis on STOL aircraft at the Air War College. He became the first commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, which produced astronauts for NASA and the USAF, after its redesignation from the USAF Flight Test Pilot School. He had only a high school education, so he was not eligible to become an astronaut like those he trained. In April 1962, Yeager made his only flight with Neil Armstrong. Their job, flying a T-33, was to evaluate Smith Ranch Dry Lake in Nevada for use as an emergency landing site for the North American X-15. In his autobiography, he wrote that he knew the lake bed was unsuitable for landings after recent rains, but Armstrong insisted on flying out anyway. As Armstrong suggested that they do a touch-and-go, Yeager advised against it, telling him \"You may touch, but you ain't gonna go!\" When Armstrong did touch down, the wheels became stuck in the mud, bringing the plane to a sudden stop and provoking Yeager to fits of laughter. They had to wait for rescue.\nYeager's participation in the test pilot training program for NASA included controversial behavior. Yeager reportedly did not believe that Ed Dwight, the first African American pilot admitted into the program, should be a part of it. In the 2019 documentary series \"Chasing the Moon\", the filmmakers made the claim that Yeager instructed staff and participants at the school that \"Washington is trying to cram the nigger down our throats. [President] Kennedy is using this to make 'racial equality,' so do not speak to him, do not socialize with him, do not drink with him, do not invite him over to your house, and in six months he'll be gone.\" In his autobiography, Dwight details how Yeager's leadership led to discriminatory treatment throughout his training at Edwards Air Force Base.\nBetween December 1963 and January 1964, Yeager completed five flights in the NASA M2-F1 lifting body. An accident during a December 1963 test flight in one of the school's NF-104s resulted in serious injuries. After climbing to a near-record altitude, the plane's controls became ineffective, and it entered a flat spin. After several turns, and an altitude loss of approximately 95,000 feet, Yeager ejected from the plane. During the ejection, the seat straps released normally, but the seat base slammed into Yeager, with the still-hot rocket motor breaking his helmet's plastic faceplate and causing his emergency oxygen supply to catch fire. The resulting burns to his face required extensive and agonizing medical care. This was Yeager's last attempt at setting test-flying records.\nIn 1966, Yeager took command of the 405th Tactical Fighter Wing at Clark Air Base, the Philippines, whose squadrons were deployed on rotational temporary duty (TDY) in South Vietnam and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. There he flew 127 missions. In February 1968, Yeager was assigned command of the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, North Carolina, and led the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II wing in South Korea during the \"Pueblo\" crisis.\nYeager was promoted to brigadier general and was assigned in July 1969 as the vice-commander of the Seventeenth Air Force.\nFrom 1971 to 1973, at the behest of Ambassador Joseph Farland, Yeager was assigned as the Air Attache in Pakistan to advise the Pakistan Air Force which was led by Abdur Rahim Khan (the first Pakistani to break the sound barrier). He arrived in Pakistan at a time when tensions with India were at a high level. One of Yeager's jobs during this time was to assist Pakistani technicians in installing AIM-9 Sidewinders on PAF's Shenyang F-6 fighters. He also had a keen interest in interacting with PAF personnel from various Pakistani Squadrons and helping them develop combat tactics. In one instance in 1972, while visiting the No. 15 Squadron \"Cobras\" at Peshawar Airbase, the Squadron's OC Wing Commander Najeeb Khan escorted him to K2 in a pair of F-86Fs after Yeager requested a visit to the second highest mountain on Earth. After hostilities broke out in 1971, he decided to stay in West Pakistan and continued overseeing the PAF's operations. Yeager recalled \"the Pakistanis whipped the Indians' asses in the sky... the Pakistanis scored a three-to-one kill ratio, knocking out 102 Russian-made Indian jets and losing 34 airplanes of their own\". During the war, he flew around the western front in a helicopter documenting wreckages of Indian aircraft of Soviet origin which included Sukhoi Su-7s and MiG-21s. These aircraft were transported to the United States after the war for analysis. Yeager also flew around in his Beechcraft Queen Air, a small passenger aircraft that was assigned to him by the Pentagon, picking up shot-down Indian fighter pilots. The Beechcraft was later destroyed during an air raid by the IAF at a Pakistani airbase when Yeager was not present. Edward C. Ingraham, a U.S. diplomat who had served as political counselor to Ambassador Farland in Islamabad, recalled this incident in the \"Washington Monthly\" of October 1985: \"After Yeager's Beechcraft was destroyed during an Indian air raid, he raged to his cowering colleagues that the Indian pilot had been specifically instructed by Indira Gandhi to blast his plane. 'It was', he later wrote, 'the Indian way of giving Uncle Sam the finger'\". Yeager was incensed over the incident and demanded U.S. retaliation.\nPost-retirement and in popular culture.\nOn March 1, 1975, Yeager retired from the Air Force at Norton Air Force Base, California.\nYeager made a cameo appearance in the movie \"The Right Stuff\" (1983). He played \"Fred\", a bartender at \"Pancho's Place\", which was most appropriate, because he said, \"if all the hours were ever totaled, I reckon I spent more time at her place than in a cockpit over those years\". Sam Shepard portrayed Yeager in the film, which chronicles in part his famous 1947 record-breaking flight.\nYeager has been referenced several times in the shared \"Star Trek\" universe, including having a namesake fictional type of starship, a dangerous starship formation-maneuver named after him called the \"Yeager Loop\" (most notably mentioned in the ' episode \"The First Duty\"), and appearing in archival footage within the opening title sequence for the series ' (2001\u20132005). For \"Enterprise\", executive producer Rick Berman said that he envisaged the lead character, Captain Jonathan Archer, as being \"halfway between Chuck Yeager and Han Solo\".\nFor several years in the 1980s, Yeager was connected to General Motors, publicizing ACDelco, the company's automotive parts division. In 1986, he was invited to drive the Chevrolet Corvette pace car for the 70th running of the Indianapolis 500. In 1988, Yeager was again invited to drive the pace car, this time at the wheel of an Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme. In 1986, President Reagan appointed Yeager to the Rogers Commission that investigated the explosion of the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\".\nDuring this time, Yeager also served as a technical adviser for three Electronic Arts flight simulator video games. The games include \"Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer\", \"Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer 2.0\", and \"Chuck Yeager's Air Combat\". The game manuals feature quotes and anecdotes from Yeager and were well received by players. Missions feature several of Yeager's accomplishments and let players challenge his records. \"Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer\" was Electronic Art's top-selling game for 1987.\nIn 2009, Yeager participated in the documentary \"The Legend of Pancho Barnes and the Happy Bottom Riding Club\", a profile of his friend Pancho Barnes. The documentary was screened at film festivals, aired on public television in the United States, and won an Emmy Award.\nOn October 14, 1997, on the 50th anniversary of his historic flight past Mach 1, he flew a new \"Glamorous Glennis III\", an F-15D Eagle, past Mach 1. The chase plane for the flight was an F-16 Fighting Falcon piloted by Bob Hoover, a longtime test, fighter, and aerobatic pilot who had been Yeager's wingman for the first supersonic flight. At the end of his speech to the crowd in 1997, Yeager concluded, \"All that I am ... I owe to the Air Force\". Later that month, he was the recipient of the Tony Jannus Award for his achievements.\nOn October 14, 2012, on the 65th anniversary of breaking the sound barrier, Yeager did it again at the age of 89, flying as co-pilot in a McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle piloted by Captain David Vincent out of Nellis Air Force Base.\nIn October 2016, Yeager reached international headlines when a Twitter argument he was having with an Irish teenager led to him lashing out at the British and Irish, namely calling Irish people British, and labeling all British people as \"nasty\" and \"arrogant\". No stranger to controversy in his life, this was one of Yeager's last major public faux-pas.\nAwards and decorations.\nIn 1973, Yeager was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame, arguably aviation's highest honor. In 1974, Yeager received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In December 1975, the U.S. Congress awarded Yeager a silver medal \"equivalent to a noncombat Medal of Honor ... for contributing immeasurably to aerospace science by risking his life in piloting the X-1 research airplane faster than the speed of sound on October 14, 1947\". President Gerald Ford presented the medal to Yeager in a ceremony at the White House on December 8, 1976.\nYeager never attended college and was often modest about his background, but is considered by many, including \"Flying Magazine\", the California Hall of Fame, the State of West Virginia, National Aviation Hall of Fame, a few U.S. presidents, and the United States Army Air Force, to be one of the greatest pilots of all time. \"Air &amp; Space/Smithsonian\" magazine ranked him the fifth greatest pilot of all time in 2003. Regardless of his lack of higher education, West Virginia's Marshall University named its highest academic scholarship the Society of Yeager Scholars in his honor. He was the chairman of Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA)'s Young Eagle Program from 1994 to 2004, and was named the program's chairman emeritus.\nIn 1966, Yeager was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame. He was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981. He was inducted into the Aerospace Walk of Honor 1990 inaugural class.\nYeager Airport in Charleston, West Virginia, is named in his honor. The Interstate 64/Interstate 77 bridge over the Kanawha River in Charleston is named in his honor. He also flew directly under the Kanawha Bridge and West Virginia named it the Chuck E. Yeager Bridge. On October 19, 2006, the state of West Virginia also honored Yeager with a marker along Corridor G (part of U.S. Highway 119) in his home Lincoln County, and also renamed part of it the \"Yeager Highway\".\nYeager was an honorary board member of the humanitarian organization Wings of Hope. On August 25, 2009, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver announced that Yeager would be one of 13 California Hall of Fame inductees in The California Museum's yearlong exhibit. The induction ceremony was on December 1, 2009, in Sacramento, California. \"Flying Magazine\" ranked Yeager number 5 on its 2013 list of The 51 Heroes of Aviation; for many years, he was the highest-ranked living person on the list.\nThe Civil Air Patrol, the volunteer auxiliary of the USAF, awards the Charles E. \"Chuck\" Yeager Award to its senior members as part of its Aerospace Education program.\nPersonal life.\nYeager named his plane after his wife, Glennis, as a good-luck charm: \"You're my good-luck charm, hon. Any airplane I name after you always brings me home.\" Yeager and Glennis moved to Grass Valley, California, after his retirement from the Air Force in 1975. The couple prospered as a result of Yeager's best-selling autobiography, speaking engagements, and commercial ventures. Glennis Yeager died of ovarian cancer in 1990. They had four children (Susan, Don, Mickey, and Sharon). Yeager's son Mickey (Michael) died unexpectedly in Oregon, on March 26, 2011.\nYeager appeared in a Texas advertisement for George H. W. Bush's 1988 presidential campaign.\nIn 2000, Yeager met actress Victoria Scott D'Angelo on a hiking trail in Nevada County. The pair started dating shortly thereafter, and married in August 2003. A bitter dispute arose between Yeager, his children, and D'Angelo. The children contended that she, at least 35 years Yeager's junior, had married him for his fortune. Yeager and D'Angelo both denied the charge. Litigation ensued, in which his children accused D'Angelo of \"undue influence\" on Yeager, and Yeager accused his children of diverting millions of dollars from his assets. In August 2008, the California Court of Appeal ruled for Yeager, finding that his daughter Susan had breached her duty as trustee.\nYeager lived in Grass Valley, Northern California and died in the afternoon of December 7, 2020 (National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day), at age 97, in a Los Angeles hospital. Following his death, President Donald Trump issued a statement of condolences stating Yeager \"was one of the greatest pilots in history, a proud West Virginian, and an American original who relentlessly pushed the boundaries of human achievement\"."}
{"id": "6186", "revid": "47900651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6186", "title": "Cajun cuisine", "text": "Cajun cuisine ( , ) is a subset of Louisiana cooking developed by the Cajuns, itself a Louisianan development incorporating elements of Native American, West African, French, and Spanish cuisine.\nCajun cuisine is often referred to as a \"rustic\" cuisine, meaning that it is based on locally available ingredients and that preparation is simple. Cajuns historically cooked their dishes, gumbo for example, in one pot.\nCrawfish, shrimp, and andouille sausage are staple meats used in a variety of dishes. The aromatic vegetables green bell pepper (), onion, and celery are called \"the trinity\" by chefs in Cajun and Louisiana Creole cuisines. Roughly diced and combined in cooking, the method is similar to the use of the \"mirepoix\" in traditional French cuisine which blends roughly diced carrot, onion, and celery. Additional characteristic aromatics for both the Creole and Cajun versions may include parsley, bay leaf, thyme, green onions, ground cayenne pepper, and ground black pepper. Cayenne and Louisiana-style hot sauce are the primary sources of spice in Cajun cuisine, which usually tends towards a moderate, well-balanced heat, despite the national \"Cajun hot\" craze of the 1980s and 1990s.\nHistory.\nThe Acadians were a group of French colonists who lived in Acadia, what is today Eastern Canada. In the mid-18th century, they were deported from Acadia by the British during the French and Indian War in what they termed \"le Grand D\u00e9rangement\", and many of them ended up settling in southern Louisiana.\nDue to the extreme change in climate from that of Acadia, Acadians were unable to cook their original dishes. Soon, their former culinary traditions were adapted and, in time, incorporated not only Native American traditions, but also African-American traditions\u2014as is exemplified in the classic Cajun dish \"gumbo\", which takes its name from the word for its principal ingredient, okra, in the West African Bambara language. In Louisiana, the Acadian settlers replaced the whole wheat bread they were accustomed to with cornbread, which by the beginning of the 19th century they were eating with cane syrup. Between 1790 and 1810 most Louisiana Acadians bought one to three enslaved black persons, many of whom who had come from the West Indies, from whom they learned the use of new ingredients, including okra, to incorporate in their cuisine. The ragu sauces that the Cajuns developed are very similar to sauces used in French West Africa, possibly introduced by enslaved cooks.\nMany other meals developed along these lines, adapted in no small part from Haiti, to become what is now considered classic Cajun cuisine traditions (not to be confused with the more modern concept associated with Prudhomme's style).\nUp through the 20th century, the meals were not elaborate but instead, rather basic. The public's false perception of \"Cajun\" cuisine was based on Prudhomme's style of Cajun cooking, which was spicy, flavorful, and not true to the classic form of the cuisine.\nCajun and Creole cuisine have mistakenly been considered the same, but the origins of Creole cooking are in New Orleans, and Cajun cooking arose 40 years after its establishment. Today, most restaurants serve dishes that consist of Cajun styles, which Paul Prudhomme dubbed \"Louisiana cooking\". In Cajun home-cooking, these individual styles are still kept separate. However, there are fewer and fewer people cooking the classic Cajun dishes that would have been eaten by the original settlers.\nCultural aspects.\nAccording to political scientist Kevin V. Mulcahy writing on cultural identity, Cajun cuisine today is different from that of the 19th and early 20th centuries, but still defines Cajun culture for many people within and outside Acadiana. Its heritage reflects French, Spanish, American Indian, German, and Afro-Caribbean influences. Cajun food is the result of this assimilation or \"cultural blending\". Rural Cajun cuisine is distinct from the urban Creole cuisine, having arisen by economic necessity among the Acadian immmigrants who came to Louisiana in the 18th century. These settlers lived off the land and survived on foods they could obtain by hunting, fishing, ranching, foraging, or growing crops.\nAlthough there is a large variety of dishes within the regions that make up Cajun country in Louisiana, rural Cajuns generally prefer strong dark roast coffee, highly seasoned foods, hot peppers, vegetables smothered in brown gravy, and one-pot dishes served with rice. Each region has its own specialties, such as \"andouille\" sausage on the west bank of the Mississippi River above New Orleans, formerly known as the German Coast; barbecued shrimp in Terrebonne Parish; tasso ham made from hog's shoulder in the area around Opelousas; and crawfish all across the parishes of southern Louisiana, where they are abundant in the fresh water wetlands and waterways.\nMany Cajun recipes are based on rice and the \"holy trinity\" of onions, celery, and green pepper, and use locally caught shell fish such as shrimp and crawfish. Much of Cajun cookery starts with a \"roux\" made of wheat flour cooked and slowly stirred with a fat such as oil, butter or lard, known especially as the base for \u00e9touff\u00e9e, gumbo and sauce piquante. Cajun cooks in south Louisiana historically have cooked meals in single pots, and still cook meats by braising. Almost all Cajun households had gardens up until the latter years of the 20th century, and lifted regional culinary standards by adding the fresh vegetables they grew to their dishes.\nThere was continuity in cuisines between the southern Bayou Teche area and the northern boundary of Cajun country in Avoyelles Parish. Fresh sausage, pork, and the use of salt and pepper as the main seasonings were universal in the region's foodway traditions, north and south. The role of seafood in the cuisine of the southern parishes distinguished it from that of the prairies, where more wild game was consumed instead.\nAnthropologist Charlotte Paige Gutierrez has written extensively on Louisiana's traditional foodways. She writes: \"The term foodways, as it is now used by writers in various disciplines, has a broad definition. The study of foodways may include the production, distribution, preparation, preservation, serving, and eating of food, as well as the social, symbolic, psychological, and behavioral aspects of food.\" Modern conveniences influenced Louisiana's culinary traditions: with the introduction of electricity and refrigerators, consuming freshly butchered meat immediately was not imperative as in the past, thus community events such as hog-killings (\"boucheries\") occurred less frequently. Improved transportation and increased incomes made food stores more accessible and buying produce became more affordable for working families. Cajuns now bought their bread at a grocery store rather than baking their own. According to Gutierrez, when the economy of southern Louisiana boomed with the expansion of oil industry operations in the 1970s, Cajuns gained a renewed pride in their ethnicity.\nOnly those Cajuns who live near the coast are able to regularly harvest seafood such as crabs, oysters, shrimp, and saltwater fish directly from their habitats. Shrimping, crabbing, fishing, frog-gigging, and gardening have been practiced in Terrebonne and Lafourche Parishes as subsistence and commercial pursuits for many generations. Before the introduction of modern transportation and refrigeration, Cajuns who lived in the southwestern prairie parishes away from the coast had little opportunity to incorporate seafood into their diets. Today, fresh seafood is available all across Acadiana, so that now it is regarded as a regional food rather than one available only to coastal residents.\nThe cooking traditions of the western prairies and those of the Bayou country in southeastern Louisiana overlap in the lower and middle Bayou Teche region. The complicated network of lakes, streams, bayous, and the flood plains with their rich soil characterize the terrain of Iberia, St. Martin, and St. Mary parishes. The traditional cuisine uses those resources available in the area: pork from hog farms on the plains and seafood from the lowlands.\nSeasoning practices in the Teche country occupy a middle place between the salt and black pepper-based approach to spices in the Bayou country and the prevalent use of cayenne pepper in the Cajun prairies. People along the lower and middle Teche use cayenne more often than in the Laforche area. Hot pepper sauce has a more dominant role in the Teche country cuisine than in other Cajun regions.\nIn the upper Teche region, wild game, freshwater fish, and pork are important in the local diet, with rabbit, duck, and venison being eaten more often than among their neighbors to southward. Avoyelles Parish, along the northern edge of Cajun country where cultural influences converge, shares some of these dietary features, although local cooking traditions are somewhat different than in the Teche country. Natives of the parish make fresh sausage, but cling to certain European customs, notably the preparation of \"cochon de lait r\u00f3ti\", or roasted suckling pig. After the young pigs are slaughtered, they are suspended vertically by a rope tied to a tree limb and hang over a hardwood fire. For even cooking of the pig, it is rotated with a stick. Halfway through the roasting, the carcass is turned end for end to assure even heating of the meat. Local cooks have constructed improvised rotisseries, some fitting theirs with small motors for mechanized rotation.\nThe upper prairie, historically an area of small farms, ranches, and rice fields, has its own distinctive cuisine, well known for its smoked meats and \"boudin blanc\", white sausage made of pork, rice, and seasonings. Local hardwoods such as oak, pecan, and hickory are used to smoke sausages and tasso. Smoked meats are comparatively rare, however, in other Cajun communities.\nCajun cooking methods.\nDeep frying of turkeys or oven-roasted turduckens entered southern Louisiana cuisine more recently. Also, blackening of fish or chicken and barbecuing of shrimp in the shell are excluded because they were not prepared in traditional Cajun cuisine. Blackening was actually an invention by chef Paul Prudhomme in the 1970s, becoming associated with Cajun cooking, and presented as such by him, but is not a true historical or traditional Cajun cooking process.\nIngredients.\nIn the late 18th century, about the same time that Acadian musicians embraced the Spanish guitar, spices from the Iberian Peninsula were adopted in the Acadian cuisine. With the cross-cultural borrowing that took place between them and their neighbors in southern Louisiana, Acadians were eating African okra and American Indian corn by the time of the Louisiana Purchase (1803) in such dishes as \"gumbo\", \"pain de ma\u00efs\", and \"soupe de ma\u00efs\", which did not closely resemble the African and Indian versions.\nThe following is a partial list of ingredients used in Cajun cuisine and some of the staple ingredients of the Acadian food culture.\nMeat and seafood.\nCajun foodways include many ways of preserving meat, some of which are waning due to the availability of refrigeration and mass-produced meat at the grocer. Smoking of meats remains a fairly common practice, but once-common preparations such as turkey or duck confit (preserved in poultry fat, with spices) are now seen even by Acadians as quaint rarities.\nGame (and hunting) are still uniformly popular in Acadiana.\nThe recent increase of catfish farming in the Mississippi Delta has brought about an increase in its usage in Cajun cuisine in place of the more traditional wild-caught speckled trout.\nBeef and dairy&lt;br&gt;\nThough parts of Acadiana are well suited to cattle or dairy farming, beef is not often used in a pre-processed or uniquely Cajun form. It is usually prepared fairly simply as chops, stews, or steaks, taking a cue from Texas to the west. Ground beef is used as is traditional throughout the US, although seasoned differently.\nDairy farming is not as prevalent as in the past, but there are still some farms in the business. There are no unique dairy items prepared in Cajun cuisine. Traditional Cajun and New Orleans Creole-influenced desserts are common.\nSeasonings.\nThyme, sage, mint, marjoram, savory, and basil are considered sweet herbs. In colonial times a herbes de Provence would be several sweet herbs tied up in a muslin.\nCajun dishes.\nPrimary favorites.\nBoudin\u2014a type of sausage made from pork, pork liver, rice, garlic, green onions and other spices. It is widely available by the link or pound from butcher shops. \"Boudin\" is typically stuffed in a natural casing and has a softer consistency than other, better-known sausage varieties. It is usually served with side dishes such as rice dressing, \"maque choux\" or bread. \"Boudin\" balls are commonly served in southern Louisiana restaurants and are made by taking the \"boudin\" out of the case and frying it in spherical form.\nGumbo\u2014High on the list of favorites of Cajun cooking are the soups called gumbos. Contrary to non-Cajun or Continental beliefs, gumbo does not mean simply \"everything in the pot\". Gumbo exemplifies the influence of French, Spanish, African and Native American food cultures on Cajun cuisine.\nThe origins of the word \"gumbo\" are in West Africa. Kellersberger Vass lists \"kingumbo\" and \"tshingombo\" as the Bantu words for okra, while John Laudon of the University of Louisiana says the word \"gombo\" is a French word that came to the Western Hemisphere from West Africa, where okra was known as \"(ki) ngombo\" along much of the region's coast.\nBoth fil\u00e9 and okra can be used as thickening agents in gumbo. Historically, large amounts of fil\u00e9 were added directly to the pot when okra was out of season. While a distinction between fil\u00e9 gumbo and okra gumbo is still held by some, many people enjoy putting fil\u00e9 in okra gumbo simply as a flavoring. Regardless of which is the dominant thickener, fil\u00e9 is also provided at the table and added to taste.\nMany claim that gumbo is a Cajun dish, but gumbo was established long before the Acadian arrival.\nIts early existence came via the early French Creole culture in New Orleans, Louisiana, where French, Spanish and Africans frequented and also influenced by later waves of Italian, German and Irish settlers.\nThe backbone of a gumbo is roux, as described above. Cajun gumbo typically favors darker roux, often approaching the color of chocolate or coffee beans. Since the starches in the flour break down more with longer cooking time, a dark roux has less thickening power than a lighter one. While the stovetop method is traditional, flour may also be dry-toasted in an oven for a fat-free roux, or a regular roux may be prepared in a microwave oven for a hands-off method. If the roux is for immediate use, the \"trinity\" may be sauteed in it, which stops the cooking process.\nA classic gumbo is made with chicken and andouille, especially in the colder months, but the ingredients vary according to what is available. Seafood gumbos are also very popular in Cajun country.\nJambalaya\u2014The only certain thing that can be said about jambalaya is that it contains rice, some sort of meat (often chicken, ham, sausage, or a combination), seafood (such as shrimp or crawfish), plus other items that may be available. Usually, it will include green peppers, onions, celery, tomatoes and hot chili peppers. This is also a great pre-Acadian dish, established by the Spanish in Louisiana. Jambalaya may be a tomato-rich New Orleans-style \"red\" jambalaya of Spanish Creole roots, or a Cajun-style \"brown\" jambalaya which draws its color and flavor from browned meat and caramelized onions. Historically, tomatoes were not as widely available in Acadiana as the area around New Orleans, but in modern times, both styles are popular across the state. Brown is the style served at the annual World Jambalaya Festival in Gonzales.\nRice and gravy\u2014Rice and gravy dishes are a staple of Cajun cuisine and is usually a brown gravy based on pan drippings, which are deglazed and simmered with extra seasonings and served over steamed or boiled rice.\nThe dish is traditionally made from cheaper cuts of meat and cooked in a cast-iron pot, typically for an extended time period to let the tough cuts of meat become tender. Beef, pork, chicken or any of a large variety of game meats are used for its preparation. Popular local varieties include hamburger steak, smothered rabbit, turkey necks, and chicken fricassee.\nFood as an event.\nCrawfish boil.\nThe crawfish boil is a celebratory event where Cajuns boil crawfish, potatoes, onions and corn in large pots over propane cookers. Lemons and small muslin bags containing a mixture of bay leaves, mustard seeds, cayenne pepper, and other spices, commonly known as \"crab boil\" or \"crawfish boil\" are added to the water for seasoning.\nThe results are then dumped onto large, newspaper-draped tables and in some areas covered in Creole/Cajun spice blends, such as REX, Zatarain's, Louisiana Fish Fry, or Tony Chachere's. Also, cocktail sauce, mayonnaise, and hot sauce are sometimes used. The seafood is scooped onto large trays or plates and eaten by hand.\nDuring times when crawfish are not abundant, shrimp and crabs are prepared and served in the same manner.\nAttendees are encouraged to \"suck the head\" of a crawfish by separating the head from the abdomen of the crustacean and sucking out the fat and juices from the head.\nOften, newcomers to the crawfish boil or those unfamiliar with the traditions are jokingly warned \"not to eat the dead ones.\" This comes from the common belief that when live crawfish are boiled, their tails curl beneath themselves, but when dead crawfish are boiled, their tails are straight and limp.\nSeafood boils with crabs and shrimp are also popular.\nFamily.\nThe traditional Cajun outdoor food event is hosted by a farmer in the rural areas of Acadiana. Family and friends of the farmer gather to socialize, play games, dance, drink, and have a copious meal consisting of hog and other dishes. Men have the task of slaughtering a hog, cutting it into usable parts, and cooking the main pork dishes while women have the task of making boudin.\nSimilar to a family , the is a food event that revolves around pork but does not need to be hosted by a farmer. Traditionally, a suckling pig was purchased for the event, but in modern , adult pigs are used.\nUnlike the family , a hog is not butchered by the hosts and there are generally not as many guests or activities. The host and male guests have the task of roasting the pig (see pig roast) while female guests bring side dishes.\nRural Mardi Gras.\nThe traditional Cajun Mardi Gras (see: \"Courir de Mardi Gras\") is a Mardi Gras celebration in rural Cajun Parishes. The tradition originated in the 18th century with the Cajuns of Louisiana, but it was abandoned in the early 20th century because of unwelcome violence associated with the event. In the early 1950s the tradition was revived in Mamou in Evangeline Parish.\nThe event revolves around male maskers on horseback who ride into the countryside to collect food ingredients for the party later on. They entertain householders with Cajun music, dancing, and festive antics in return for the ingredients. The preferred ingredient is fresh chicken: the householder throws a live chicken to the maskers, allowing them to chase it down (symbolizing a hunt); other ingredients include rice, sausage, vegetables, or a frozen chicken if a live one is not available.\nUnlike other Cajun events, men take no part in cooking the main course for the party, and women prepare the chicken and ingredients for the gumbo. Once the festivities begin, the Cajun community members eat and dance to Cajun music until midnight after which is the beginning of Lent."}
{"id": "6187", "revid": "45278140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6187", "title": "Cologne", "text": "Cologne ( ; ; ) is the largest city of the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia and the fourth-most populous city of Germany with nearly 1.1\u00a0million inhabitants in the city proper and over 3.1 million people in the Cologne Bonn urban region. Cologne is also part of the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region, the second biggest metropolitan region by GDP in the European Union. Centered on the left (west) bank of the Rhine, Cologne is located on the River Rhine (Lower Rhine), about southeast of the North Rhine-Westphalia state capital D\u00fcsseldorf and northwest of Bonn, the former capital of West Germany.\nThe city's medieval Cologne Cathedral () was the and is today the third-tallest church and tallest cathedral in the world. It was constructed to house the Shrine of the Three Kings and is a globally recognized landmark and one of the most visited sights and pilgrimage destinations in Europe. The cityscape is further shaped by the Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne. Cologne is famous for Eau de Cologne, which has been produced in the city since 1709; \"cologne\" has since come to be a generic term.\nCologne was founded and established in Germanic Ubii territory in the 1st century\u00a0CE as the Roman , hence its name. was later dropped (except in Latin), and became the name of the city in its own right, which developed into modern German as . , the French version of the city's name, has become standard in English as well. Cologne functioned as the capital of the Roman province of and as the headquarters of the Roman military in the region until occupied by the Franks in 462. During the Middle Ages the city flourished as being located on one of the most important major trade routes between east and western Europe (including the Brabant Road, Via Regia and Publica). Cologne was a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire and one of the major members of the trade union Hanseatic League. It was one of the largest European cities in medieval and renaissance times.\nPrior to World War II, the city had undergone occupations by the French (1794\u20131815) and the British (1918\u20131926), and was part of Prussia beginning in 1815. Cologne was one of the most heavily bombed cities in Germany during World War\u00a0II. The bombing reduced the population by 93% mainly due to evacuation, and destroyed around 80% of the millennia-old city center. The post-war rebuilding has resulted in a mixed cityscape, restoring most major historic landmarks like city gates and churches (31 of them being Romanesque). The city nowadays consists of around 25% pre World War II buildings and boasts around 9,000 historic buildings.\nCologne is a major cultural center for the Rhineland; it hosts more than 30 museums and hundreds of galleries. There are many institutions of higher education, most notably the University of Cologne, one of Europe's oldest and largest universities; the Technical University of Cologne, Germany's largest university of applied sciences; and the German Sport University Cologne. It hosts three Max Planck science institutes and is a major research hub for the aerospace industry, with the German Aerospace Center and the European Astronaut Centre headquarters. Lufthansa, Europe's largest airline, have their main corporate headquarters in Cologne. It also has a significant chemical and automobile industry. Cologne Bonn Airport is a regional hub, the main airport for the region being D\u00fcsseldorf Airport. The Cologne Trade Fair hosts a number of trade shows.\nHistory.\nRoman Cologne.\nThe first urban settlement on the grounds of modern-day Cologne was \"Oppidum Ubiorum\", founded in 38\u00a0BCE by the Ubii, a Cisrhenian Germanic tribe. In 50\u00a0CE, the Romans founded Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium (Cologne) on the river Rhine and the city became the provincial capital of Germania Inferior in 85\u00a0CE. It was also known as . Considerable Roman remains can be found in present-day Cologne, especially near the wharf area, where a 1,900-year-old Roman boat was discovered in late 2007. From 260 to 271, Cologne was the capital of the Gallic Empire under Postumus, Marius, and Victorinus. In 310, under emperor Constantine I, a bridge was built over the Rhine at Cologne. Roman imperial governors resided in the city and it became one of the most important trade and production centers in the Roman Empire north of the Alps. Cologne is shown on the 4th century Peutinger Map.\nMaternus, who was elected as bishop in 313, was the first known bishop of Cologne. The city was the capital of a Roman province until it was occupied by the Ripuarian Franks in 462. Parts of the original Roman sewers are preserved underneath the city, with the new sewerage system having opened in 1890.\nAfter the destruction of the Second Temple in the Siege of Jerusalem and the associated dispersion (diaspora) of the Jews, there is evidence of a Jewish community in Cologne. In 321 CE, Emperor Constantine approved the settlement of a Jewish community with all the freedoms of Roman citizens. It is assumed that it was located near the Marspforte within the city wall. The Edict of Constantine to the Jews is the oldest documented evidence in Germany.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarly medieval Cologne was part of Austrasia within the Frankish Empire. Cunibert, made bishop of Cologne in 623, was an important advisor to the Merovingian King Dagobert I and served with domesticus Pepin of Landen as tutor to the king's son and heir Siegebert III, the future king of Austrasia. In 716, Charles Martel commanded an army for the first time and suffered the only defeat of his life when Chilperic II, King of Neustria, invaded Austrasia and the city fell to him in the Battle of Cologne. Charles fled to the Eifel mountains, rallied supporters and took the city back that same year after defeating Chilperic in the Battle of Ambl\u00e8ve. Cologne had been the seat of a bishop since the Roman period; under Charlemagne, in 795, bishop Hildebold was promoted to archbishop. In the 843 Treaty of Verdun Cologne fell into the dominion of Lothair I's Middle Francia \u2013 later called Lotharingia (Lower Lorraine).\nIn 953, the archbishops of Cologne first gained noteworthy secular power when bishop Bruno was appointed as duke by his brother Otto I, King of Germany. In order to weaken the secular nobility, who threatened his power, Otto endowed Bruno and his archiepiscopal successors with the prerogatives of secular princes, thus establishing the Electorate of Cologne, formed by the temporal possessions of the archbishopric and included in the end a strip of territory along the left Bank of the Rhine east of J\u00fclich, as well as the Duchy of Westphalia on the other side of the Rhine, beyond Berg and Mark. By the end of the 12th century, the Archbishop of Cologne was one of the seven electors of the Holy Roman Emperor. Besides being prince elector, he was Archchancellor of Italy as well, technically from 1238 and permanently from 1263 until 1803.\nFollowing the Battle of Worringen in 1288, Cologne gained its independence from the archbishops and became a Free City. Archbishop Sigfried II von Westerburg was forced to reside in Bonn. The archbishop nevertheless preserved the right of capital punishment. Thus the municipal council (though in strict political opposition towards the archbishop) depended upon him in all matters concerning criminal justice. This included torture, the sentence for which was only allowed to be handed down by the episcopal judge known as the greve. This legal situation lasted until the French conquest of Cologne.\nBesides its economic and political significance Cologne also became an important centre of medieval pilgrimage, when Cologne's archbishop, Rainald of Dassel, gave the relics of the Three Wise Men to Cologne's cathedral in 1164 (after they had been taken from Milan). Besides the three magi Cologne preserves the relics of Saint Ursula and Albertus Magnus.\nCologne's location on the river Rhine placed it at the intersection of the major trade routes between east and west as well as the main south\u2013north Western Europe trade route, Venice to Netherlands; even by the mid-10th century, merchants in the town were already known for their prosperity and luxurious standard of living due to the availability of trade opportunities. The intersection of these trade routes was the basis of Cologne's growth. By the end of the 12th century, Archbishop Phillip von Heinsberg enclosed the entire city with walls. By 1300 the city population was 50,000\u201355,000. Cologne was a member of the Hanseatic League in 1475, when Frederick III confirmed the city's imperial immediacy. Cologne was so influential in regional commerce that its systems of weights and measurements (e.g. the Cologne mark) were used throughout Europe.\nEarly modern history.\nThe economic structures of medieval and early modern Cologne were characterised by the city's status as a major harbour and transport hub on the Rhine. Craftsmanship was organised by self-administering guilds, some of which were exclusive to women.\nAs a free imperial city, Cologne was a self-ruling state within the Holy Roman Empire, an imperial estate with seat and vote at the Imperial Diet, and as such had the right (and obligation) to contribute to the defense of the Empire and maintain its own military force. As they wore a red uniform, these troops were known as the \"Rote Funken\" (red sparks). These soldiers were part of the Army of the Holy Roman Empire (\"Reichskontingent\"). They fought in the wars of the 17th and 18th century, including the wars against revolutionary France in which the small force was almost completely wiped out in combat. The tradition of these troops is preserved as a military persiflage by Cologne's most outstanding carnival society, the \"Rote Funken\".\nThe Free Imperial City of Cologne must not be confused with the Electorate of Cologne, which was a state of its own within the Holy Roman Empire. Since the second half of the 16th century the majority of archbishops were drawn from the Bavarian Wittelsbach dynasty. Due to the free status of Cologne, the archbishops were usually not allowed to enter the city. Thus they took up residence in Bonn and later in Br\u00fchl on the Rhine. As members of an influential and powerful family, and supported by their outstanding status as electors, the archbishops of Cologne repeatedly challenged and threatened the free status of Cologne during the 17th and 18th centuries, resulting in complicated affairs, which were handled by diplomatic means and propaganda as well as by the supreme courts of the Holy Roman Empire.\nFrom the 19th century until World War I.\nCologne lost its status as a free city during the French period. According to the Treaty of Lun\u00e9ville (1801) all the territories of the Holy Roman Empire on the left bank of the Rhine were officially incorporated into the French Republic (which had already occupied Cologne in 1794). Thus this region later became part of Napoleon's Empire. Cologne was part of the French D\u00e9partement Roer (named after the river Roer, German: Rur) with Aachen (French: Aix-la-Chapelle) as its capital. The French modernised public life, for example by introducing the Napoleonic code and removing the old elites from power. The Napoleonic code remained in use on the left bank of the Rhine until 1900, when a unified civil code (the \"B\u00fcrgerliches Gesetzbuch\") was introduced in the German Empire. In 1815 at the Congress of Vienna, Cologne was made part of the Kingdom of Prussia, first in the Province of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg and then the Rhine Province.\nThe permanent tensions between the Catholic Rhineland and the overwhelmingly Protestant Prussian state repeatedly escalated with Cologne being in the focus of the conflict. In 1837 the archbishop of Cologne, Clemens August von Droste-Vischering, was arrested and imprisoned for two years after a dispute over the legal status of marriages between Catholics and Protestants (\"Mischehenstreit\"). In 1874, during the Kulturkampf, Archbishop Paul Melchers was imprisoned before taking asylum in the Netherlands. These conflicts alienated the Catholic population from Berlin and contributed to a deeply felt anti-Prussian resentment, which was still significant after World War II, when the former mayor of Cologne, Konrad Adenauer, became the first West German chancellor.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, Cologne absorbed numerous surrounding towns, and by World War\u00a0I had already grown to 700,000 inhabitants. Industrialisation changed the city and spurred its growth. Vehicle and engine manufacturing was especially successful, though the heavy industry was less ubiquitous than in the Ruhr area. The cathedral, started in 1248 but abandoned around 1560, was eventually finished in 1880 not just as a place of worship but also as a German national monument celebrating the newly founded German empire and the continuity of the German nation since the Middle Ages. Some of this urban growth occurred at the expense of the city's historic heritage with much being demolished (for example, the city walls or the area around the cathedral) and sometimes replaced by contemporary buildings.\nCologne was designated as one of the Fortresses of the German Confederation. It was turned into a heavily armed fortress (opposing the French and Belgian fortresses of Verdun and Li\u00e8ge) with two fortified belts surrounding the city, the remains of which can be seen to this day. The military demands on what became Germany's largest fortress presented a significant obstacle to urban development, with forts, bunkers, and wide defensive dugouts completely encircling the city and preventing expansion; this resulted in a very densely built-up area within the city itself.\nDuring World War\u00a0I Cologne was the target of several minor air raids but suffered no significant damage. Cologne was occupied by the British Army of the Rhine until 1926, under the terms of the Armistice and the subsequent Versailles Peace Treaty. In contrast with the harsh behaviour of the French occupation troops in Germany, the British forces were more lenient to the local population. Konrad Adenauer, the mayor of Cologne from 1917 until 1933 and later a West German chancellor, acknowledged the political impact of this approach, especially since Britain had opposed French demands for a permanent Allied occupation of the entire Rhineland.\nAs part of the demilitarisation of the Rhineland, the city's fortifications had to be dismantled. This was an opportunity to create two green belts (\"Gr\u00fcng\u00fcrtel\") around the city by converting the fortifications and their fields of fire into large public parks. This was not completed until 1933. In 1919 the University of Cologne, closed by the French in 1798, was reopened. This was considered to be a replacement for the loss of the University of Strasbourg on the west bank of the Rhine, which reverted to France with the rest of Alsace. Cologne prospered during the Weimar Republic (1919\u201333), and progress was made especially in public governance, city planning, housing and social affairs. Social housing projects were considered exemplary and were copied by other German cities. Cologne competed to host the Olympics, and a modern sports stadium was erected at M\u00fcngersdorf. When the British occupation ended, the prohibition of civil aviation was lifted and Cologne Butzweilerhof Airport soon became a hub for national and international air traffic, second in Germany only to Berlin Tempelhof Airport.\nThe democratic parties lost the local elections in Cologne in March 1933 to the Nazi Party and other extreme-right parties. The Nazis then arrested the Communist and Social Democrats members of the city assembly, and Mayor Adenauer was dismissed. Compared to some other major cities, however, the Nazis never gained decisive support in Cologne. (Significantly, the number of votes cast for the Nazi Party in Reichstag elections had always been the national average.) By 1939, the population had risen to 772,221 inhabitants.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Cologne was a Military Area Command Headquarters () for Wehrkreis VI (headquartered at M\u00fcnster). Cologne was under the command of Lieutenant-General Freiherr Roeder von Diersburg, who was responsible for military operations in Bonn, Siegburg, Aachen, J\u00fclich, D\u00fcren, and Monschau. Cologne was home to the 211th Infantry Regiment and the 26th Artillery Regiment.\nThe Allies dropped 44,923.2 tons of bombs on the city during World War II, destroying 61% of its built up area. During the Bombing of Cologne in World War II, Cologne endured 262 air raids by the Western Allies, which caused approximately 20,000 civilian casualties and almost completely wiped out the central part of the city. During the night of 31 May 1942, Cologne was the target of \"Operation Millennium\", the first 1,000 bomber raid by the Royal Air Force in World War\u00a0II. 1,046 heavy bombers attacked their target with 1,455 tons of explosives, approximately two-thirds of which were incendiary. This raid lasted about 75 minutes, destroyed of built-up area (61%), killed 486 civilians and made 59,000 people homeless. The devastation was recorded by Hermann Claasen from 1942 until the end of the war, and presented in his exhibition and book of 1947 \"Singing in the furnace. Cologne \u2013 Remains of an old city\".\nCologne was taken by the American First Army in early March 1945 during the Invasion of Germany after a battle. By the end of the war, the population of Cologne had been reduced by 95%. This loss was mainly caused by a massive evacuation of the people to more rural areas. The same happened in many other German cities in the last two years of war. By the end of 1945, however, the population had already recovered to approximately 450,000. By the end of the war, essentially all of Cologne's pre-war Jewish population of 11,000 had been deported or killed by the Nazis. The six synagogues of the city were destroyed. The synagogue on Roonstra\u00dfe was rebuilt in 1959.\nPost-war and Cold War eras.\nDespite Cologne's status as the largest city in the region, nearby D\u00fcsseldorf was chosen as the political capital of the federated state of North Rhine-Westphalia. With Bonn being chosen as the provisional federal capital (\"provisorische Bundeshauptstadt\") and seat of the government of the Federal Republic of Germany (then informally West Germany), Cologne benefited by being sandwiched between two important political centres. The city became\u2013and still is\u2013home to a number of federal agencies and organizations. After reunification in 1990, Berlin was made the capital of Germany.\nIn 1945 architect and urban planner Rudolf Schwarz called Cologne the \"world's greatest heap of rubble\". Schwarz designed the master plan for reconstruction in 1947, which included the construction of several new thoroughfares through the city centre, especially the \"Nord-S\u00fcd-Fahrt\" (\"North-South-Drive\"). The master plan took into consideration the fact that even shortly after the war a large increase in automobile traffic could be anticipated. Plans for new roads had already, to a certain degree, evolved under the Nazi administration, but the actual construction became easier when most of the city centre was in ruins.\nThe destruction of 95% of the city centre, including the famous Twelve Romanesque churches such as St.\u00a0Gereon, Great St.\u00a0Martin, St.\u00a0Maria im Kapitol and several other monuments in World War\u00a0II, meant a tremendous loss of cultural treasures. The rebuilding of those churches and other landmarks such as the G\u00fcrzenich event hall was not undisputed among leading architects and art historians at that time, but in most cases, civil intention prevailed. The reconstruction lasted until the 1990s, when the Romanesque church of St.\u00a0Kunibert was finished.\nIn 1959, the city's population reached pre-war numbers again. It then grew steadily, exceeding 1\u00a0million for about one year from 1975. It remained just below that until mid-2010, when it exceeded 1\u00a0million again.\nPost-reunification.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s Cologne's economy prospered for two main reasons. The first was the growth in the number of media companies, both in the private and public sectors; they are especially catered for in the newly developed Media Park, which creates a strong visual focal point in Cologne's city centre and includes the \"K\u00f6lnTurm\", one of Cologne's most prominent high-rise buildings. The second was the permanent improvement of the diverse traffic infrastructure, which made Cologne one of the most easily accessible metropolitan areas in Central Europe.\nDue to the economic success of the Cologne Trade Fair, the city arranged a large extension to the fair site in 2005. At the same time the original buildings, which date back to the 1920s, were rented out to RTL, Germany's largest private broadcaster, as their new corporate headquarters.\nCologne was the focus of the 2015-16 New Year's Eve sexual assaults in Germany, with over 500 women reporting that they were sexually assaulted by persons of African and Arab appearance.\nGeography.\nThe metropolitan area encompasses over , extending around a central point that lies at 50\u00b0 56' 33 latitude and 6\u00b0 57' 32 longitude. The city's highest point is above sea level (the Monte Troodel\u00f6h) and its lowest point is above sea level (the Worringer Bruch). The city of Cologne lies within the larger area of the Cologne Lowland, a cone-shaped area of the central Rhineland that lies between Bonn, Aachen and D\u00fcsseldorf.\nDistricts.\nCologne is divided into 9 boroughs (\"Stadtbezirke\") and 85 districts (\"Stadtteile\"):\nClimate.\nLocated in the Rhine-Ruhr area, Cologne is one of the warmest cities in Germany. It has a temperate\u2013oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") with cool winters and warm summers. It is also one of the cloudiest cities in Germany, with just 1,567.5 hours of sun a year. Its average annual temperature is : during the day and at night. In January, the mean temperature is , while the mean temperature in July is . The record high temperature of happened on 25 July 2019 during the July 2019 European heat wave in which Cologne saw three consecutive days over . Especially the inner urban neighbourhoods experience a greater number of hot days, as well as significantly higher temperatures during nighttime compared to the surrounding area (including the airport, where temperatures are classified). Still temperatures can vary noticeably over the course of a month with warmer and colder weather. Precipitation is spread evenly throughout the year with a light peak in summer due to showers and thunderstorms.\nThe progressing climate change can be seen by looking at the climate data of the previous decade with lower mean temperatures.\nFlood protection.\nCologne is regularly affected by flooding from the Rhine and is considered the most flood-prone European city. A city agency (\"Stadtentw\u00e4sserungsbetriebe K\u00f6ln\", \"Cologne Urban Drainage Operations\") manages an extensive flood control system which includes both permanent and mobile flood walls, protection from rising waters for buildings close to the river banks, monitoring and forecasting systems, pumping stations and programmes to create or protect floodplains, and river embankments. The system was redesigned after a 1993 flood, which resulted in heavy damage.\nDemographics.\nIn the Roman Empire, the city was large and rich with a population of 40,000 in 100\u2013200\u00a0AD. The city was home to around 20,000 people in 1000\u00a0AD, growing to 50,000 in 1200\u00a0AD. The Rhineland metropolis still had 50,000 residents in 1300\u00a0AD.\nCologne is the fourth-largest city by population in Germany after Berlin, Hamburg and Munich. As of 31 December 2021, there were 1,079,301 people registered as living in Cologne in an area of , which makes Cologne the third largest city by area. The population density was . Cologne first reached the population of 1,000,000 in 1975 due to the incorporation of Wesseling, however this was reversed after public opposition. In 2009 Cologne's population again reached 1,000,000 and it became one of the four cities in Germany with a population exceeding 1 Million. The metropolitan area of the Cologne Bonn Region is home to 3,573,500 living on . It is part of the polycentric megacity region Rhine-Ruhr with a population of over 11,000,000 people.\nThere were 551,528 women and 527,773 men in Cologne. In 2021, there were 11,127 births in Cologne; 5,844 marriages and 1,808 divorces, and 10,536 deaths. In the city, the population was spread out, with 16.3% under the age of 18, and 17.8% were 65 years of age or older. 203 people in Cologne were over the age of 100.\nAccording to the Statistical Office of the City of Cologne, the number of people with a migrant background is at 40.5% (436,660). 2,254 people acquired German citizenship in 2021. In 2021, there were 559,854 households, of which 18.4% had children under the age of 18; 51% of all households were made up of singles. 8% of all households were single-parent households. The average household size was 1.88.\nResidents with foreign citizenship.\nCologne residents with a foreign citizenship as of 31 December 2021 is as follows:\nTurkish community.\nCologne is home to 90,000 people of Turkish origin and is the second largest German city with Turkish population after Berlin. Cologne has a Little Istanbul in Keupstra\u00dfe that has many Turkish restaurants and markets. Famous Turkish-German people like rapper Eko Fresh and TV presenter Nazan Eckes were born in Cologne.\nLanguage.\nColognian or K\u00f6lsch () (natively \"K\u00f6lsch Platt\") is a small set of very closely related dialects, or variants, of the Ripuarian Central German group of languages. These dialects are spoken in the area covered by the Archdiocese and former Electorate of Cologne reaching from Neuss in the north to just south of Bonn, west to D\u00fcren and east to Olpe in the North-West of Germany. K\u00f6lsch is one of the very few city dialects in Germany, which also include the dialect spoken in Berlin, for example.\nReligion.\nAs of 2015, 35.5% of the population belonged to the Catholic Church, the largest religious body, and 15.5% to the Protestant Church. Irenaeus of Lyons claimed that Christianity was brought to Cologne by Roman soldiers and traders at an unknown early date. It is known that in the early second century it was a bishop's seat. The first historical Bishop of Cologne was Saint Maternus. Thomas Aquinas studied in Cologne in 1244 under Albertus Magnus. Cologne is the seat of the Archdiocese of Cologne.\nAccording to the 2011 census, 2.1% of the population was Eastern Orthodox, 0.5% belonged of an Evangelical Free Church and 4.2% belonged to further religious communities officially recognized by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia (such as Jehovah's Witnesses).\nThere are several mosques, including the Cologne Central Mosque run by the Turkish-Islamic Union for Religious Affairs. In 2011, about 11.2% of the population was Muslim.\nCologne also has one of the oldest and largest Jewish communities in Germany. In 2011, 0.3% of Cologne's population was Jewish.\nOn 11 October 2021, the Mayor of Cologne, Henriette Reker, announced that all of Cologne's 35 mosques would be allowed to broadcast the Adhan (prayer call) for up to five minutes on Fridays between noon and 3 p.m. She commented that the move \"shows that diversity is appreciated and loved in Cologne\".\nGovernment and politics.\nThe city's administration is headed by the mayor and the three deputy mayors.\nPolitical traditions and developments.\nThe long tradition of a free imperial city, which long dominated an exclusively Catholic population and the age-old conflict between the church and the bourgeoisie (and within it between the patricians and craftsmen) have created its own political climate in Cologne. Various interest groups often form networks beyond party boundaries. The resulting web of relationships, with political, economic, and cultural links with each other in a system of mutual favours, obligations and dependencies, is called the 'Cologne coterie'. This has often led to an unusual proportional distribution in the city government and degenerated at times into corruption: in 1999, a \"waste scandal\" over kickbacks and illegal campaign contributions came to light, which led not only to the imprisonment of the entrepreneur Hellmut Trienekens, but also to the downfall of almost the entire leadership of the ruling Social Democrats.\nMayor.\nThe incumbent Lord Mayor of Cologne is Henriette Reker. She received 52.66% of the vote at the municipal election on 17 October 2015, running as an independent with the support of the CDU, FDP, and Greens. She took office on 15 December 2015. Reker was re-elected to a second term in a runoff election on 27 September 2020, in which she received 59.27% of the vote.\nThe most recent mayoral election was held on 13 September 2020, with a runoff held on 27 September, and the results were as follows:\n! rowspan=2 colspan=2| Candidate\n! rowspan=2| Party\n! colspan=2| First round\n! colspan=2| Second round\n! Votes\n! Votes\n! colspan=3| Valid votes\n! 415,933\n! 98.7\n! 294,016\n! 99.1\n! colspan=3| Invalid votes\n! 5,633\n! 1.3\n! 2,727\n! 0.9\n! colspan=3| Total\n! 421,566\n! 100.0\n! 296,743\n! 100.0\n! colspan=3| Electorate/voter turnout\n! 820,527\n! 51.4\n! 818,731\n! 36.2\nCity council.\nThe Cologne city council (\"K\u00f6lner Stadtrat\") governs the city alongside the Mayor. It serves a term of five years. The most recent city council election was held on 13 September 2020, and the results were as follows:\n! colspan=2| Party\n! Votes\n! +/-\n! Seats\n! colspan=2| Valid votes\n! 417,227\n! 98.9\n! \n! colspan=2| Invalid votes\n! 4,596\n! 1.1\n! \n! colspan=2| Total\n! 421,823\n! 100.0\n! 90\n! \u00b10\n! colspan=2| Electorate/voter turnout\n! 820,526\n! 51.4\n! 1.8\n! \nState Landtag.\nIn the Landtag of North Rhine-Westphalia, Cologne is divided among seven constituencies. After the 2022 North Rhine-Westphalia state election, the composition and representation of each was as follows:\nFederal parliament.\nIn the Bundestag, Cologne is divided among four constituencies. In the 20th Bundestag, elected 26 September 2021, the composition and representation of each was as follows:\nCityscape.\nThe inner city of Cologne was largely destroyed during World War\u00a0II. The reconstruction of the city followed the style of the 1950s, while respecting the old layout and naming of the streets. Thus, the city centre today is characterized by modern architecture, with a few interspersed pre-war buildings which were reconstructed due to their historical importance. Some buildings of the \"Wiederaufbauzeit\" (era of reconstruction), for example, the opera house by Wilhelm Riphahn, are nowadays regarded as classics of modern architecture. Nevertheless, the uncompromising style of the Cologne Opera house and other modern buildings has remained controversial.\nThe districts outside the city center consist mostly of 19th and 20th century buildings. Around 25% of Cologne was built before 1945.\nGreen areas account for over a quarter of Cologne, which is approximately of public green space for every inhabitant.\nWildlife.\nThe dominant wildlife of Cologne is insects, small rodents, and several species of birds. Pigeons are the most often seen animals in Cologne, although the number of birds is augmented each year by a growing population of feral exotics, most visibly parrots such as the rose-ringed parakeet. The sheltered climate in southeast Northrhine-Westphalia allows these birds to survive through the winter, and in some cases, they are displacing native species. The plumage of Cologne's green parrots is highly visible even from a distance, and contrasts starkly with the otherwise muted colours of the cityscape.\nHedgehogs, rabbits and squirrels are common in parks and the greener parts of town. In the outer suburbs foxes and wild boar can be seen, even during the day.\nTourism.\nCologne had 5.8\u00a0million overnight stays booked and 3.35\u00a0million arrivals in 2016.\nLandmarks.\nMedieval houses.\nThe Cologne City Hall (\"K\u00f6lner Rathaus\"), founded in the 12th century, is the oldest city hall in Germany still in use. The Renaissance-style loggia and tower were added in the 15th century. Other famous buildings include the G\u00fcrzenich, Haus Saaleck and the Overstolzenhaus.\nMedieval city gates.\nOf the twelve medieval city gates that once existed, only the Eigelsteintorburg at Ebertplatz, the Hahnentor at Rudolfplatz and the Severinstorburg at Chlodwigplatz still stand today.\nBridges.\nSeveral bridges cross the Rhine in Cologne. They are (from south to north): the Rodenkirchen Bridge, South Bridge (railway), , Deutz Bridge, Hohenzollern Bridge (railway), (\"Zoobr\u00fccke\") and M\u00fclheim Bridge. In particular the iron tied arch Hohenzollern Bridge (\"Hohenzollernbr\u00fccke\") is a dominant landmark along the river embankment. A Rhine crossing of a special kind is provided by the Cologne Cable Car (German: \"K\u00f6lner Seilbahn\"), a cableway that runs across the river between the Cologne Zoological Garden in Riehl and the Rheinpark in Deutz.\nHigh-rise structures.\nCologne's tallest structure is the Colonius telecommunication tower at . The observation deck has been closed since 1992. A selection of the tallest buildings in Cologne is listed below. Other tall structures include the Hansahochhaus (designed by architect Jacob Koerfer and completed in 1925 \u2013 it was at one time Europe's tallest office building), the Kranhaus buildings at Rheinauhafen, and the Messeturm K\u00f6ln (\"trade fair tower\").\nCulture.\nCologne has numerous museums. The famous Roman-Germanic Museum features art and architecture from the city's distant past; the Museum Ludwig houses one of the most important collections of modern art in Europe, including a Picasso collection matched only by the museums in Barcelona and Paris. The Museum Schn\u00fctgen of religious art is partly housed in St.\u00a0Cecilia, one of Cologne's Twelve Romanesque churches. Many art galleries in Cologne enjoy a worldwide reputation like e.g. Galerie Karsten Greve, one of the leading galleries for postwar and contemporary art.\nCologne has more than 60 music venues and the third-highest density of music venues of Germany's four largest cities, after Munich and Hamburg and ahead of Berlin.\nSeveral orchestras are active in the city, among them the G\u00fcrzenich Orchestra, which is also the orchestra of the Cologne Opera and the WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne (\"German State Radio Orchestra\"), both based at the Cologne Philharmonic Orchestra Building (K\u00f6lner Philharmonie). Other orchestras are the Musica Antiqua K\u00f6ln, the WDR Rundfunkorchester K\u00f6ln and WDR Big Band, and several choirs, including the WDR Rundfunkchor K\u00f6ln. Cologne was also an important hotbed for electronic music in the 1950s (Studio f\u00fcr elektronische Musik, Karlheinz Stockhausen) and again from the 1990s onward. The public radio and TV station WDR was involved in promoting musical movements such as Krautrock in the 1970s; the influential Can was formed there in 1968. There are several centres of nightlife, among them the \"Kwartier Lat\u00e4ng\" (the student quarter around the Z\u00fclpicher Stra\u00dfe) and the nightclub-studded areas around Hohenzollernring, Friesenplatz and Rudolfplatz.\nThe large annual literary festival with its features regional and international authors. The main literary figure connected with Cologne is the writer Heinrich B\u00f6ll, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature. Since 2012, there is also an annual international festival of philosophy called .\nThe city also has the most pubs per capita in Germany. Cologne is well known for its beer, called K\u00f6lsch. K\u00f6lsch is also the name of the local dialect. This has led to the common joke of K\u00f6lsch being the only language one can drink.\nCologne is also famous for Eau de Cologne (German: \"K\u00f6lnisch Wasser\"; lit: \"Water of Cologne\"), a perfume created by Italian expatriate Johann Maria Farina at the beginning of the 18th century. During the 18th century, this perfume became increasingly popular, was exported all over Europe by the Farina family and \"Farina\" became a household name for \"Eau de Cologne\". In 1803 Wilhelm M\u00fclhens entered into a contract with an unrelated person from Italy named Carlo Francesco Farina who granted him the right to use his family name and M\u00fchlens opened a small factory at Cologne's Glockengasse. In later years, and after various court battles, his grandson Ferdinand M\u00fclhens was forced to abandon the name \"Farina\" for the company and their product. He decided to use the house number given to the factory at Glockengasse during the French occupation in the early 19th century, 4711. Today, original Eau de Cologne is still produced in Cologne by both the Farina family, in the eighth generation, and by M\u00e4urer &amp; Wirtz who bought the 4711 brand in 2006.\nCarnival.\nThe Cologne carnival is one of the largest street festivals in Europe. In Cologne, the carnival season officially starts on 11 November at 11 minutes past 11\u00a0a.m. with the proclamation of the new Carnival Season, and continues until Ash Wednesday. However, the so-called \"Tolle Tage\" (crazy days) do not start until \"Weiberfastnacht\" (Women's Carnival) or, in dialect, \"Wieverfastelovend\", the Thursday before Ash Wednesday, which is the beginning of the street carnival. Z\u00fclpicher Strasse and its surroundings, Neumarkt square, Heumarkt and all bars and pubs in the city are crowded with people in costumes dancing and drinking in the streets. Hundreds of thousands of visitors flock to Cologne during this time. Generally, around a million people celebrate in the streets on the Thursday before Ash Wednesday.\nRivalry with D\u00fcsseldorf.\nCologne and D\u00fcsseldorf have a \"fierce regional rivalry\", which includes carnival parades, ice hockey, football, and beer. People in Cologne prefer K\u00f6lsch while people in D\u00fcsseldorf prefer Altbier (\"Alt\"). Waiters and patrons will \"scorn\" and make a \"mockery\" of people who order Alt beer in Cologne or K\u00f6lsch in D\u00fcsseldorf. The rivalry has been described as a \"love\u2013hate relationship\". The K\u00f6ln Guild of Brewers was established in 1396. The K\u00f6lsch beer style first appeared in the 1800s and in 1986 the breweries established an appellation under which only breweries in the city are allowed to use the term K\u00f6lsch.\nMusic fairs and festivals.\nThe city was home to the internationally famous Ringfest, and now to the C/o pop festival.&lt;ref name=\"C/o pop\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn addition, Cologne enjoys a thriving Christmas Market (\"Weihnachtsmarkt\") presence with several locations in the city.\nEconomy.\nAs the largest city in the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region, Cologne benefits from a large market structure. In competition with D\u00fcsseldorf, the economy of Cologne is primarily based on insurance and media industries, while the city is also an important cultural and research centre and home to a number of corporate headquarters.\nAmong the largest media companies based in Cologne are Westdeutscher Rundfunk, RTL Television (with subsidiaries), n-tv, Deutschlandradio, Brainpool TV and publishing houses like J.\u00a0P. Bachem, Taschen, Tandem Verlag, and M.\u00a0DuMont Schauberg. Several clusters of media, arts and communications agencies, TV production studios, and state agencies work partly with private and government-funded cultural institutions. Among the insurance companies based in Cologne are Central, DEVK, DKV, Generali Deutschland, Gen Re, Gothaer, HDI Gerling and national headquarters of Axa Insurance, Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Group and Zurich Financial Services.\nThe German flag carrier Lufthansa and its subsidiary Lufthansa CityLine have their main corporate headquarters in Cologne. The largest employer in Cologne is Ford Europe, which has its European headquarters and a factory in Niehl (Ford-Werke GmbH). Toyota Motorsport GmbH (TMG), Toyota's official motorsports team, responsible for Toyota rally cars, and then Formula One cars, has its headquarters and workshops in Cologne. Other large companies based in Cologne include the REWE Group, T\u00dcV Rheinland, Deutz AG and a number of K\u00f6lsch breweries. The largest three K\u00f6lsch breweries of Cologne are Reissdorf, Gaffel, and Fr\u00fch.\nHistorically, Cologne has always been an important trade city, with land, air, and sea connections. The city has five Rhine ports, the second largest inland port in Germany and one of the largest in Europe. Cologne Bonn Airport is the second largest freight terminal in Germany. Today, the Cologne trade fair (\"Koelnmesse\") ranks as a major European trade fair location with over 50 trade fairs and other large cultural and sports events. In 2008 Cologne had 4.31\u00a0million overnight stays booked and 2.38\u00a0million arrivals. Cologne's largest daily newspaper is the \"K\u00f6lner Stadt-Anzeiger\".\nCologne shows a significant increase in startup companies, especially when considering digital business.\nCologne has also become the first German city with a population of more than a million people to declare climate emergency.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nRoad building had been a major issue in the 1920s under the leadership of mayor Konrad Adenauer. The first German limited-access road was constructed after 1929 between Cologne and Bonn. Today, this is the Bundesautobahn 555. In 1965, Cologne became the first German city to be fully encircled by a motorway ring road. Roughly at the same time, a city centre bypass (\"Stadtautobahn\") was planned, but only partially put into effect, due to opposition by environmental groups. The completed section became \"Bundesstra\u00dfe (\"Federal Road\") B 55a\", which begins at the \"Zoobr\u00fccke\" (\"Zoo Bridge\") and meets with A\u00a04 and A\u00a03 at the interchange Cologne East. Nevertheless, it is referred to as \"Stadtautobahn\" by most locals. In contrast to this, the \"Nord-S\u00fcd-Fahrt\" (\"North-South-Drive\") was actually completed, a new four/six-lane city centre through-route, which had already been anticipated by planners such as Fritz Schumacher in the 1920s. The last section south of \"Ebertplatz\" was completed in 1972.\nIn 2005, the first stretch of an eight-lane motorway in North Rhine-Westphalia was opened to traffic on Bundesautobahn\u00a03, part of the eastern section of the Cologne Beltway between the interchanges Cologne East and Heumar.\nCycling.\nCompared to other German cities, Cologne has a traffic layout that is not very bicycle-friendly. It has repeatedly ranked among the worst in an independent evaluation conducted by the Allgemeiner Deutscher Fahrrad-Club. In 2014, it ranked 36th out of 39 German cities with a population greater than 200,000.\nRailway.\nCologne has a railway service with InterCity and ICE-trains stopping at K\u00f6ln Hauptbahnhof (Cologne Main Station), K\u00f6ln Messe/Deutz and Cologne/Bonn Airport. ICE and TGV Thalys high-speed trains link Cologne with Amsterdam, Brussels (in 1h47, 9 departures/day) and Paris (in 3h14, 6 departures/day). There are frequent ICE trains to other German cities, including Frankfurt am Main and Berlin. ICE trains to London via the Channel Tunnel were planned for 2013.\nThe Cologne Stadtbahn operated by K\u00f6lner Verkehrsbetriebe (KVB) is an extensive light rail system that is partially underground and serves Cologne and a number of neighbouring cities. It evolved from the tram system. Nearby Bonn is linked by both the Stadtbahn and main line railway trains, with occasional recreational boats on the Rhine. D\u00fcsseldorf is also linked by S-Bahn trains, which are operated by .\nThe Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn has 5 lines which cross Cologne. The S13/S19 runs 24/7 between Cologne Hbf and Cologne/Bonn airport.\nBuses.\nThere are frequent buses covering most of the city and surrounding suburbs, and Eurolines coaches to London via Brussels.\nWater.\nH\u00e4fen und G\u00fcterverkehr K\u00f6ln (Ports and Goods traffic Cologne, HGK) is one of the largest operators of inland ports in Germany. Ports include K\u00f6ln-Deutz, K\u00f6ln-Godorf and K\u00f6ln-Niehl\u00a0I and II.\nAir.\nCologne's international airport is Cologne/Bonn Airport (CGN). It is also called \"Konrad Adenauer Airport\" after Germany's first post-war Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who was born in the city and was mayor of Cologne from 1917 until 1933. The airport is shared with the neighbouring city of Bonn. Cologne is headquarters to the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA).\nEducation.\nCologne is home to numerous universities and colleges, and host to some 72,000 students. Its oldest university, the University of Cologne (founded in 1388) is the largest university in Germany, as the Cologne University of Applied Sciences is the largest university of Applied Sciences in the country. The Cologne University of Music and Dance is the largest conservatory in Europe. Foreigners can have German lessons in the VHS (Adult Education Centre).\nLauder Morijah School (), a Jewish school in Cologne, previously closed. After Russian immigration increased the Jewish population, the school reopened in 2002.\nMedia.\nWithin Germany, Cologne is known as an important media centre. Several radio and television stations, including Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR), RTL and VOX, have their headquarters in the city. Film and TV production is also important. The city is \"Germany's capital of TV crime stories\". A third of all German TV productions are made in the Cologne region. Furthermore, the city hosts the Cologne Comedy Festival, which is considered to be the largest comedy festival in mainland Europe.\nSports.\nCologne hosts the football club 1. FC K\u00f6ln, who play currently in the 2. Bundesliga (second division). They play their home matches in RheinEnergieStadion which also hosted five matches of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. The International Olympic Committee and the International Association of Sports and Leisure Facilities gave RheinEnergieStadion a bronze medal for \"being one of the best sporting venues in the world\". The city also hosts the two football clubs FC Viktoria K\u00f6ln and SC Fortuna K\u00f6ln, who play in the 3. Liga (third division) and the Regionalliga West (fourth division) respectively. Cologne's oldest football club 1. FSV K\u00f6ln 1899 is playing with its amateur team in the Verbandsliga (sixth division).\nCologne also is home of the ice hockey team K\u00f6lner Haie, which is playing in the highest ice hockey league in Germany, the Deutsche Eishockey Liga. They are based at Lanxess Arena.\nSeveral horse races per year are held at Cologne-Weidenpesch Racecourse since 1897, the annual Cologne Marathon was started in 1997 and the classic cycling race Rund um K\u00f6ln is organised in Cologne since 1908. The city also has a long tradition in rowing, being home of some of Germany's oldest regatta courses and boat clubs, such as the K\u00f6lner Rudergesellschaft 1891 or the K\u00f6lner Ruderverein von 1877 in the Rodenkirchen district.\nJapanese automotive manufacturer Toyota has their major motorsport facility known by the name Toyota Motorsport GmbH, which is located in the Marsdorf district, and is responsible for Toyota's major motorsport development and operations, which in the past included the FIA Formula One World Championship, the FIA World Rally Championship and the Le Mans Series. They are working on Toyota's team Toyota Gazoo Racing which competes in the FIA World Endurance Championship.\nCologne is considered \"the secret golf capital of Germany\". The first golf club in North Rhine-Westphalia was founded in Cologne in 1906. The city offers the most options and top events in Germany.\nThe city has hosted several athletic events which includes the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup, 2006 FIFA World Cup, 2007 World Men's Handball Championship, 2010 and 2017 Ice Hockey World Championships, 2024 FIFA European Championship and 2010 Gay Games.\nSince 2014, the city has hosted ESL One Cologne, one of the biggest tournaments held annually in July/August at Lanxess Arena.\nFurthermore, Cologne is home of the Sport-Club Colonia 1906, Germany's oldest boxing club, and the K\u00f6lner Athleten-Club 1882, the world's oldest active weightlifting club.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nCologne is twinned with:"}
{"id": "6188", "revid": "48991186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6188", "title": "Buddhist cuisine", "text": "Buddhist cuisine is an Asian cuisine that is followed by monks and many believers from areas historically influenced by Mahayana Buddhism. It is vegetarian or vegan, and it is based on the Dharmic concept of ahimsa (non-violence). Vegetarianism is common in other Dharmic faiths such as Hinduism, Jainism and Sikhism, as well as East Asian religions like Taoism. While monks, nuns and a minority of believers are vegetarian year-round, many believers follow the Buddhist vegetarian diet for celebrations.\nBuddhists believe that cooking is seen as a spiritual practice that produces the nourishment which the body needs to work hard and meditate. The origin of \"Buddhist food\" as a distinct sub-style of cuisine is tied to monasteries, where one member of the community would have the duty of being the head cook and supplying meals that paid respect to the strictures of Buddhist precepts. Temples that were open to visitors from the general public might also serve meals to them and a few temples effectively run functioning restaurants on the premises. In Japan, this culinary custom, recognized as \"sh\u014djin ry\u014dri\" (\u7cbe\u9032\u6599\u7406) or devotion cuisine, is commonly offered at numerous temples, notably in Kyoto. This centuries-old culinary tradition, primarily associated with religious contexts, is seldom encountered beyond places like temples, religious festivals, and funerals. A more recent version, more Chinese in style, is prepared by the \u014cbaku school of zen, and known as ; this is served at the head temple of Manpuku-ji, as well as various subtemples. In modern times, commercial restaurants have also latched on to the style, catering both to practicing and non-practicing lay people.\nPhilosophies governing food.\nVegetarianism.\nMost of the dishes considered to be uniquely Buddhist are vegetarian, but not all Buddhist traditions require vegetarianism of lay followers or clergy. Vegetarian eating is primarily associated with the East and Southeast Asian tradition in China, Vietnam, Japan, and Korea where it is commonly practiced by clergy and may be observed by laity on holidays or as a devotional practice.\nIn the Mahayana tradition, several sutras of the Mahayana canon contain explicit prohibitions against consuming meat, including sections of the Lankavatara Sutra and Surangama Sutra. The monastic community in Chinese Buddhism, Vietnamese Buddhism and most of Korean Buddhism strictly adhere to vegetarianism. \nTheravada Buddhist monks and nuns consume food by gathering alms themselves, and generally must eat whatever foods are offered to them, including meat. The exception to this alms rule is when monks and nuns have seen, heard or known that animal(s) have been specifically killed to feed the alms-seeker, in which case consumption of such meat would be karmically negative, as well as meat from certain animals, such as dogs and snakes, that were regarded as impure in ancient India. The same restriction is also followed by some lay Buddhists and is known as the consumption of \"triply clean meat\" (\u4e09\u51c0\u8089). The P\u0101li Scriptures also indicated that Lord Buddha refusing a proposal by his traitor disciple Devadatta to mandate vegetarianism in the monastic precepts.\nTibetan Buddhism has long accepted that the practical difficulties in obtaining vegetables and grains within most of Tibet make it impossible to insist upon vegetarianism; however, many leading Tibetan Buddhist teachers agree upon the great worth of practicing vegetarianism whenever and wherever possible, such as Chatral Rinpoche, a lifelong advocate of vegetarianism who famously released large numbers of fish caught for food back into the ocean once a year, and who wrote about the practice of saving lives.\nBoth Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists consider that one may practice vegetarianism as part of cultivating Bodhisattvas's paramita.\nOther restrictions.\nIn addition to the ban on garlic, practically all Mahayana monastics in China, Korea, Vietnam and Japan specifically avoid eating strong-smelling plants, traditionally asafoetida, shallot, mountain leek and Chinese onion, which together with garlic are referred to as \"w\u01d4 h\u016bn\" (\u4e94\u8477, or 'Five Acrid and Strong-smelling Vegetables') or \"w\u01d4 x\u012bn\" (\u4e94\u8f9b or 'Five Spices') as they tend to excite senses. This is based on teachings found in the Brahmajala Sutra, the Surangama Sutra and the Lankavatara Sutra. In modern times this rule is often interpreted to include other vegetables of the onion genus, as well as coriander. The origin of this additional restriction is from the Indic region and can still be found among some believers of Hinduism and Jainism.\nThe consumption of non-vegetarian food by strict Buddhists is also subject to various restrictions. As well as the aforementioned \"triply clean meat\" rule followed by Theravada monks, nuns, and some lay Buddhists, many Chinese Buddhists avoid the consumption of beef, large animals, and exotic species. Some Buddhists abstain from eating offal (organ meat), known as \"xi\u00e0shui\" (\u4e0b\u6c34).\nAlcohol and other drugs are also avoided by many Buddhists because of their effects on the mind and \"mindfulness\". It is part of the Five Precepts which dictate that one is not to \"not to take any substance that will cloud the mind.\" Caffeinated drinks may sometimes be included under this restriction. \nSimple and natural.\nIn theory and practice, many regional styles of cooking may be adapted to be \"Buddhist\" as long as the cook, with the above restrictions in mind, prepares the food, generally in simple preparations, with expert attention to its quality, wholesomeness and flavor. Often working on a tight budget, the monastery cook would have to make the most of whatever ingredients were available.\nIn \"Tenzo kyokun\" (\"Instructions for the Zen Cook\"), Soto Zen founder Eihei Dogen wrote:\nIn preparing food, it is essential to be sincere and to respect each ingredient regardless of how coarse or fine it is. (...) A rich buttery soup is not better as such than a broth of wild herbs. In handling and preparing wild herbs, do so as you would the ingredients for a rich feast, wholeheartedly, sincerely, clearly. When you serve the monastic assembly, they and you should taste only the flavour of the Ocean of Reality, the Ocean of unobscured Awake Awareness, not whether or not the soup is creamy or made only of wild herbs. In nourishing the seeds of living in the Way, rich food and wild grass are not separate.\nIngredients.\nFollowing its dominant status in most parts of East Asia where Buddhism is most practiced, rice features heavily as a staple in the Buddhist meal, especially in the form of rice porridge or congee as the usual morning meal. Noodles and other grains may often be served as well. Vegetables of all sorts are generally either stir-fried or cooked in vegetarian broth with seasonings and may be eaten with various sauces. Onions and garlic are usually avoided as consumption of these is thought to increase undesirable emotions such as anger or sexual desire. Traditionally, eggs and dairy are not permitted. Seasonings will be informed by whatever is common in the local region; for example, soy sauce and vegan dashi figure strongly in Japanese monastery food while Thai curry and t\u01b0\u01a1ng (as a vegetarian replacement for fish sauce) may be prominent in Southeast Asia. Sweets and desserts are not often consumed, but are permitted in moderation and may be served at special occasions, such as in the context of a tea ceremony in the Zen tradition.\nBuddhist vegetarian chefs have become extremely creative in imitating meat using prepared wheat gluten, also known as seitan, kao fu (\u70e4\u9eb8) or wheat meat, soy (such as tofu or tempeh), agar, konnyaku and other plant products. Some of their recipes are the oldest and most-refined meat analogues in the world. Soy and wheat gluten are very versatile materials, because they can be manufactured into various shapes and textures, and they absorb flavorings (including, but not limited to, meat-like flavorings), while having very little flavor of their own. With the proper seasonings, they can mimic various kinds of meat quite closely.\nSome of these Buddhist vegetarian chefs are in the many monasteries and temples which serve allium-free and mock-meat (also known as 'meat analogues') dishes to the monks and visitors (including non-Buddhists who often stay for a few hours or days, to Buddhists who are not monks, but staying overnight for anywhere up to weeks or months). Many Buddhist restaurants also serve vegetarian, vegan, non-alcoholic or allium-free dishes.\nSome Buddhists eat vegetarian on the 1st and 15th of the lunar calendar (lenten days), on Chinese New Year eve, and on saint and ancestral holy days. To cater to this type of customer, as well as full-time vegetarians, the menu of a Buddhist vegetarian restaurant usually shows no difference from a typical Chinese or East Asian restaurant, except that in recipes originally made to contain meat, a soy chicken substitute might be served instead.\nVariations by sect or region.\nAccording to cookbooks published in English, formal monastery meals in the Zen tradition generally follow a pattern of \"three bowls\" in descending size. The first and largest bowl is a grain-based dish such as rice, noodles or congee; the second contains the protein dish which is often some form of stew or soup; the third and smallest bowl is a vegetable dish or a salad.\nHistory.\nThe earliest surviving written accounts of Buddhism are the Edicts written by King Ashoka, a well-known Buddhist king who propagated Buddhism throughout Asia, and is honored by both Theravada and Mahayana schools of Buddhism. The authority of the Edicts of Ashoka as a historical record is suggested by the mention of numerous topics omitted as well as corroboration of numerous accounts found in the Theravada and Mahayana Tripitakas written down centuries later.\nAsoka Rock Edict 1, dated to c. 257 BCE, mentions the prohibition of animal sacrifices in Ashoka's Maurya Empire as well as his commitment to vegetarianism; however, whether the Sangha was vegetarian in part or in whole is unclear from these edicts. However, Ashoka's personal commitment to, and advocating of, vegetarianism suggests Early Buddhism (at the very least for the layperson) most likely already had a vegetarian tradition (the details of what that entailed besides not killing animals and eating their flesh were not mentioned, and therefore are unknown)."}
{"id": "6190", "revid": "50881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6190", "title": "Chinese five spice", "text": ""}
{"id": "6191", "revid": "38498248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6191", "title": "Charles V", "text": "Charles V may refer to:"}
{"id": "6193", "revid": "1256338238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6193", "title": "Constantin von Tischendorf", "text": "Lobegott Friedrich Constantin (von) Tischendorf (18 January 18157 December 1874) was a German biblical scholar. In 1844, he discovered the world's oldest and most complete Bible dated to around the mid-4th century and called Codex Sinaiticus after Saint Catherine's Monastery at Mount Sinai.\nTischendorf was made an honorary doctor by the University of Oxford on 16 March 1865, and by the University of Cambridge on 9 March 1865 following his discovery. While a student gaining his academic degree in the 1840s, he earned international recognition when he deciphered the \"Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus\", a 5th-century Greek manuscript of the New Testament.\nEarly life and education.\nTischendorf was born in Lengenfeld, Saxony, the son of a forensic physician. After attending primary school in Lengenfield, he went to grammar school in nearby Plauen. From Easter 1834, having achieved excellent marks at school, he studied theology and philosophy at the University of Leipzig. \nAt Leipzig he was mainly influenced by JGB Winer, and he began to take special interest in New Testament criticism. Winer's influence gave him the desire to use the oldest manuscripts in order to compile the text of the New Testament as close to the original as possible. Despite his father's death in 1835 and his mother's just a year later, he was still able to achieve his doctorate in 1838, before accepting a tutoring job in the home of Reverend Ferdinand Leberecht Zehme in Grossstadeln where he met and fell in love with the clergyman's daughter Angelika. He published a volume of poetry in 1838, Maiknospen (Buds of May) and Der junge Mystiker (The Young Mystic) was published under a pseudonym in 1839. At this time he also began his first critical edition of the NewTestament in Greek which was to become his life's work.\nAfter a journey through southern Germany and Switzerland, and a visit to Strassburg, he returned to Leipzig to begin work on a critical study of the New Testament text.\nCareer.\nIn 1840, he qualified as university lecturer in theology with a dissertation on the recensions of the New Testament text, the main part of which reappeared the following year in the prolegomena to his first edition of the Greek New Testament. These early textual studies convinced him of the absolute necessity of new and more exact collations of manuscripts.\nFrom October 1840 until January 1843 he was in Paris, busy with the treasures of the Biblioth\u00e8que Nationale, eking out his scanty means by making collations for other scholars, and producing for the publisher, Firmin Didot, several editions of the Greek New Testament, one of them exhibiting the form of the text corresponding most closely to the Vulgate. His second edition retracted the more precarious readings of the first, and included a statement of critical principles that is a landmark for evolving critical studies of Biblical texts.\nA great triumph of these laborious months was the decipherment of the palimpsest \"Codex Ephraemi Syri Rescriptus\", of which the New Testament part was printed before he left Paris, and the Old Testament in 1845. His success in dealing with a manuscript that, having been over-written with other works of Ephrem the Syrian, had been mostly illegible to earlier collators, made him more well known, and gained support for more extended critical expeditions. He now became \"professor extraordinarius\" at Leipzig, where he was married in 1845. He also began to publish \"Reise in den Orient\", an account of his travels in the east (in 2 vols., 1845\u201346, translated as \"Travels in the East\" in 1847). Even though he was an expert in reading the text of a palimpsest (this is a document where the original writing has been removed and new writing added), he was not able to identify the value or meaning of the \"Archimedes Palimpsest\", a torn leaf of which he held and after his death was sold to the Cambridge University Library.\nTischendorf briefly visited the Netherlands in 1841 and England in 1842. In 1843 he visited Italy for thirteen months, before continuing on to Egypt, Sinai, and the Levant, returning via Vienna and Munich.\nDiscovery of the Codex Sinaiticus Bible manuscripts.\nIn 1844 Tischendorf travelled the first time to Saint Catherine's Monastery at the foot of Mount Sinai in Egypt, where he found a portion of what would later be hailed as the oldest complete known New Testament. \nOf the many pages which were contained in an old wicker basket (the kind that the monastery hauled in its visitors as customary in unsafe territories) he was given 43 pages containing a part of the Old Testament as a present. He donated those 43 pages to King Frederick Augustus II of Saxony (reigned 1836\u20131854), to honour him and to recognise his patronage as the funder of Tischendorf's journey. (Tischendorf held a position as Theological Professor at Leipzig University, also under the patronage of Frederick Augustus II.) Leipzig University put two of the leaves on display in 2011.\nTischendorf reported in his 1865 book \"Wann Wurden Unsere Evangelen Verfasst\", translated to English in 1866 as \"When Were Our Gospels Written\" in the section \"The Discovery of the Sinaitic Manuscript\" that he found, in a trash basket, forty-three sheets of parchment of an ancient copy of the Greek Old Testament, reporting that the monks were using the trash to start fires. And Tischendorf, horrified, asked if he could have them. He deposited them at the University of Leipzig, under the title of the \"Codex Friderico-Augustanus\", a name given in honour of his patron, Frederick Augustus II of Saxony, king of Saxony. The fragments were published in 1846, although Tischendorf kept the place of discovery a secret.\nMany have expressed skepticism at the historical accuracy of this report of saving a 1500-year-old parchment from the flames. J. Rendel Harris referred to the story as a \"myth\". The Tischendorf Lesebuch (see References) quotes that the Librarian Kyrillos mentioned to Tischendorf that the contents of the basket had already twice been submitted to the fire. The contents of the baskets were damaged scriptures, the third filling apparently, so cited by Tischendorf himself.[see Tischendorf Lesebuch, Tischendorf's own account]. \nIn 1853 Tischendorf made a second trip to the Syrian monastery but made no new discoveries. He returned a third time in January 1859 under the patronage of Tsar Alexander II of Russia with the active aid of the Russian government to find more of the \"Codex Frederico-Augustanus\" or similar ancient Biblical texts. On 4 February, the last day of his visit, he was shown a text which he recognized as significant \u2013 the \"Codex Sinaiticus\" \u2013 a Greek manuscript of the complete New Testament and parts of the Old Testament dating to the 4th century.\nTischendorf persuaded the monks to present the manuscript to Tsar Alexander II of Russia, at the cost of the Tsar it was published in 1862 (in four folio volumes). Those ignorant of the details of his discovery of the \"Codex Sinaiticus\" accused Tischendorf of buying manuscripts from ignorant monastery librarians at low prices. Indeed, he was never rich, but he staunchly defended the rights of the monks at Saint Catherine's Monastery when he persuaded them eventually to send the manuscript to the Tsar. This took approximately 10 years because the abbot of St Catherines had to be re-elected and confirmed in office in Cairo and in Jerusalem, and during those 10 years no one in the monastery had the authority to hand over any documents. However the documents were handed over in due course following a signed and sealed letter to the Tsar Alexander II (Schenkungsurkunde). Even so, the monks of Mt. Sinai still display a receipt-letter from Tischendorf promising to return the manuscript to them in the case that the donation can not be done. This token-letter had to be destroyed, following the late issue of a \"Schenkungsurkunde\". This donation act regulated the Codex exchange with the Tsar, against 9000 Rubels and Rumanian estate protection. The Tsar was seen as the protector of Greek-Orthodox Christians. Thought lost since the Russian revolution, the document (Schenkungsurkunde) has now resurfaced in St Petersburg 2003, and has also been long before commented upon by other scholars like Kurt Aland. The monastery has disputed the existence of the gift certificate (Schenkungsurkunde) since the British Library was named as the new owner of the Codex. Now following the late find of the gift certificate by the National Russian Library the existence cannot be disputed in earnest. \nIn 1869 the Tsar awarded Tischendorf the style of \"von\" Tischendorf as a Russian noble. 327 facsimile editions of the Codex were printed in Leipzig for the Tsar (instead of a salary for the three-year work of Tischendorf the Tsar gave him 100 copies for reselling) in order to celebrate the 1000th anniversary of the traditional foundation of the Rus' state in 862 with the publication of this most amazing find. Supporting the production of the facsimile, all made with special print characters for each of the 4 scribes of the Codex Sinaiticus, was shift work and contributed to Tischendorf's early demise due to exhausting work for months also during nights. Thus the Codex found its way to the Imperial Library at St. Petersburg.\nWhen the 4-volume luxury edition of the Sinai Bible was completed in 1862, C. Tischendorf presented the original ancient manuscript to Emperor Alexander II. Meanwhile, the question of transferring the manuscript to the full possession of the Russian Sovereign remained unresolved for some years. In 1869, the new Archbishop of Sinai, Callistratus, and the monastic community, signed the official certificate presenting the manuscript to the Tsar. The Russian Government, in turn, bestowed the Monastery with 9000 rubles and decorated the Archbishop and some of the brethren with orders. In 1933 the Soviet Government sold the Codex Sinaiticus for 100,000 pounds to the British Museum in London, England. The official certificate with signatures in Russian/ French/ Greek sections has been refound in St Petersburg.\nNovum Testamentum Graece \u2013 publication with 21 editions.\nIn the winter of 1849 the first edition of his great work now titled \"Novum Testamentum Graece. Ad antiquos testes recensuit. Apparatum criticum multis modis\" appeared (translated as \"Greek New Testament. The ancient witnesses reviewed. Preparations critical in many ways\"), containing canons of criticism, adding examples of their application that are applicable to students today:\nBasic rule: \"The text is only to be sought from ancient evidence, and especially from Greek manuscripts, but without neglecting the testimonies of versions and fathers.\"\nThese were partly the result of the tireless travels he had begun in 1839 in search of unread manuscripts of the New Testament, \"to clear up in this way,\" he wrote, \"the history of the sacred text, and to recover if possible the genuine apostolic text which is the foundation of our faith.\"\nIn 1850 appeared his edition of the \"Codex Amiatinus\" (in 1854 corrected) and of the Septuagint version of the Old Testament (7th ed., 1887); in 1852, amongst other works, his edition of the \"Codex Claromontanus\". In 1859, he was named \"professor ordinarius\" of theology and of Biblical paleography, this latter professorship being specially created for him; and another book of travel, \"Aus dem heiligen Lande\", appeared in 1862. Tischendorf's Eastern journeys were rich enough in other discoveries to merit the highest praise.\nBesides his fame as a scholar, he was a friend of both Robert Schumann, with whom he corresponded, and Felix Mendelssohn, who dedicated a song to him. His colleague Samuel Prideaux Tregelles wrote warmly of their mutual interest in textual scholarship. His personal library, purchased after his death, eventually came to the University of Glasgow, where a commemorative exhibition of books from his library was held in 1974 and can be accessed by the public.\nDeath.\nLobegott Friedrich Constantin (von) Tischendorf died in Leipzig on 7 December 1874, aged 59.\nCodex Sinaiticus.\nThe \"Codex Sinaiticus\" contains a 4th-century manuscript of New Testament texts. Two other Bibles of similar age exist, though they are less complete: Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican Library and Codex Alexandrinus, currently owned by the British Library. The Codex Sinaiticus is deemed by some to be the most important surviving New Testament manuscript, as no older manuscript is as nearly complete as the Codex. The codex can be viewed in the British Library in London, or as a digitized version on the Internet.\nTischendorf's motivation.\nThroughout his life Tischendorf sought old biblical manuscripts, as he saw it as his task to give theology a Greek New Testament which was based on the oldest possible scriptures. He intended to be as close as possible to the original sources. Tischendorf's greatest discovery was in the monastery of Saint Catherine on the Sinai Peninsula, which he visited in May 1844, and again in 1853 and 1859 (as Russian envoy).\nIn 1862 Tischendorf published the text of the Codex Sinaiticus for the 1000th Anniversary of the Russian Monarchy in both an illustrious four-volume facsimile edition and in a less costly text edition, to enable all scholars to have access to the Codex.\nTischendorf pursued a constant course of editorial labours, mainly on the New Testament, until he was broken down by overwork in 1873. His motive, as explained in a publication on Tischendorf's Letter by Prof. Christfried Boettrich (Leipzig University, Prof. of Theology), was to prove scientifically that the words of the Bible were trustfully transmitted over centuries.\nWorks.\nHis \"magnum opus\" was the \"Critical Edition of the New Testament.\"\nThe great edition, of which the text and apparatus appeared in 1869 and 1872, was called by himself \"editio viii\"; but this number is raised to twenty or twenty-one, if mere reprints from stereotype plates and the minor editions of his great critical texts are included; posthumous prints bring the total to forty-one. Four main recensions of Tischendorf's text may be distinguished, dating respectively from his editions of 1841, 1849, 1859 (ed. vii), and 1869\u201372 (ed. viii). The edition of 1849 may be regarded as historically the most important, from the mass of new critical material it used; that of 1859 is distinguished from Tischendorf's other editions by coming nearer to the received text; in the eighth edition, the testimony of the Sinaitic manuscript received great (probably too great) weight. The readings of the Vatican manuscript were given with more exactness and certainty than had been possible in the earlier editions, and the editor had also the advantage of using the published labours of his colleague and friend Samuel Prideaux Tregelles.\nOf relatively lesser importance was Tischendorf's work on the Greek Old Testament. His edition of the Roman text, with the variants of the Alexandrian manuscript, the \"Codex Ephraemi\", and the \"Friderico-Augustanus\", was of service when it appeared in 1850, but, being stereotyped, was not greatly improved in subsequent issues. Its imperfections, even within the limited field it covers, may be judged by the aid of Eberhard Nestle's appendix to the 6th issue (1880).\nBesides this may be mentioned editions of the New Testament apocrypha, \"De Evangeliorum apocryphorum origine et usu\" (1851); \"Acta Apostolorum apocrypha\" (1851); \"Evangelia apocrypha\" (1853; 2nd ed., 1876); \"Apocalypses apocryphae\" (1866), and various minor writings, partly of an apologetic character, such as \"Wann wurden unsere Evangelien verfasst?\" (\"When Were Our Gospels Written?\"; 1865; 4th ed., 1866, digitized by Google and available for e-readers), \"Haben wir den echten Schrifttext der Evangelisten und Apostel?\" (1873), and \"Synopsis evangelica\" (7th ed., 1898)."}
{"id": "6195", "revid": "48366681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6195", "title": "Calvin Coolidge", "text": "John Calvin Coolidge Jr. ( ; July 4, 1872January 5, 1933) was the 30th president of the United States, serving from 1923 to 1929. A Republican lawyer from Massachusetts, he previously served as the 29th vice president from 1921 to 1923 under President Warren G. Harding, and as the 48th governor of Massachusetts from 1919 to 1921. Coolidge gained a reputation as a small-government conservative with a taciturn personality and dry sense of humor that earned him the nickname \"Silent Cal\".\nCoolidge began his career as a member of the Massachusetts State House. He rose up the ranks of Massachusetts politics and was elected governor in 1918. As governor, Coolidge ran on the record of fiscal conservatism, strong support for women's suffrage, and vague opposition to Prohibition. His prompt and effective response to the Boston police strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight as a man of decisive action. The following year, the Republican Party nominated Coolidge as the running mate to Senator Warren G. Harding in the 1920 presidential election, which they won in a landslide. Coolidge served as vice president until Harding's death in 1923, after which he assumed the presidency. \nDuring his presidency, Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the Harding administration's many scandals. He signed into law the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans, and oversaw a period of rapid and expansive economic growth known as the \"Roaring Twenties\", leaving office with considerable popularity. He was known for his hands-off governing approach and pro-business stance; biographer Claude Fuess wrote: \"He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class, could interpret their longings and express their opinions. That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength.\" Coolidge chose not to run again in 1928, remarking that ten years as president would be \"longer than any other man has had it\u2014too long!\"\nCoolidge is widely admired for his stalwart support of racial equality during a period of heightened racial tension, and is highly regarded by advocates of smaller government and \"laissez-faire\" economics; supporters of an active central government generally view him far less favorably. His critics argue that he failed to use the country's economic boom to help struggling farmers and workers in other flailing industries, and there is still much debate among historians about the extent to which Coolidge's economic policies contributed to the onset of the Great Depression, which began shortly after he left office. Scholars have ranked Coolidge in the lower half of U.S. presidents.\nEarly life and family history.\nJohn Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born on July 4, 1872, in Plymouth Notch, Vermont\u2014the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day. He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr. (1845\u20131926) and Victoria Josephine Moor (1846\u20131885). Although named for his father, from early childhood Coolidge was addressed by his middle name. The name Calvin was used in multiple generations of the Coolidge family, apparently selected in honor of John Calvin, the Protestant Reformer.\nCoolidge Senior engaged in many occupations and developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper, and public servant. He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in both houses of the Vermont General Assembly. When Coolidge was 12 years old, his chronically ill mother died at the age of 39, perhaps from tuberculosis. His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge (1875\u20131890), died at the age of 15, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was 18. Coolidge's father married a Plymouth schoolteacher in 1891, and lived to the age of 80.\nCoolidge's earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge emigrated from Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts. Coolidge also descended from Samuel Appleton, who settled in Ipswich and led the Massachusetts Bay Colony during King Philip's War. Coolidge's great-great-grandfather, another John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth. His grandfather Calvin Galusha Coolidge served in the Vermont House of Representatives. His cousin Park Pollard was a businessman in Cavendish, Vermont and the longtime chair of the Vermont Democratic Party. Coolidge's mother was the daughter of Hiram Dunlap Moor, a Plymouth Notch farmer, and Abigail Franklin.\nEarly career and marriage.\nEducation and law practice.\nCoolidge attended the Black River Academy and then St. Johnsbury Academy before enrolling at Amherst College, where he distinguished himself in the debating class. As a senior, he joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity and graduated \"cum laude\". While at Amherst, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman, a Congregational mystic who had a neo-Hegelian philosophy. Coolidge explained Garman's ethics forty years later:\nAt his father's urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts, to become a lawyer. Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond &amp; Field, and reading law with them. John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field, both Amherst graduates, introduced Coolidge to practicing law in the county seat of Hampshire County, Massachusetts. In 1897, Coolidge was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, becoming a country lawyer. With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898. He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court. As his reputation as a hard-working and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1903, Coolidge met Grace Goodhue, a graduate of the University of Vermont and a teacher at Northampton's Clarke School for the Deaf. They married on October 4, 1905, at 2:30\u00a0p.m. in a small ceremony which took place in the parlor of Grace's family's house, having overcome her mother's objections to the marriage. The newlyweds went on a honeymoon trip to Montreal, originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidge's request. After 25 years he wrote of Grace, \"for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces\".\nThe Coolidges had two sons: John (1906\u20132000) and Calvin Jr. (1908\u20131924). On June 30, 1924, Calvin Jr. had played tennis with his brother on the White House tennis courts without putting on socks and developed a blister on one of his toes. The blister subsequently degenerated into sepsis. Calvin Jr. died a little over a week later at the age of 16. The President never forgave himself for Calvin Jr's death. His eldest son John said it \"hurt [Coolidge] terribly\", and psychiatric biographer Robert E. Gilbert, author of\" The Tormented President: Calvin Coolidge, Death, and Clinical Depression\", said that Coolidge \"ceased to function as President after the death of his sixteen-year-old son\". Gilbert explains in his book how Coolidge displayed all ten of the symptoms listed by the American Psychiatric Association as evidence of major depressive disorder following Calvin Jr.'s sudden death. John later became a railroad executive, helped to start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site.\nCoolidge was frugal, and when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting. He and his wife attended Northampton's Edwards Congregational Church before and after his presidency.\nLocal political office (1898\u22121915).\nCity offices.\nThe Republican Party was dominant in New England at the time, and Coolidge followed the example of Hammond and Field by becoming active in local politics. In 1896, Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley, and was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee the next year. In 1898, he won election to the City Council of Northampton, placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected. The position offered no salary but provided Coolidge with valuable political experience. In 1899, he was chosen City Solicitor by the City Council. He was elected for a one-year term in 1900, and reelected in 1901. This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of $600 (). In 1902, the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor, and Coolidge returned to private practice. Soon thereafter, however, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him. The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only one year. In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board. When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern, the recently married Coolidge replied, \"Might give me time!\"\nMassachusetts state legislator and mayor.\nIn 1906, the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the Massachusetts House of Representatives. He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court. In his freshman term, Coolidge served on minor committees and, although he usually voted with the party, was known as a Progressive Republican, voting in favor of such measures as women's suffrage and the direct election of Senators. While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane who controlled the western faction of the Massachusetts Republican Party; Crane's party rival in the east of the commonwealth was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge. Coolidge forged another key strategic alliance with Guy Currier, who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm and broad circle of friends which Coolidge lacked, and which would have a lasting impact on his political career. In 1907, he was elected to a second term, and in the 1908 session Coolidge was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position.\nInstead of vying for another term in the State House, Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired. He was well liked in the town, and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1,597 to 1,409. During his first term (1910 to 1911), he increased teachers' salaries and retired some of the city's debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease. He was renominated in 1911, and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin.\nIn 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session; Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin. At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the \"Bread and Roses\" strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts. After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers' demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee. A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans that year was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt, and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft. Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party. When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district, Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin.\nIn the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act, which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in Western Massachusetts. Coolidge intended to retire after his second term as was the custom, but when the president of the state senate, Levi H. Greenwood, considered running for lieutenant governor, Coolidge decided to run again for the Senate in the hopes of being elected as its presiding officer. Although Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate, he was defeated primarily due to his opposition to women's suffrage; Coolidge was in favor of the women's vote, won his re-election, and with Crane's help, assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate. After his election in January 1914, Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech entitled \"Have Faith in Massachusetts\", which summarized his philosophy of government.\nCoolidge's speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account; towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing his name for nomination to lieutenant governor. After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections, Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate. Coolidge's supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns, encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor. Stearns, an executive with the Boston department store R. H. Stearns, became another key ally, and began a publicity campaign on Coolidge's behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session.\nLieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916\u22121921).\nCoolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall. Coolidge was the leading vote-getter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall's eastern base of support. McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one-year terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes.\nIn Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states; nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as an administrative inspector and was a member of the governor's council. He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee. As a full-time elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton. McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and again in 1917. When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor.\n1918 election.\nCoolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918. He and his running mate, Channing Cox, a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, ran on the previous administration's record: fiscal conservatism, a vague opposition to Prohibition, support for women's suffrage, and support for American involvement in World War I. The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish and German Americans. Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16,773 votes over his opponent, Richard H. Long, in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns.\nBoston police strike.\nIn 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union, Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated. In August of that year, the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union. Curtis declared the union's leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty, but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4. The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters, convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8. The following day, about three-quarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike. Coolidge, tacitly but fully in support of Curtis' position, closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities. He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principlethat a policeman does not strike. That night and the next, there was sporadic violence and rioting in the unruly city. Peters, concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority, and relieved Curtis of duty.\nCoolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then in need of his intervention, conferred with Crane's operative, William Butler, and then acted. He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force. Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited.\nThat night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers. \"Whatever disorder has occurred\", Gompers wrote, \"is due to Curtis's order in which the right of the policemen has been denied\u2026\" Coolidge publicly answered Gompers's telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strikeand his response launched him into the national consciousness. Newspapers across the nation picked up on Coolidge's statement and he became the newest hero to opponents of the strike. Amid of the First Red Scare, many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolutions, like those that had taken place in Russia, Hungary, and Germany. While Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, conservatives across the nation had seen a rising star. Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave him a national reputation as a decisive leader, and as a strict enforcer of law and order.\n1919 election.\nCoolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919. By this time Coolidge's supporters (especially Stearns) had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation and some of Coolidge's speeches were published in book form. He faced the same opponent as in 1918, Richard Long, but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125,101 votes, more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier. His actions in the police strike, combined with the massive electoral victory, led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920.\nLegislation and vetoes as governor.\nBy the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $100 bonus () to Massachusetts veterans. He also signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from fifty-four hours to forty-eight, saying, \"We must humanize the industry, or the system will break down.\" He signed into law a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming $4 million from expenditures, thus allowing the state to retire some of its debt.\nCoolidge also wielded the veto pen as governor. His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators' pay by 50%. Although he was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75% alcohol or less, in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. \"Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution,\" he said in his veto message. \"Against it, they are void.\"\nVice presidency (1921\u20131923).\n1920 election.\nAt the 1920 Republican National Convention, most of the delegates were selected by state party caucuses, not primaries. As such, the field was divided among many local favorites. Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the party's U.S. Senators, never considered him seriously. After ten ballots, the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president. When the time came to select a vice presidential nominee, the bosses also made and announced their decision on whom they wantedSen. Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsinand then prematurely departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision. A delegate from Oregon, Wallace McCamant, having read \"Have Faith in Massachusetts\", proposed Coolidge for vice president instead. The suggestion caught on quickly with the masses starving for an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated.\nThe Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox, for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, for vice president. The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign, as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism. Harding ran a \"front-porch\" campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South, New York, and New Englandhis audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches. On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South. They also won in Tennessee, the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction.\n\"Silent Cal\".\nThe U.S. vice-presidency did not carry many official duties, but Coolidge was invited by President Harding to attend cabinet meetings, making him the first vice president to do so. He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country.\nAs vice president, Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties, where the legend of \"Silent Cal\" was born. It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate, such as Coolidge being \"silent in five languages\". Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker, in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as \"Silent Cal\". An apocryphal story has it that a person seated next to him at a dinner said to him, \"I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you.\" He replied, \"You lose.\" However, on April 22, 1924, Coolidge himself said that the \"You lose\" quotation never occurred. The story about it was related by Frank B. Noyes, President of the Associated Press, to their membership at their annual luncheon at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, when toasting and introducing Coolidge, who was the invited speaker. After the introduction and before his prepared remarks, Coolidge said to the membership, \"Your President [referring to Noyes] has given you a perfect example of one of those rumors now current in Washington which is without any foundation.\"\nCoolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society; when asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, \"Got to eat somewhere.\" Alice Roosevelt Longworth, a leading Republican wit, underscored Coolidge's silence and his dour personality: \"When he wished he were elsewhere, he pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said nothing. He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle.\" Coolidge and his wife, Grace, who was a great baseball fan, once attended a Washington Senators game and sat through all nine innings without saying a word, except once when he asked her the time.\nAs president, Coolidge's reputation as a quiet man continued. \"The words of a President have an enormous weight,\" he would later write, \"and ought not to be used indiscriminately.\" Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation; indeed, he cultivated it. \"I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President,\" he once told Ethel Barrymore, \"and I think I will go along with them.\" Some historians suggest that Coolidge's image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic, while others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior to be natural, deepening after the death of his son in 1924. Dorothy Parker, upon learning that Coolidge had died, reportedly remarked, \"How can they tell?\"\nPresidency (1923\u20131929).\nOn August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly from a heart attack in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States. Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding's death. Coolidge dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled. His father, a notary public and justice of the peace, administered the oath of office in the family's parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47\u00a0a.m. on August 3, 1923, whereupon the new President of the United States returned to bed.\nCoolidge returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath. This second oath-taking remained a secret until it was revealed by Harry M. Daugherty in 1932, and confirmed by Hoehling. When Hoehling confirmed Daugherty's story, he indicated that Daugherty, then serving as United States Attorney General, asked him to administer the oath without fanfare at the Willard Hotel. According to Hoehling, he did not question Daugherty's reason for requesting a second oath-taking but assumed it was to resolve any doubt about whether the first swearing-in was valid.\nThe nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge, who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration; many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924. Coolidge believed that those of Harding's men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence, taking a methodical approach to the scandals, principally the Teapot Dome scandal, while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty. Coolidge thought the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice; this was affirmed by the resulting resignations of those involved. He personally intervened in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after he refused to cooperate with the congressional probe. He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing. Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors.\nCoolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened on December 6, 1923, giving a speech that supported many of Harding's policies, including Harding's formal budgeting process, the enforcement of immigration restrictions and arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania. The address to Congress was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio. The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed just one month into Coolidge's term, and was generally well received in the country. In May 1924, the World War I veterans' World War Adjusted Compensation Act or \"Bonus Bill\" was passed over his veto. Coolidge signed the Immigration Act later that year, which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration, but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bill's specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants. Just before the Republican Convention began, Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58 percent to 46 percent, as well as personal income tax rates across the board, increased the estate tax and bolstered it with a new gift tax.\nOn June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States. By that time, two-thirds of them were already citizens, having gained it through marriage, military service (veterans of World War I were granted citizenship in 1919), or the land allotments that had earlier taken place.\n1924 election.\nThe Republican Convention was held from June 10 to 12, 1924, in Cleveland, Ohio; Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot. The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot, but he declined; former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted.\nThe Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City. The convention soon deadlocked, and after 103 ballots, the delegates finally agreed on a compromise candidate, John W. Davis, with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president. The Democrats' hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette, a Republican senator from Wisconsin, split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party. Many believed that the split in the Republican Party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency.\nAfter the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn; he later said that \"when he [the son] died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him.\" Even as he mourned, Coolidge ran his standard campaign, not mentioning his opponents by name or maligning them, and delivering speeches on his theory of government, including several that were broadcast over the radio. It was the most subdued campaign since 1896, partly because of Coolidge's grief, but also because of his naturally non-confrontational style. The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920. Coolidge and Dawes won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follette's home state. Coolidge won the election with 382 electoral votes and the popular vote by 2.5\u00a0million over his opponents' combined total.\nIndustry and trade.\nDuring Coolidge's presidency, the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the \"Roaring Twenties\". He left the administration's industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover, who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio. Coolidge disdained regulation and demonstrated this by appointing commissioners to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction. The regulatory state under Coolidge was, as one biographer described it, \"thin to the point of invisibility\".\nHistorian Robert Sobel offers some context of Coolidge's \"laissez-faire\" ideology, based on the prevailing understanding of federalism during his presidency: \"As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards. Did he support these measures while president? No, because in the 1920s, such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments.\" However, Coolidge did sign the Radio Act of 1927 into law that established the Federal Radio Commission (1927\u20131934), the equal-time rule for radio broadcasters in the United States, and restricted radio broadcasting licenses to stations that demonstrated that they served \"the public interest, convenience, or necessity\".\nTaxation and government spending.\nCoolidge adopted the taxation policies of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, who advocated \"scientific taxation\"the notion that lowering taxes will increase, rather than decrease, government receipts. Congress agreed, and tax rates were reduced in Coolidge's term. In addition to federal tax cuts, Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring of the federal debt. Coolidge's ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress, and in 1924, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for some two million people. They reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928, all the while continuing to keep spending down so as to reduce the overall federal debt. By 1927, only the wealthiest 2% of taxpayers paid any federal income tax. Federal spending remained flat during Coolidge's administration, allowing one-fourth of the federal debt to be retired in total. State and local governments saw considerable growth, however, surpassing the federal budget in 1927. By 1929, after Coolidge's series of tax rate reductions had cut the tax rate to 24 percent on those making over $100,000, the federal government collected more than a billion dollars in income taxes, of which 65 percent was collected from those making over $100,000. In 1921, when the tax rate on people making over $100,000 a year was 73 percent, the federal government collected a little over $700 million in income taxes, of which 30 percent was paid by those making over $100,000.\nOpposition to farm subsidies.\nPerhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge's presidency was relief for farmers. Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices. Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the elections that year. In 1926, with farm prices falling once more, Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugenboth Republicansproposed the McNary\u2013Haugen Farm Relief Bill. The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in high-yield years and hold it (when feasible) for later sale or sell it abroad. Coolidge opposed McNary-Haugen, declaring that agriculture must stand \"on an independent business basis\", and said that \"government control cannot be divorced from political control.\" Instead of manipulating prices, he favored instead Herbert Hoover's proposal to increase profitability by modernizing agriculture. Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing the McNary-Haugen measure as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated.\nAfter McNary-Haugen's defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the Curtis-Crisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm co-operatives in times of surplus; the bill did not pass. In February 1927, Congress took up the McNary-Haugen bill again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it. In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy. Congress did not override the veto, but it passed the bill again in May 1928 by an increased majority; again, Coolidge vetoed it. \"Farmers never have made much money,\" said Coolidge, the Vermont farmer's son. \"I do not believe we can do much about it.\"\nFlood control.\nCoolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Although he did eventually name Secretary Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that Coolidge overall showed a lack of interest in federal flood control. Coolidge did not believe that personally visiting the region after the floods would accomplish anything, and that it would be seen as mere political grandstanding. He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require; he believed property owners should bear much of the cost. On the other hand, Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation. When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15.\nCivil rights.\nAccording to one biographer, Coolidge was \"devoid of racial prejudice\", but rarely took the lead on civil rights. Coolidge disliked the Ku Klux Klan and no Klansman is known to have received an appointment from him. In the 1924 presidential election his opponents (Robert La Follette and John Davis), and his running mate Charles Dawes, often attacked the Klan but Coolidge avoided the subject. Due to Coolidge's failure to condemn the Klan, some African-American leaders such as former Taft assistant attorney general William Henry Lewis endorsed Davis over Coolidge. Davis got little of the black vote outside Indiana, where Klan control of the Indiana Republican Party caused many blacks to vote Democratic; it is estimated that over 90% of non-Indiana blacks voted for Coolidge. Coolidge's secretary of commerce, Herbert Hoover, was accused of running forced labor camps for African Americans during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, which led more African Americans to vote Democratic when Hoover was the Republican presidential nominee in 1928 and 1932. During Coolidge's administration, lynchings of African-Americans decreased and millions of people left the Ku Klux Klan.\nCoolidge spoke in favor of the civil rights of African Americans, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were \"just as sacred as those of any other citizen\" under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a \"public and a private duty to protect those rights.\" Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to make lynching a federal crime (it was already a state crime, although not always enforced). Congress refused to pass any such legislation. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans living on reservations; those off reservations had long been citizens. On June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at historically black, non-segregated Howard University, in which he thanked and commended African Americans for their rapid advances in education and their contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in the World War, all while being faced with discrimination and prejudices at home.\nIn a speech in October 1924, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they have \"contributed much to making our country what it is\". He stated that although the diversity of peoples was a detrimental source of conflict and tension in Europe, it was peculiar for the United States that it was a \"harmonious\" benefit for the country. Coolidge further stated the United States should assist and help immigrants who come to the country and urged immigrants to reject \"race hatreds\" and \"prejudices\".\nForeign policy.\nCoolidge was neither well versed nor very interested in world affairs. His focus was directed mainly at American business, especially pertaining to trade, and \"Maintaining the Status Quo\". Although not an isolationist, he was reluctant to enter into European involvements. While Coolidge believed strongly in a non-interventionist foreign policy, he was a supporter of American exceptionalism. Coolidge considered the 1920 Republican victory as a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the United States should join the League of Nations. Coolidge believed the League did not serve American interests. However, he spoke in favor of joining the Permanent Court of International Justice (World Court), provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions. In 1926, the Senate eventually approved joining the Court (with reservations). The League of Nations accepted the reservations, but it suggested some modifications of its own. The Senate failed to act and so the United States did not join the World Court.\nIn 1924, the Coolidge administration nominated Charles Dawes to head the multi-national committee that produced the Dawes Plan. It set fixed annual amounts for Germany's World War I reparations payments and authorized a large loan, mostly from American banks, to help stabilize and stimulate the German economy. Additionally, Coolidge attempted to pursue further curbs on naval strength following the early successes of Harding's Washington Naval Conference by sponsoring the Geneva Naval Conference in 1927, which failed owing to a French and Italian boycott and ultimate failure of Great Britain and the United States to agree on cruiser tonnages. As a result, the conference was a failure and Congress eventually authorized for increased American naval spending in 1928. The Kellogg\u2013Briand Pact of 1928, named for Coolidge's Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg, and French foreign minister Aristide Briand, was also a key peacekeeping initiative. The treaty, ratified in 1929, committed signatoriesthe United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Japanto \"renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another\". The treaty did not achieve its intended resultthe outlawry of warbut it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II. Coolidge also continued the previous administration's policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union.\nEfforts were made to normalize ties with post-Revolution Mexico. Coolidge recognized Mexico's new governments under \u00c1lvaro Obreg\u00f3n and Plutarco El\u00edas Calles, and continued American support for the elected Mexican government against the National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty during the Cristero War, lifting the arms embargo on that country; he also appointed Dwight Morrow as Ambassador to Mexico with the successful objective to avoid further American conflict with Mexico. Coolidge's administration would see continuity in the occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti, and an end to the occupation of the Dominican Republic in 1924 as a result of withdrawal agreements finalized during Harding's administration. In 1925, Coolidge ordered the withdrawal of Marines stationed in Nicaragua following perceived stability after the 1924 Nicaraguan general election, but redeployed them there in January 1927 following failed attempts to peacefully resolve the rapid deterioration of political stability and avert the ensuing Constitutionalist War; Henry L. Stimson was later sent by Coolidge to mediate a peace deal that would end the civil war and extend American military presence in Nicaragua beyond Coolidge's term in office.\nTo extend an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over America's interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean, Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States, January 15\u201317, 1928, in Havana, Cuba, the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency. He would be the last sitting American president to visit Cuba until Barack Obama in 2016. For Canada, Coolidge authorized the St. Lawrence Seaway, a system of locks and canals that would provide large vessels passage between the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes.\nCabinet.\nAlthough a few of Harding's cabinet appointees were scandal-tarred, Coolidge initially retained all of them, out of an ardent conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president he was obligated to retain Harding's counselors and policies until the next election. He kept Harding's able speechwriter Judson T. Welliver; Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925. Coolidge appointed C. Bascom Slemp, a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician, to work jointly with Edward T. Clark, a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vice-presidential staff, as Secretaries to the President (a position equivalent to the modern White House Chief of Staff).\nPerhaps the most powerful person in Coolidge's Cabinet was Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, who controlled the administration's financial policies and was regarded by many, including House Minority Leader John Nance Garner, as more powerful than Coolidge himself. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover also held a prominent place in Coolidge's Cabinet, in part because Coolidge found value in Hoover's ability to win positive publicity with his pro-business proposals. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes directed Coolidge's foreign policy until he resigned in 1925 following Coolidge's re-election. He was replaced by Frank B. Kellogg, who had previously served as a senator and as the ambassador to Great Britain. Coolidge made two other appointments following his re-election, with William M. Jardine taking the position of Secretary of Agriculture and John G. Sargent becoming Attorney General. Coolidge did not have a vice president during his first term, but Charles Dawes became vice president during Coolidge's second term, and Dawes and Coolidge clashed over farm policy and other issues.\nJudicial appointments.\nCoolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Harlan F. Stone in 1925. Stone was Coolidge's fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican. Stone was serving as dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general in 1924 to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding's Attorney General, Harry M. Daugherty. It does not appear that Coolidge considered appointing anyone other than Stone, although Stone himself had urged Coolidge to appoint Benjamin N. Cardozo. Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the court's three liberal justices who would often vote to uphold New Deal legislation. President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone to be chief justice.\nCoolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 61 judges to the United States district courts. He appointed judges to various specialty courts as well, including Genevieve R. Cline, who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928. Coolidge also signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload.\n1928 election.\nIn the summer of 1927, Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota. While on vacation, Coolidge issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president: \"I do not choose to run for President in 1928.\" After allowing the reporters to take that in, Coolidge elaborated. \"If I take another term, I will be in the White House till 1933\u00a0\u2026 Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had ittoo long!\" In his memoirs, Coolidge explained his decision not to run: \"The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them. While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish.\" After leaving office, he and Grace returned to Northampton, where he wrote his memoirs. The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 with a landslide by Herbert Hoover. Coolidge had been reluctant to endorse Hoover as his successor; on one occasion he remarked that \"for six years that man has given me unsolicited adviceall of it bad.\" Even so, Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing the nomination of the popular commerce secretary.\nPost-presidency (1929\u20131933).\nAfter his presidency, Coolidge retired to a spacious home in Northampton, \"The Beeches\". He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River and was often observed on the water by local boating enthusiasts. During this period, he also served as chairman of the Non-Partisan Railroad Commission, an entity created by several banks and corporations to survey the country's long-term transportation needs and make recommendations for improvements. He was an honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind, a director of New York Life Insurance Company, president of the American Antiquarian Society, and a trustee of Amherst College.\nCoolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, \"Calvin Coolidge Says\", from 1930 to 1931. Faced with a Democratic landslide in the 1932 presidential election, some Republicans spoke of rejecting Hoover as their party's nominee, and instead drafting Coolidge to run. Coolidge made it clear that he was not interested in running again, and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him. Hoover was renominated, and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him. Hoover then lost the general election to Coolidge's 1920 vice presidential Democratic opponent Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide.\nDeath.\nCoolidge died suddenly from coronary thrombosis at \"The Beeches\" on January 5, 1933, at 12:45\u00a0p.m., aged 60. Shortly before his death, he confided to an old friend: \"I feel I no longer fit in with these times.\" Coolidge is buried in Plymouth Notch Cemetery, Plymouth Notch, Vermont. The nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site. The State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors' center nearby to mark Coolidge's 100th birthday on July 4, 1972.\nLegacy.\nDespite being one of the most popular U.S. presidents while in office, Coolidge is generally rated as below-average by modern historians. David Greenberg, a scholar from Rutgers University, said that, \"although the public liked and admired Calvin Coolidge during his tenure, the Great Depression that began in 1929 seriously eroded his reputation and changed public opinion about his policies\". Historians have criticized Coolidge for his lack of assertiveness and have characterized him as a \"do nothing president\" who only enjoyed high public approval because he was in office when things were going naturally well around the world. Some historians have also scrutinized Coolidge for his signing of laws that broadened federal regulatory authority and claimed it paved the way for corruption in future presidential administrations. \nIn a 1982 \"Chicago Tribune\" survey, when 49 historians were asked to rank the best and worst U.S. presidents, Coolidge was ranked the eighth worst. In 2006, British journalist William Shawcross said he believed Coolidge was the worst president of the 20th century. In a 2021 C-SPAN survey, historians ranked Coolidge 24th out of 44 presidents. Historians in the survey gave him high ratings for \"moral authority\" and \"administrative skills\" but poor ratings for \"setting an agenda\" and \"pursuing equal justice\".\nAlthough historians generally view Coolidge unfavorably, his hands-off government approach continues to resonate with modern conservatives and Republican politicians. In 1981, newly sworn-in U.S. President Ronald Reagan publicly praised Coolidge's laissez-faire policy. Later, Reagan had a portrait of Thomas Jefferson in the White House Cabinet Room taken down and replaced with one of Coolidge.\nRadio, film, and commemorations.\nDespite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician, Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president. He made himself available to reporters, giving 520 press conferences, meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since. Coolidge's second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio. On December 6, 1923, his speech to Congress was broadcast on radio, the first presidential radio address. Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission. On August 11, 1924, Theodore W. Case, using the Phonofilm sound-on-film process he developed for Lee de Forest, filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn, making \"Silent Cal\" the first president to appear in a sound film. The title of the DeForest film was \"President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds\". When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. Navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans-Atlantic flight, President Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and presented him with the Medal of Honor; the event was captured on film."}
{"id": "6196", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6196", "title": "Clanking Replicator", "text": ""}
{"id": "6197", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6197", "title": "Clanking replicator", "text": ""}
{"id": "6198", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6198", "title": "Convention on Biological Diversity", "text": "The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), known informally as the Biodiversity Convention, is a multilateral treaty. The Convention has three main goals: the conservation of biological diversity (or biodiversity); the sustainable use of its components; and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from genetic resources. Its objective is to develop national strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, and it is often seen as the key document regarding sustainable development.\nThe Convention was opened for signature at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro on 5 June 1992 and entered into force on 29 December 1993. The United States is the only UN member state which has not ratified the Convention. It has two supplementary agreements, the Cartagena Protocol and Nagoya Protocol.\nThe Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity is an international treaty governing the movements of living modified organisms (LMOs) resulting from modern biotechnology from one country to another. It was adopted on 29 January 2000 as a supplementary agreement to the CBD and entered into force on 11 September 2003.\nThe Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS) to the Convention on Biological Diversity is another supplementary agreement to the CBD. It provides a transparent legal framework for the effective implementation of one of the three objectives of the CBD: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. The Nagoya Protocol was adopted on 29 October 2010 in Nagoya, Japan, and entered into force on 12 October 2014.\n2010 was also the International Year of Biodiversity, and the Secretariat of the CBD was its focal point. Following a recommendation of CBD signatories at Nagoya, the UN declared 2011 to 2020 as the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity in December 2010. The Convention's \"Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011\u20132020\", created in 2010, include the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.\nThe meetings of the Parties to the Convention are known as Conferences of the Parties (COP), with the first one (COP 1) held in Nassau, Bahamas, in 1994 and the most recent one (COP 16) in 2024 in Cali, Colombia.\nIn the area of marine and coastal biodiversity CBD's focus at present is to identify Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas (EBSAs) in specific ocean locations based on scientific criteria. The aim is to create an international legally binding instrument (ILBI) involving area-based planning and decision-making under UNCLOS to support the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (BBNJ treaty or High Seas Treaty).\nOrigin and scope.\nThe notion of an international convention on biodiversity was conceived at a United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on Biological Diversity in November 1988. The subsequent year, the Ad Hoc Working Group of Technical and Legal Experts was established for the drafting of a legal text which addressed the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, as well as the sharing of benefits arising from their utilization with sovereign states and local communities.\nIn 1991, an intergovernmental negotiating committee was established, tasked with finalizing the Convention's text.\nA Conference for the Adoption of the Agreed Text of the Convention on Biological Diversity was held in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1992, and its conclusions were distilled in the Nairobi Final Act. The Convention's text was opened for signature on 5 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (the Rio \"Earth Summit\"). By its closing date, 4 June 1993, the Convention had received 168 signatures. It entered into force on 29 December 1993.\nThe Convention recognized for the first time in international law that the conservation of biodiversity is \"a common concern of humankind\" and is an integral part of the development process. The agreement covers all ecosystems, species, and genetic resources. It links traditional conservation efforts to the economic goal of using biological resources sustainably. It sets principles for the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the use of genetic resources, notably those destined for commercial use. It also covers the rapidly expanding field of biotechnology through its Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, addressing technology development and transfer, benefit-sharing and biosafety issues. Importantly, the Convention is legally binding; countries that join it ('Parties') are obliged to implement its provisions.\nThe Convention reminds decision-makers of the finite status of natural resources and sets out a philosophy of sustainable use. While past conservation efforts were aimed at protecting particular species and habitats, the Convention recognizes that ecosystems, species and genes must be used for the benefit of humans. However, this should be done in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity.\nThe Convention also offers decision-makers guidance based on the precautionary principle which demands that where there is a threat of significant reduction or loss of biological diversity, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to avoid or minimize such a threat. The Convention acknowledges that substantial investments are required to conserve biological diversity. It argues, however, that conservation will bring us significant environmental, economic and social benefits in return.\nThe Convention on Biological Diversity of 2010 banned some forms of geoengineering.\nExecutive secretary.\nAs of April 2024, the acting executive secretary is Astrid Schomaker.\nThe previous executive secretaries were: David Cooper (2023\u20132024), Elizabeth Maruma Mrema (2020\u20132023), \n (2017\u20132019), Braulio Ferreira de Souza Dias (2012\u20132017), Ahmed Djoghlaf (2006\u20132012), Hamdallah Zedan (1998\u20132005), Calestous Juma (1995\u20131998), and Angela Cropper (1993\u20131995).\nIssues.\nSome of the many issues dealt with under the Convention include:\nInternational bodies established.\nConference of the Parties (COP).\nThe Convention's governing body is the Conference of the Parties (COP), consisting of all governments (and regional economic integration organizations) that have ratified the treaty. This ultimate authority reviews progress under the Convention, identifies new priorities, and sets work plans for members. The COP can also make amendments to the Convention, create expert advisory bodies, review progress reports by member nations, and collaborate with other international organizations and agreements.\nThe Conference of the Parties uses expertise and support from several other bodies that are established by the Convention. In addition to committees or mechanisms established on an ad hoc basis, the main organs are:\nCBD Secretariat.\nThe CBD Secretariat, based in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, operates under UNEP, the United Nations Environment Programme. Its main functions are to organize meetings, draft documents, assist member governments in the implementation of the programme of work, coordinate with other international organizations, and collect and disseminate information.\nSubsidiary Body for Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA).\nThe SBSTTA is a committee composed of experts from member governments competent in relevant fields. It plays a key role in making recommendations to the COP on scientific and technical issues. It provides assessments of the status of biological diversity and of various measures taken in accordance with Convention, and also gives recommendations to the Conference of the Parties, which may be endorsed in whole, in part or in modified form by the COPs. SBSTTA had met 26 times, with a 26th meeting taking place in Nairobi, Kenya in 2024.\nSubsidiary Body on Implementation.\nIn 2014, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity established the Subsidiary Body on Implementation (SBI) to replace the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Review of Implementation of the Convention. The four functions and core areas of work of SBI are: (a) review of progress in implementation; (b) strategic actions to enhance implementation; (c) strengthening means of implementation; and (d) operations of the Convention and the Protocols. The first meeting of the SBI was held on 2\u20136 May 2016 and the second meeting was held on 9\u201313 July 2018, both in Montreal, Canada. The latest (fifth) meeting of the SBI was held in October 2024 in Cali, Colombia. The Bureau of the Conference of the Parties serves as the Bureau of the SBI. The current chair of the SBI is Ms. Clarissa Souza Della Nina of Brazil.\nParties.\nAs of 2016, the Convention has 196 Parties, which includes 195 states and the European Union. All UN member states\u2014with the exception of the United States\u2014have ratified the treaty. Non-UN member states that have ratified are the Cook Islands, Niue, and the State of Palestine. The Holy See and the states with limited recognition are non-Parties. The US has signed but not ratified the treaty, because ratification requires a two-thirds majority in the Senate and is blocked by Republican Party senators.\nThe European Union created the Cartagena Protocol (see below) in 2000 to enhance biosafety regulation and propagate the \"precautionary principle\" over the \"sound science principle\" defended by the United States. Whereas the impact of the Cartagena Protocol on domestic regulations has been substantial, its impact on international trade law remains uncertain. In 2006, the World Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that the European Union had violated international trade law between 1999 and 2003 by imposing a moratorium on the approval of genetically modified organisms (GMO) imports. Disappointing the United States, the panel nevertheless \"decided not to decide\" by not invalidating the stringent European biosafety regulations.\nImplementation by the Parties to the Convention is achieved using two means:\nNational Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAP).\nNational Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAP) are the principal instruments for implementing the Convention at the national level. The Convention requires that countries prepare a national biodiversity strategy and to ensure that this strategy is included in planning for activities in all sectors where diversity may be impacted. As of early 2012, 173 Parties had developed NBSAPs.\nThe United Kingdom, New Zealand and Tanzania carried out elaborate responses to conserve individual species and specific habitats. The United States of America, a signatory who had not yet ratified the treaty by 2010, produced one of the most thorough implementation programs through species recovery programs and other mechanisms long in place in the US for species conservation.\nSingapore established a detailed \"National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan\". The \"National Biodiversity Centre\" of Singapore represents Singapore in the Convention for Biological Diversity.\nNational Reports.\nIn accordance with Article 26 of the Convention, Parties prepare national reports on the status of implementation of the Convention.\nProtocols and plans developed by CBD.\nCartagena Protocol (2000).\nThe Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, also known as the Biosafety Protocol, was adopted in January 2000, after a CBD Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on Biosafety had met six times between July 1996 and February 1999. The Working Group submitted a draft text of the Protocol for consideration by Conference of the Parties at its first extraordinary meeting, which was convened for the express purpose of adopting a protocol on biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity. After a few delays, the Cartagena Protocol was eventually adopted on 29 January 2000. The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology.\nThe Biosafety Protocol makes clear that products from new technologies must be based on the precautionary principle and allow developing nations to balance public health against economic benefits. It will, for example, let countries ban imports of a genetically modified organism if they feel there is not enough scientific evidence the product is safe and requires exporters to label shipments containing genetically modified commodities such as corn or cotton.\nThe required number of 50 instruments of ratification/accession/approval/acceptance by countries was reached in May 2003. In accordance with the provisions of its Article 37, the Protocol entered into force on 11 September 2003.\nGlobal Strategy for Plant Conservation (2002).\nIn April 2002, the Parties of the UN CBD adopted the recommendations of the Gran Canaria Declaration Calling for a Global Plant Conservation Strategy, and adopted a 16-point plan aiming to slow the rate of plant extinctions around the world by 2010.\nNagoya Protocol (2010).\nThe Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted on 29 October 2010 in Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, Japan, at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, and entered into force on 12 October 2014. The protocol is a supplementary agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and provides a transparent legal framework for the effective implementation of one of the three objectives of the CBD: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. It thereby contributes to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.\nStrategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011\u20132020.\nAlso at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held from 18 to 29 October 2010 in Nagoya, a revised and updated \"Strategic Plan for Biodiversity, 2011\u20132020\" was agreed and published. This document included the \"Aichi Biodiversity Targets\", comprising 20 targets that address each of five strategic goals defined in the plan. The strategic plan includes the following strategic goals:\nUpon the launch of Agenda 2030, CBD released a technical note mapping and identifying synergies between the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets. This helps to understand the contributions of biodiversity to achieving the SDGs.\nPost-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework.\nA new plan, known as the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF) was developed to guide action through 2030. A first draft of this framework was released in July 2021, and its final content was discussed and negotiated as part of the COP 15 meetings. Reducing agricultural pollution and sharing the benefits of digital sequence information arose as key points of contention among Parties during development of the framework. A final version was adopted by the Convention on 19 December 2022. The framework includes a number of ambitious goals, including a commitment to designate at least 30 percent of global land and sea as protected areas (known as the \"30 by 30\" initiative).\nMarine and coastal biodiversity.\nThe CBD has a significant focus on marine and coastal biodiversity.\u00a0A series of expert workshops have been held (2018\u20132022) to identify options for modifying the description of Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas (EBSAs) and describing new areas. These have focused on the North-East, North-West and South-Eastern Atlantic Ocean, Baltic Sea, Caspian Sea, Black Sea, Seas of East Asia, North-West Indian Ocean and Adjacent Gulf Areas, Southern and North-East Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, North and South Pacific, Eastern Tropical and Temperate Pacific, Wider Caribbean and Western Mid-Atlantic. The workshop meetings have followed the EBSA process based on internationally agreed scientific criteria. This is aimed at creating an international legally binding instrument (ILBI) under UNCLOS to support the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (BBNJ or High Seas Treaty). The central mechanism is area-based planning and decision-making. It integrates EBSAs, Vulnerable Marine Ecosystems (VMEs) and High Seas (Marine Protected Areas) with Blue Growth scenarios. There is also linkage with the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive.\nCriticism.\nThere have been criticisms against CBD that its implementation has been weakened due to resistance of Western countries to the implementation of pro-South provisions of the Convention. CBD is also regarded as a case of a hard treaty gone soft in the implementation trajectory. The argument to enforce the treaty as a legally binding multilateral instrument with the Conference of Parties reviewing the infractions and non-compliance is also gaining strength.\nAlthough the Convention explicitly states that all forms of life are covered by its provisions, examination of reports and of national biodiversity strategies and action plans submitted by participating countries shows that in practice this is not happening. The fifth report of the European Union, for example, makes frequent reference to animals (particularly fish) and plants, but does not mention bacteria, fungi or protists at all. The International Society for Fungal Conservation has assessed more than 100 of these CBD documents for their coverage of fungi using defined criteria to place each in one of six categories. No documents were assessed as good or adequate, less than 10% as nearly adequate or poor, and the rest as deficient, seriously deficient or totally deficient.\nScientists working with biodiversity and medical research are expressing fears that the Nagoya Protocol is counterproductive, and will hamper disease prevention and conservation efforts, and that the threat of imprisonment of scientists will have a chilling effect on research. Non-commercial researchers and institutions such as natural history museums fear maintaining biological reference collections and exchanging material between institutions will become difficult, and medical researchers have expressed alarm at plans to expand the protocol to make it illegal to publicly share genetic information, e.g. via GenBank.\nWilliam Yancey Brown, when with the Brookings Institution, suggested that the Convention on Biological Diversity should include the preservation of intact genomes and viable cells for every known species and for new species as they are discovered.\nMeetings of the Parties.\nA Conference of the Parties (COP) was held annually for three years after 1994, and thence biennially on even-numbered years.\n1994 COP 1.\nThe first ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in November and December 1994, in Nassau, Bahamas. The International Coral Reef Initiative (ICRI) was launched at this first COP for the Convention on Biological Diversity. \n1995 COP 2.\nThe second ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in November 1995, in Jakarta, Indonesia.\n1996 COP 3.\nThe third ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in November 1996, in Buenos Aires, Argentina.\n1998 COP 4.\nThe fourth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May 1998, in Bratislava, Slovakia.\n1999 EX-COP 1 (Cartagena).\nThe First Extraordinary Meeting of the Conference of the Parties took place in February 1999, in Cartagena, Colombia. A series of meetings led to the adoption of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in January 2000, effective from 2003.\n2000 COP 5.\nThe fifth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May 2000, in Nairobi, Kenya.\n2002 COP 6.\nThe sixth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in April 2002, in The Hague, Netherlands.\n2004 COP 7.\nThe seventh ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in February 2004, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.\n2006 COP 8.\nThe eighth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in March 2006, in Curitiba, Brazil.\n2008 COP 9.\nThe ninth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May 2008, in Bonn, Germany.\n2010 COP 10 (Nagoya).\nThe tenth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in October 2010, in Nagoya, Japan. It was at this meeting that the Nagoya Protocol was ratified.\n2010 was the International Year of Biodiversity, which resulted in 110 reports on the loss of biodiversity in different countries, but little or no progress toward the goal of \"significant reduction\" in the problem. Following a recommendation of CBD signatories, the UN declared 2011 to 2020 as the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity.\n2012 COP 11.\nLeading up to the Conference of the Parties (COP 11) meeting on biodiversity in Hyderabad, India, 2012, preparations for a World Wide Views on Biodiversity has begun, involving old and new partners and building on the experiences from the World Wide Views on Global Warming.\n2014 COP 12.\nUnder the theme, \"Biodiversity for Sustainable Development\", thousands of representatives of governments, NGOs, indigenous peoples, scientists and the private sector gathered in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea in October 2014 for the 12th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP 12).\nFrom 6\u201317 October 2014, Parties discussed the implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011\u20132020 and its Aichi Biodiversity Targets, which are to be achieved by the end of this decade. The results of Global Biodiversity Outlook 4, the flagship assessment report of the CBD informed the discussions.\nThe conference gave a mid-term evaluation to the UN Decade on Biodiversity (2011\u20132020) initiative, which aims to promote the conservation and sustainable use of nature. The meeting achieved a total of 35 decisions, including a decision on \"Mainstreaming gender considerations\", to incorporate gender perspective to the analysis of biodiversity.\nAt the end of the meeting, the meeting adopted the \"Pyeongchang Road Map\", which addresses ways to achieve biodiversity through technology cooperation, funding and strengthening the capacity of developing countries.\n2016 COP 13.\nThe thirteenth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place between 2 and 17 December 2016 in Canc\u00fan, Mexico.\n2018 COP 14.\nThe 14th ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place on 17\u201329 November 2018, in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt. The 2018 UN Biodiversity Conference closed on 29 November 2018 with broad international agreement on reversing the global destruction of nature and biodiversity loss threatening all forms of life on Earth. Parties adopted the Voluntary Guidelines for the design and effective implementation of ecosystem-based approaches to climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Governments also agreed to accelerate action to achieve the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, agreed in 2010, until 2020. Work to achieve these targets would take place at the global, regional, national and subnational levels.\n2021/2022 COP 15.\nThe 15th meeting of the Parties was originally scheduled to take place in Kunming, China in 2020, but was postponed several times due to the COVID-19 pandemic. After the start date was delayed for a third time, the Convention was split into two sessions. A mostly online event took place in October 2021, where over 100 nations signed the Kunming declaration on biodiversity. The theme of the declaration was \"Ecological Civilization: Building a Shared Future for All Life on Earth\". Twenty-one action-oriented draft targets were provisionally agreed in the October meeting, to be further discussed in the second session: an in-person event that was originally scheduled to start in April 2022, but was rescheduled to occur later in 2022. The second part of COP 15 ultimately took place in Montreal, Canada, from 5\u201317 December 2022. At the meeting, the Parties to the Convention adopted a new action plan, the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.\n2024 COP 16.\nThe 16th meeting of the Parties is scheduled to be held in Cali, Colombia in 2024. Originally, Turkey was going to host it but after a series of earthquakes in February 2023 they had to withdraw."}
{"id": "6199", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6199", "title": "Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas", "text": "The Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas is an agreement that was designed to solve through international cooperation the problems involved in the conservation of living resources of the high seas, considering that because of the development of modern technology some of these resources are in danger of being overexploited. The convention opened for signature on 29 April 1958 and entered into force on 20 March 1966.\nParticipation.\n\"Parties\" \u2013 (39): Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Colombia, Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Montenegro, Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela.\n\"Countries that have signed, but not yet ratified\" \u2013 (21): Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ghana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Uruguay."}
{"id": "6200", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6200", "title": "Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution", "text": "The Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, often abbreviated as Air Convention or CLRTAP, is intended to protect the human environment against air pollution and to gradually reduce and prevent air pollution, including long-range transboundary air pollution. It is implemented by the European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (EMEP), directed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE).\nThe convention opened for signature on , and entered into force on .\nSecretariat.\nThe Convention, which now has 51 Parties, identifies the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) as its secretariat. The current parties to the Convention are shown on the map.\nThe Convention is implemented by the European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (EMEP) (short for \"Co-operative Programme for Monitoring and Evaluation of the Long-range Transmission of Air Pollutants in Europe\"). Results of the EMEP programme are published on the EMEP website, www.emep.int.\nProcedure.\nThe aim of the Convention is that Parties shall endeavour to limit and, as far as possible, gradually reduce and prevent air pollution including long-range transboundary air pollution. Parties develop policies and strategies to combat the discharge of air pollutants through exchanges of information, consultation, research and monitoring.\nThe Parties meet annually at sessions of the Executive Body to review ongoing work and plan future activities including a workplan for the coming year. The three main subsidiary bodies \u2013 the Working Group on Effects, the Steering Body to EMEP and the Working Group on Strategies and Review \u2013 as well as the Convention's Implementation Committee, report to the Executive Body each year.\nCurrently, the Convention's priority activities include review and possible revision of its most recent protocols, implementation of the Convention and its protocols across the entire UNECE region (with special focus on Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia and South-East Europe) and sharing its knowledge and information with other regions of the world.\nProtocols.\nSince 1979 the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution has addressed some of the major environmental problems of the UNECE region through scientific collaboration and policy negotiation. The Convention has been extended by eight protocols that identify specific measures to be taken by Parties to cut their emissions of air pollutants:"}
{"id": "6201", "revid": "1272048372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6201", "title": "CITES", "text": "CITES (shorter name for the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, also known as the Washington Convention) is a multilateral treaty to protect endangered plants and animals from the threats of international trade. It was drafted as a result of a resolution adopted in 1963 at a meeting of members of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The convention was opened for signature in 1973 and CITES entered into force on 1 July 1975.\nIts aim is to ensure that international trade (import/export) in specimens of animals and plants included under CITES does not threaten the survival of the species in the wild. This is achieved via a system of permits and certificates. CITES affords varying degrees of protection to more than 40,900 species.\n, the Secretary-General of CITES is Ivonne Higuero.\nBackground.\nCITES is one of the largest and oldest conservation and sustainable use agreements in existence. There are three working languages of the Convention (English, French and Spanish) in which all documents are made available. Participation is voluntary and countries that have agreed to be bound by the convention are known as Parties. Although CITES is legally binding on the Parties, it does not take the place of national laws. Rather it provides a framework respected by each Party, which must adopt their own domestic legislation to implement CITES at the national level.\nOriginally, CITES addressed depletion resulting from demand for luxury goods such as furs in Western countries, but with the rising wealth of Asia, particularly in China, the focus changed to products demanded there, particularly those used for luxury goods such as elephant ivory or rhinoceros horn. As of 2022, CITES has expanded to include thousands of species previously considered unremarkable and in no danger of extinction such as manta rays or pangolins.\nRatifications.\nThe text of the convention was finalized at a meeting of representatives of 80 countries in Washington, D.C., United States, on 3 March 1973. It was then open for signature until 31 December 1974. It entered into force after the 10th ratification by a signatory country, on 1 July 1975. Countries that signed the Convention become Parties by ratifying, accepting or approving it. By the end of 2003, all signatory countries had become Parties. States that were not signatories may become Parties by acceding to the convention. , the convention has 184 parties, including 183 states and the European Union.\nThe CITES Convention includes provisions and rules for trade with non-Parties. All member states of the United Nations are party to the treaty, with the exception of North Korea, Federated States of Micronesia, Haiti, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, South Sudan, East Timor, Turkmenistan, and Tuvalu. UN observer the Holy See is also not a member. The Faroe Islands, an autonomous region in the Kingdom of Denmark, is also treated as a non-Party to CITES (both the Danish mainland and Greenland are part of CITES).\nAn amendment to the text of the convention, known as the Gaborone Amendment allows regional economic integration organizations (REIO), such as the European Union, to have the status of a member state and to be a Party to the convention. The REIO can vote at CITES meetings with the number of votes representing the number of members in the REIO, but it does not have an additional vote.\nIn accordance with Article XVII, paragraph 3, of the CITES Convention, the Gaborone Amendment entered into force on 29 November 2013, 60 days after 54 (two-thirds) of the 80 States that were party to CITES on 30 April 1983 deposited their instrument of acceptance of the amendment. At that time it entered into force only for those States that had accepted the amendment. The amended text of the convention will apply automatically to any State that becomes a Party after 29 November 2013. For States that became party to the convention before that date and have not accepted the amendment, it will enter into force 60 days after they accept it.\nGoverning Structure of CITES.\nCITES operates to support the member Parties. This support consists of the input from three Committees (Standing, Animal and Plant) who are overseen by the Secretary-General. The secretariat position has been held by a variety of people from different nations. \nTimeline of CITES Secretary-General Offices.\n1978-1981: Peter H. Sand\nHe was born in Bavaria, Germany and was educated in international law in Germany, France and Canada. He became a professor and an author, focusing on environmental law, holding other positions such as the Director-General of the IUCN and legal advisor for environmental affairs to the World Bank. \n1982-1990: Eugene Lapointe\nA Canadian native, Lapointe served in the military for many years and acted as a diplomat before governing the CITES. He is currently an author and holds the position of President of the IWMC World Conservation Trust, a non-profit organization that promotes wildlife conservation with an emphasis on a human-centered approach to natural-resources.\n1991 - 1998: Izgrev Topkov\nBorn and raised in Bulgaria, Topkov was a diplomat before managing CITES, and was removed from that position following the misuse of permits that violated CITES guidelines.\n1999 - 2010: Willem Wijnstekers\nA native of the Netherlands and graduate from the University of Amsterdam, Wijnsteker held the position of Secretary-General for the longest period of time and is now an author. \n2010 - 2018: John E. Scanlon\nAn Australian who studied environmental law, Scanlon was active in combating illegal animal trade and currently works in the effort to protect Elephants in Africa as CEO of the Elephant Protection Initiative Foundation (EPIF). \n2018- Current: Ivonne Higuero \nThe first woman to hold this position, Higuero was educated in environmental economics and is from Panama.\nRegulation of trade.\nCITES works by subjecting international trade in specimens of listed taxa to controls as they move across international borders. CITES specimens can include a wide range of items including the whole animal/plant (whether alive or dead), or a product that contains a part or derivative of the listed taxa such as cosmetics or traditional medicines.\nFour types of trade are recognized by CITES - import, export, re-export (export of any specimen that has previously been imported) and introduction from the sea (transportation into a state of specimens of any species which were taken in the marine environment not under the jurisdiction of any state). The CITES definition of \"trade\" does not require a financial transaction to be occurring. All trade in specimens of species covered by CITES must be authorized through a system of permits and certificates prior to the trade taking place. CITES permits and certificates are issued by one or more Management Authorities in charge of administering the CITES system in each country. Management Authorities are advised by one or more Scientific Authorities on the effects of trade of the specimen on the status of CITES-listed species. CITES permits and certificates must be presented to relevant border authorities in each country in order to authorize the trade.\nEach party must enact their own domestic legislation to bring the provisions of CITES into effect in their territories. Parties may choose to take stricter domestic measures than CITES provides (for example by requiring permits/certificates in cases where they would not normally be needed or by prohibiting trade in some specimens).\nAppendices.\nOver 40,900 species, subspecies and populations are protected under CITES. Each protected taxa or population is included in one of three lists called Appendices. The Appendix that lists a taxon or population reflects the level of the threat posed by international trade and the CITES controls that apply.\nTaxa may be split-listed meaning that some populations of a species are on one Appendix, while some are on another. The African bush elephant (\"Loxodonta africana\") is currently split-listed, with all populations except those of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe listed in Appendix I. Those of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe are listed in Appendix II. There are also species that have only some populations listed in an Appendix. One example is the pronghorn (\"Antilocapra americana\"), a ruminant native to North America. Its Mexican population is listed in Appendix I, but its U.S. and Canadian populations are not listed (though certain U.S. populations in Arizona are nonetheless protected under other domestic legislation, in this case the Endangered Species Act).\nTaxa are proposed for inclusion, amendment or deletion in Appendices I and II at meetings of the Conference of the Parties (CoP), which are held approximately once every three years. Amendments to listing in Appendix III may be made unilaterally by individual parties.\nAppendix I.\nAppendix I taxa are those that are threatened with extinction and to which the highest level of CITES protection is afforded. Commercial trade in wild-sourced specimens of these taxa is not permitted and non-commercial trade is strictly controlled by requiring an import permit and export permit to be granted by the relevant Management Authorities in each country before the trade occurs.\nNotable taxa listed in Appendix I include the red panda (\"Ailurus fulgens\"), western gorilla (\"Gorilla gorilla\"), the chimpanzee species (\"Pan spp.\"), tigers (\"Panthera tigris\" sp.), Asian elephant (\"Elephas maximus\"), snow leopard (\"Panthera uncia\"), red-shanked douc (\"Pygathrix nemaeus\"), some populations of African bush elephant (\"Loxodonta africana\"), and the monkey puzzle tree (\"Araucaria araucana\").\nAppendix II.\nAppendix II taxa are those that are not necessarily threatened with extinction, but trade must be controlled in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival. Appendix II taxa may also include species similar in appearance to species already listed in the Appendices. The vast majority of taxa listed under CITES are listed in Appendix II. Any trade in Appendix II taxa standardly requires a CITES export permit or re-export certificate to be granted by the Management Authority of the exporting country before the trade occurs.\nExamples of taxa listed on Appendix II are the great white shark (\"Carcharodon carcharias\"), the American black bear (\"Ursus americanus\"), Hartmann's mountain zebra (\"Equus zebra hartmannae\"), green iguana (\"Iguana iguana\"), queen conch (\"Strombus gigas\"), emperor scorpion (\"Pandinus imperator\"), Mertens' water monitor (\"Varanus mertensi\"), bigleaf mahogany (\"Swietenia macrophylla\"), lignum vitae (\"Guaiacum officinale\"), the chambered nautilus (\"Nautilus pompilius\"), all stony corals (\"Scleractinia\" spp.), Jungle cat (\"Felis chaus\") and American ginseng (\"Panax quinquefolius\").\nAppendix III.\nAppendix III species are those that are protected in at least one country, and that country has asked other CITES Parties for assistance in controlling the trade.\nAny trade in Appendix III species standardly requires a CITES export permit (if sourced from the country that listed the species) or a certificate of origin (from any other country) to be granted before the trade occurs.\nExamples of species listed on Appendix III and the countries that listed them are the Hoffmann's two-toed sloth (\"Choloepus hoffmanni\") by Costa Rica, sitatunga (\"Tragelaphus spekii\") by Ghana and African civet (\"Civettictis civetta\") by Botswana.\nExemptions and special procedures.\nUnder Article VII, the Convention allows for certain exceptions to the general trade requirements described above.\nPre-Convention specimens.\nCITES provides for a special process for specimens that were acquired before the provisions of the Convention applied to that specimen. These are known as \"pre-Convention\" specimens and must be granted a CITES pre-Convention certificate before the trade occurs. Only specimens legally acquired before the date on which the species concerned was first included in the Appendices qualify for this exemption.\nPersonal and household effects.\nCITES provides that the standard permit/certificate requirements for trade in CITES specimens do not generally apply if a specimen is a personal or household effect. However there are a number of situations where permits/certificates for personal or household effects are required and some countries choose to take stricter domestic measures by requiring permits/certificates for some or all personal or household effects.\nCaptive bred or artificially propagated specimens.\nCITES allows trade in specimens to follow special procedures if Management Authorities are satisfied that they are sourced from captive bred animals or artificially propagated plants. \nIn the case of commercial trade of Appendix I taxa, captive bred or artificially propagated specimens may be traded as if they were Appendix II. This reduces the permit requirements from two permits (import/export) to one (export only). \nIn the case of non-commercial trade, specimens may be traded with a certificate of captive breeding/artificial propagation issued by the Management Authority of the state of export in lieu of standard permits.\nScientific exchange.\nStandard CITES permit and certificates are not required for the non-commercial loan, donation or exchange between scientific or forensic institutions that have been registered by a Management Authority of their State. Consignments containing the specimens must carry a label issued or approved by that Management Authority (in some cases Customs Declaration labels may be used). Specimens that may be included under this provision include museum, herbarium, diagnostic and forensic research specimens. Registered institutions are listed on the CITES website.\nAmendments and reservations.\nAmendments to the Convention must be supported by a two-thirds majority who are \"present and voting\" and can be made during an extraordinary meeting of the COP if one-third of the Parties are interested in such a meeting. The Gaborone Amendment (1983) allows regional economic blocs to accede to the treaty. Trade with non-Party states is allowed, although permits and certificates are recommended to be issued by exporters and sought by importers.\nSpecies in the Appendices may be proposed for addition, change of Appendix, or de-listing (i.e., deletion) by any Party, whether or not it is a range State and changes may be made despite objections by range States if there is sufficient (2/3 majority) support for the listing. Species listings are made at the Conference of Parties.\nUpon acceding to the Convention or within 90 days of a species listing being amended, Parties may make reservations. In these cases, the party is treated as being a state that is not a Party to CITES with respect to trade in the species concerned. Notable reservations include those by Iceland, Japan, and Norway on various baleen whale species and those on Falconiformes by Saudi Arabia.\nShortcomings and concerns.\nImplementation.\nAs of 2002, 50% of Parties lacked one or more of the four major CITES requirements - designation of Management and Scientific Authorities; laws prohibiting the trade in violation of CITES; penalties for such trade and laws providing for the confiscation of specimens.\nAlthough the Convention itself does not provide for arbitration or dispute in the case of noncompliance, 36 years of CITES in practice has resulted in several strategies to deal with infractions by Parties. The Secretariat, when informed of an infraction by a Party, will notify all other parties. The Secretariat will give the Party time to respond to the allegations and may provide technical assistance to prevent further infractions. Other actions the Convention itself does not provide for but that derive from subsequent COP resolutions may be taken against the offending Party. These include:\nBilateral sanctions have been imposed on the basis of national legislation (e.g. the USA used certification under the Pelly Amendment to get Japan to revoke its reservation to hawksbill turtle products in 1991, thus reducing the volume of its exports).\nInfractions may include negligence with respect to permit issuing, excessive trade, lax enforcement, and failing to produce annual reports (the most common).\nApproach to biodiversity conservation.\nGeneral limitations about the structure and philosophy of CITES include: by design and intent it focuses on trade at the species level and does not address habitat loss, ecosystem approaches to conservation, or poverty; it seeks to prevent unsustainable use rather than promote sustainable use (which generally conflicts with the Convention on Biological Diversity), although this has been changing (see Nile crocodile, African elephant, South African white rhino case studies in Hutton and Dickinson 2000). It does not explicitly address market demand. In fact, CITES listings have been demonstrated to increase financial speculation in certain markets for high value species. Funding does not provide for increased on-the-ground enforcement (it must apply for bilateral aid for most projects of this nature).\nThere has been increasing willingness within the Parties to allow for trade in products from well-managed populations. For instance, sales of the South African white rhino have generated revenues that helped pay for protection. Listing the species on Appendix I increased the price of rhino horn (which fueled more poaching), but the species survived wherever there was adequate on-the-ground protection. Thus field protection may be the primary mechanism that saved the population, but it is likely that field protection would not have been increased without CITES protection. In another instance, the United States initially stopped exports of bobcat and lynx hides in 1977 when it first implemented CITES for lack of data to support no detriment findings. However, in this Federal Register notice, issued by William Yancey Brown, the U.S. Endangered Species Scientific Authority (ESSA) established a framework of no detriment findings for each state and the Navajo nation and indicated that approval would be forthcoming if the states and Navajo nation provided evidence that their furbearer management programs assured the species would be conserved. Management programs for these species expanded rapidly, including tagging for export, and are currently recognized in program approvals under regulations of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.\nDrafting.\nBy design, CITES regulates and monitors trade in the manner of a \"negative list\" such that trade in all species is permitted and unregulated \"unless\" the species in question appears on the Appendices or looks very much like one of those taxa. Then and only then, trade is regulated or constrained. Because the remit of the Convention covers millions of species of plants and animals, and tens of thousands of these taxa are potentially of economic value, in practice this negative list approach effectively forces CITES signatories to expend limited resources on just a select few, leaving many species to be traded with neither constraint nor review. For example, recently several bird classified as threatened with extinction appeared in the legal wild bird trade because the CITES process never considered their status. If a \"positive list\" approach were taken, only species evaluated and approved for the positive list would be permitted in trade, thus lightening the review burden for member states and the Secretariat, and also preventing inadvertent legal trade threats to poorly known species.\nSpecific weaknesses in the text include: it does not stipulate guidelines for the 'non-detriment' finding required of national Scientific Authorities; non-detriment findings require copious amounts of information; the 'household effects' clause is often not rigid enough/specific enough to prevent CITES violations by means of this Article (VII); non-reporting from Parties means Secretariat monitoring is incomplete; and it has no capacity to address domestic trade in listed species.\nIn order to ensure that the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was not violated, the Secretariat of GATT was consulted during the drafting process.\nAnimal sourced pathogens.\nDuring the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 CEO Ivonne Higuero noted that illegal wildlife trade not only helps to destroy habitats, but these habitats create a safety barrier for humans that can prevent pathogens from animals passing themselves on to people.\nReform suggestions.\nSuggestions for improvement in the operation of CITES include: more regular missions by the Secretariat (not reserved just for high-profile species); improvement of national legislation and enforcement; better reporting by Parties (and the consolidation of information from all sources-NGOs, TRAFFIC, the wildlife trade monitoring network and Parties); more emphasis on enforcement-including a technical committee enforcement officer; the development of CITES Action Plans (akin to Biodiversity Action Plans related to the Convention on Biological Diversity) including: designation of Scientific/Management Authorities and national enforcement strategies; incentives for reporting and timelines for both Action Plans and reporting. CITES would benefit from access to Global Environment Facility (GEF), funds-although this is difficult given the GEFs more ecosystem approach-or other more regular funds. Development of a future mechanism similar to that of the Montreal Protocol (developed nations contribute to a fund for developing nations) could allow more funds for non-Secretariat activities.\nTRAFFIC Data.\nFrom 2005 to 2009 the legal trade corresponded with these numbers:\nIn the 1990s the annual trade of legal animal products was $160 billion annually. In 2009 the estimated value almost doubled to $300 billion.\nTraffic released a report in December, 2024 outlining illegal trade in animal products occurring in Vietnam:\nAdditional information about the documented trade can be extracted through queries on the CITES website.\nMeetings.\nThe Conference of the Parties (CoP) is held once every three years. The location of the next CoP is chosen at the close of each CoP by a secret ballot vote.\nThe CITES Committees (Animals Committee, Plants Committee and Standing Committee) hold meetings during each year that does not have a CoP, while the Standing committee meets also in years with a CoP. The Committee meetings take place in Geneva, Switzerland (where the Secretariat of the CITES Convention is located), unless another country offers to host the meeting. The Secretariat is administered by UNEP. The Animals and Plants Committees have sometimes held joint meetings. The previous joint meeting was held in March 2012 in Dublin, Ireland, and the latest one was held in Veracruz, Mexico, in May 2014.\nA current list of upcoming meetings appears on the CITES calendar.\nAt the seventeenth Conference of the Parties (CoP 17), Namibia and Zimbabwe introduced proposals to amend their listing of elephant populations in Appendix II. Instead, they wished to establish controlled trade in all elephant specimens, including ivory. They argue that revenue from regulated trade could be used for elephant conservation and rural communities' development. However, both proposals were opposed by the US and other countries."}
{"id": "6202", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6202", "title": "Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and Other Matter", "text": ""}
{"id": "6203", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6203", "title": "Environmental Modification Convention", "text": "The Environmental Modification Convention (ENMOD), formally the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques, is an international treaty prohibiting the military or other hostile use of environmental modification techniques having widespread, long-lasting or severe effects. It opened for signature on 18 May 1977 in Geneva and entered into force on 5 October 1978.\nThe Convention bans weather warfare, which is the use of weather modification techniques for the purposes of inducing damage or destruction. The Convention on Biological Diversity of 2010 would also ban some forms of weather modification or geoengineering.\nMany states do not regard this as a complete ban on the use of herbicides in warfare, such as Agent Orange, but it does require case-by-case consideration.\nParties.\nThe convention was signed by 48 states; 16 of the signatories have not ratified. As of 2022 the convention has 78 state parties.\nHistory.\nThe problem of artificial modification of the environment for military or other hostile purposes was brought to the international agenda in the early 1970s. Following the US decision of July 1972 to renounce the use of climate modification techniques for hostile purposes, the 1973 resolution by the US Senate calling for an international agreement \"prohibiting the use of any environmental or geophysical modification activity as a weapon of war\", and an in-depth review by the Department of Defense of the military aspects of weather and other environmental modification techniques, US decided to seek agreement with the Soviet Union to explore the possibilities of an international agreement.\nIn July 1974, US and USSR agreed to hold bilateral discussions on measures to overcome the danger of the use of environmental modification techniques for military purposes and three subsequent rounds of discussions in 1974 and 1975. In August 1975, US and USSR tabled identical draft texts of a convention at the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD), Conference on Disarmament, where intensive negotiations resulted in a modified text and understandings regarding four articles of this Convention in 1976.\nThe convention was approved by Resolution 31/72 of the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10 December 1976, by 96 to 8 votes with 30 abstentions.\nEnvironmental Modification Technique.\nEnvironmental Modification Technique includes any technique for changing \u2013 through the deliberate manipulation of natural processes \u2013 the dynamics, composition or structure of the earth, including its biota, lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, or of outer space.\nStructure of ENMOD.\nThe Convention contains ten articles and one Annex on the Consultative Committee of Experts. Integral part of the convention are also the Understandings relating to articles I, II, III and VIII. These Understandings are not incorporated into the convention but are part of the negotiating record and were included in the report transmitted by the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to the United Nations General Assembly in September 1976 Report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, Volume I, General Assembly Official records: Thirty-first session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), New York, United Nations, 1976, pp.\u00a091\u201392.\nAnthropogenic climate change.\nENMOD treaty members are responsible for 83% of carbon dioxide emissions since the treaty entered into force in 1978. The ENMOD treaty could potentially be used by ENMOD member states seeking climate-change loss and damage compensation from other ENMOD member states at the International Court of Justice. With the knowledge that carbon dioxide emissions can enhance extreme weather events, the continued unmitigated greenhouse gas emissions from some ENMOD member states could be viewed as \u2018reckless\u2019 in the context of deliberately declining emissions from other ENMOD member states. It is unclear whether the International Court of Justice will consider the ENMOD treaty when it issues a legal opinion on international climate change obligations requested by the United Nations General Assembly on 29 March 2023."}
{"id": "6204", "revid": "8029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6204", "title": "Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As Waterfowl Habitat", "text": ""}
{"id": "6205", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6205", "title": "Chaitin's constant", "text": "In the computer science subfield of algorithmic information theory, a Chaitin constant (Chaitin omega number) or halting probability is a real number that, informally speaking, represents the probability that a randomly constructed program will halt. These numbers are formed from a construction due to Gregory Chaitin.\nAlthough there are infinitely many halting probabilities, one for each (universal, see below) method of encoding programs, it is common to use the letter to refer to them as if there were only one. Because depends on the program encoding used, it is sometimes called Chaitin's construction when not referring to any specific encoding.\nEach halting probability is a normal and transcendental real number that is not computable, which means that there is no algorithm to compute its digits. Each halting probability is Martin-L\u00f6f random, meaning there is not even any algorithm which can reliably guess its digits.\nBackground.\nThe definition of a halting probability relies on the existence of a prefix-free universal computable function. Such a function, intuitively, represents a program in a programming language with the property that no valid program can be obtained as a proper extension of another valid program. Computer programming languages generally consist of sequences of commands, so no programming language is a prefix-free universal computable function.\nSuppose that is a partial function that takes one argument, a finite binary string, and possibly returns a single binary string as output. The function is called computable if there is a Turing machine that computes it, in the sense that for any finite binary strings and , if and only if the Turing machine halts with on its tape when given the input .\nThe function is called universal if for every computable function of a single variable there is a string such that for all , ; here represents the concatenation of the two strings and . This means that can be used to simulate any computable function of one variable. Informally, represents a \"script\" for the computable function , and represents an \"interpreter\" that parses the script as a prefix of its input and then executes it on the remainder of input.\nThe domain of is the set of all inputs on which it is defined. For that are universal, such a can generally be seen both as the concatenation of a program part and a data part, and as a single program for the function .\nThe function is called prefix-free if there are no two elements , in its domain such that is a proper extension of . This can be rephrased as: the domain of is a prefix-free code (instantaneous code) on the set of finite binary strings. A simple way to enforce prefix-free-ness is to use machines whose means of input is a binary stream from which bits can be read one at a time. There is no end-of-stream marker; the end of input is determined by when the universal machine decides to stop reading more bits, and the remaining bits are not considered part of the accepted string. Here, the difference between the two notions of program mentioned in the last paragraph becomes clear; one is easily recognized by some grammar, while the other requires arbitrary computation to recognize.\nThe domain of any universal computable function is a computably enumerable set but never a computable set. The domain is always Turing equivalent to the halting problem.\nDefinition.\nLet be the domain of a prefix-free universal computable function . The constant is then defined as\nformula_1\nwhere denotes the length of a string . This is an infinite sum which has one summand for every in the domain of . The requirement that the domain be prefix-free, together with Kraft's inequality, ensures that this sum converges to a real number between 0 and 1. If is clear from context then may be denoted simply , although different prefix-free universal computable functions lead to different values of .\nRelationship to the halting problem.\nKnowing the first bits of , one could calculate the halting problem for all programs of a size up to . Let the program for which the halting problem is to be solved be bits long. In dovetailing fashion, all programs of all lengths are run, until enough have halted to jointly contribute enough probability to match these first bits. If the program has not halted yet, then it never will, since its contribution to the halting probability would affect the first bits. Thus, the halting problem would be solved for .\nBecause many outstanding problems in number theory, such as Goldbach's conjecture, are equivalent to solving the halting problem for special programs (which would basically search for counter-examples and halt if one is found), knowing enough bits of Chaitin's constant would also imply knowing the answer to these problems. But as the halting problem is not generally solvable, and therefore calculating any but the first few bits of Chaitin's constant is not possible for a universal language. This reduces hard problems to impossible ones, much like trying to build an oracle machine for the halting problem would be.\nInterpretation as a probability.\nThe Cantor space is the collection of all infinite sequences of 0s and 1s. A halting probability can be interpreted as the measure of a certain subset of Cantor space under the usual probability measure on Cantor space. It is from this interpretation that halting probabilities take their name.\nThe probability measure on Cantor space, sometimes called the fair-coin measure, is defined so that for any binary string the set of sequences that begin with has measure . This implies that for each natural number , the set of sequences in Cantor space such that = 1 has measure , and the set of sequences whose th element is 0 also has measure .\nLet be a prefix-free universal computable function. The domain of consists of an infinite set of binary strings\nformula_2\nEach of these strings determines a subset of Cantor space; the set contains all sequences in cantor space that begin with . These sets are disjoint because is a prefix-free set. The sum\nformula_3\nrepresents the measure of the set \nformula_4\nIn this way, represents the probability that a randomly selected infinite sequence of 0s and 1s begins with a bit string (of some finite length) that is in the domain of . It is for this reason that is called a halting probability.\nProperties.\nEach Chaitin constant has the following properties:\nNot every set that is Turing equivalent to the halting problem is a halting probability. A finer equivalence relation, Solovay equivalence, can be used to characterize the halting probabilities among the left-c.e. reals. One can show that a real number in is a Chaitin constant (i.e. the halting probability of some prefix-free universal computable function) if and only if it is left-c.e. and algorithmically random. is among the few definable algorithmically random numbers and is the best-known algorithmically random number, but it is not at all typical of all algorithmically random numbers.\nUncomputability.\nA real number is called computable if there is an algorithm which, given , returns the first digits of the number. This is equivalent to the existence of a program that enumerates the digits of the real number.\nNo halting probability is computable. The proof of this fact relies on an algorithm which, given the first digits of , solves Turing's halting problem for programs of length up to . Since the halting problem is undecidable, cannot be computed.\nThe algorithm proceeds as follows. Given the first digits of and a , the algorithm enumerates the domain of until enough elements of the domain have been found so that the probability they represent is within of . After this point, no additional program of length can be in the domain, because each of these would add to the measure, which is impossible. Thus the set of strings of length in the domain is exactly the set of such strings already enumerated.\nAlgorithmic randomness.\nA real number is random if the binary sequence representing the real number is an algorithmically random sequence. Calude, Hertling, Khoussainov, and Wang showed that a recursively enumerable real number is an algorithmically random sequence if and only if it is a Chaitin's number.\nIncompleteness theorem for halting probabilities.\nFor each specific consistent effectively represented axiomatic system for the natural numbers, such as Peano arithmetic, there exists a constant such that no bit of after the th can be proven to be 1 or 0 within that system. The constant depends on how the formal system is effectively represented, and thus does not directly reflect the complexity of the axiomatic system. This incompleteness result is similar to G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem in that it shows that no consistent formal theory for arithmetic can be complete.\nSuper Omega.\nThe first bits of Gregory Chaitin's constant are random or incompressible in the sense that they cannot be computed by a halting algorithm with fewer than bits. However, consider the short but never halting algorithm which systematically lists and runs all possible programs; whenever one of them halts its probability gets added to the output (initialized by zero). After finite time the first bits of the output will never change any more (it does not matter that this time itself is not computable by a halting program). So there is a short non-halting algorithm whose output converges (after finite time) onto the first bits of . In other words, the enumerable first bits of are highly compressible in the sense that they are limit-computable by a very short algorithm; they are not random with respect to the set of enumerating algorithms. J\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber constructed a limit-computable \"Super \" which in a sense is much more random than the original limit-computable , as one cannot significantly compress the Super by any enumerating non-halting algorithm.\nFor an alternative \"Super \", the universality probability of a prefix-free universal Turing machine (UTM) namely, the probability that it remains universal even when every input of it (as a binary string) is prefixed by a random binary string can be seen as the non-halting probability of a machine with oracle the third iteration of the halting problem (i.e., using Turing jump notation)."}
{"id": "6206", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6206", "title": "Computable number", "text": "In mathematics, computable numbers are the real numbers that can be computed to within any desired precision by a finite, terminating algorithm. They are also known as the recursive numbers, effective numbers, computable reals, or recursive reals. The concept of a computable real number was introduced by \u00c9mile Borel in 1912, using the intuitive notion of computability available at the time.\nEquivalent definitions can be given using \u03bc-recursive functions, Turing machines, or \u03bb-calculus as the formal representation of algorithms. The computable numbers form a real closed field and can be used in the place of real numbers for many, but not all, mathematical purposes.\nInformal definition.\nIn the following, Marvin Minsky defines the numbers to be computed in a manner similar to those defined by Alan Turing in 1936; i.e., as \"sequences of digits interpreted as decimal fractions\" between 0 and 1:\nThe key notions in the definition are (1) that some \"n\" is specified at the start, (2) for any \"n\" the computation only takes a finite number of steps, after which the machine produces the desired output and terminates.\nAn alternate form of (2) \u2013 the machine successively prints all \"n\" of the digits on its tape, halting after printing the \"n\"th \u2013 emphasizes Minsky's observation: (3) That by use of a Turing machine, a \"finite\" definition \u2013 in the form of the machine's state table \u2013 is being used to define what is a potentially \"infinite\" string of decimal digits.\nThis is however not the modern definition which only requires the result be accurate to within any given accuracy. The informal definition above is subject to a rounding problem called the table-maker's dilemma whereas the modern definition is not.\nFormal definition.\nA real number \"a\" is computable if it can be approximated by some computable function formula_1 in the following manner: given any positive integer \"n\", the function produces an integer \"f\"(\"n\") such that:\nA complex number is called computable if its real and imaginary parts are computable.\nEquivalent definitions.\nThere are two similar definitions that are equivalent:\nThere is another equivalent definition of computable numbers via computable Dedekind cuts. A computable Dedekind cut is a computable function formula_8 which when provided with a rational number formula_9 as input returns formula_10 or formula_11, satisfying the following conditions:\nAn example is given by a program \"D\" that defines the cube root of 3. Assuming formula_15 this is defined by:\nA real number is computable if and only if there is a computable Dedekind cut \"D\" corresponding to it. The function \"D\" is unique for each computable number (although of course two different programs may provide the same function).\nProperties.\nNot computably enumerable.\nAssigning a G\u00f6del number to each Turing machine definition produces a subset formula_18 of the natural numbers corresponding to the computable numbers and identifies a surjection from formula_18 to the computable numbers. There are only countably many Turing machines, showing that the computable numbers are subcountable. The set formula_18 of these G\u00f6del numbers, however, is not computably enumerable (and consequently, neither are subsets of formula_18 that are defined in terms of it). This is because there is no algorithm to determine which G\u00f6del numbers correspond to Turing machines that produce computable reals. In order to produce a computable real, a Turing machine must compute a total function, but the corresponding decision problem is in Turing degree 0\u2032\u2032. Consequently, there is no surjective computable function from the natural numbers to the set formula_18 of machines representing computable reals, and Cantor's diagonal argument cannot be used constructively to demonstrate uncountably many of them.\nWhile the set of real numbers is uncountable, the set of computable numbers is classically countable and thus almost all real numbers are not computable. Here, for any given computable number formula_23 the well ordering principle provides that there is a minimal element in formula_18 which corresponds to formula_25, and therefore there exists a subset consisting of the minimal elements, on which the map is a bijection. The inverse of this bijection is an injection into the natural numbers of the computable numbers, proving that they are countable. But, again, this subset is not computable, even though the computable reals are themselves ordered.\nProperties as a field.\nThe arithmetical operations on computable numbers are themselves computable in the sense that whenever real numbers \"a\" and \"b\" are computable then the following real numbers are also computable: \"a + b\", \"a - b\", \"ab\", and \"a/b\" if \"b\" is nonzero.\nThese operations are actually \"uniformly computable\"; for example, there is a Turing machine which on input (\"A\",\"B\",formula_26) produces output \"r\", where \"A\" is the description of a Turing machine approximating \"a\", \"B\" is the description of a Turing machine approximating \"b\", and \"r\" is an formula_26 approximation of \"a\"+\"b\".\nThe fact that computable real numbers form a field was first proved by Henry Gordon Rice in 1954.\nComputable reals however do not form a computable field, because the definition of a computable field requires effective equality.\nNon-computability of the ordering.\nThe order relation on the computable numbers is not computable. Let \"A\" be the description of a Turing machine approximating the number formula_6. Then there is no Turing machine which on input \"A\" outputs \"YES\" if formula_29 and \"NO\" if formula_30 To see why, suppose the machine described by \"A\" keeps outputting 0 as formula_26 approximations. It is not clear how long to wait before deciding that the machine will \"never\" output an approximation which forces \"a\" to be positive. Thus the machine will eventually have to guess that the number will equal 0, in order to produce an output; the sequence may later become different from 0. This idea can be used to show that the machine is incorrect on some sequences if it computes a total function. A similar problem occurs when the computable reals are represented as Dedekind cuts. The same holds for the equality relation: the equality test is not computable.\nWhile the full order relation is not computable, the restriction of it to pairs of unequal numbers is computable. That is, there is a program that takes as input two Turing machines \"A\" and \"B\" approximating numbers formula_32 and formula_33, where formula_34, and outputs whether formula_35 or formula_36 It is sufficient to use formula_26-approximations where formula_38 so by taking increasingly small formula_26 (approaching 0), one eventually can decide whether formula_35 or formula_36\nOther properties.\nThe computable real numbers do not share all the properties of the real numbers used in analysis. For example, the least upper bound of a bounded increasing computable sequence of computable real numbers need not be a computable real number. A sequence with this property is known as a Specker sequence, as the first construction is due to Ernst Specker in 1949. Despite the existence of counterexamples such as these, parts of calculus and real analysis can be developed in the field of computable numbers, leading to the study of computable analysis.\nEvery computable number is arithmetically definable, but not vice versa. There are many arithmetically definable, noncomputable real numbers, including:\nBoth of these examples in fact define an infinite set of definable, uncomputable numbers, one for each universal Turing machine.\nA real number is computable if and only if the set of natural numbers it represents (when written in binary and viewed as a characteristic function) is computable.\nThe set of computable real numbers (as well as every countable, densely ordered subset of computable reals without ends) is order-isomorphic to the set of rational numbers.\nDigit strings and the Cantor and Baire spaces.\nTuring's original paper defined computable numbers as follows:\nTuring was aware that this definition is equivalent to the formula_26-approximation definition given above. The argument proceeds as follows: if a number is computable in the Turing sense, then it is also computable in the formula_26 sense: if formula_45, then the first \"n\" digits of the decimal expansion for \"a\" provide an formula_26 approximation of \"a\". For the converse, we pick an formula_26 computable real number \"a\" and generate increasingly precise approximations until the \"n\"th digit after the decimal point is certain. This always generates a decimal expansion equal to \"a\" but it may improperly end in an infinite sequence of 9's in which case it must have a finite (and thus computable) proper decimal expansion.\nUnless certain topological properties of the real numbers are relevant, it is often more convenient to deal with elements of formula_48 (total 0,1 valued functions) instead of reals numbers in formula_49. The members of formula_48 can be identified with binary decimal expansions, but since the decimal expansions formula_51 and formula_52 denote the same real number, the interval formula_49 can only be bijectively (and homeomorphically under the subset topology) identified with the subset of formula_48 not ending in all 1's.\nNote that this property of decimal expansions means that it is impossible to effectively identify the computable real numbers defined in terms of a decimal expansion and those defined in the formula_26 approximation sense. Hirst has shown that there is no algorithm which takes as input the description of a Turing machine which produces formula_26 approximations for the computable number \"a\", and produces as output a Turing machine which enumerates the digits of \"a\" in the sense of Turing's definition. Similarly, it means that the arithmetic operations on the computable reals are not effective on their decimal representations as when adding decimal numbers. In order to produce one digit, it may be necessary to look arbitrarily far to the right to determine if there is a carry to the current location. This lack of uniformity is one reason why the contemporary definition of computable numbers uses formula_26 approximations rather than decimal expansions.\nHowever, from a computability theoretic or measure theoretic perspective, the two structures formula_48 and formula_49 are essentially identical. Thus, computability theorists often refer to members of formula_48 as reals. While formula_48 is totally disconnected, for questions about formula_62 classes or randomness it is easier to work in formula_48.\nElements of formula_64 are sometimes called reals as well and though containing a homeomorphic image of formula_65, formula_64 isn't even locally compact (in addition to being totally disconnected). This leads to genuine differences in the computational properties. For instance the formula_67 satisfying formula_68, with formula_69 quantifier free, must be computable while the unique formula_70 satisfying a universal formula may have an arbitrarily high position in the hyperarithmetic hierarchy.\nUse in place of the reals.\nThe computable numbers include the specific real numbers which appear in practice, including all real algebraic numbers, as well as \"e\", \"\u03c0\", and many other transcendental numbers. Though the computable reals exhaust those reals we can calculate or approximate, the assumption that all reals are computable leads to substantially different conclusions about the real numbers. The question naturally arises of whether it is possible to dispose of the full set of reals and use computable numbers for all of mathematics. This idea is appealing from a constructivist point of view, and has been pursued by the Russian school of constructive mathematics.\nTo actually develop analysis over computable numbers, some care must be taken. For example, if one uses the classical definition of a sequence, the set of computable numbers is not closed under the basic operation of taking the supremum of a bounded sequence (for example, consider a Specker sequence, see the section above). This difficulty is addressed by considering only sequences which have a computable modulus of convergence. The resulting mathematical theory is called computable analysis.\nImplementations of exact arithmetic.\nComputer packages representing real numbers as programs computing approximations have been proposed as early as 1985, under the name \"exact arithmetic\". Modern examples include the CoRN library (Coq), and the RealLib package (C++). A related line of work is based on taking a real RAM program and running it with rational or floating-point numbers of sufficient precision, such as the package."}
{"id": "6207", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6207", "title": "Electric current", "text": "An electric current is a flow of charged particles, such as electrons or ions, moving through an electrical conductor or space. It is defined as the net rate of flow of electric charge through a surface. The moving particles are called charge carriers, which may be one of several types of particles, depending on the conductor. In electric circuits the charge carriers are often electrons moving through a wire. In semiconductors they can be electrons or holes. In an electrolyte the charge carriers are ions, while in plasma, an ionized gas, they are ions and electrons.\nIn the International System of Units (SI), electric current is expressed in units of ampere (sometimes called an \"amp\", symbol A), which is equivalent to one coulomb per second. The ampere is an SI base unit and electric current is a base quantity in the International System of Quantities (ISQ). Electric current is also known as amperage and is measured using a device called an \"ammeter\".\nElectric currents create magnetic fields, which are used in motors, generators, inductors, and transformers. In ordinary conductors, they cause Joule heating, which creates light in incandescent light bulbs. Time-varying currents emit electromagnetic waves, which are used in telecommunications to broadcast information.\nSymbol.\nThe conventional symbol for current is , which originates from the French phrase , (current intensity). Current intensity is often referred to simply as \"current\". The symbol was used by Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re, after whom the unit of electric current is named, in formulating Amp\u00e8re's force law (1820). The notation travelled from France to Great Britain, where it became standard, although at least one journal did not change from using to until 1896.\nConventions.\nThe conventional direction of current, also known as \"conventional current\", is arbitrarily defined as the direction in which charges flow. In a conductive material, the moving charged particles that constitute the electric current are called charge carriers. In metals, which make up the wires and other conductors in most electrical circuits, the positively charged atomic nuclei of the atoms are held in a fixed position, and the negatively charged electrons are the charge carriers, free to move about in the metal. In other materials, notably the semiconductors, the charge carriers can be positive \"or\" negative, depending on the dopant used. Positive and negative charge carriers may even be present at the same time, as happens in an electrolyte in an electrochemical cell.\nA flow of positive charges gives the same electric current, and has the same effect in a circuit, as an equal flow of negative charges in the opposite direction. Since current can be the flow of either positive or negative charges, or both, a convention is needed for the direction of current that is independent of the type of charge carriers. Negatively charged carriers, such as the electrons (the charge carriers in metal wires and many other electronic circuit components), therefore flow in the opposite direction of conventional current flow in an electrical circuit.\nReference direction.\nA current in a wire or circuit element can flow in either of two directions. When defining a variable formula_1 to represent the current, the direction representing positive current must be specified, usually by an arrow on the circuit schematic diagram. This is called the \"reference direction\" of the current formula_1. When analyzing electrical circuits, the actual direction of current through a specific circuit element is usually unknown until the analysis is completed. Consequently, the reference directions of currents are often assigned arbitrarily. When the circuit is solved, a negative value for the current implies the actual direction of current through that circuit element is opposite that of the chosen reference direction.\nOhm's law.\nOhm's law states that the current through a conductor between two points is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two points. Introducing the constant of proportionality, the resistance, one arrives at the usual mathematical equation that describes this relationship:\nformula_3\nwhere \"I\" is the current through the conductor in units of amperes, \"V\" is the potential difference measured \"across\" the conductor in units of volts, and \"R\" is the resistance of the conductor in units of ohms. More specifically, Ohm's law states that the \"R\" in this relation is constant, independent of the current.\nAlternating and direct current.\nIn alternating current (AC) systems, the movement of electric charge periodically reverses direction. AC is the form of electric power most commonly delivered to businesses and residences. The usual waveform of an AC power circuit is a sine wave, though certain applications use alternative waveforms, such as triangular or square waves. Audio and radio signals carried on electrical wires are also examples of alternating current. An important goal in these applications is recovery of information encoded (or \"modulated\") onto the AC signal.\nIn contrast, direct current (DC) refers to a system in which the movement of electric charge in only one direction (sometimes called unidirectional flow). Direct current is produced by sources such as batteries, thermocouples, solar cells, and commutator-type electric machines of the dynamo type. Alternating current can also be converted to direct current through use of a rectifier. Direct current may flow in a conductor such as a wire, but can also flow through semiconductors, insulators, or even through a vacuum as in electron or ion beams. An old name for direct current was \"galvanic current\".\nOccurrences.\nNatural observable examples of electric current include lightning, static electric discharge, and the solar wind, the source of the polar auroras.\nMan-made occurrences of electric current include the flow of conduction electrons in metal wires such as the overhead power lines that deliver electrical energy across long distances and the smaller wires within electrical and electronic equipment. Eddy currents are electric currents that occur in conductors exposed to changing magnetic fields. Similarly, electric currents occur, particularly in the surface, of conductors exposed to electromagnetic waves. When oscillating electric currents flow at the correct voltages within radio antennas, radio waves are generated.\nIn electronics, other forms of electric current include the flow of electrons through resistors or through the vacuum in a vacuum tube, the flow of ions inside a battery, and the flow of holes within metals and semiconductors. \nA biological example of current is the flow of ions in neurons and nerves, responsible for both thought and sensory perception.\nMeasurement.\nCurrent can be measured using an ammeter.\nElectric current can be directly measured with a galvanometer, but this method involves breaking the electrical circuit, which is sometimes inconvenient. \nCurrent can also be measured without breaking the circuit by detecting the magnetic field associated with the current. \nDevices, at the circuit level, use various techniques to measure current:\nResistive heating.\nJoule heating, also known as \"ohmic heating\" and \"resistive heating\", is the process of power dissipation by which the passage of an electric current through a conductor increases the internal energy of the conductor, converting thermodynamic work into heat. The phenomenon was first studied by James Prescott Joule in 1841. Joule immersed a length of wire in a fixed mass of water and measured the temperature rise due to a known current through the wire for a 30 minute period. By varying the current and the length of the wire he deduced that the heat produced was proportional to the square of the current multiplied by the electrical resistance of the wire.\nformula_4\nThis relationship is known as Joule's Law. The SI unit of energy was subsequently named the joule and given the symbol \"J\". The commonly known SI unit of power, the watt (symbol: W), is equivalent to one joule per second.\nElectromagnetism.\nElectromagnet.\nIn an electromagnet a coil of wires behaves like a magnet when an electric current flows through it. When the current is switched off, the coil loses its magnetism immediately.\nElectric current produces a magnetic field. The magnetic field can be visualized as a pattern of circular field lines surrounding the wire that persists as long as there is current.\nElectromagnetic induction.\nMagnetic fields can also be used to make electric currents. When a changing magnetic field is applied to a conductor, an electromotive force (EMF) is induced, which starts an electric current, when there is a suitable path.\nRadio waves.\nWhen an electric current flows in a suitably shaped conductor at radio frequencies, radio waves can be generated. These travel at the speed of light and can cause electric currents in distant conductors.\nConduction mechanisms in various media.\nIn metallic solids, electric charge flows by means of electrons, from lower to higher electrical potential. In other media, any stream of charged objects (ions, for example) may constitute an electric current. To provide a definition of current independent of the type of charge carriers, \"conventional current\" is defined as moving in the same direction as the positive charge flow. So, in metals where the charge carriers (electrons) are negative, conventional current is in the opposite direction to the overall electron movement. In conductors where the charge carriers are positive, conventional current is in the same direction as the charge carriers.\nIn a vacuum, a beam of ions or electrons may be formed. In other conductive materials, the electric current is due to the flow of both positively and negatively charged particles at the same time. In still others, the current is entirely due to positive charge flow. For example, the electric currents in electrolytes are flows of positively and negatively charged ions. In a common lead-acid electrochemical cell, electric currents are composed of positive hydronium ions flowing in one direction, and negative sulfate ions flowing in the other. Electric currents in sparks or plasma are flows of electrons as well as positive and negative ions. In ice and in certain solid electrolytes, the electric current is entirely composed of flowing ions.\nMetals.\nIn a metal, some of the outer electrons in each atom are not bound to the individual molecules as they are in molecular solids, or in full bands as they are in insulating materials, but are free to move within the metal lattice. These conduction electrons can serve as charge carriers, carrying a current. Metals are particularly conductive because there are many of these free electrons. With no external electric field applied, these electrons move about randomly due to thermal energy but, on average, there is zero net current within the metal. At room temperature, the average speed of these random motions is 106 metres per second. Given a surface through which a metal wire passes, electrons move in both directions across the surface at an equal rate. As George Gamow wrote in his popular science book, \"One, Two, Three...Infinity\" (1947), \"The metallic substances differ from all other materials by the fact that the outer shells of their atoms are bound rather loosely, and often let one of their electrons go free. Thus the interior of a metal is filled up with a large number of unattached electrons that travel aimlessly around like a crowd of displaced persons. When a metal wire is subjected to electric force applied on its opposite ends, these free electrons rush in the direction of the force, thus forming what we call an electric current.\"\nWhen a metal wire is connected across the two terminals of a DC voltage source such as a battery, the source places an electric field across the conductor. The moment contact is made, the free electrons of the conductor are forced to drift toward the positive terminal under the influence of this field. The free electrons are therefore the charge carrier in a typical solid conductor.\nFor a steady flow of charge through a surface, the current \"I\" (in amperes) can be calculated with the following equation:\nformula_5\nwhere \"Q\" is the electric charge transferred through the surface over a time \"t\". If \"Q\" and \"t\" are measured in coulombs and seconds respectively, \"I\" is in amperes.\nMore generally, electric current can be represented as the rate at which charge flows through a given surface as:\nformula_6\nElectrolytes.\nElectric currents in electrolytes are flows of electrically charged particles (ions). For example, if an electric field is placed across a solution of Na+ and Cl\u2212 (and conditions are right) the sodium ions move towards the negative electrode (cathode), while the chloride ions move towards the positive electrode (anode). Reactions take place at both electrode surfaces, neutralizing each ion.\nWater-ice and certain solid electrolytes called proton conductors contain positive hydrogen ions (\"protons\") that are mobile. In these materials, electric currents are composed of moving protons, as opposed to the moving electrons in metals.\nIn certain electrolyte mixtures, brightly coloured ions are the moving electric charges. The slow progress of the colour makes the current visible.\nGases and plasmas.\nIn air and other ordinary gases below the breakdown field, the dominant source of electrical conduction is via relatively few mobile ions produced by radioactive gases, ultraviolet light, or cosmic rays. Since the electrical conductivity is low, gases are dielectrics or insulators. However, once the applied electric field approaches the breakdown value, free electrons become sufficiently accelerated by the electric field to create additional free electrons by colliding, and ionizing, neutral gas atoms or molecules in a process called avalanche breakdown. The breakdown process forms a plasma that contains enough mobile electrons and positive ions to make it an electrical conductor. In the process, it forms a light emitting conductive path, such as a spark, arc or lightning.\nPlasma is the state of matter where some of the electrons in a gas are stripped or \"ionized\" from their molecules or atoms. A plasma can be formed by high temperature, or by application of a high electric or alternating magnetic field as noted above. Due to their lower mass, the electrons in a plasma accelerate more quickly in response to an electric field than the heavier positive ions, and hence carry the bulk of the current. The free ions recombine to create new chemical compounds (for example, breaking atmospheric oxygen into single oxygen [O2 \u2192 2O], which then recombine creating ozone [O3]).\nVacuum.\nSince a \"perfect vacuum\" contains no charged particles, it normally behaves as a perfect insulator. However, metal electrode surfaces can cause a region of the vacuum to become conductive by injecting free electrons or ions through either field electron emission or thermionic emission. Thermionic emission occurs when the thermal energy exceeds the metal's work function, while field electron emission occurs when the electric field at the surface of the metal is high enough to cause tunneling, which results in the ejection of free electrons from the metal into the vacuum. Externally heated electrodes are often used to generate an electron cloud as in the filament or indirectly heated cathode of vacuum tubes. Cold electrodes can also spontaneously produce electron clouds via thermionic emission when small incandescent regions (called \"cathode spots\" or \"anode spots\") are formed. These are incandescent regions of the electrode surface that are created by a localized high current. These regions may be initiated by field electron emission, but are then sustained by localized thermionic emission once a vacuum arc forms. These small electron-emitting regions can form quite rapidly, even explosively, on a metal surface subjected to a high electrical field. Vacuum tubes and sprytrons are some of the electronic switching and amplifying devices based on vacuum conductivity.\nSuperconductivity.\nSuperconductivity is a phenomenon of exactly zero electrical resistance and expulsion of magnetic fields occurring in certain materials when cooled below a characteristic critical temperature. It was discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes on April\u00a08, 1911 in Leiden. Like ferromagnetism and atomic spectral lines, superconductivity is a quantum mechanical phenomenon. It is characterized by the Meissner effect, the complete ejection of magnetic field lines from the interior of the superconductor as it transitions into the superconducting state. The occurrence of the Meissner effect indicates that superconductivity cannot be understood simply as the idealization of \"perfect conductivity\" in classical physics.\nSemiconductor.\nIn a semiconductor it is sometimes useful to think of the current as due to the flow of positive \"holes\" (the mobile positive charge carriers that are places where the semiconductor crystal is missing a valence electron). This is the case in a p-type semiconductor. A semiconductor has electrical conductivity intermediate in magnitude between that of a conductor and an insulator. This means a conductivity roughly in the range of 10\u22122 to 104 siemens per centimeter (S\u22c5cm\u22121).\nIn the classic crystalline semiconductors, electrons can have energies only within certain bands (i.e. ranges of levels of energy). Energetically, these bands are located between the energy of the ground state, the state in which electrons are tightly bound to the atomic nuclei of the material, and the free electron energy, the latter describing the energy required for an electron to escape entirely from the material. The energy bands each correspond to many discrete quantum states of the electrons, and most of the states with low energy (closer to the nucleus) are occupied, up to a particular band called the \"valence band\". Semiconductors and insulators are distinguished from metals because the valence band in any given metal is nearly filled with electrons under usual operating conditions, while very few (semiconductor) or virtually none (insulator) of them are available in the \"conduction band\", the band immediately above the valence band.\nThe ease of exciting electrons in the semiconductor from the valence band to the conduction band depends on the band gap between the bands. The size of this energy band gap serves as an arbitrary dividing line (roughly 4 eV) between semiconductors and insulators.\nWith covalent bonds, an electron moves by hopping to a neighboring bond. The Pauli exclusion principle requires that the electron be lifted into the higher anti-bonding state of that bond. For delocalized states, for example in one dimensionthat is in a nanowire, for every energy there is a state with electrons flowing in one direction and another state with the electrons flowing in the other. For a net current to flow, more states for one direction than for the other direction must be occupied. For this to occur, energy is required, as in the semiconductor the next higher states lie above the band gap. Often this is stated as: full bands do not contribute to the electrical conductivity. However, as a semiconductor's temperature rises above absolute zero, there is more energy in the semiconductor to spend on lattice vibration and on exciting electrons into the conduction band. The current-carrying electrons in the conduction band are known as \"free electrons\", though they are often simply called \"electrons\" if that is clear in context.\nCurrent density and Ohm's law.\nCurrent density is the rate at which charge passes through a chosen unit area. It is defined as a vector whose magnitude is the current per unit cross-sectional area. As discussed in Reference direction, the direction is arbitrary. Conventionally, if the moving charges are positive, then the current density has the same sign as the velocity of the charges. For negative charges, the sign of the current density is opposite to the velocity of the charges. In SI units, current density (symbol: j) is expressed in the SI base units of amperes per square metre.\nIn linear materials such as metals, and under low frequencies, the current density across the conductor surface is uniform. In such conditions, Ohm's law states that the current is directly proportional to the potential difference between two ends (across) of that metal (ideal) resistor (or other ohmic device):\nformula_7\nwhere formula_1 is the current, measured in amperes; formula_9 is the potential difference, measured in volts; and formula_10 is the resistance, measured in ohms. For alternating currents, especially at higher frequencies, skin effect causes the current to spread unevenly across the conductor cross-section, with higher density near the surface, thus increasing the apparent resistance.\nDrift speed.\nThe mobile charged particles within a conductor move constantly in random directions, like the particles of a gas. (More accurately, a Fermi gas.) To create a net flow of charge, the particles must also move together with an average drift rate. Electrons are the charge carriers in most metals and they follow an erratic path, bouncing from atom to atom, but generally drifting in the opposite direction of the electric field. The speed they drift at can be calculated from the equation:\nformula_11\nwhere\nTypically, electric charges in solids flow slowly. For example, in a copper wire of cross-section 0.5\u00a0mm2, carrying a current of 5\u00a0A, the drift velocity of the electrons is on the order of a millimetre per second. To take a different example, in the near-vacuum inside a cathode-ray tube, the electrons travel in near-straight lines at about a tenth of the speed of light.\nAny accelerating electric charge, and therefore any changing electric current, gives rise to an electromagnetic wave that propagates at very high speed outside the surface of the conductor. This speed is usually a significant fraction of the speed of light, as can be deduced from Maxwell's equations, and is therefore many times faster than the drift velocity of the electrons. For example, in AC power lines, the waves of electromagnetic energy propagate through the space between the wires, moving from a source to a distant load, even though the electrons in the wires only move back and forth over a tiny distance.\nThe ratio of the speed of the electromagnetic wave to the speed of light in free space is called the velocity factor, and depends on the electromagnetic properties of the conductor and the insulating materials surrounding it, and on their shape and size.\nThe magnitudes (not the natures) of these three velocities can be illustrated by an analogy with the three similar velocities associated with gases. (See also hydraulic analogy.)"}
{"id": "6208", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6208", "title": "Charles Ancillon", "text": "Charles Ancillon (28 July 16595 July 1715) was a French jurist and diplomat.\nLife.\nAncillon was born in Metz into a distinguished family of Huguenots. His father, David Ancillon (1617\u20131692), was obliged to leave France on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and became pastor of the French Protestant community in Berlin.\nAncillon studied law at Marburg, Geneva and Paris, where he was called to the bar. At the request of the Huguenots at Metz, he pleaded its cause at the court of King Louis XIV, urging that it should be excepted in the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, but his efforts were unsuccessful, and he joined his father in Berlin. He was at once appointed by Elector Frederick III \"\"juge et directeur de colonie de Berlin\".\" He also became the first headmaster of Franz\u00f6sisches Gymnasium Berlin. Before this, he had published several works on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes and its consequences, but his literary capacity was mediocre, his style stiff and cold, and it was his personal character rather than his reputation as a writer that earned him the confidence of the elector.\nIn 1687 Ancillon was appointed head of the so-called \"Academie des nobles,\" the principal educational establishment of the state; later on, as councillor of embassy, he took part in the negotiations which led to the assumption of the title of \"King in Prussia\" by the elector. In 1699 he succeeded Samuel Pufendorf as historiographer to the elector, and the same year replaced his uncle Joseph Ancillon as judge of all the French refugees in the Margraviate of Brandenburg.\nAncillon is mainly remembered for what he did for education in Brandenburg-Prussia, and the share he took, in co-operation with Gottfried Leibniz, in founding the Academy of Berlin. Of his fairly numerous works the most valued is the \"Histoire de l'etablissement des Francais refugies dans les etats de Brandebourg\" published in Berlin in 1690."}
{"id": "6210", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6210", "title": "Clark Ashton Smith", "text": "Clark Ashton Smith (January 13, 1893 \u2013 August 14, 1961) was an influential American writer of fantasy, horror, and science fiction stories and poetry, and an artist. He achieved early recognition in California (largely through the enthusiasm of George Sterling) for traditional verse in the vein of Swinburne. As a poet, Smith is grouped with the West Coast Romantics alongside Joaquin Miller, Sterling, and Nora May French and remembered as \"The Last of the Great Romantics\" and \"The Bard of Auburn\". Smith's work was praised by his contemporaries. H. P. Lovecraft stated that \"in sheer daemonic strangeness and fertility of conception, Clark Ashton Smith is perhaps unexcelled\", and Ray Bradbury said that Smith \"filled my mind with incredible worlds, impossibly beautiful cities, and still more fantastic creatures\". Additional writers influenced by Smith include Leigh Brackett, Harlan Ellison, Stephen King, Fritz Lieber, George R. R. Martin, and Donald Sidney-Fryer.\nSmith was one of \"the big three of \"Weird Tales\", with Robert E. Howard and H. P. Lovecraft\", though some readers objected to his morbidness and violation of pulp traditions. The fantasy writer and critic L. Sprague de Camp said of him that \"nobody since Poe has so loved a well-rotted corpse\". Smith was a member of the Lovecraft circle, and his literary friendship with Lovecraft lasted from 1922 until Lovecraft's death in 1937. His work is marked by an extraordinarily rich and ornate vocabulary, a cosmic perspective and a vein of sardonic and sometimes ribald humor.\nOf his writing style, Smith stated: \"My own conscious ideal has been to delude the reader into accepting an impossibility, or series of impossibilities, by means of a sort of verbal black magic, in the achievement of which I make use of prose-rhythm, metaphor, simile, tone-color, counter-point, and other stylistic resources, like a sort of incantation.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nSmith was born January 13, 1893, in Long Valley, Placer County, California, into a family of English and New England heritage. He spent most of his life in the small town of Auburn, California, living in a cabin built by his parents, Fanny and Timeus Smith. Smith professed to hate the town's provincialism but rarely left it until he married late in life.\nHis formal education was limited: he suffered from psychological disorders including intense agoraphobia, and although he was accepted to high school after attending eight years of grammar school, his parents decided it was better for him to be taught at home. An insatiable reader with an extraordinary eidetic memory, Smith appeared to retain most or all of whatever he read. After leaving formal education, he embarked upon a self-directed course of literature, including \"Robinson Crusoe\", \"Gulliver's Travels\", the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen and Madame d'Aulnoy, the \"Arabian Nights\" and the poems of Edgar Allan Poe. He read an unabridged dictionary word for word, studying not only the definitions of the words but also their etymology.\nThe other main course in Smith's self-education was to read the complete 11th edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" at least twice. Smith later taught himself French and Spanish to translate verse out of those languages, including works by G\u00e9rard de Nerval, Paul Verlaine, Amado Nervo, Gustavo Adolfo B\u00e9cquer and all but 6 of Charles Baudelaire's 157 poems in \"The Flowers of Evil\".\nEarly writing.\nHis first literary efforts, at the age of 11, took the form of fairy tales and imitations of the Arabian Nights. Later, he wrote long adventure novels dealing with Oriental life. By 14 he had already written a short adventure novel called \"The Black Diamonds\" which was lost for years until published in 2002. Another juvenile novel was written in his teenaged years: \"The Sword of Zagan\" (unpublished until 2004). Like \"The Black Diamonds\", it uses a medieval, \"Arabian Nights\"-like setting, and the \"Arabian Nights\", like the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and the works of Edgar Allan Poe, are known to have strongly influenced Smith's early writing, as did William Beckford's \"Vathek\".\nWhen he was 15, Smith read George Sterling's fantasy-horror poem \"A Wine of Wizardry\" in a national magazine (which he later described as \"In the ruck of magazine verse it was like finding a fire-opal of the Titans in a potato bin\") and decided he wanted to become a poet. At age 17, he sold several tales to \"The Black Cat\", a magazine which specialized in unusual tales. He also published some tales in the \"Overland Monthly\" in this brief foray into fiction which preceded his poetic career.\nHowever, it was primarily poetry that motivated the young Smith and he confined his efforts to poetry for more than a decade. In his later youth, Smith met Sterling through a member of the local Auburn Monday Night Club, where Smith read several of his poems with considerable success. On a month-long visit to Sterling in Carmel, California, Smith was introduced by Sterling to the poetry of Charles Baudelaire.\nHe became Sterling's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and Sterling helped him to publish his first volume of poems, \"The Star-Treader and Other Poems\", at the age of 19. Smith received international acclaim for the collection. \"The Star-Treader\" was received very favorably by American critics, one of whom named Smith \"the Keats of the Pacific\". Smith briefly moved among the circle that included Ambrose Bierce and Jack London, but his early fame soon faded away.\nHealth breakdown period.\nA little later, Smith's health broke down and for eight years his literary production was intermittent, though he produced his best poetry during this period. A small volume, \"Odes and Sonnets\", was brought out in 1918. Smith came into contact with literary figures who would later form part of H.P. Lovecraft's circle of correspondents; Smith knew them far earlier than Lovecraft. These figures include poet Samuel Loveman and bookman George Kirk. It was Smith who in fact later introduced Donald Wandrei to Lovecraft. For this reason, it has been suggested that Lovecraft might as well be referred to as a member of a \"Smith\" circle as Smith was a member of a Lovecraft one.\nIn 1920 Smith composed a celebrated long poem in blank verse, \"The Hashish Eater, or The Apocalypse of Evil\", published in \"Ebony and Crystal\" (1922). This was followed by a fan letter from H. P. Lovecraft, which was the beginning of 15 years of friendship and correspondence. With studied playfulness, Smith and Lovecraft borrowed each other's coinages of place names and the names of strange gods for their stories, though so different is Smith's treatment of the Lovecraft theme that it has been dubbed the \"Clark Ashton Smythos.\"\nIn 1925 Smith published \"Sandalwood\", which was partly funded by a gift of $50 from Donald Wandrei. He wrote little fiction in this period with the exception of some imaginative vignettes or prose poems. Smith was poor for most of his life and often did hard manual jobs such as fruit picking and woodcutting to support himself and his parents. He was an able cook and made many kinds of wine. He also did well digging, typing and journalism, as well as contributing a column to \"The Auburn Journal\" and sometimes worked as its night editor.\nOne of Smith's artistic patrons and frequent correspondents was San Francisco businessman Albert Bender.\nProlific fiction-writing period.\nAt the beginning of the Depression in 1929, with his aged parents' health weakening, Smith resumed fiction writing and turned out more than a hundred short stories between 1929 and 1934, nearly all of which can be classed as weird horror or science fiction. Like Lovecraft, he drew upon the nightmares that had plagued him during youthful spells of sickness. Brian Stableford has written that the stories written during this brief phase of hectic productivity \"constitute one of the most remarkable oeuvres in imaginative literature\".\nHe published at his own expense a volume containing six of his best stories, \"The Double Shadow and Other Fantasies\", in an edition of 1000 copies printed by the \"Auburn Journal\". The theme of much of his work is egotism and its supernatural punishment; his weird fiction is generally macabre in subject matter, gloatingly preoccupied with images of death, decay and abnormality.\nMost of Smith's weird fiction falls into four series set variously in Hyperborea, Poseidonis, Averoigne and Zothique. Hyperborea, which is a lost continent of the Miocene period, and Poseidonis, which is a remnant of Atlantis, are much the same, with a magical culture characterized by bizarreness, cruelty, death and postmortem horrors. Averoigne is Smith's version of pre-modern France, comparable to James Branch Cabell's Poictesme. Zothique exists millions of years in the future. It is \"the last continent of earth, when the sun is dim and tarnished\". These tales have been compared to the \"Dying Earth\" sequence of Jack Vance.\nIn 1933 Smith began corresponding with Robert E. Howard, the Texan creator of Conan the Barbarian. From 1933 to 1936, Smith, Howard and Lovecraft were the leaders of the Weird Tales school of fiction and corresponded frequently, although they never met. The writer of oriental fantasies E. Hoffmann Price is the only man known to have met all three in the flesh.\nCritic Steve Behrends has suggested that the frequent theme of 'loss' in Smith's fiction (many of his characters attempt to recapture a long-vanished youth, early love, or picturesque past) may reflect Smith's own feeling that his career had suffered a \"fall from grace\":\nMid-late career: return to poetry and sculpture.\nIn September 1935, Smith's mother Fanny died. Smith spent the next two years nursing his father through his last illness. Timeus died in December 1937. Aged 44, Smith now virtually ceased writing fiction. He had been severely affected by several tragedies occurring in a short period of time: Robert E. Howard's death by suicide (1936), Lovecraft's death from cancer (1937) and the deaths of his parents, which left him exhausted. As a result, he withdrew from the scene, marking the end of \"Weird Tales\"s Golden Age. He began sculpting and resumed the writing of poetry. However, Smith was visited by many writers at his cabin, including Fritz Leiber, Rah Hoffman, Francis T. Laney and others.\nIn 1942, three years after August Derleth founded Arkham House for the purpose of preserving the work of H.P. Lovecraft, Derleth published the first of several major collections of Smith's fiction, \"Out of Space and Time\" (1942). This was followed by \"Lost Worlds\" (1944). The books sold slowly, went out of print and became costly rarities. Derleth published five more volumes of Smith's prose and two of his verse, and at his death in 1971 had a large volume of Smith's poems in press.\nLater life, marriage and death.\nIn 1953, Smith suffered a coronary attack. Aged 61, he married Carol(yn) Jones Dorman on November 10, 1954. Dorman had much experience in Hollywood and radio public relations. After honeymooning at the Smith cabin, they moved to Pacific Grove, California, where he set up a household including her three children from a previous marriage. For several years he alternated between the house on Indian Ridge and their house in Pacific Grove. Smith having sold most of his father's tract, in 1957 the old house burned \u2013 the Smiths believed by arson, others said by accident.\nSmith now reluctantly did gardening for other residents at Pacific Grove, and grew a goatee. He spent much time shopping and walking near the seafront but despite Derleth's badgering, resisted the writing of more fiction. In 1961 he suffered a series of strokes and in August 1961 he quietly died in his sleep, aged 68. After Smith's death, Carol remarried (becoming Carolyn Wakefield) and subsequently died of cancer.\nThe poet's ashes were buried beside, or beneath, a boulder to the immediate west of where his childhood home (destroyed by fire in 1957) stood; some were also scattered in a stand of blue oaks near the boulder. There was no marker. Plaques recognizing Smith have been erected at the Auburn Placer County Library in 1985 and in Bicentennial Park in Auburn in 2003.\nBookseller Roy A. Squires was appointed Smith's \"west coast executor\", with Jack L. Chalker as his \"east coast executor\". Squires published many letterpress editions of individual Smith poems.\nSmith's literary estate is represented by his stepson, Prof William Dorman, director of CASiana Literary Enterprises. Arkham House owns the copyright to many Smith stories, though some are now in the public domain.\nFor 'posthumous collaborations' of Smith (stories completed by Lin Carter), see the entry on Lin Carter.\nArtistic periods.\nWhile Smith was always an artist who worked in several very different media, it is possible to identify three distinct periods in which one form of art had precedence over the others.\nPoetry: until 1925.\nSmith published most of his volumes of poetry in this period, including the aforementioned \"The Star-Treader and Other Poems\", as well as \"Odes and Sonnets\" (1918), \"Ebony and Crystal\" (1922) and \"Sandalwood\" (1925). His long poem \"The Hashish-Eater; Or, the Apocalypse of Evil\" was written in 1920.\nWeird fiction: 1926\u20131935.\nSmith wrote most of his weird fiction and Cthulhu Mythos stories, inspired by H. P. Lovecraft. Creatures of his invention include Aforgomon, Rlim-Shaikorth, Mordiggian, Tsathoggua, the wizard Eibon, and various others. In an homage to his friend, Lovecraft referred in \"The Whisperer in Darkness\" and \"The Battle That Ended the Century\" (written in collaboration with R. H. Barlow) to an Atlantean high-priest, \"Klarkash-Ton\".\nSmith's weird stories form several cycles, called after the lands in which they are set: Averoigne, Hyperborea, Mars, Poseidonis, Zothique. To some extent Smith was influenced in his vision of such lost worlds by the teachings of Theosophy and the writings of Helena Blavatsky. Stories set in Zothique belong to the Dying Earth subgenre. Amongst Smith's science fiction tales are stories set on Mars and the invented planet of Xiccarph.\nHis short stories originally appeared in the magazines \"Weird Tales\", \"Strange Tales\", \"Astounding Stories\", \"Stirring Science Stories\" and \"Wonder Stories\".\nClark Ashton Smith was the third member of the great triumvirate of \"Weird Tales\", with Lovecraft and Robert E. Howard.\nMany of Smith's stories were published in six hardcover volumes by August Derleth under his Arkham House imprint. For a full bibliography to 1978, see Sidney-Fryer, \"Emperor of Dreams\" (cited below). S. T. Joshi is working with other scholars to produce an updated bibliography of Smith's work.\nA selection of Smith's best-known tales includes:\nVisual art: 1935\u20131961.\nBy this time his interest in writing fiction began to lessen and he turned to creating sculptures from soft rock such as soapstone. Smith also made hundreds of fantastic paintings and drawings.\nBibliography.\nThe authoritative bibliography on Smith's work is S. T. Joshi, David E. Schultz, and Scott Conners' \"Clark Ashton Smith: A Comprehensive Bibliography.\" NY: Hippocampus Press, 2020. The first Smith bibliography, which focused on his short fiction, was \"The Tales Of Clark Ashton Smith,\" published by Thomas G L Cockcroft in New Zealand in 1951.\nOther (essays, letters, etc).\nScholars S.T. Joshi and David E. Schultz are preparing various additional volumes of Smith's letters to such of his individual correspondents as Donald Wandrei and R. H. Barlow."}
{"id": "6211", "revid": "1253959429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6211", "title": "Context-sensitive grammar", "text": "A context-sensitive grammar (CSG) is a formal grammar in which the left-hand sides and right-hand sides of any production rules may be surrounded by a context of terminal and nonterminal symbols. Context-sensitive grammars are more general than context-free grammars, in the sense that there are languages that can be described by a CSG but not by a context-free grammar. Context-sensitive grammars are less general (in the same sense) than unrestricted grammars. Thus, CSGs are positioned between context-free and unrestricted grammars in the Chomsky hierarchy.\nA formal language that can be described by a context-sensitive grammar, or, equivalently, by a noncontracting grammar or a linear bounded automaton, is called a context-sensitive language. Some textbooks actually define CSGs as non-contracting, although this is not how Noam Chomsky defined them in 1959. This choice of definition makes no difference in terms of the languages generated (i.e. the two definitions are weakly equivalent), but it does make a difference in terms of what grammars are structurally considered context-sensitive; the latter issue was analyzed by Chomsky in 1963.\nChomsky introduced context-sensitive grammars as a way to describe the syntax of natural language where it is often the case that a word may or may not be appropriate in a certain place depending on the context. Walter Savitch has criticized the terminology \"context-sensitive\" as misleading and proposed \"non-erasing\" as better explaining the distinction between a CSG and an unrestricted grammar.\nAlthough it is well known that certain features of languages (e.g. cross-serial dependency) are not context-free, it is an open question how much of CSGs' expressive power is needed to capture the context sensitivity found in natural languages. Subsequent research in this area has focused on the more computationally tractable mildly context-sensitive languages. The syntaxes of some visual programming languages can be described by context-sensitive graph grammars.\nFormal definition.\nFormal grammar.\nLet us notate a formal grammar as formula_1, with formula_2 a set of nonterminal symbols, formula_3 a set of terminal symbols, formula_4 a set of production rules, and formula_5 the start symbol.\nA string formula_6 \"directly yields\", or \"directly derives to\", a string formula_7, denoted as formula_8, if \"v\" can be obtained from \"u\" by an application of some production rule in \"P\", that is, if formula_9 and formula_10, where formula_11 is a production rule, and formula_12 is the unaffected left and right part of the string, respectively.\nMore generally, \"u\" is said to \"yield\", or \"derive to\", \"v\", denoted as formula_13, if \"v\" can be obtained from \"u\" by repeated application of production rules, that is, if formula_14 for some \"n\" \u2265 0 and some strings formula_15. In other words, the relation formula_16 is the reflexive transitive closure of the relation formula_17.\nThe language of the grammar \"G\" is the set of all terminal-symbol strings derivable from its start symbol, formally: formula_18.\nDerivations that do not end in a string composed of terminal symbols only are possible, but do not contribute to \"L\"(\"G\").\nContext-sensitive grammar.\nA formal grammar is context-sensitive if each rule in \"P\" is either of the form formula_19 where formula_20 is the empty string, or of the form\nwith \"A\" \u2208 \"N\", formula_21, and formula_22.\nThe name \"context-sensitive\" is explained by the \u03b1 and \u03b2 that form the context of \"A\" and determine whether \"A\" can be replaced with \u03b3 or not.\nBy contrast, in a context-free grammar, no context is present: the left hand side of every production rule is just a nonterminal.\nThe string \u03b3 is not allowed to be empty. Without this restriction, the resulting grammars become equal in power to unrestricted grammars.\n(Weakly) equivalent definitions.\nA noncontracting grammar is a grammar in which for any production rule, of the form \"u\" \u2192 \"v\", the length of \"u\" is less than or equal to the length of \"v\".\nEvery context-sensitive grammar is noncontracting, while every noncontracting grammar can be converted into an equivalent context-sensitive grammar; the two classes are weakly equivalent.\nSome authors use the term \"context-sensitive grammar\" to refer to noncontracting grammars in general.\nThe left-context- and right-context-sensitive grammars are defined by restricting the rules to just the form \u03b1\"A\" \u2192 \u03b1\u03b3 and to just \"A\"\u03b2 \u2192 \u03b3\u03b2, respectively. The languages generated by these grammars are also the full class of context-sensitive languages. The equivalence was established by Penttonen normal form.\nExamples.\n\"anbncn\".\nThe following context-sensitive grammar, with start symbol \"S\", generates the canonical non-context-free language { \"anbncn\" | \"n\" \u2265 1 } :\nRules 1 and 2 allow for blowing-up \"S\" to \"a\"\"n\"\"BC\"(\"BC\")\"n\"\u22121; rules 3 to 6 allow for successively exchanging each \"CB\" to \"BC\" (four rules are needed for that since a rule \"CB\" \u2192 \"BC\" wouldn't fit into the scheme \u03b1\"A\"\u03b2 \u2192 \u03b1\u03b3\u03b2); rules 7\u201310 allow replacing a non-terminal \"B\" or \"C\" with its corresponding terminal \"b\" or \"c\", respectively, provided it is in the right place.\nA generation chain for \"\" is:\n\"anbncndn\", etc..\nMore complicated grammars can be used to parse { \"anbncndn\" | \"n\" \u2265 1 }, and other languages with even more letters. Here we show a simpler approach using non-contracting grammars:\nStart with a kernel of regular productions generating the sentential forms\nformula_23 and then include the non contracting productions\nformula_24,\nformula_25,\nformula_26,\nformula_27,\nformula_28,\nformula_29,\nformula_30,\nformula_31,\nformula_32,\nformula_33.\n\"ambncmdn\".\nA non contracting grammar (for which there is an equivalent CSG) for the language formula_34 is defined by\nWith these definitions, a derivation for formula_43 is:\nformula_44.\n\"a\"2\"i\".\nA noncontracting grammar for the language { \"a\"2\"i\" | \"i\" \u2265 1 } is constructed in Example 9.5 (p.\u00a0224) of (Hopcroft, Ullman, 1979):\nKuroda normal form.\nEvery context-sensitive grammar which does not generate the empty string can be transformed into a weakly equivalent one in Kuroda normal form. \"Weakly equivalent\" here means that the two grammars generate the same language. The normal form will not in general be context-sensitive, but will be a noncontracting grammar.\nThe Kuroda normal form is an actual normal form for non-contracting grammars.\nProperties and uses.\nEquivalence to linear bounded automaton.\nA formal language can be described by a context-sensitive grammar if and only if it is accepted by some linear bounded automaton (LBA). In some textbooks this result is attributed solely to Landweber and Kuroda. Others call it the Myhill\u2013Landweber\u2013Kuroda theorem. (Myhill introduced the concept of deterministic LBA in 1960. Peter S. Landweber published in 1963 that the language accepted by a deterministic LBA is context sensitive. Kuroda introduced the notion of non-deterministic LBA and the equivalence between LBA and CSGs in 1964.)\n it is still an open question whether every context-sensitive language can be accepted by a \"deterministic\" LBA.\nClosure properties.\nContext-sensitive languages are closed under complement. This 1988 result is known as the Immerman\u2013Szelepcs\u00e9nyi theorem.\nMoreover, they are closed under union, intersection, concatenation, substitution, inverse homomorphism, and Kleene plus.\nEvery recursively enumerable language \"L\" can be written as \"h\"(\"L\") for some context-sensitive language \"L\" and some string homomorphism \"h\".\nComputational problems.\nThe decision problem that asks whether a certain string \"s\" belongs to the language of a given context-sensitive grammar \"G\", is PSPACE-complete. Moreover, there are context-sensitive grammars whose languages are PSPACE-complete. In other words, there is a context-sensitive grammar \"G\" such that deciding whether a certain string \"s\" belongs to the language of \"G\" is PSPACE-complete (so \"G\" is fixed and only \"s\" is part of the input of the problem).\nThe emptiness problem for context-sensitive grammars (given a context-sensitive grammar \"G\", is \"L\"(\"G\")=\u2205 ?) is undecidable.\nAs model of natural languages.\nSavitch has proven the following theoretical result, on which he bases his criticism of CSGs as basis for natural language: for any recursively enumerable set \"R\", there exists a context-sensitive language/grammar \"G\" which can be used as a sort of proxy to test membership in \"R\" in the following way: given a string \"s\", \"s\" is in \"R\" if and only if there exists a positive integer \"n\" for which \"scn\" is in G, where \"c\" is an arbitrary symbol not part of \"R\".\nIt has been shown that nearly all natural languages may in general be characterized by context-sensitive grammars, but the whole class of CSGs seems to be much bigger than natural languages. Worse yet, since the aforementioned decision problem for CSGs is PSPACE-complete, that makes them totally unworkable for practical use, as a polynomial-time algorithm for a PSPACE-complete problem would imply P=NP.\nIt was proven that some natural languages are not context-free, based on identifying so-called cross-serial dependencies and unbounded scrambling phenomena. However this does not necessarily imply that the class of CSGs is necessary to capture \"context sensitivity\" in the colloquial sense of these terms in natural languages. For example, linear context-free rewriting systems (LCFRSs) are strictly weaker than CSGs but can account for the phenomenon of cross-serial dependencies; one can write a LCFRS grammar for {\"anbncndn\" | \"n\" \u2265 1} for example.\nOngoing research on computational linguistics has focused on formulating other classes of languages that are \"mildly context-sensitive\" whose decision problems are feasible, such as tree-adjoining grammars, combinatory categorial grammars, coupled context-free languages, and linear context-free rewriting systems. The languages generated by these formalisms properly lie between the context-free and context-sensitive languages.\nMore recently, the class PTIME has been identified with range concatenation grammars, which are now considered to be the most expressive of the mild-context sensitive language classes."}
{"id": "6212", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6212", "title": "Context-sensitive language", "text": "In formal language theory, a context-sensitive language is a language that can be defined by a context-sensitive grammar (and equivalently by a noncontracting grammar). Context-sensitive is known as type-1 in the Chomsky hierarchy of formal languages.\nComputational properties.\nComputationally, a context-sensitive language is equivalent to a linear bounded nondeterministic Turing machine, also called a linear bounded automaton. That is a non-deterministic Turing machine with a tape of only formula_1 cells, where formula_2 is the size of the input and formula_3 is a constant associated with the machine. This means that every formal language that can be decided by such a machine is a context-sensitive language, and every context-sensitive language can be decided by such a machine.\nThis set of languages is also known as NLINSPACE or NSPACE(\"O\"(\"n\")), because they can be accepted using linear space on a non-deterministic Turing machine. The class LINSPACE (or DSPACE(\"O\"(\"n\"))) is defined the same, except using a deterministic Turing machine. Clearly LINSPACE is a subset of NLINSPACE, but it is not known whether LINSPACE\u2009=\u2009NLINSPACE.\nExamples.\nOne of the simplest context-sensitive but not context-free languages is formula_4: the language of all strings consisting of occurrences of the symbol \"a\", then \"b\"s, then \"c\"s (abc, , , etc.). A superset of this language, called the Bach language, is defined as the set of all strings where \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" (or any other set of three symbols) occurs equally often (, , etc.) and is also context-sensitive.\n can be shown to be a context-sensitive language by constructing a linear bounded automaton which accepts . The language can easily be shown to be neither regular nor context-free by applying the respective pumping lemmas for each of the language classes to .\nSimilarly:\nformula_5 is another context-sensitive language; the corresponding context-sensitive grammar can be easily projected starting with two context-free grammars generating sentential forms in the formats\nformula_6\nand\nformula_7\nand then supplementing them with a permutation production like \nformula_8, a new starting symbol and standard syntactic sugar.\nformula_9 is another context-sensitive language (the \"3\" in the name of this language is intended to mean a ternary alphabet); that is, the \"product\" operation defines a context-sensitive language (but the \"sum\" defines only a context-free language as the grammar formula_10 and formula_11 shows). Because of the commutative property of the product, the most intuitive grammar for formula_12 is ambiguous. This problem can be avoided considering a somehow more restrictive definition of the language, e.g. formula_13. This can be specialized to \nformula_14 and, from this, to formula_15, formula_16, etc.\nformula_17 is a context-sensitive language. The corresponding context-sensitive grammar can be obtained as a generalization of the context-sensitive grammars for formula_18, formula_19, etc.\nformula_20 is a context-sensitive language.\nformula_21 is a context-sensitive language (the \"2\" in the name of this language is intended to mean a binary alphabet). This was proved by Hartmanis using pumping lemmas for regular and context-free languages over a binary alphabet and, after that, sketching a linear bounded multitape automaton accepting formula_22.\nformula_23 is a context-sensitive language (the \"1\" in the name of this language is intended to mean a unary alphabet). This was credited by A. Salomaa to Matti Soittola by means of a linear bounded automaton over a unary alphabet (pages 213-214, exercise 6.8) and also to Marti Penttonen by means of a context-sensitive grammar also over a unary alphabet (See: Formal Languages by A. Salomaa, page 14, Example 2.5).\nAn example of recursive language that is not context-sensitive is any recursive language whose decision is an EXPSPACE-hard problem, say, the set of pairs of equivalent regular expressions with exponentiation."}
{"id": "6216", "revid": "45435589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6216", "title": "Chinese room", "text": "The Chinese room argument holds that a computer executing a program cannot have a mind, understanding, or consciousness, regardless of how intelligently or human-like the program may make the computer behave. The argument was presented in a 1980 paper by the philosopher John Searle entitled \"Minds, Brains, and Programs\" and published in the journal \"Behavioral and Brain Sciences\". Before Searle, similar arguments had been presented by figures including Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1714), Anatoly Dneprov (1961), Lawrence Davis (1974) and Ned Block (1978). Searle's version has been widely discussed in the years since. The centerpiece of Searle's argument is a thought experiment known as the Chinese room.\nThe thought experiment starts by placing a computer that can perfectly converse in Chinese in one room, and a human that only knows English in another, with a door separating them. Chinese characters are written and placed on a piece of paper underneath the door, and the computer can reply fluently, slipping the reply underneath the door. The human is then given English instructions which replicate the instructions and function of the computer program to converse in Chinese. The human follows the instructions and the two rooms can perfectly communicate in Chinese, but the human still does not actually understand the characters, merely following instructions to converse. Searle states that both the computer and human are doing identical tasks, following instructions without truly understanding or \"thinking\".\nThe argument is directed against the philosophical positions of functionalism and computationalism, which hold that the mind may be viewed as an information-processing system operating on formal symbols, and that simulation of a given mental state is sufficient for its presence. Specifically, the argument is intended to refute a position Searle calls the strong AI hypothesis: \"The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds.\"\nAlthough its proponents originally presented the argument in reaction to statements of artificial intelligence (AI) researchers, it is not an argument against the goals of mainstream AI research because it does not show a limit in the amount of intelligent behavior a machine can display. The argument applies only to digital computers running programs and does not apply to machines in general. While widely discussed, the argument has been subject to significant criticism and remains controversial among philosophers of mind and AI researchers.\nSearle's thought experiment.\nSuppose that artificial intelligence research has succeeded in programming a computer to behave as if it understands Chinese. The machine accepts Chinese characters as input, carries out each instruction of the program step by step, and then produces Chinese characters as output. The machine does this so perfectly that no one can tell that they are communicating with a machine and not a hidden Chinese speaker.\nThe questions at issue are these: does the machine actually understand the conversation, or is it just simulating the ability to understand the conversation? Does the machine have a mind in exactly the same sense that people do, or is it just acting as if it has a mind?\nNow suppose that Searle is in a room with an English version of the program, along with sufficient pencils, paper, erasers and filing cabinets. Chinese characters are slipped in under the door, he follows the program step-by-step, which eventually instructs him to slide other Chinese characters back out under the door. If the computer had passed the Turing test this way, it follows that Searle would do so as well, simply by running the program by hand.\nSearle asserts that there is no essential difference between the roles of the computer and himself in the experiment. Each simply follows a program, step-by-step, producing behavior that makes them appear to understand. However, Searle would not be able to understand the conversation. Therefore, he argues, it follows that the computer would not be able to understand the conversation either.\nSearle argues that, without \"understanding\" (or \"intentionality\"), we cannot describe what the machine is doing as \"thinking\" and, since it does not think, it does not have a \"mind\" in the normal sense of the word. Therefore, he concludes that the strong AI hypothesis is false: a computer running a program that simulates a mind would not have a mind in the same sense that human beings have a mind.\nHistory.\nGottfried Leibniz made a similar argument in 1714 against mechanism (the idea that everything that makes up a human being could, in principle, be explained in mechanical terms. In other words, that a person, including their mind, is merely a very complex machine). Leibniz used the thought experiment of expanding the brain until it was the size of a mill. Leibniz found it difficult to imagine that a \"mind\" capable of \"perception\" could be constructed using only mechanical processes.\nPeter Winch made the same point in his book \"The Idea of a Social Science and its Relation to Philosophy\" (1958), where he provides an argument to show that \"a man who understands Chinese is not a man who has a firm grasp of the statistical probabilities for the occurrence of the various words in the Chinese language\" (p.\u00a0108).\nSoviet cyberneticist Anatoly Dneprov made an essentially identical argument in 1961, in the form of the short story \"The Game\". In it, a stadium of people act as switches and memory cells implementing a program to translate a sentence of Portuguese, a language that none of them know. The game was organized by a \"Professor Zarubin\" to answer the question \"Can mathematical machines think?\" Speaking through Zarubin, Dneprov writes \"the only way to prove that machines can think is to turn yourself into a machine and examine your thinking process\" and he concludes, as Searle does, \"We've proven that even the most perfect simulation of machine thinking is not the thinking process itself.\"\nIn 1974, Lawrence H. Davis imagined duplicating the brain using telephone lines and offices staffed by people, and in 1978 Ned Block envisioned the entire population of China involved in such a brain simulation. This thought experiment is called the China brain, also the \"Chinese Nation\" or the \"Chinese Gym\".\nSearle's version appeared in his 1980 paper \"Minds, Brains, and Programs\", published in \"Behavioral and Brain Sciences\". It eventually became the journal's \"most influential target article\", generating an enormous number of commentaries and responses in the ensuing decades, and Searle has continued to defend and refine the argument in many papers, popular articles and books. David Cole writes that \"the Chinese Room argument has probably been the most widely discussed philosophical argument in cognitive science to appear in the past 25 years\".\nMost of the discussion consists of attempts to refute it. \"The overwhelming majority\", notes \"Behavioral and Brain Sciences\" editor Stevan Harnad, \"still think that the Chinese Room Argument is dead wrong\". The sheer volume of the literature that has grown up around it inspired Pat Hayes to comment that the field of cognitive science ought to be redefined as \"the ongoing research program of showing Searle's Chinese Room Argument to be false\".\nSearle's argument has become \"something of a classic in cognitive science\", according to Harnad. Varol Akman agrees, and has described the original paper as \"an exemplar of philosophical clarity and purity\".\nPhilosophy.\nAlthough the Chinese Room argument was originally presented in reaction to the statements of artificial intelligence researchers, philosophers have come to consider it as an important part of the philosophy of mind. It is a challenge to functionalism and the computational theory of mind, and is related to such questions as the mind\u2013body problem, the problem of other minds, the symbol grounding problem, and the hard problem of consciousness.\nStrong AI.\nSearle identified a philosophical position he calls \"strong AI\":\nThe definition depends on the distinction between simulating a mind and actually having one. Searle writes that \"according to Strong AI, the correct simulation really is a mind. According to Weak AI, the correct simulation is a model of the mind.\"\nThe claim is implicit in some of the statements of early AI researchers and analysts. For example, in 1955, AI founder Herbert A. Simon declared that \"there are now in the world machines that think, that learn and create\". Simon, together with Allen Newell and Cliff Shaw, after having completed the first program that could do formal reasoning (the Logic Theorist), claimed that they had \"solved the venerable mind\u2013body problem, explaining how a system composed of matter can have the properties of mind.\" John Haugeland wrote that \"AI wants only the genuine article: machines with minds, in the full and literal sense. This is not science fiction, but real science, based on a theoretical conception as deep as it is daring: namely, we are, at root, computers ourselves.\"\nSearle also ascribes the following claims to advocates of strong AI:\nStrong AI as computationalism or functionalism.\nIn more recent presentations of the Chinese room argument, Searle has identified \"strong AI\" as \"computer functionalism\" (a term he attributes to Daniel Dennett). Functionalism is a position in modern philosophy of mind that holds that we can define mental phenomena (such as beliefs, desires, and perceptions) by describing their functions in relation to each other and to the outside world. Because a computer program can accurately represent functional relationships as relationships between symbols, a computer can have mental phenomena if it runs the right program, according to functionalism.\nStevan Harnad argues that Searle's depictions of strong AI can be reformulated as \"recognizable tenets of computationalism, a position (unlike \"strong AI\") that is actually held by many thinkers, and hence one worth refuting.\" Computationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind which argues that the mind can be accurately described as an information-processing system.\nEach of the following, according to Harnad, is a \"tenet\" of computationalism:\nRecent philosophical discussions have revisited the implications of computationalism for artificial intelligence. Goldstein and Levinstein explore whether large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT can possess minds, focusing on their ability to exhibit folk psychology, including beliefs, desires, and intentions. The authors argue that LLMs satisfy several philosophical theories of mental representation, such as informational, causal, and structural theories, by demonstrating robust internal representations of the world. However, they highlight that the evidence for LLMs having action dispositions necessary for belief-desire psychology remains inconclusive. Additionally, they refute common skeptical challenges, such as the \"stochastic parrots\" argument and concerns over memorization, asserting that LLMs exhibit structured internal representations that align with these philosophical criteria.\nBuilding on this discourse, Kristina \u0160ekrst highlights how AI hallucinations offer a unique perspective on computationalism. While functionalism defines mental states through their functional relationships, the emergence of hallucinations in AI systems reveals the limitations of such states when divorced from intrinsic understanding. These hallucinations, though arising from accurate functional representations, underscore the gap between computational reliability and the ontological complexity of human mental states. By doing so, they challenge the adequacy of functional accuracy in attributing mental phenomena to AI systems within a computationalist framework.\nDavid Chalmers suggests that while current LLMs lack features like recurrent processing and unified agency, advancements in AI could address these limitations within the next decade, potentially enabling systems to achieve consciousness. This perspective challenges Searle's original claim that purely \"syntactic\" processing cannot yield understanding or consciousness, arguing instead that such systems could have authentic mental states.\nStrong AI vs. biological naturalism.\nSearle holds a philosophical position he calls \"biological naturalism\": that consciousness and understanding require specific biological machinery that are found in brains. He writes \"brains cause minds\" and that \"actual human mental phenomena [are] dependent on actual physical\u2013chemical properties of actual human brains\". Searle argues that this machinery (known in neuroscience as the \"neural correlates of consciousness\") must have some causal powers that permit the human experience of consciousness. Searle's belief in the existence of these powers has been criticized.\nSearle does not disagree with the notion that machines can have consciousness and understanding, because, as he writes, \"we are precisely such machines\". Searle holds that the brain is, in fact, a machine, but that the brain gives rise to consciousness and understanding using specific machinery. If neuroscience is able to isolate the mechanical process that gives rise to consciousness, then Searle grants that it may be possible to create machines that have consciousness and understanding. However, without the specific machinery required, Searle does not believe that consciousness can occur.\nBiological naturalism implies that one cannot determine if the experience of consciousness is occurring merely by examining how a system functions, because the specific machinery of the brain is essential. Thus, biological naturalism is directly opposed to both behaviorism and functionalism (including \"computer functionalism\" or \"strong AI\"). Biological naturalism is similar to identity theory (the position that mental states are \"identical to\" or \"composed of\" neurological events); however, Searle has specific technical objections to identity theory. Searle's biological naturalism and strong AI are both opposed to Cartesian dualism, the classical idea that the brain and mind are made of different \"substances\". Indeed, Searle accuses strong AI of dualism, writing that \"strong AI only makes sense given the dualistic assumption that, where the mind is concerned, the brain doesn't matter\".\nConsciousness.\nSearle's original presentation emphasized understanding\u2014that is, mental states with intentionality\u2014and did not directly address other closely related ideas such as \"consciousness\". However, in more recent presentations, Searle has included consciousness as the real target of the argument.\nDavid Chalmers writes, \"it is fairly clear that consciousness is at the root of the matter\" of the Chinese room.\nColin McGinn argues that the Chinese room provides strong evidence that the hard problem of consciousness is fundamentally insoluble. The argument, to be clear, is not about whether a machine can be conscious, but about whether it (or anything else for that matter) can be shown to be conscious. It is plain that any other method of probing the occupant of a Chinese room has the same difficulties in principle as exchanging questions and answers in Chinese. It is simply not possible to divine whether a conscious agency or some clever simulation inhabits the room.\nSearle argues that this is only true for an observer outside of the room. The whole point of the thought experiment is to put someone inside the room, where they can directly observe the operations of consciousness. Searle claims that from his vantage point within the room there is nothing he can see that could imaginably give rise to consciousness, other than himself, and clearly he does not have a mind that can speak Chinese. In Searle's words, \"the computer has nothing more than I have in the case where I understand nothing\".\nApplied ethics.\nPatrick Hew used the Chinese Room argument to deduce requirements from military command and control systems if they are to preserve a commander's moral agency. He drew an analogy between a commander in their command center and the person in the Chinese Room, and analyzed it under a reading of Aristotle's notions of \"compulsory\" and \"ignorance\". Information could be \"down converted\" from meaning to symbols, and manipulated symbolically, but moral agency could be undermined if there was inadequate 'up conversion' into meaning. Hew cited examples from the USS \"Vincennes\" incident.\nComputer science.\nThe Chinese room argument is primarily an argument in the philosophy of mind, and both major computer scientists and artificial intelligence researchers consider it irrelevant to their fields. However, several concepts developed by computer scientists are essential to understanding the argument, including symbol processing, Turing machines, Turing completeness, and the Turing test.\nStrong AI vs. AI research.\nSearle's arguments are not usually considered an issue for AI research. The primary mission of artificial intelligence research is only to create useful systems that act intelligently and it does not matter if the intelligence is \"merely\" a simulation. AI researchers Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig wrote in 2021: \"We are interested in programs that behave intelligently. Individual aspects of consciousness\u2014awareness, self-awareness, attention\u2014can be programmed and can be part of an intelligent machine. The additional project making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one that we are equipped to take on.\"\nSearle does not disagree that AI research can create machines that are capable of highly intelligent behavior. The Chinese room argument leaves open the possibility that a digital machine could be built that acts more intelligently than a person, but does not have a mind or intentionality in the same way that brains do.\nSearle's \"strong AI hypothesis\" should not be confused with \"strong AI\" as defined by Ray Kurzweil and other futurists, who use the term to describe machine intelligence that rivals or exceeds human intelligence\u2014that is, artificial general intelligence, human level AI or superintelligence. Kurzweil is referring primarily to the amount of intelligence displayed by the machine, whereas Searle's argument sets no limit on this. Searle argues that a superintelligent machine would not necessarily have a mind and consciousness.\nTuring test.\nThe Chinese room implements a version of the Turing test. Alan Turing introduced the test in 1950 to help answer the question \"can machines think?\" In the standard version, a human judge engages in a natural language conversation with a human and a machine designed to generate performance indistinguishable from that of a human being. All participants are separated from one another. If the judge cannot reliably tell the machine from the human, the machine is said to have passed the test.\nTuring then considered each possible objection to the proposal \"machines can think\", and found that there are simple, obvious answers if the question is de-mystified in this way. He did not, however, intend for the test to measure for the presence of \"consciousness\" or \"understanding\". He did not believe this was relevant to the issues that he was addressing. He wrote:\nTo Searle, as a philosopher investigating in the nature of mind and consciousness, these are the relevant mysteries. The Chinese room is designed to show that the Turing test is insufficient to detect the presence of consciousness, even if the room can behave or function as a conscious mind would.\nSymbol processing.\nComputers manipulate physical objects in order to carry out calculations and do simulations. AI researchers Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon called this kind of machine a physical symbol system. It is also equivalent to the formal systems used in the field of mathematical logic.\nSearle emphasizes the fact that this kind of symbol manipulation is syntactic (borrowing a term from the study of grammar). The computer manipulates the symbols using a form of syntax, without any knowledge of the symbol's semantics (that is, their meaning).\nNewell and Simon had conjectured that a physical symbol system (such as a digital computer) had all the necessary machinery for \"general intelligent action\", or, as it is known today, artificial general intelligence. They framed this as a philosophical position, the physical symbol system hypothesis: \"A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means for general intelligent action.\" The Chinese room argument does not refute this, because it is framed in terms of \"intelligent action\", i.e. the external behavior of the machine, rather than the presence or absence of understanding, consciousness and mind.\nTwenty-first century AI programs (such as \"deep learning\") do mathematical operations on huge matrixes of unidentified numbers and bear little resemblance to the symbolic processing used by AI programs at the time Searle wrote his critique in 1980. Nils Nilsson describes systems like these as \"dynamic\" rather than \"symbolic\". Nilsson notes that these are essentially digitized representations of dynamic systems\u2014the individual numbers do not have a specific semantics, but are instead samples or data points from a dynamic signal, and it is the signal being approximated which would have semantics. Nilsson argues it is not reasonable to consider these signals as \"symbol processing\" in the same sense as the physical symbol systems hypothesis.\nChinese room and Turing completeness.\nThe Chinese room has a design analogous to that of a modern computer. It has a Von Neumann architecture, which consists of a program (the book of instructions), some memory (the papers and file cabinets), a machine that follows the instructions (the man), and a means to write symbols in memory (the pencil and eraser). A machine with this design is known in theoretical computer science as \"Turing complete\", because it has the necessary machinery to carry out any computation that a Turing machine can do, and therefore it is capable of doing a step-by-step simulation of any other digital machine, given enough memory and time. Turing writes, \"all digital computers are in a sense equivalent.\" The widely accepted Church\u2013Turing thesis holds that any function computable by an effective procedure is computable by a Turing machine.\nThe Turing completeness of the Chinese room implies that it can do whatever any other digital computer can do (albeit much, much more slowly). Thus, if the Chinese room does not or can not contain a Chinese-speaking mind, then no other digital computer can contain a mind. Some replies to Searle begin by arguing that the room, as described, cannot have a Chinese-speaking mind. Arguments of this form, according to Stevan Harnad, are \"no refutation (but rather an affirmation)\" of the Chinese room argument, because these arguments actually imply that no digital computers can have a mind.\nThere are some critics, such as Hanoch Ben-Yami, who argue that the Chinese room cannot simulate all the abilities of a digital computer, such as being able to determine the current time.\nComplete argument.\nSearle has produced a more formal version of the argument of which the Chinese Room forms a part. He presented the first version in 1984. The version given below is from 1990. The Chinese room thought experiment is intended to prove point A3.\nHe begins with three axioms:\nSearle posits that these lead directly to this conclusion:\nThis much of the argument is intended to show that artificial intelligence can never produce a machine with a mind by writing programs that manipulate symbols. The remainder of the argument addresses a different issue. Is the human brain running a program? In other words, is the computational theory of mind correct? He begins with an axiom that is intended to express the basic modern scientific consensus about brains and minds:\nSearle claims that we can derive \"immediately\" and \"trivially\" that:\nAnd from this he derives the further conclusions:\nRefutations of Searle's argument take many different forms (see below). Computationalists and functionalists reject A3, arguing that \"syntax\" (as Searle describes it) can have \"semantics\" if the syntax has the right functional structure. Eliminative materialists reject A2, arguing that minds don't actually have \"semantics\"\u2014that thoughts and other mental phenomena are inherently meaningless but nevertheless function as if they had meaning.\nReplies.\nReplies to Searle's argument may be classified according to what they claim to show:\nSome of the arguments (robot and brain simulation, for example) fall into multiple categories.\nSystems and virtual mind replies: finding the mind.\nThese replies attempt to answer the question: since the man in the room does not speak Chinese, where is the mind that does? These replies address the key ontological issues of mind versus body and simulation vs. reality. All of the replies that identify the mind in the room are versions of \"the system reply\".\nSystem reply.\nThe basic version of the system reply argues that it is the \"whole system\" that understands Chinese. While the man understands only English, when he is combined with the program, scratch paper, pencils and file cabinets, they form a system that can understand Chinese. \"Here, understanding is not being ascribed to the mere individual; rather it is being ascribed to this whole system of which he is a part\" Searle explains.\nSearle notes that (in this simple version of the reply) the \"system\" is nothing more than a collection of ordinary physical objects; it grants the power of understanding and consciousness to \"the conjunction of that person and bits of paper\" without making any effort to explain how this pile of objects has become a conscious, thinking being. Searle argues that no reasonable person should be satisfied with the reply, unless they are \"under the grip of an ideology;\" In order for this reply to be remotely plausible, one must take it for granted that consciousness can be the product of an information processing \"system\", and does not require anything resembling the actual biology of the brain.\nSearle then responds by simplifying this list of physical objects: he asks what happens if the man memorizes the rules and keeps track of everything in his head? Then the whole system consists of just one object: the man himself. Searle argues that if the man does not understand Chinese then the system does not understand Chinese either because now \"the system\" and \"the man\" both describe exactly the same object.\nCritics of Searle's response argue that the program has allowed the man to have two minds in one head. If we assume a \"mind\" is a form of information processing, then the theory of computation can account for two computations occurring at once, namely (1) the computation for universal programmability (which is the function instantiated by the person and note-taking materials independently from any particular program contents) and (2) the computation of the Turing machine that is described by the program (which is instantiated by everything including the specific program). The theory of computation thus formally explains the open possibility that the second computation in the Chinese Room could entail a human-equivalent semantic understanding of the Chinese inputs. The focus belongs on the program's Turing machine rather than on the person's. However, from Searle's perspective, this argument is circular. The question at issue is whether consciousness is a form of information processing, and this reply requires that we make that assumption.\nMore sophisticated versions of the systems reply try to identify more precisely what \"the system\" is and they differ in exactly how they describe it. According to these replies, the \"mind that speaks Chinese\" could be such things as: the \"software\", a \"program\", a \"running program\", a simulation of the \"neural correlates of consciousness\", the \"functional system\", a \"simulated mind\", an \"emergent property\", or \"a virtual mind\".\nVirtual mind reply.\nMarvin Minsky suggested a version of the system reply known as the \"virtual mind reply\". The term \"virtual\" is used in computer science to describe an object that appears to exist \"in\" a computer (or computer network) only because software makes it appear to exist. The objects \"inside\" computers (including files, folders, and so on) are all \"virtual\", except for the computer's electronic components. Similarly, Minsky that a computer may contain a \"mind\" that is virtual in the same sense as virtual machines, virtual communities and virtual reality.\nTo clarify the distinction between the simple systems reply given above and virtual mind reply, David Cole notes that two simulations could be running on one system at the same time: one speaking Chinese and one speaking Korean. While there is only one system, there can be multiple \"virtual minds,\" thus the \"system\" cannot be the \"mind\".\nSearle responds that such a mind is at best a simulation, and writes: \"No one supposes that computer simulations of a five-alarm fire will burn the neighborhood down or that a computer simulation of a rainstorm will leave us all drenched.\" Nicholas Fearn responds that, for some things, simulation is as good as the real thing. \"When we call up the pocket calculator function on a desktop computer, the image of a pocket calculator appears on the screen. We don't complain that it isn't really a calculator, because the physical attributes of the device do not matter.\" The question is, is the human mind like the pocket calculator, essentially composed of information, where a perfect simulation of the thing just is the thing? Or is the mind like the rainstorm, a thing in the world that is more than just its simulation, and not realizable in full by a computer simulation? For decades, this question of simulation has led AI researchers and philosophers to consider whether the term \"synthetic intelligence\" is more appropriate than the common description of such intelligences as \"artificial.\"\nThese replies provide an explanation of exactly who it is that understands Chinese. If there is something \"besides\" the man in the room that can understand Chinese, Searle cannot argue that (1) the man does not understand Chinese, therefore (2) nothing in the room understands Chinese. This, according to those who make this reply, shows that Searle's argument fails to prove that \"strong AI\" is false.\nThese replies, by themselves, do not provide any evidence that strong AI is true, however. They do not show that the system (or the virtual mind) understands Chinese, other than the hypothetical premise that it passes the Turing test. Searle argues that, if we are to consider Strong AI remotely plausible, the Chinese Room is an example that requires explanation, and it is difficult or impossible to explain how consciousness might \"emerge\" from the room or how the system would have consciousness. As Searle writes \"the systems reply simply begs the question by insisting that the system must understand Chinese\" and thus is dodging the question or hopelessly circular.\nRobot and semantics replies: finding the meaning.\nAs far as the person in the room is concerned, the symbols are just meaningless \"squiggles.\" But if the Chinese room really \"understands\" what it is saying, then the symbols must get their meaning from somewhere. These arguments attempt to connect the symbols to the things they symbolize. These replies address Searle's concerns about intentionality, symbol grounding and syntax vs. semantics.\nRobot reply.\nSuppose that instead of a room, the program was placed into a robot that could wander around and interact with its environment. This would allow a \"causal connection\" between the symbols and things they represent. Hans Moravec comments: \"If we could graft a robot to a reasoning program, we wouldn't need a person to provide the meaning anymore: it would come from the physical world.\"\nSearle's reply is to suppose that, unbeknownst to the individual in the Chinese room, some of the inputs came directly from a camera mounted on a robot, and some of the outputs were used to manipulate the arms and legs of the robot. Nevertheless, the person in the room is still just following the rules, and does not know what the symbols mean. Searle writes \"he doesn't see what comes into the robot's eyes.\"\nDerived meaning.\nSome respond that the room, as Searle describes it, is connected to the world: through the Chinese speakers that it is \"talking\" to and through the programmers who designed the knowledge base in his file cabinet. The symbols Searle manipulates are already meaningful, they are just not meaningful to him.\nSearle says that the symbols only have a \"derived\" meaning, like the meaning of words in books. The meaning of the symbols depends on the conscious understanding of the Chinese speakers and the programmers outside the room. The room, like a book, has no understanding of its own.\nContextualist reply.\nSome have argued that the meanings of the symbols would come from a vast \"background\" of commonsense knowledge encoded in the program and the filing cabinets. This would provide a \"context\" that would give the symbols their meaning.\nSearle agrees that this background exists, but he does not agree that it can be built into programs. Hubert Dreyfus has also criticized the idea that the \"background\" can be represented symbolically.\nTo each of these suggestions, Searle's response is the same: no matter how much knowledge is written into the program and no matter how the program is connected to the world, he is still in the room manipulating symbols according to rules. His actions are syntactic and this can never explain to him what the symbols stand for. Searle writes \"syntax is insufficient for semantics.\"\nHowever, for those who accept that Searle's actions simulate a mind, separate from his own, the important question is not what the symbols mean to Searle, what is important is what they mean to the virtual mind. While Searle is trapped in the room, the virtual mind is not: it is connected to the outside world through the Chinese speakers it speaks to, through the programmers who gave it world knowledge, and through the cameras and other sensors that roboticists can supply.\nBrain simulation and connectionist replies: redesigning the room.\nThese arguments are all versions of the systems reply that identify a particular kind of system as being important; they identify some special technology that would create conscious understanding in a machine. (The \"robot\" and \"commonsense knowledge\" replies above also specify a certain kind of system as being important.)\nBrain simulator reply.\nSuppose that the program simulated in fine detail the action of every neuron in the brain of a Chinese speaker. This strengthens the intuition that there would be no significant difference between the operation of the program and the operation of a live human brain.\nSearle replies that such a simulation does not reproduce the important features of the brain\u2014its causal and intentional states. He is adamant that \"human mental phenomena [are] dependent on actual physical\u2013chemical properties of actual human brains.\" Moreover, he argues:\nChina brain.\nWhat if we ask each citizen of China to simulate one neuron, using the telephone system to simulate the connections between axons and dendrites? In this version, it seems obvious that no individual would have any understanding of what the brain might be saying. It is also obvious that this system would be functionally equivalent to a brain, so if consciousness is a function, this system would be conscious.\nBrain replacement scenario.\nIn this, we are asked to imagine that engineers have invented a tiny computer that simulates the action of an individual neuron. What would happen if we replaced one neuron at a time? Replacing one would clearly do nothing to change conscious awareness. Replacing all of them would create a digital computer that simulates a brain. If Searle is right, then conscious awareness must disappear during the procedure (either gradually or all at once). Searle's critics argue that there would be no point during the procedure when he can claim that conscious awareness ends and mindless simulation begins. (See Ship of Theseus for a similar thought experiment.)\nMany mansions / wait till next year reply.\nThese arguments (and the robot or common-sense knowledge replies) identify some special technology that would help create conscious understanding in a machine. They may be interpreted in two ways: either they claim (1) this technology is required for consciousness, the Chinese room does not or cannot implement this technology, and therefore the Chinese room cannot pass the Turing test or (even if it did) it would not have conscious understanding. Or they may be claiming that (2) it is easier to see that the Chinese room has a mind if we visualize this technology as being used to create it.\nIn the first case, where features like a robot body or a connectionist architecture are required, Searle claims that strong AI (as he understands it) has been abandoned. The Chinese room has all the elements of a Turing complete machine, and thus is capable of simulating any digital computation whatsoever. If Searle's room cannot pass the Turing test then there is no other digital technology that could pass the Turing test. If Searle's room could pass the Turing test, but still does not have a mind, then the Turing test is not sufficient to determine if the room has a \"mind\". Either way, it denies one or the other of the positions Searle thinks of as \"strong AI\", proving his argument.\nThe brain arguments in particular deny strong AI if they assume that there is no simpler way to describe the mind than to create a program that is just as mysterious as the brain was. He writes \"I thought the whole idea of strong AI was that we don't need to know how the brain works to know how the mind works.\" If computation does not provide an explanation of the human mind, then strong AI has failed, according to Searle.\nOther critics hold that the room as Searle described it does, in fact, have a mind, however they argue that it is difficult to see\u2014Searle's description is correct, but misleading. By redesigning the room more realistically they hope to make this more obvious. In this case, these arguments are being used as appeals to intuition (see next section).\nIn fact, the room can just as easily be redesigned to weaken our intuitions. Ned Block's Blockhead argument suggests that the program could, in theory, be rewritten into a simple lookup table of rules of the form \"if the user writes \"S\", reply with \"P\" and goto X\". At least in principle, any program can be rewritten (or \"refactored\") into this form, even a brain simulation. In the blockhead scenario, the entire mental state is hidden in the letter X, which represents a memory address\u2014a number associated with the next rule. It is hard to visualize that an instant of one's conscious experience can be captured in a single large number, yet this is exactly what \"strong AI\" claims. On the other hand, such a lookup table would be ridiculously large (to the point of being physically impossible), and the states could therefore be overly specific.\nSearle argues that however the program is written or however the machine is connected to the world, the mind is being simulated by a simple step-by-step digital machine (or machines). These machines are always just like the man in the room: they understand nothing and do not speak Chinese. They are merely manipulating symbols without knowing what they mean. Searle writes: \"I can have any formal program you like, but I still understand nothing.\"\nSpeed and complexity: appeals to intuition.\nThe following arguments (and the intuitive interpretations of the arguments above) do not directly explain how a Chinese speaking mind could exist in Searle's room, or how the symbols he manipulates could become meaningful. However, by raising doubts about Searle's intuitions they support other positions, such as the system and robot replies. These arguments, if accepted, prevent Searle from claiming that his conclusion is obvious by undermining the intuitions that his certainty requires.\nSeveral critics believe that Searle's argument relies entirely on intuitions. Block writes \"Searle's argument depends for its force on intuitions that certain entities do not think.\" Daniel Dennett describes the Chinese room argument as a misleading \"intuition pump\" and writes \"Searle's thought experiment depends, illicitly, on your imagining too simple a case, an irrelevant case, and drawing the obvious conclusion from it.\"\nSome of the arguments above also function as appeals to intuition, especially those that are intended to make it seem more plausible that the Chinese room contains a mind, which can include the robot, commonsense knowledge, brain simulation and connectionist replies. Several of the replies above also address the specific issue of complexity. The connectionist reply emphasizes that a working artificial intelligence system would have to be as complex and as interconnected as the human brain. The commonsense knowledge reply emphasizes that any program that passed a Turing test would have to be \"an extraordinarily supple, sophisticated, and multilayered system, brimming with 'world knowledge' and meta-knowledge and meta-meta-knowledge\", as Daniel Dennett explains.\nSpeed and complexity replies.\nMany of these critiques emphasize speed and complexity of the human brain, which processes information at 100 billion operations per second (by some estimates). Several critics point out that the man in the room would probably take millions of years to respond to a simple question, and would require \"filing cabinets\" of astronomical proportions. This brings the clarity of Searle's intuition into doubt.\nAn especially vivid version of the speed and complexity reply is from Paul and Patricia Churchland. They propose this analogous thought experiment: \"Consider a dark room containing a man holding a bar magnet or charged object. If the man pumps the magnet up and down, then, according to Maxwell's theory of artificial luminance (AL), it will initiate a spreading circle of electromagnetic waves and will thus be luminous. But as all of us who have toyed with magnets or charged balls well know, their forces (or any other forces for that matter), even when set in motion produce no luminance at all. It is inconceivable that you might constitute real luminance just by moving forces around!\" Churchland's point is that the problem is that he would have to wave the magnet up and down something like 450 trillion times per second in order to see anything.\nStevan Harnad is critical of speed and complexity replies when they stray beyond addressing our intuitions. He writes \"Some have made a cult of speed and timing, holding that, when accelerated to the right speed, the computational may make a phase transition into the mental. It should be clear that is not a counterargument but merely an ad hoc speculation (as is the view that it is all just a matter of ratcheting up to the right degree of 'complexity.')\"\nSearle argues that his critics are also relying on intuitions, however his opponents' intuitions have no empirical basis. He writes that, in order to consider the \"system reply\" as remotely plausible, a person must be \"under the grip of an ideology\". The system reply only makes sense (to Searle) if one assumes that any \"system\" can have consciousness, just by virtue of being a system with the right behavior and functional parts. This assumption, he argues, is not tenable given our experience of consciousness.\nOther minds and zombies: meaninglessness.\nSeveral replies argue that Searle's argument is irrelevant because his assumptions about the mind and consciousness are faulty. Searle believes that human beings directly experience their consciousness, intentionality and the nature of the mind every day, and that this experience of consciousness is not open to question. He writes that we must \"presuppose the reality and knowability of the mental.\" The replies below question whether Searle is justified in using his own experience of consciousness to determine that it is more than mechanical symbol processing. In particular, the other minds reply argues that we cannot use our experience of consciousness to answer questions about other minds (even the mind of a computer), the epiphenoma replies question whether we can make any argument at all about something like consciousness which can not, by definition, be detected by any experiment, and the eliminative materialist reply argues that Searle's own personal consciousness does not \"exist\" in the sense that Searle thinks it does.\nOther minds reply.\nThe \"Other Minds Reply\" points out that Searle's argument is a version of the problem of other minds, applied to machines. There is no way we can determine if other people's subjective experience is the same as our own. We can only study their behavior (i.e., by giving them our own Turing test). Critics of Searle argue that he is holding the Chinese room to a higher standard than we would hold an ordinary person.\nNils Nilsson writes \"If a program behaves as if it were multiplying, most of us would say that it is, in fact, multiplying. For all I know, Searle may only be behaving as if he were thinking deeply about these matters. But, even though I disagree with him, his simulation is pretty good, so I'm willing to credit him with real thought.\"\nTuring anticipated Searle's line of argument (which he called \"The Argument from Consciousness\") in 1950 and makes the other minds reply. He noted that people never consider the problem of other minds when dealing with each other. He writes that \"instead of arguing continually over this point it is usual to have the polite convention that everyone thinks.\" The Turing test simply extends this \"polite convention\" to machines. He does not intend to solve the problem of other minds (for machines or people) and he does not think we need to.\nReplies considering that Searle's \"consciousness\" is undetectable.\nIf we accept Searle's description of intentionality, consciousness, and the mind, we are forced to accept that consciousness is epiphenomenal: that it \"casts no shadow\" i.e. is undetectable in the outside world. Searle's \"causal properties\" cannot be detected by anyone outside the mind, otherwise the Chinese Room could not pass the Turing test\u2014the people outside would be able to tell there was not a Chinese speaker in the room by detecting their causal properties. Since they cannot detect causal properties, they cannot detect the existence of the mental. Thus, Searle's \"causal properties\" and consciousness itself is undetectable, and anything that cannot be detected either does not exist or does not matter.\nMike Alder calls this the \"Newton's Flaming Laser Sword Reply\". He argues that the entire argument is frivolous, because it is non-verificationist: not only is the distinction between simulating a mind and having a mind ill-defined, but it is also irrelevant because no experiments were, or even can be, proposed to distinguish between the two.\nDaniel Dennett provides this illustration: suppose that, by some mutation, a human being is born that does not have Searle's \"causal properties\" but nevertheless acts exactly like a human being. This is a philosophical zombie, as formulated in the philosophy of mind. This new animal would reproduce just as any other human and eventually there would be more of these zombies. Natural selection would favor the zombies, since their design is (we could suppose) a bit simpler. Eventually the humans would die out. So therefore, if Searle is right, it is most likely that human beings (as we see them today) are actually \"zombies\", who nevertheless insist they are conscious. It is impossible to know whether we are all zombies or not. Even if we are all zombies, we would still believe that we are not.\nEliminative materialist reply.\nSeveral philosophers argue that consciousness, as Searle describes it, does not exist. Daniel Dennett describes consciousness as a \"user illusion\".\nThis position is sometimes referred to as eliminative materialism: the view that consciousness is not a concept that can \"enjoy reduction\" to a strictly mechanical description, but rather is a concept that will be simply \"eliminated\" once the way the \"material\" brain works is fully understood, in just the same way as the concept of a demon has already been eliminated from science rather than enjoying reduction to a strictly mechanical description. Other mental properties, such as original intentionality (also called \u201cmeaning\u201d, \u201ccontent\u201d, and \u201csemantic character\u201d), are also commonly regarded as special properties related to beliefs and other propositional attitudes. Eliminative materialism maintains that propositional attitudes such as beliefs and desires, among other intentional mental states that have content, do not exist. If eliminative materialism is the correct scientific account of human cognition then the assumption of the Chinese room argument that \"minds have mental contents (semantics)\" must be rejected.\nSearle disagrees with this analysis and argues that \"the study of the mind starts with such facts as that humans have beliefs, while thermostats, telephones, and adding machines don't ... what we wanted to know is what distinguishes the mind from thermostats and livers.\" He takes it as obvious that we can detect the presence of consciousness and dismisses these replies as being off the point.\nOther replies.\nMargaret Boden argued in her paper \"Escaping from the Chinese Room\" that even if the person in the room does not understand the Chinese, it does not mean there is no understanding in the room. The person in the room at least understands the rule book used to provide output responses.\nCarbon chauvinism.\nSearle conclusion that \"human mental phenomena [are] dependent on actual physical\u2013chemical properties of actual human brains\" have been sometimes described as a form of \"Carbon chauvinism\". Steven Pinker suggested that a response to that conclusion would be to make a counter thought experiment to the Chinese Room, where the incredulity goes the other way. He brings as an example the short story \"They're Made Out of Meat\" which depicts an alien race composed of some electronic beings who upon finding Earth express disbelief that the meat brain of humans can experience consciousness and thought.\nHowever, Searle himself denied being \"Carbon chauvinist\". He said \"I have not tried to show that only biological based systems like our brains can think. [...] I regard this issue as up for grabs\". He said that even silicon machines could theoretically have human-like consciousness and thought, if the actual physical\u2013chemical properties of silicon could be used in a way that can produce consciousness and thought, but \"until we know how the brain does it we are not in a position to try to do it artificially\"."}
{"id": "6217", "revid": "1223123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6217", "title": "Charon (disambiguation)", "text": "Charon, in Greek mythology, is the ferryman who carried the souls of the dead to the underworld.\nCharon may also refer to:"}
{"id": "6219", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6219", "title": "Claudio Zuan Antonio Monteverdi", "text": ""}
{"id": "6220", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6220", "title": "Circle", "text": "A circle is a shape consisting of all points in a plane that are at a given distance from a given point, the centre. The distance between any point of the circle and the centre is called the radius. The length of a line segment connecting two points on the circle and passing through the centre is called the diameter. A circle bounds a region of the plane called a disc.\nThe circle has been known since before the beginning of recorded history. Natural circles are common, such as the full moon or a slice of round fruit. The circle is the basis for the wheel, which, with related inventions such as gears, makes much of modern machinery possible. In mathematics, the study of the circle has helped inspire the development of geometry, astronomy and calculus.\nTerminology.\nAll of the specified regions may be considered as \"open\", that is, not containing their boundaries, or as \"closed\", including their respective boundaries.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"circle\" derives from the Greek \u03ba\u03af\u03c1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2/\u03ba\u03cd\u03ba\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 (\"kirkos/kuklos\"), itself a metathesis of the Homeric Greek \u03ba\u03c1\u03af\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2 (\"krikos\"), meaning \"hoop\" or \"ring\". The origins of the words \"circus\" and \"circuit\" are closely related.\nHistory.\nPrehistoric people made stone circles and timber circles, and circular elements are common in petroglyphs and cave paintings. Disc-shaped prehistoric artifacts include the Nebra sky disc and jade discs called Bi.\nThe Egyptian Rhind papyrus, dated to 1700 BCE, gives a method to find the area of a circle. The result corresponds to (3.16049...) as an approximate value of .\nBook 3 of Euclid's \"Elements\" deals with the properties of circles. Euclid's definition of a circle is:\nIn Plato's Seventh Letter there is a detailed definition and explanation of the circle. Plato explains the perfect circle, and how it is different from any drawing, words, definition or explanation. Early science, particularly geometry and astrology and astronomy, was connected to the divine for most medieval scholars, and many believed that there was something intrinsically \"divine\" or \"perfect\" that could be found in circles.\nIn 1880 CE, Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that is transcendental, proving that the millennia-old problem of squaring the circle cannot be performed with straightedge and compass.\nWith the advent of abstract art in the early 20th century, geometric objects became an artistic subject in their own right. Wassily Kandinsky in particular often used circles as an element of his compositions.\nSymbolism and religious use.\nFrom the time of the earliest known civilisations \u2013 such as the Assyrians and ancient Egyptians, those in the Indus Valley and along the Yellow River in China, and the Western civilisations of ancient Greece and Rome during classical Antiquity \u2013 the circle has been used directly or indirectly in visual art to convey the artist's message and to express certain ideas.\nHowever, differences in worldview (beliefs and culture) had a great impact on artists' perceptions. While some emphasised the circle's perimeter to demonstrate their democratic manifestation, others focused on its centre to symbolise the concept of cosmic unity. In mystical doctrines, the circle mainly symbolises the infinite and cyclical nature of existence, but in religious traditions it represents heavenly bodies and divine spirits.\nThe circle signifies many sacred and spiritual concepts, including unity, infinity, wholeness, the universe, divinity, balance, stability and perfection, among others. Such concepts have been conveyed in cultures worldwide through the use of symbols, for example, a compass, a halo, the vesica piscis and its derivatives (fish, eye, aureole, mandorla, etc.), the ouroboros, the Dharma wheel, a rainbow, mandalas, rose windows and so forth. Magic circles are part of some traditions of Western esotericism.\nAnalytic results.\nCircumference.\nThe ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter is (pi), an irrational constant approximately equal to 3.141592654. The ratio of a circle's circumference to its radius is . Thus the circumference \"C\" is related to the radius \"r\" and diameter \"d\" by:\nformula_3\nArea enclosed.\nAs proved by Archimedes, in his Measurement of a Circle, the area enclosed by a circle is equal to that of a triangle whose base has the length of the circle's circumference and whose height equals the circle's radius, which comes to multiplied by the radius squared:\nformula_4\nEquivalently, denoting diameter by \"d\",\nformula_5\nthat is, approximately 79% of the circumscribing square (whose side is of length \"d\").\nThe circle is the plane curve enclosing the maximum area for a given arc length. This relates the circle to a problem in the calculus of variations, namely the isoperimetric inequality.\nRadian.\nIf a circle of radius is centred at the vertex of an angle, and that angle intercepts an arc of the circle with an arc length of , then the radian measure of the angle is the ratio of the arc length to the radius:\nformula_6\nThe circular arc is said to subtend the angle, known as the central angle, at the centre of the circle. The angle subtended by a complete circle at its centre is a complete angle, which measures radians, 360 degrees, or one turn.\nUsing radians, the formula for the arc length of a circular arc of radius and subtending a central angle of measure is\nformula_7\nand the formula for the area of a circular sector of radius and with central angle of measure is\nformula_8\nIn the special case , these formulae yield the circumference of a complete circle and area of a complete disc, respectively.\nEquations.\nCartesian coordinates.\nEquation of a circle.\nIn an \"x\"\u2013\"y\" Cartesian coordinate system, the circle with centre coordinates (\"a\", \"b\") and radius \"r\" is the set of all points (\"x\", \"y\") such that\nformula_9\nThis equation, known as the \"equation of the circle\", follows from the Pythagorean theorem applied to any point on the circle: as shown in the adjacent diagram, the radius is the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle whose other sides are of length |\"x\" \u2212 \"a\"| and |\"y\" \u2212 \"b\"|. If the circle is centred at the origin (0,\u00a00), then the equation simplifies to\nformula_10\nOne coordinate as a function of the other.\nThe circle of radius with center at in the \u2013 plane can be broken into two semicircles each of which is the graph of a function, and , respectively:\nformula_11\nfor values of ranging from to .\nParametric form.\nThe equation can be written in parametric form using the trigonometric functions sine and cosine as\nformula_12\nwhere \"t\" is a parametric variable in the range 0 to 2, interpreted geometrically as the angle that the ray from (\"a\",\u00a0\"b\") to (\"x\",\u00a0\"y\") makes with the positive \"x\"\u00a0axis.\nAn alternative parametrisation of the circle is\nformula_13\nIn this parameterisation, the ratio of \"t\" to \"r\" can be interpreted geometrically as the stereographic projection of the line passing through the centre parallel to the \"x\"\u00a0axis (see Tangent half-angle substitution). However, this parameterisation works only if \"t\" is made to range not only through all reals but also to a point at infinity; otherwise, the leftmost point of the circle would be omitted.\n3-point form.\nThe equation of the circle determined by three points formula_14 not on a line is obtained by a conversion of the \"3-point form of a circle equation\":\nformula_15\nHomogeneous form.\nIn homogeneous coordinates, each conic section with the equation of a circle has the form\nformula_16\nIt can be proven that a conic section is a circle exactly when it contains (when extended to the complex projective plane) the points \"I\"(1: \"i\": 0) and \"J\"(1:\u00a0\u2212\"i\":\u00a00). These points are called the circular points at infinity.\nPolar coordinates.\nIn polar coordinates, the equation of a circle is\nformula_17\nwhere \"a\" is the radius of the circle, formula_18 are the polar coordinates of a generic point on the circle, and formula_19 are the polar coordinates of the centre of the circle (i.e., \"r\"0 is the distance from the origin to the centre of the circle, and \"\u03c6\" is the anticlockwise angle from the positive \"x\"\u00a0axis to the line connecting the origin to the centre of the circle). For a circle centred on the origin, i.e. , this reduces to . When , or when the origin lies on the circle, the equation becomes\nformula_20\nIn the general case, the equation can be solved for \"r\", giving\nformula_21\nWithout the \u00b1 sign, the equation would in some cases describe only half a circle.\nComplex plane.\nIn the complex plane, a circle with a centre at \"c\" and radius \"r\" has the equation\nformula_22\nIn parametric form, this can be written as\nformula_23\nThe slightly generalised equation\nformula_24\nfor real \"p\", \"q\" and complex \"g\" is sometimes called a generalised circle. This becomes the above equation for a circle with formula_25, since formula_26. Not all generalised circles are actually circles: a generalised circle is either a (true) circle or a line.\nTangent lines.\nThe tangent line through a point \"P\" on the circle is perpendicular to the diameter passing through \"P\". If and the circle has centre (\"a\", \"b\") and radius \"r\", then the tangent line is perpendicular to the line from (\"a\", \"b\") to (\"x\"1, \"y\"1), so it has the form . Evaluating at (\"x\"1, \"y\"1) determines the value of \"c\", and the result is that the equation of the tangent is\nformula_27\nor\nformula_28\nIf , then the slope of this line is\nformula_29\nThis can also be found using implicit differentiation.\nWhen the centre of the circle is at the origin, then the equation of the tangent line becomes\nformula_30\nand its slope is\nformula_31\nProperties.\nInscribed angles.\nAn inscribed angle (examples are the blue and green angles in the figure) is exactly half the corresponding central angle (red). Hence, all inscribed angles that subtend the same arc (pink) are equal. Angles inscribed on the arc (brown) are supplementary. In particular, every inscribed angle that subtends a diameter is a right angle (since the central angle is 180\u00b0).\nSagitta.\nThe sagitta (also known as the versine) is a line segment drawn perpendicular to a chord, between the midpoint of that chord and the arc of the circle.\nGiven the length \"y\" of a chord and the length \"x\" of the sagitta, the Pythagorean theorem can be used to calculate the radius of the unique circle that will fit around the two lines:\nformula_35\nAnother proof of this result, which relies only on two chord properties given above, is as follows. Given a chord of length \"y\" and with sagitta of length \"x\", since the sagitta intersects the midpoint of the chord, we know that it is a part of a diameter of the circle. Since the diameter is twice the radius, the \"missing\" part of the diameter is () in length. Using the fact that one part of one chord times the other part is equal to the same product taken along a chord intersecting the first chord, we find that (. Solving for \"r\", we find the required result.\nCompass and straightedge constructions.\nThere are many compass-and-straightedge constructions resulting in circles.\nThe simplest and most basic is the construction given the centre of the circle and a point on the circle. Place the fixed leg of the compass on the centre point, the movable leg on the point on the circle and rotate the compass.\nCircle of Apollonius.\nApollonius of Perga showed that a circle may also be defined as the set of points in a plane having a constant \"ratio\" (other than 1) of distances to two fixed foci, \"A\" and \"B\". (The set of points where the distances are equal is the perpendicular bisector of segment \"AB\", a line.) That circle is sometimes said to be drawn \"about\" two points.\nThe proof is in two parts. First, one must prove that, given two foci \"A\" and \"B\" and a ratio of distances, any point \"P\" satisfying the ratio of distances must fall on a particular circle. Let \"C\" be another point, also satisfying the ratio and lying on segment \"AB\". By the angle bisector theorem the line segment \"PC\" will bisect the interior angle \"APB\", since the segments are similar:\nformula_36\nAnalogously, a line segment \"PD\" through some point \"D\" on \"AB\" extended bisects the corresponding exterior angle \"BPQ\" where \"Q\" is on \"AP\" extended. Since the interior and exterior angles sum to 180 degrees, the angle \"CPD\" is exactly 90 degrees; that is, a right angle. The set of points \"P\" such that angle \"CPD\" is a right angle forms a circle, of which \"CD\" is a diameter.\nSecond, see for a proof that every point on the indicated circle satisfies the given ratio.\nCross-ratios.\nA closely related property of circles involves the geometry of the cross-ratio of points in the complex plane. If \"A\", \"B\", and \"C\" are as above, then the circle of Apollonius for these three points is the collection of points \"P\" for which the absolute value of the cross-ratio is equal to one:\nformula_37\nStated another way, \"P\" is a point on the circle of Apollonius if and only if the cross-ratio is on the unit circle in the complex plane.\nGeneralised circles.\nIf \"C\" is the midpoint of the segment \"AB\", then the collection of points \"P\" satisfying the Apollonius condition\nformula_38\nis not a circle, but rather a line.\nThus, if \"A\", \"B\", and \"C\" are given distinct points in the plane, then the locus of points \"P\" satisfying the above equation is called a \"generalised circle.\" It may either be a true circle or a line. In this sense a line is a generalised circle of infinite radius.\nInscription in or circumscription about other figures.\nIn every triangle a unique circle, called the incircle, can be inscribed such that it is tangent to each of the three sides of the triangle.\nAbout every triangle a unique circle, called the circumcircle, can be circumscribed such that it goes through each of the triangle's three vertices.\nA tangential polygon, such as a tangential quadrilateral, is any convex polygon within which a circle can be inscribed that is tangent to each side of the polygon. Every regular polygon and every triangle is a tangential polygon.\nA cyclic polygon is any convex polygon about which a circle can be circumscribed, passing through each vertex. A well-studied example is the cyclic quadrilateral. Every regular polygon and every triangle is a cyclic polygon. A polygon that is both cyclic and tangential is called a bicentric polygon.\nA hypocycloid is a curve that is inscribed in a given circle by tracing a fixed point on a smaller circle that rolls within and tangent to the given circle.\nLimiting case of other figures.\nThe circle can be viewed as a limiting case of various other figures:\nLocus of constant sum.\nConsider a finite set of formula_40 points in the plane. The locus of points such that the sum of the squares of the distances to the given points is constant is a circle, whose centre is at the centroid of the given points.\nA generalisation for higher powers of distances is obtained if under formula_40 points the vertices of the regular polygon formula_42 are taken. The locus of points such that the sum of the formula_43-th power of distances formula_44 to the vertices of a given regular polygon with circumradius formula_45 is constant is a circle, if\nformula_46\nwhose centre is the centroid of the formula_42.\nIn the case of the equilateral triangle, the loci of the constant sums of the second and fourth powers are circles, whereas for the square, the loci are circles for the constant sums of the second, fourth, and sixth powers. For the regular pentagon the constant sum of the eighth powers of the distances will be added and so forth.\nSquaring the circle.\nSquaring the circle is the problem, proposed by ancient geometers, of constructing a square with the same area as a given circle by using only a finite number of steps with compass and straightedge.\nIn 1882, the task was proven to be impossible, as a consequence of the Lindemann\u2013Weierstrass theorem, which proves that pi () is a transcendental number, rather than an algebraic irrational number; that is, it is not the root of any polynomial with rational coefficients. Despite the impossibility, this topic continues to be of interest for pseudomath enthusiasts.\nGeneralisations.\nIn other \"p\"-norms.\nDefining a circle as the set of points with a fixed distance from a point, different shapes can be considered circles under different definitions of distance. In \"p\"-norm, distance is determined by\nformula_48\nIn Euclidean geometry, \"p\" = 2, giving the familiar\nformula_49\nIn taxicab geometry, \"p\" = 1. Taxicab circles are squares with sides oriented at a 45\u00b0 angle to the coordinate axes. While each side would have length formula_50 using a Euclidean metric, where \"r\" is the circle's radius, its length in taxicab geometry is 2\"r\". Thus, a circle's circumference is 8\"r\". Thus, the value of a geometric analog to formula_51 is 4 in this geometry. The formula for the unit circle in taxicab geometry is formula_52 in Cartesian coordinates and\nformula_53\nin polar coordinates.\nA circle of radius 1 (using this distance) is the von Neumann neighborhood of its centre.\nA circle of radius \"r\" for the Chebyshev distance (\"L\"\u221e metric) on a plane is also a square with side length 2\"r\" parallel to the coordinate axes, so planar Chebyshev distance can be viewed as equivalent by rotation and scaling to planar taxicab distance. However, this equivalence between \"L\"1 and \"L\"\u221e metrics does not generalise to higher dimensions.\nTopological definition.\nThe circle is the one-dimensional hypersphere (the 1-sphere).\nIn topology, a circle is not limited to the geometric concept, but to all of its homeomorphisms. Two topological circles are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other via a deformation of R3 upon itself (known as an ambient isotopy)."}
{"id": "6221", "revid": "1272212209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6221", "title": "Cardinal (Catholic Church)", "text": "A cardinal (; ) is a senior member of the clergy of the Catholic Church. They are titular members of the clergy of the Diocese of Rome, thereby serving as the primary advisors to the Bishop of Rome (the Pope). Cardinals are created by the pope and typically hold the title for life. Collectively, they constitute the College of Cardinals. The most solemn responsibility of the cardinals is to elect a new pope in a conclave, almost always from among themselves (with a few historical exceptions), when the Holy See is vacant. During the period between a pope's death or resignation and the election of his successor, the day-to-day governance of the Holy See is in the hands of the College of Cardinals. The right to participate in a conclave is limited to cardinals who have not reached the age of 80 years by the day the vacancy occurs. In addition, cardinals collectively participate in papal consistories (which generally take place annually), in which matters of importance to the Church are considered and new cardinals may be created. Cardinals of working age are also appointed to roles overseeing dicasteries of the Roman Curia, the central administration of the Catholic Church.\nCardinals are drawn from a variety of backgrounds, being appointed as cardinals \"in addition\" to their existing roles within the Church. Most cardinals are bishops and archbishops leading dioceses and archdioceses around the world \u2013 often the most prominent diocese or archdiocese in their country. Others are titular bishops who are current or former officials within the Roman Curia (generally the heads of dicasteries and other bodies linked to the Curia). A very small number are priests recognised by the pope for their service to the Church; as canon law requires them to be generally consecrated as bishops before they are made cardinals, but some are granted a papal dispensation. There are no strict criteria for elevation to the College of Cardinals. Since 1917, a potential cardinal must already be at least a priest, but laymen have been cardinals in the past. The selection is entirely up to the pope, and tradition is his only guide.\n there are serving cardinals, of whom are eligible to vote in a conclave to elect a new pope.\nHistory.\nThere is general disagreement about the origin of the term, but a chief consensus that \"cardinalis\" is etymologically from the Latin word (meaning \"pivot\" or \"hinge\") was first used in late antiquity to designate a bishop or priest who was incorporated into a church for which he had not originally been ordained. In Rome the first persons to be called cardinals were the deacons of the seven regions of the city at the beginning of the 6th century, when the word began to mean \"principal\", \"eminent\", or \"superior\". The name was also given to the senior priest in each of the \"title\" churches (the parish churches) of Rome and to the bishops of the seven sees surrounding the city. By the 8th century the Roman cardinals constituted a privileged class among the Roman clergy. They took part in the administration of the Church of Rome and in the papal liturgy. By decree of a synod of 769, only a cardinal was eligible to become Bishop of Rome. Cardinals were granted the privilege of wearing the red hat by Pope Innocent IV in 1244.\nIn cities other than Rome, the name cardinal began to be applied to certain churchmen as a mark of honour. The earliest example of this occurs in a letter sent by Pope Zacharias in 747 to Pippin the Younger, ruler of the Franks, in which Zacharias applied the title to the priests of Paris to distinguish them from country clergy. This meaning of the word spread rapidly, and from the 9th century various episcopal cities had a special class among the clergy known as cardinals. The use of the title was reserved for the cardinals of Rome in 1567 by Pius V.\nIn 1059 (five years after the East-West Schism), the right of electing the pope was reserved to the principal clergy of Rome and the bishops of the seven suburbicarian sees. In the 12th century the practice of appointing ecclesiastics from outside Rome as cardinals began, with each of them assigned a church in Rome as his titular church or linked with one of the suburbicarian dioceses, while still being incardinated in a diocese other than that of Rome.\nThe term \"cardinal\" at one time applied to any priest permanently assigned or incardinated to a church, or specifically to the senior priest of an important church, based on the Latin \"cardo\" (hinge), meaning \"pivotal\" as in \"principal\" or \"chief\". The term was applied in this sense as early as the 9th century to the priests of the \"tituli\" (parishes) of the diocese of Rome.\nIn the year 1563, the Ecumenical Council of Trent, headed by Pope Pius IV, wrote about the importance of selecting good cardinals: \"nothing is more necessary to the Church of God than that the holy Roman pontiff apply that solicitude which by the duty of his office he owes the universal Church in a very special way by associating with himself as cardinals the most select persons only, and appoint to each church most eminently upright and competent shepherds; and this the more so, because our Lord Jesus Christ will require at his hands the blood of the sheep of Christ that perish through the evil government of shepherds who are negligent and forgetful of their office.\"\nThe earlier influence of temporal rulers, notably the kings of France, reasserted itself through the influence of cardinals of certain nationalities or politically significant movements. Traditions even developed entitling certain monarchs, including those of Austria, Spain, and France, to nominate one of their trusted clerical subjects to be created cardinal, a so-called \"crown-cardinal\".\nIn early modern times, cardinals often had important roles in secular affairs. In some cases, they took on powerful positions in government. In Henry VIII's England, his chief minister was for some time Cardinal Wolsey. Cardinal Richelieu's power was so great that he was for many years effectively the ruler of France. Richelieu's successor was also a cardinal, Jules Mazarin. Guillaume Dubois and Andr\u00e9-Hercule de Fleury complete the list of the four great cardinals to have ruled France. In Portugal, due to a succession crisis, one cardinal, Henry of Portugal, was crowned king, the only example of a cardinal-king (although John II Casimir Vasa was a cardinal from 1646 until he resigned in 1647, later being elected and crowned King of Poland, in 1648 and 1649, respectively).\nWhile the incumbents of some sees are regularly made cardinals, and some countries are entitled to at least one cardinal by concordat (usually earning either its primate or the metropolitan of the capital city the cardinal's hat), almost no see carries an actual right to the cardinalate, not even if its bishop is a patriarch: the notable exception is the Patriarch of Lisbon who, by Pope Clement XII's 1737 bull \"Inter praecipuas apostolici ministerii\", is accorded the right to be elevated to the rank of cardinal in the consistory following his appointment.\nPapal elections.\nIn 1059, Pope Nicholas II gave cardinals the right to elect the Bishop of Rome in the papal bull . For a time this power was assigned exclusively to the cardinal bishops, but in 1179 the Third Lateran Council restored the right to the whole body of cardinals.\nNumbers.\nIn 1586, Pope Sixtus V limited the number of cardinals to 70: six cardinal bishops, 50 cardinal priests, and 14 cardinal deacons. Pope John XXIII exceeded that limit citing the need to staff church offices. In November 1970 in \"Ingravescentem aetatem\", Pope Paul VI established that electors would be under the age of eighty years. When it took effect on 1 January 1971, it deprived 25 cardinals of the right to participate in a conclave. In October 1975 in \"Romano Pontifici eligendo\", he set the maximum number of electors at 120, while establishing no limit on the overall size of the college.\nPopes can set aside church laws and they have regularly brought the number of cardinals under the age of 80 to more than 120, twice reaching as high as 135 with Pope John Paul II's consistories of February 2001 and October 2003. No more than 120 electors have ever participated in a conclave, but most canon lawyers believe that if their number exceeded 120 they would all participate.\nPope Paul VI also increased the number of cardinal bishops by assigning that rank, in 1965, to patriarchs of the Eastern Catholic Churches when named cardinals. In 2018, Pope Francis expanded the cardinal bishops of Roman title, because this had not been done despite recent decades' expansion in the two lower orders of cardinals, besides having all six such cardinals being over the age limit for a conclave.\nTitular churches.\nEach cardinal is assigned a titular church upon his creation, which is always a church in the city of Rome. Through the process of opting (\"optazione\"), a cardinal can rise through the ranks from cardinal deacon to priest, and from cardinal priest to that of cardinal bishop - in which case he obtains one of the suburbicarian sees located around the city of Rome. The only exception is for patriarchs of the Eastern Catholic Churches. Nevertheless, cardinals possess no power of governance nor are they to intervene in any way in matters which pertain to the administration of goods, discipline, or the service of their titular churches. They are allowed to celebrate Mass and hear confessions and lead visits and pilgrimages to their titular churches, in coordination with the staff of the church. They often support their churches monetarily, and many cardinals do keep in contact with the pastoral staffs of their titular churches. The term cardinal is from the Latin word \"cardo\" meaning a hinge. Here it means a \"door\", an example of synecdoche, a figure of speech whereby the part refers to the whole. The \"door\" is the address of the titular church from which the cardinal derives his membership of the Roman clergy, who elect the pope.\nThe Dean of the College of Cardinals in addition to such a titular church also receives the titular bishopric of Ostia, the primary suburbicarian see. Cardinals governing a particular church retain that church.\nTitle and reference style.\nIn 1630, Pope Urban VIII decreed their title to be \"Eminence\" (previously, it had been \"illustrissimo\" and \"reverendissimo\") and decreed that their secular rank would equate to prince, making them second only to the pope and crowned monarchs.\nIn accordance with tradition, they sign by placing the title \"Cardinal\" (abbreviated \"Card.\") after their personal name and before their surname as, for instance, \"John Card(inal) Doe\" or, in Latin, \"Ioannes Card(inalis) Doe\". Some writers, such as James-Charles Noonan, hold that, in the case of cardinals, the form used for signatures should be used also when referring to them in English. However, official sources, such as the Catholic News Service, say that the correct form for referring to a cardinal in English is normally as \"Cardinal [First name] [Surname]\". This is the rule given also in stylebooks not associated with the church. This style is also generally followed on the websites of the Holy See and episcopal conferences. Oriental patriarchs who are created cardinals customarily use \"Sanctae Ecclesiae Cardinalis\" as their full title, probably because they do not belong to the Roman clergy.\nThe [First name] Cardinal [Surname] order is used in the Latin proclamation of the election of a new pope by the cardinal protodeacon, if the new pope is a cardinal, as has been the case since 1378.\nThe term Prince of the Church has historically been applied to cardinals of the Catholic church, and sometimes more broadly to senior members of the church hierarchy. It has been rejected by Pope Francis, who stated to a group of newly created cardinals \"He (Jesus) does not call you to become 'princes' of the Church, to 'sit on his right or on his left.' He calls you to serve like Him and with Him.\" The term is still applied, both seriously and as a criticism of the perceived attitudes of some cardinals.\nOrders and their chief offices.\nCardinal bishops.\nCardinal bishops (cardinals of the episcopal order; ) are the senior order of cardinals. Though in modern times the vast majority of cardinals are also bishops or archbishops, few are \"cardinal bishops\". For most of the second millennium there were six cardinal bishops, each presiding over one of the seven suburbicarian sees around Rome: Ostia, Albano, Porto and Santa Rufina, Palestrina, Sabina and Mentana, Frascati, and Velletri. Velletri was united with Ostia from 1150 until 1914, when Pope Pius X separated them again, but decreed that whichever cardinal bishop became Dean of the College of Cardinals would keep the suburbicarian see he already held, adding to it that of Ostia, with the result that there continued to be only six cardinal bishops. Since 1962, the cardinal bishops have only a titular relationship with the suburbicarian sees, each of which is governed by a separate ordinary.\nUntil 1961, membership in the order of cardinal bishops was achieved through precedence in the College of Cardinals. When a suburbicarian see fell vacant, the most senior cardinal by precedence could exercise his option to claim the see and be promoted to the order of cardinal bishops. Pope John XXIII abolished that privilege on 10 March 1961 and made the right to promote someone to the order of cardinal bishops the sole prerogative of the pope.\nIn 1965, Pope Paul VI decreed in his \"motu proprio\" \"Ad purpuratorum Patrum Collegium\" that patriarchs of the Eastern Catholic Churches who were named cardinals (i.e. \"cardinal patriarchs\") would also be cardinal bishops, ranking after the six Latin Church cardinal bishops of the suburbicarian sees. (Latin Church patriarchs who become cardinals are cardinal priests, not cardinal bishops: for example Angelo Scola was made Patriarch of Venice in 2002 and cardinal priest of Santi XII Apostoli in 2003.) Those of cardinal patriarch rank continue to hold their patriarchal see and are not assigned any Roman title (suburbicarian see or title or deaconry).\nAt the June 2018 consistory, Pope Francis increased the number of Latin Church cardinal bishops to match the expansion in cardinal priests and cardinal deacons in recent decades. He elevated four cardinals to this rank granting their titular churches and deaconries suburbicarian rank \"pro hac vice\" (temporarily) and making them equivalent to suburbicarian see titles. At the time of the announcement, all six cardinal bishops of suburbicarian see titles, as well as two of the three cardinal patriarchs, were non-electors as they had reached the age of 80. Pope Francis created another cardinal bishop in the same way on 1 May 2020, bringing the number of Latin Church cardinal bishops to eleven.\nThe Dean of the College of Cardinals, the highest ranking cardinal, was formerly the longest serving cardinal bishop, but since 1965 is elected by the Latin Church cardinal bishops from among their number, subject to papal approval. Likewise the Vice-Dean, formerly the second longest serving, is also elected. Seniority of the remaining Latin Church cardinal bishops is still by date of appointment to the rank. The current Dean is Giovanni Battista Re and the Vice-Dean is Leonardo Sandri.\nCardinal priests.\nCardinal priests () are the most numerous of the three orders of cardinals in the Catholic Church, ranking above the cardinal deacons and below the cardinal bishops. Those who are named cardinal priests today are generally also bishops of important dioceses throughout the world, though some hold Curial positions.\nIn modern times, the term \"cardinal priest\" is interpreted as meaning a cardinal who is of the order of priests. Originally, however, this referred to certain key priests of important churches of the Diocese of Rome, who were recognized as the \"cardinal\" priests, the important priests chosen by the pope to advise him in his duties as Bishop of Rome (the Latin \"cardo\" means \"hinge\"). Certain clerics in many dioceses at the time, not just that of Rome, were said to be the key personnel\u2014the term gradually became exclusive to Rome to indicate those entrusted with electing the Bishop of Rome, the pope.\nWhile the cardinalate has long been expanded beyond the Roman pastoral clergy and Roman Curia, every cardinal priest has a titular church in Rome, though they may be bishops or archbishops elsewhere, just as cardinal bishops were given one of the suburbicarian dioceses around Rome. Pope Paul VI abolished all administrative rights cardinals had with regard to their titular churches, though the cardinal's name and coat of arms are still posted in the church, and they are expected to celebrate Mass and preach there if convenient when they are in Rome.\nWhile the number of cardinals was small from the times of the Roman Empire to the Renaissance, and frequently smaller than the number of recognized churches entitled to a cardinal priest, in the 16th century the college expanded markedly. In 1587, Pope Sixtus V sought to arrest this growth by fixing the maximum size of the college at 70, including 50 cardinal priests, about twice the historical number. This limit was respected until 1958, and the list of titular churches modified only on rare occasions, generally when a building fell into disrepair. When Pope John XXIII abolished the limit, he began to add new churches to the list, which Popes Paul VI and John Paul II continued to do. Today there are close to 150 titular churches, out of over 300 churches in Rome.\nThe cardinal who is the longest-serving member of the order of cardinal priests is titled \"cardinal protopriest\". He had certain ceremonial duties in the conclave that have effectively ceased because he would generally have already reached age 80, at which cardinals are barred from the conclave. The current cardinal protopriest is Michael Michai Kitbunchu of Thailand.\nCardinal deacons.\nThe cardinal deacons () are the lowest-ranking cardinals. Cardinals elevated to the diaconal order are either officials of the Roman Curia or priests elevated after their 80th birthday, chosen mainly for the honor of it (since those over 80 are not able to vote in a conclave). While bishops with diocesan responsibilities are created cardinal priests, it is generally not so for cardinal deacons.\nCardinal deacons derive originally from the seven deacons in the Papal Household who supervised the Church's works in the 14 districts of Rome during the early Middle Ages, when church administration was effectively the government of Rome and provided all social services. They came to be called \"cardinal deacons\" by the late eighth century, and they were granted active rights in papal elections and made eligible for the election as pope by the decree of 769.\nCardinals elevated to the diaconal order are mainly officials of the Roman Curia holding various posts in the church administration. Their number and influence has varied through the years. While historically predominantly Italian, the group has become much more internationally diverse in later years. While in 1939 about half were Italian, by 1994 the number was reduced to one third. Their influence in the election of the pope has been considered important. They are better informed and connected than the dislocated cardinals but their level of unity has been varied. Under the 1587 decree of Pope Sixtus V, which fixed the maximum size of the College of Cardinals, there were 14 cardinal deacons. Later the number increased. As late as 1939 almost half of the cardinals were members of the Curia. Pius XII reduced this percentage to 24 percent. John XXIII brought it back up to 37 percent but Paul VI brought it down to 27 percent. John Paul II maintained this ratio.\nAs of 2005, there were over 50 churches recognized as cardinalatial deaconries, though there were only 30 cardinals of the order of deacons. Cardinal deacons have long enjoyed the right to \"opt for the order of cardinal priests\" (\"optazione\") after they have been cardinal deacons for 10 years. They may on such elevation take a vacant \"title\" (a church allotted to a cardinal priest as the church in Rome with which he is associated) or their diaconal church may be temporarily elevated to a cardinal priest's \"title\" for that occasion. When elevated to cardinal priests, they take their precedence according to the day they were first made cardinal deacons (thus ranking above cardinal priests who were elevated to the college after them, regardless of order).\nWhen not celebrating Mass, but still serving a liturgical function, such as the semiannual \"Urbi et Orbi\" papal blessing, some Papal Masses and some events at Ecumenical Councils, cardinal deacons can be recognized by the dalmatics they would don with the simple white mitre (so called \"mitra simplex\").\nCardinal protodeacon.\nThe cardinal protodeacon is the senior cardinal deacon in order of appointment to the College of Cardinals. If he is a cardinal elector and participates in a conclave, he announces a new pope's election and name from the central balcony of St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City. The protodeacon also bestows the pallium on the new pope and crowns him with the papal tiara, although the crowning has not been celebrated since Pope John Paul I opted for a simpler papal inauguration ceremony in 1978. The current cardinal protodeacon is Dominique Mamberti.\nSpecial types of cardinals.\nCamerlengo.\nThe Cardinal Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church, assisted by the Vice-Camerlengo and the other prelates of the office known as the Apostolic Camera, has functions that in essence are limited to a period of \"sede vacante\" of the papacy. He is to collate information about the financial situation of all administrations dependent on the Holy See and present the results to the College of Cardinals, as they gather for the papal conclave.\nCardinals who are not bishops.\nUntil 1918, any cleric, even one only in minor orders, could be created a cardinal (see \"lay cardinals\", below), but enrolled only in the order of cardinal deacons. For example, in the 16th century, Reginald Pole was a cardinal for 18 years before he was ordained a priest. The 1917 Code of Canon Law mandated that all cardinals, even cardinal deacons, had to be priests, and, in 1962, Pope John XXIII set the norm that all cardinals be consecrated as bishops, even if they are only priests at the time of appointment. As a consequence of these two changes, canon 351 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law requires that a cardinal be at least in the order of priesthood at his appointment, and that those who are not already bishops must receive episcopal consecration. Several cardinals near to or over the age of 80 when appointed have obtained dispensation from the rule of having to be a bishop. These were all appointed cardinal-deacons, but Roberto Tucci and Albert Vanhoye lived long enough to exercise the right of option and be promoted to the rank of cardinal-priest. No cardinal who was not a bishop has participated in a papal conclave since the 1962 rule change.\nA cardinal who is not a bishop is entitled to wear and use the episcopal vestments and other pontificalia (episcopal regalia: mitre, crozier, zucchetto, pectoral cross, and ring). He has both actual and honorary precedence over archbishops, and bishops who are not cardinals. However, he cannot perform the sacrament of ordination or other rites reserved solely to bishops.\n\"Lay cardinals\".\nAt various times, there have been cardinals who had only received first tonsure and minor orders but not yet been ordained as deacons or priests. Though clerics, they were inaccurately called \"lay cardinals\". Teodolfo Mertel was among the last of the lay cardinals. When he died in 1899 he was the last surviving cardinal who was not at least ordained a priest. With the revision of the Code of Canon Law promulgated in 1917 by Pope Benedict XV, only those who are already priests or bishops may be appointed cardinals. Since the time of Pope John XXIII a priest who is appointed a cardinal must be consecrated a bishop, unless he obtains a dispensation.\nCardinals \"in pectore\" or secret cardinals.\nIn addition to the named cardinals, the pope may name secret cardinals or cardinals (Latin for \"in the breast\"). During the Western Schism, many cardinals were created by the contending popes. Beginning with the reign of Pope Martin V, cardinals were created without publishing their names until later, a practice termed \"creati et reservati in pectore\". A cardinal named \"in pectore\" is known only to the pope. In the modern era, popes have named cardinals \"in pectore\" to protect them or their congregations from political reprisals. If conditions change, the pope makes the appointment public. The cardinal in question then ranks in precedence with those made cardinals at the time of his \"in pectore\" appointment. If a pope dies before revealing the identity of an \"in pectore\" cardinal, the person's status as cardinal expires. The last pope known to have named a cardinal \"in pectore\" is Pope John Paul II, who named four, including one whose identity was never revealed.\nVesture and privileges.\nWhen in choir dress, a Latin Church cardinal wears scarlet garments\u2014the blood-like red symbolizes a cardinal's willingness to die for his faith. Excluding the rochet \u2014 which is always white\u2014the scarlet garments include the cassock, mozzetta, and biretta (over the usual scarlet zucchetto). The biretta of a cardinal is distinctive not merely for its scarlet color, but also for the fact that it does not have a pompom or tassel on the top as do the birettas of other prelates. Until the 1460s, it was customary for cardinals to wear a violet or blue cape unless granted the privilege of wearing red when acting on papal business. His normal-wear cassock is black but has scarlet piping and a scarlet fascia (sash). Occasionally, a cardinal wears a scarlet \"ferraiolo\" which is a cape worn over the shoulders, tied at the neck in a bow by narrow strips of cloth in the front, without any 'trim' or piping on it. It is because of the scarlet color of cardinals' vesture that the bird of the same name has become known as such.\nEastern Catholic cardinals continue to wear the normal dress appropriate to their liturgical tradition, though some may line their cassocks with scarlet and wear scarlet fascias, or in some cases, wear Eastern-style cassocks entirely of scarlet.\nIn previous times, at the consistory at which the pope named a new cardinal, he would bestow upon him a distinctive wide-brimmed hat called a galero. This custom was discontinued in 1969 and the investiture now takes place with the scarlet biretta. In ecclesiastical heraldry, however, the scarlet galero is still displayed on the cardinal's coat of arms. Cardinals had the right to display the galero in their cathedral, and when a cardinal died, it would be suspended from the ceiling above his tomb. Some cardinals will still have a galero made, even though it is not officially part of their apparel.\nTo symbolize their bond with the papacy, the pope gives each newly appointed cardinal a gold ring, which is traditionally kissed by Catholics when greeting a cardinal (as with a bishop's episcopal ring). Before the new uniformity imposed by John Paul II, each cardinal was given a ring, the central piece of which was a gem, usually a sapphire, with the pope's stemma engraved on the inside. There is now no gemstone, and the pope chooses the image on the outside: under Pope Benedict XVI it was a modern depiction of the crucifixion of Jesus, with Mary and John to each side. The ring includes the pope's coat of arms on the inside.\nCardinals have in canon law a \"privilege of forum\" (i.e., exemption from being judged by ecclesiastical tribunals of ordinary rank): only the pope is competent to judge them in matters subject to ecclesiastical jurisdiction (cases that refer to matters that are spiritual or linked with the spiritual, or with regard to infringement of ecclesiastical laws and whatever contains an element of sin, where culpability must be determined and the appropriate\necclesiastical penalty imposed). The pope either decides the case himself or delegates the decision to a tribunal, usually one of the tribunals or congregations of the Roman Curia. Without such delegation, no ecclesiastical court, even the Roman Rota, is competent to judge a canon law case against a cardinal.\nAdditionally, canon law gives cardinals the faculty of hearing confessions validly and licitly everywhere, whereas other priests and bishops must be granted this faculty and might be restricted in its use by the local bishop."}
{"id": "6223", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6223", "title": "Comic books and strips", "text": ""}
{"id": "6225", "revid": "1652336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6225", "title": "Cantigas de Santa Maria", "text": "The Cantigas de Santa Maria (, ; \"Canticles of Holy Mary\") are 420 poems with musical notation, written in the medieval Galician-Portuguese language during the reign of Alfonso X of Castile \"El Sabio\" (1221\u20131284). Traditionally, they are all attributed to Alfonso, though scholars have since established that the musicians and poets of his court were responsible for most of them, with Alfonso being credited with a few as well.\nIt is one of the largest collections of monophonic (solo) songs from the Middle Ages and is characterized by the mention of the Virgin Mary in every song, while every tenth song is a hymn.\nThe \"Cantigas\" have survived in four manuscript codices: two at El Escorial, one at Madrid's National Library, and one in Florence, Italy. The E codex from El Escorial is illuminated with colored miniatures showing pairs of musicians playing a wide variety of instruments. The \"C\u00f3dice Rico\" (T) from El Escorial and the one in the Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale of Florence (F) are richly illuminated with narrative vignettes.\nDescription.\nThe Cantigas are written in the early Medieval Galician variety of Galician-Portuguese, using Galician spelling; this was because of Galician-Portuguese being fashionable as a lyrical language in Castile at the time, as well as Alfonso X having passed part of his early years in Galicia and so probably being a fluent speaker since his childhood.\nThe Cantigas are a collection of 420 poems, 356 of which are in a narrative format relating to Marian miracles; the rest of them, except an introduction and two prologues, are of songs of praise or involve Marian festivities. The Cantigas depict the Virgin Mary in a very humanized way, often having her play a role in earthly episodes.\nThe authors are unknown, although several studies have suggested that Galician poet Airas Nunes might have been the author of a large number of the Cantiga poems. King Alfonso X \u2014 named as Affonso in the Cantigas \u2014 is also believed to be an author of some of them as he refers himself in first person. Support for this theory can be found in the prologue of the Cantigas. Also, many sources credit Alfonso owing to his influence on other works within the poetic tradition, including his introduction on religious song. Although King Alfonso X's authorship is debatable, his influence is not. While the other major works that came out of Alfonso's workshops, including histories and other prose texts, were in Castilian, the Cantigas are in Galician-Portuguese, and reflect the popularity in the Castilian court of other poetic corpuses such as the \"cantigas d'amigo\" and \"cantigas d'amor\".\nThe metrics are extraordinarily diverse: 280 different formats for the 420 Cantigas. The most common are the \"virelai\" and the \"rondeau\". The length of the lines varies between two and 24 syllables. The narrative voice in many of the songs describes an erotic relationship, in the troubadour fashion, with the Divine.\nThe music is written in notation which is similar to that used for chant, but also contains some information about the length of the notes. Several transcriptions exist. The Cantigas are frequently recorded and performed by early music groups, and quite a few CDs featuring music from the Cantigas are available.\nCodices.\nThe Cantigas are preserved in four manuscripts:\n\"E\" contains the largest number of songs (406 Cantigas, plus the Introduction and the Prologue); it contains 41 carefully detailed miniatures and many illuminated letters. \"To\" is the earliest collection and contains 129 songs. Although not illustrated, it is richly decorated with pen flourished initials, and great care has been taken over its construction. The \"T\" and \"F\" manuscripts are sister volumes. \"T\" contains 195 surviving cantigas (8 are missing due to loss of folios) which roughly correspond in order to the first two hundred in \"E\", each song being illustrated with either 6 or 12 miniatures that depict scenes from the cantiga. \"F\" follows the same format but has only 111 cantigas, of which 7 have no text, only miniatures. These are basically a subset of those found in the second half of \"E\", but are presented here in a radically different order. \"F\" was never finished, and so no music was ever added. Only the empty staves display the intention to add musical notation to the codex at a later date. It is generally thought that the codices were constructed during Alfonso's lifetime, \"To\" perhaps in the 1270s, and \"T\"/\"F\" and \"E\" in the early 1280s up until the time of his death in 1284.\nThe music.\nThe musical forms within the Cantigas, and there are many, are still being studied. There have been many false leads, and there is little beyond pitch value that is very reliable. Mensuration is a particular problem in the Cantigas, and most attempts at determining meaningful rhythmic schemes have tended, with some exceptions, to be unsatisfactory. This remains a lively topic of debate and study. Progress, while on-going, has nevertheless been significant over the course of the last 20 years."}
{"id": "6226", "revid": "40976397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6226", "title": "Claudio Monteverdi", "text": "Claudio Giovanni Antonio Monteverdi (baptized 15 May 1567 \u2013 29 November 1643) was an Italian composer, choirmaster and string player. A composer of both secular and sacred music, and a pioneer in the development of opera, he is considered a crucial transitional figure between the Renaissance and Baroque periods of music history.\nBorn in Cremona, where he undertook his first musical studies and compositions, Monteverdi developed his career first at the court of Mantua () and then until his death in the Republic of Venice where he was \"maestro di cappella\" at the basilica of San Marco. His surviving letters give insight into the life of a professional musician in Italy of the period, including problems of income, patronage and politics.\nMuch of Monteverdi's output, including many stage works, has been lost. His surviving music includes nine books of madrigals, large-scale religious works, such as his \"Vespro della Beata Vergine\" (\"Vespers for the Blessed Virgin\") of 1610, and three complete operas. His opera \"L'Orfeo\" (1607) is the earliest of the genre still widely performed; towards the end of his life he wrote works for Venice, including \"Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria\" and \"L'incoronazione di Poppea\".\nWhile he worked extensively in the tradition of earlier Renaissance polyphony, as evidenced in his madrigals, he undertook great developments in form and melody, and began to employ the basso continuo technique, distinctive of the Baroque. No stranger to controversy, he defended his sometimes novel techniques as elements of a \"seconda pratica\", contrasting with the more orthodox earlier style which he termed the \"prima pratica\". Largely forgotten during the eighteenth and much of the nineteenth centuries, his works enjoyed a rediscovery around the beginning of the twentieth century. He is now established both as a significant influence in European musical history and as a composer whose works are regularly performed and recorded.\nLife.\nCremona: 1567\u20131591.\nMonteverdi was baptised in the church of SS Nazaro e Celso, Cremona, on 15 May 1567. The register records his name as \"Claudio Zuan Antonio\" the son of \"Messer Baldasar Mondeverdo\". He was the first child of the apothecary Baldassare Monteverdi and his first wife Maddalena (n\u00e9e Zignani); they had married early the previous year. Claudio's brother Giulio Cesare Monteverdi (b. 1573) was also to become a musician; there were two other brothers and two sisters from Baldassare's marriage to Maddalena and his subsequent marriage in 1576 or 1577. Cremona was close to the border of the Republic of Venice, and not far from the lands controlled by the Duchy of Mantua, in both of which states Monteverdi was later to establish his career.\nThere is no clear record of Monteverdi's early musical training, or evidence that (as is sometimes claimed) he was a member of the Cathedral choir or studied at Cremona University. Monteverdi's first published work, a set of motets, \" (Sacred Songs)\" for three voices, was issued in Venice in 1582, when he was only fifteen years old. In this, and his other initial publications, he describes himself as the pupil of Marc'Antonio Ingegneri, who was from 1581 (and possibly from 1576) to 1592 the \"maestro di cappella\" at Cremona Cathedral. The musicologist Tim Carter deduces that Ingegneri \"gave him a solid grounding in counterpoint and composition\", and that Monteverdi would also have studied playing instruments of the viol family and singing.\nMonteverdi's first publications also give evidence of his connections beyond Cremona, even in his early years. His second published work, \"Madrigali spirituali\" (Spiritual Madrigals, 1583), was printed at Brescia. His next works (his first published secular compositions) were sets of five-part madrigals, according to his biographer Paolo Fabbri: \"the inevitable proving ground for any composer of the second half of the sixteenth century\u00a0... the secular genre \"par excellence\"\". The first book of madrigals (Venice, 1587) was dedicated to Count Marco Verit\u00e0 of Verona; the second book of madrigals (Venice, 1590) was dedicated to the President of the Senate of Milan, Giacomo Ricardi, for whom he had played the viola da braccio in 1587.\nMantua: 1591\u20131613.\nCourt musician.\nIn the dedication of his second book of madrigals, Monteverdi had described himself as a player of the \"vivuola\" (which could mean either viola da gamba or viola da braccio). In 1590 or 1591 he entered the service of Duke Vincenzo I Gonzaga of Mantua; he recalled in his dedication to the Duke of his third book of madrigals (Venice, 1592) that \"the most noble exercise of the \"vivuola\" opened to me the fortunate way into your service.\" In the same dedication he compares his instrumental playing to \"flowers\" and his compositions as \"fruit\" which as it matures \"can more worthily and more perfectly serve you\", indicating his intentions to establish himself as a composer.\nDuke Vincenzo was keen to establish his court as a musical centre, and sought to recruit leading musicians. When Monteverdi arrived in Mantua, the \"maestro di capella\" at the court was the Flemish musician Giaches de Wert. Other notable musicians at the court during this period included the composer and violinist Salomone Rossi, Rossi's sister, the singer Madama Europa, and Francesco Rasi. Monteverdi married the court singer Claudia de Cattaneis in 1599; they were to have three children, two sons (Francesco, b. 1601 and Massimiliano, b. 1604), and a daughter who died soon after birth in 1603. Monteverdi's brother Giulio Cesare joined the court musicians in 1602.\nWhen Wert died in 1596, his post was given to Benedetto Pallavicino, but Monteverdi was clearly highly regarded by Vincenzo and accompanied him on his military campaigns in Hungary (1595) and also on a visit to Flanders in 1599. Here at the town of Spa he is reported by his brother Giulio Cesare as encountering, and bringing back to Italy, the \"canto alla francese\". (The meaning of this, literally \"song in the French style\", is debatable, but may refer to the French-influenced poetry of Gabriello Chiabrera, some of which was set by Monteverdi in his \"Scherzi musicali\", and which departs from the traditional Italian style of lines of 9 or 11 syllables). Monteverdi may possibly have been a member of Vincenzo's entourage at Florence in 1600 for the marriage of Maria de' Medici and Henry IV of France, at which celebrations Jacopo Peri's opera \"Euridice\" (the earliest surviving opera) was premiered. On the death of Pallavicino in 1601, Monteverdi was confirmed as the new \"maestro di capella\".\nArtusi controversy and \"seconda pratica\".\nAt the turn of the 17th century, Monteverdi found himself the target of musical controversy. The influential Bolognese theorist Giovanni Maria Artusi attacked Monteverdi's music (without naming the composer) in his work \"L'Artusi, overo Delle imperfettioni della moderna musica (Artusi, or On the imperfections of modern music)\" of 1600, followed by a sequel in 1603. Artusi cited extracts from Monteverdi's works not yet published (they later formed parts of his fourth and fifth books of madrigals of 1603 and 1605), condemning their use of harmony and their innovations in use of musical modes, compared to orthodox polyphonic practice of the sixteenth century. Artusi attempted to correspond with Monteverdi on these issues; the composer refused to respond, but found a champion in a pseudonymous supporter, \"L'Ottuso Academico\" (\"The Obtuse Academic\"). Eventually Monteverdi replied in the preface to the fifth book of madrigals that his duties at court prevented him from a detailed reply; but in a note to \"the studious reader\", he claimed that he would shortly publish a response, \"Seconda Pratica, overo Perfettione della Moderna Musica (The Second Style, or Perfection of Modern Music)\". This work never appeared, but a later publication by Claudio's brother Giulio Cesare made it clear that the \"seconda pratica\" which Monteverdi defended was not seen by him as a radical change or his own invention, but was an evolution from previous styles (\"prima pratica\") which was complementary to them.\nThis debate seems in any case to have raised the composer's profile, leading to reprints of his earlier books of madrigals. Some of his madrigals were published in Copenhagen in 1605 and 1606, and the poet Tommaso Stigliani (1573\u20131651) published a eulogy of him in his 1605 poem \"O sirene de' fiumi\". The composer of madrigal comedies and theorist Adriano Banchieri wrote in 1609: \"I must not neglect to mention the most noble of composers, Monteverdi\u00a0... his expressive qualities are truly deserving of the highest commendation, and we find in them countless examples of matchless declamation\u00a0... enhanced by comparable harmonies.\" The modern music historian Massimo Ossi has placed the Artusi issue in the context of Monteverdi's artistic development: \"If the controversy seems to define Monteverdi's historical position, it also seems to have been about stylistic developments that by 1600 Monteverdi had already outgrown\".\nThe non-appearance of Monteverdi's promised explanatory treatise may have been a deliberate ploy, since by 1608, by Monteverdi's reckoning, Artusi had become fully reconciled to modern trends in music, and the \"seconda pratica\" was by then well established; Monteverdi had no need to revisit the issue. On the other hand, letters to Giovanni Battista Doni of 1632 show that Monteverdi was still preparing a defence of the \"seconda pratica\", in a treatise entitled \"Melodia\"; he may still have been working on this at the time of his death ten years later.\nOpera, conflict and departure.\nIn 1606 Vincenzo's heir Francesco commissioned from Monteverdi the opera \"L'Orfeo\", to a libretto by Alessandro Striggio, for the Carnival season of 1607. It was given two performances in February and March 1607; the singers included, in the title role, Rasi, who had sung in the first performance of \"Euridice\" witnessed by Vincenzo in 1600. This was followed in 1608 by the opera \"L'Arianna\" (libretto by Ottavio Rinuccini), intended for the celebration of the marriage of Francesco to Margherita of Savoy. All the music for this opera is lost apart from \"Ariadne's Lament\", which became extremely popular. To this period also belongs the ballet entertainment \"Il ballo delle ingrate\".\nThe strain of the hard work Monteverdi had been putting into these and other compositions was exacerbated by personal tragedies. His wife died in September 1607 and the young singer Caterina Martinelli, intended for the title role of \"Arianna\", died of smallpox in March 1608. Monteverdi also resented his increasingly poor financial treatment by the Gonzagas. He retired to Cremona in 1608 to convalesce, and wrote a bitter letter to Vincenzo's minister Annibale Chieppio in November of that year seeking (unsuccessfully) \"an honourable dismissal\". Although the Duke increased Monteverdi's salary and pension, and Monteverdi returned to continue his work at the court, he began to seek patronage elsewhere. After publishing his Vespers in 1610, which were dedicated to Pope Paul V, he visited Rome, ostensibly hoping to place his son Francesco at a seminary, but apparently also seeking alternative employment. In the same year he may also have visited Venice, where a large collection of his church music was being printed, with a similar intention.\nDuke Vincenzo died on 18 February 1612. When Francesco succeeded him, court intrigues and cost-cutting led to the dismissal of Monteverdi and his brother Giulio Cesare, who both returned, almost penniless, to Cremona. Despite Francesco's own death from smallpox in December 1612, Monteverdi was unable to return to favour with his successor, his brother Cardinal Ferdinando Gonzaga. In 1613, following the death of Giulio Cesare Martinengo, Monteverdi auditioned for his post as \"maestro\" at the basilica of San Marco in Venice, for which he submitted music for a Mass. He was appointed in August 1613, and given 50 ducats for his expenses (of which he was robbed, together with his other belongings, by highwaymen at Sanguinetto on his return to Cremona).\nVenice: 1613\u20131643.\nMaturity: 1613\u20131630.\nMartinengo had been ill for some time before his death and had left the music of San Marco in a fragile state. The choir had been neglected and the administration overlooked. When Monteverdi arrived to take up his post, his principal responsibility was to recruit, train, discipline and manage the musicians of San Marco (the \"capella\"), who amounted to about 30 singers and six instrumentalists; the numbers could be increased for major events. Among the recruits to the choir was Francesco Cavalli, who joined in 1616 at the age of 14; he remained connected with San Marco throughout his life, and developed a close association with Monteverdi. Monteverdi also sought to expand the repertory, including not only the traditional \"a cappella\" repertoire of Roman and Flemish composers, but also examples of the modern style which he favoured, including the use of continuo and other instruments. Apart from this he was of course expected to compose music for all the major feasts of the church. This included a new mass each year for Holy Cross Day and Christmas Eve, cantatas in honour of the Venetian Doge, and numerous other works (many of which are lost). Monteverdi was also free to obtain income by providing music for other Venetian churches and for other patrons, and was frequently commissioned to provide music for state banquets. The Procurators of San Marco, to whom Monteverdi was directly responsible, showed their satisfaction with his work in 1616 by raising his annual salary from 300 ducats to 400.\nThe relative freedom which the Republic of Venice afforded him, compared to the problems of court politics in Mantua, are reflected in Monteverdi's letters to Striggio, particularly his letter of 13 March 1620, when he rejects an invitation to return to Mantua, extolling his present position and finances in Venice, and referring to the pension which Mantua still owes him. Nonetheless, remaining a Mantuan citizen, he accepted commissions from the new Duke Ferdinando, who had formally renounced his position as Cardinal in 1616 to take on the duties of state. These included the \"balli\" \"Tirsi e Clori\" (1616) and \"Apollo\" (1620), an opera \"Andromeda\" (1620) and an \"intermedio\", \"Le nozze di Tetide\", for the marriage of Ferdinando with Caterina de' Medici (1617). Most of these compositions were extensively delayed in creation \u2013 partly, as shown by surviving correspondence, through the composer's unwillingness to prioritise them, and partly because of constant changes in the court's requirements. They are now lost, apart from \"Tirsi e Clori\", which was included in the seventh book of madrigals (published 1619) and dedicated to the Duchess Caterina, for which the composer received a pearl necklace from the Duchess. A subsequent major commission, the opera \"La finta pazza Licori\", to a libretto by Giulio Strozzi, was completed for Fernando's successor Vincenzo II, who succeeded to the dukedom in 1626. Because of the latter's illness (he died in 1627), it was never performed, and it is now also lost.\nMonteverdi also received commissions from other Italian states and from their communities in Venice. These included, for the Milanese community in 1620, music for the Feast of St. Charles Borromeo, and for the Florentine community a Requiem Mass for Cosimo II de' Medici (1621). Monteverdi acted on behalf of Paolo Giordano II, Duke of Bracciano, to arrange publication of works by the Cremona musician Francesco Petratti. Among Monteverdi's private Venetian patrons was the nobleman Girolamo Mocenigo, at whose home was premiered in 1624 the dramatic entertainment \"Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\" based on an episode from Torquato Tasso's \"La Gerusalemme liberata\". In 1627 Monteverdi received a major commission from Odoardo Farnese, Duke of Parma, for a series of works, and gained leave from the Procurators to spend time there during 1627 and 1628.\nMonteverdi's musical direction received the attention of foreign visitors. The Dutch diplomat and musician Constantijn Huygens, attending a Vespers service at the church of SS. Giovanni e Lucia, wrote that he \"heard the most perfect music I had ever heard in my life. It was directed by the most famous Claudio Monteverdi\u00a0... who was also the composer and was accompanied by four theorbos, two cornettos, two bassoons, one \"basso de viola\" of huge size, organs and other instruments\u00a0...\". Monteverdi wrote a mass, and provided other musical entertainment, for the visit to Venice in 1625 of the Crown Prince W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Poland, who may have sought to revive attempts made a few years previously to lure Monteverdi to Warsaw. He also provided chamber music for Wolfgang Wilhelm, Count Palatine of Neuburg, when the latter was paying an incognito visit to Venice in July 1625.\nCorrespondence of Monteverdi in 1625 and 1626 with the Mantuan courtier Ercole Marigliani reveals an interest in alchemy, which apparently Monteverdi had taken up as a hobby. He discusses experiments to transform lead into gold, the problems of obtaining mercury, and mentions commissioning special vessels for his experiments from the glassworks at Murano.\nDespite his generally satisfactory situation in Venice, Monteverdi experienced personal problems from time to time. He was on one occasion \u2013 probably because of his wide network of contacts \u2013 the subject of an anonymous denunciation to the Venetian authorities alleging that he supported the Habsburgs. He was also subject to anxieties about his children. His son Francesco, while a student of law at Padua in 1619, was spending in Monteverdi's opinion too much time with music, and he, therefore, moved him to the University of Bologna. This change did not have the desired result, and it seems that Monteverdi resigned himself to Francesco having a musical career \u2013 he joined the choir of San Marco in 1623. His other son Massimiliano, who graduated in medicine, was arrested by the Inquisition in Mantua in 1627 for reading forbidden literature. Monteverdi was obliged to sell the necklace he had received from Duchess Caterina to pay for his son's (eventually successful) defence. Monteverdi wrote at the time to Striggio seeking his help, and fearing that Massimiliano might be subject to torture; it seems that Striggio's intervention was helpful. Money worries at this time also led Monteverdi to visit Cremona to secure for himself a church canonry.\nPause and priesthood: 1630\u20131637.\nA series of disturbing events troubled Monteverdi's world in the period around 1630. Mantua was invaded by Habsburg armies in 1630, who besieged the plague-stricken town, and after its fall in July looted its treasures, and dispersed the artistic community. The plague was carried to Mantua's ally Venice by an embassy led by Monteverdi's confidante Striggio, and over a period of 16 months led to over 45,000 deaths, leaving Venice's population in 1633 at just above 100,000, the lowest level for about 150 years. Among the plague victims was Monteverdi's assistant at San Marco, and a notable composer in his own right, Alessandro Grandi. The plague and the after-effects of war had an inevitable deleterious effect on the economy and artistic life of Venice. Monteverdi's younger brother Giulio Cesare also died at this time, probably from the plague.\nBy this time Monteverdi was in his sixties, and his rate of composition seems to have slowed down. He had written a setting of Strozzi's \"Proserpina rapita (The Abduction of Proserpina)\", now lost except for one vocal trio, for a Mocenigo wedding in 1630, and produced a Mass for deliverance from the plague for San Marco which was performed in November 1631. His set of \"Scherzi musicali\" was published in Venice in 1632. In 1631, Monteverdi was admitted to the tonsure, and was ordained deacon, and later priest, in 1632. Although these ceremonies took place in Venice, he was nominated as a member of Diocese of Cremona; this may imply that he intended to retire there.\nLate flowering: 1637\u20131643.\nThe opening of the opera house of San Cassiano in 1637, the first public opera house in Europe, stimulated the city's musical life and coincided with a new burst of the composer's activity. The year 1638 saw the publication of Monteverdi's eighth book of madrigals and a revision of the \"Ballo delle ingrate\". The eighth book contains a \"ballo\", \"Volgendi il ciel\", which may have been composed for the Holy Roman Emperor, Ferdinand III, to whom the book is dedicated. The years 1640\u20131641 saw the publication of the extensive collection of church music, \"Selva morale e spirituale\". Among other commissions, Monteverdi wrote music in 1637 and 1638 for Strozzi's \"Accademia degli Unisoni\" in Venice, and in 1641 a ballet, \"La vittoria d'Amore\", for the court of Piacenza.\nMonteverdi was still not entirely free from his responsibilities for the musicians at San Marco. He wrote to complain about one of his singers to the Procurators, on 9 June 1637: \"I, Claudio Monteverdi\u00a0... come humbly\u00a0... to set forth to you how Domenicato Aldegati\u00a0... a bass, yesterday morning\u00a0... at the time of the greatest concourse of people\u00a0... spoke these exact words\u00a0...'The Director of Music comes from a brood of cut-throat bastards, a thieving, fucking, he-goat\u00a0... and I shit on him and whoever protects him\u00a0...\nMonteverdi's contribution to opera at this period is notable. He revised his earlier opera \"L'Arianna\" in 1640 and wrote three new works for the commercial stage, \"Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria\" (\"The Return of Ulysses to his Homeland\", 1640, first performed in Bologna with Venetian singers), \"Le nozze d'Enea e Lavinia\" (\"The Marriage of Aeneas and Lavinia\", 1641, music now lost), and \"L'incoronazione di Poppea\" (\"The Coronation of Poppea\", 1643). The introduction to the printed scenario of \"Le nozze d'Enea\", by an unknown author, acknowledges that Monteverdi is to be credited for the rebirth of theatrical music and that \"he will be sighed for in later ages, for his compositions will surely outlive the ravages of time.\"\nIn his last surviving letter (20 August 1643), Monteverdi, already ill, was still hoping for the settlement of the long-disputed pension from Mantua, and asked the Doge of Venice to intervene on his behalf. He died in Venice on 29 November 1643, after paying a brief visit to Cremona, and is buried in the Church of the Frari. He was survived by his sons; Masimilliano died in 1661, Francesco after 1677.\nMusic.\nBackground: Renaissance to Baroque.\nThere is a consensus among music historians that a period extending from the mid-15th century to around 1625, characterised in Lewis Lockwood's phrase by \"substantial unity of outlook and language\", should be identified as the period of \"Renaissance music\". Musical literature has also defined the succeeding period (covering music from approximately 1580 to 1750) as the era of \"Baroque music\". It is in the late-16th to early-17th-century overlap of these periods that much of Monteverdi's creativity flourished; he stands as a transitional figure between the Renaissance and the Baroque.\nIn the Renaissance era, music had developed as a formal discipline, a \"pure science of relationships\" in the words of Lockwood. In the Baroque era it became a form of aesthetic expression, increasingly used to adorn religious, social and festive celebrations in which, in accordance with Plato's ideal, the music was subordinated to the text. Solo singing with instrumental accompaniment, or monody, acquired greater significance towards the end of the 16th century, replacing polyphony as the principal means of dramatic music expression. This was the changing world in which Monteverdi was active. Percy Scholes in his \"Oxford Companion to Music\" describes the \"new music\" thus: \"[Composers] discarded the choral polyphony of the madrigal style as barbaric, and set dialogue or soliloquy for single voices, imitating more or less the inflexions of speech and accompanying the voice by playing mere supporting chords. Short choruses were interspersed, but they too were homophonic rather than polyphonic.\"\nNovice years: Madrigal books 1 and 2.\nMarc'Antonio Ingegneri, Monteverdi's first tutor, was a master of the \"musica reservata\" vocal style, which involved the use of chromatic progressions and word-painting; Monteverdi's early compositions were grounded in this style. Ingegneri was a traditional Renaissance composer, \"something of an anachronism\", according to Arnold, but Monteverdi also studied the work of more \"modern\" composers such as Luca Marenzio, Luzzasco Luzzaschi, and a little later, Giaches de Wert, from whom he would learn the art of expressing passion. He was a precocious and productive student, as indicated by his youthful publications of 1582\u201383. Mark Ringer writes that \"these teenaged efforts reveal palpable ambition matched with a convincing mastery of contemporary style\", but at this stage they display their creator's competence rather than any striking originality. Geoffrey Chew classifies them as \"not in the most modern vein for the period\", acceptable but out-of-date. Chew rates the \"Canzonette\" collection of 1584 much more highly than the earlier juvenilia: \"These brief three-voice pieces draw on the airy, modern style of the villanellas of Marenzio, [drawing on] a substantial vocabulary of text-related madrigalisms\".\nThe canzonetta form was much used by composers of the day as a technical exercise, and is a prominent element in Monteverdi's first book of madrigals published in 1587. In this book, the playful, pastoral settings again reflect the style of Marenzio, while Luzzaschi's influence is evident in Monteverdi's use of dissonance. The second book (1590) begins with a setting modelled on Marenzio of a modern verse, Torquato Tasso's \"Non si levav' ancor\", and concludes with a text from 50 years earlier: Pietro Bembo's \"Cantai un tempo\". Monteverdi set the latter to music in an archaic style reminiscent of the long-dead Cipriano de Rore. Between them is \"Ecco mormorar l'onde\", strongly influenced by de Wert and hailed by Chew as the great masterpiece of the second book.\nA thread common throughout these early works is Monteverdi's use of the technique of \"imitatio\", a general practice among composers of the period whereby material from earlier or contemporary composers was used as models for their own work. Monteverdi continued to use this procedure well beyond his apprentice years, a factor that in some critics' eyes has compromised his reputation for originality.\nMadrigals 1590\u20131605: books 3, 4, 5.\nMonteverdi's first fifteen years of service in Mantua are bracketed by his publications of the third book of madrigals in 1592 and the fourth and fifth books in 1603 and 1605. Between 1592 and 1603 he made minor contributions to other anthologies. How much he composed in this period is a matter of conjecture; his many duties in the Mantuan court may have limited his opportunities, but several of the madrigals that he published in the fourth and fifth books were written and performed during the 1590s, some figuring prominently in the Artusi controversy.\nThe third book shows strongly the increased influence of Wert, by that time Monteverdi's direct superior as \"maestro de capella\" at Mantua. Two poets dominate the collection: Tasso, whose lyrical poetry had figured prominently in the second book but is here represented through the more epic, heroic verses from \"Gerusalemme liberata\", and Giovanni Battista Guarini, whose verses had appeared sporadically in Monteverdi's earlier publications, but form around half of the contents of the third book. Wert's influence is reflected in Monteverdi's forthrightly modern approach, and his expressive and chromatic settings of Tasso's verses. Of the Guarini settings, Chew writes: \"The epigrammatic style\u00a0... closely matches a poetic and musical ideal of the period\u00a0... [and] often depends on strong, final cadential progressions, with or without the intensification provided by chains of suspended dissonances\". Chew cites the setting of \"Stracciami pur il core\" as \"a prime example of Monteverdi's irregular dissonance practice\". Tasso and Guarini were both regular visitors to the Mantuan court; Monteverdi's association with them and his absorption of their ideas may have helped lay the foundations of his own approach to the musical dramas that he would create a decade later.\nAs the 1590s progressed, Monteverdi moved closer towards the form that he would identify in due course as the \"seconda pratica\". Claude V. Palisca quotes the madrigal \"Ohim\u00e8, se tanto amate\", published in the fourth book but written before 1600 \u2013 it is among the works attacked by Artusi \u2013 as a typical example of the composer's developing powers of invention. In this madrigal Monteverdi again departs from the established practice in the use of dissonance, by means of a vocal ornament Palisca describes as \"\u00e9chapp\u00e9\". Monteverdi's daring use of this device is, says Palisca, \"like a forbidden pleasure\". In this and in other settings the poet's images were supreme, even at the expense of musical consistency.\nThe fourth book includes madrigals to which Artusi objected on the grounds of their \"modernism\". However, Ossi describes it as \"an anthology of disparate works firmly rooted in the 16th century\", closer in nature to the third book than to the fifth. Besides Tasso and Guarini, Monteverdi set to music verses by Rinuccini, Maurizio Moro (\"S\u00ec ch'io vorrei morire\") and Ridolfo Arlotti (\"Luci serene e chiare\"). There is evidence of the composer's familiarity with the works of Carlo Gesualdo, and with composers of the school of Ferrara such as Luzzaschi; the book was dedicated to a Ferrarese musical society, the \"Accademici Intrepidi\".\nThe fifth book looks more to the future; for example, Monteverdi employs the \"concertato\" style with basso continuo (a device that was to become a typical feature in the emergent Baroque era), and includes a \"sinfonia\" (instrumental interlude) in the final piece. He presents his music through complex counterpoint and daring harmonies, although at times combining the expressive possibilities of the new music with traditional polyphony.\nAquilino Coppini drew much of the music for his sacred contrafacta of 1608 from Monteverdi's 3rd, 4th and 5th books of madrigals. In writing to a friend in 1609 Coppini commented that Monteverdi's pieces \"require, during their performance, more flexible rests and bars that are not strictly regular, now pressing forward or abandoning themselves to slowing down [...] In them there is a truly wondrous capacity for moving the affections\".\nOpera and sacred music: 1607\u20131612.\nIn Monteverdi's final five years' service in Mantua he completed the operas \"L'Orfeo\" (1607) and \"L'Arianna\" (1608), and wrote quantities of sacred music, including the \"Messa in illo tempore\" (1610) and also the collection known as \"Vespro della Beata Vergine\" which is often referred to as \"Monteverdi's \"Vespers\"\" (1610). He also published \"Scherzi musicale a tre voci\" (1607), settings of verses composed since 1599 and dedicated to the Gonzaga heir, Francesco. The vocal trio in the \"Scherzi\" comprises two sopranos and a bass, accompanied by simple instrumental ritornellos. According to Bowers the music \"reflected the modesty of the prince's resources; it was, nevertheless, the earliest publication to associate voices and instruments in this particular way\".\n\"L'Orfeo\".\nThe opera opens with a brief trumpet toccata. The prologue of La musica (a figure representing music) is introduced with a ritornello by the strings, repeated often to represent the \"power of music\" \u2013 one of the earliest examples of an operatic leitmotif. Act 1 presents a pastoral idyll, the buoyant mood of which continues into Act 2. The confusion and grief which follow the news of Euridice's death are musically reflected by harsh dissonances and the juxtaposition of keys. The music remains in this vein until the act ends with the consoling sounds of the ritornello.\nAct 3 is dominated by Orfeo's aria \"Possente spirto e formidabil nume\" by which he attempts to persuade Caronte to allow him to enter Hades. Monteverdi's vocal embellishments and virtuoso accompaniment provide what Tim Carter has described as \"one of the most compelling visual and aural representations\" in early opera. In Act 4 the warmth of Proserpina's singing on behalf of Orfeo is retained until Orfeo fatally \"looks back\". The brief final act, which sees Orfeo's rescue and metamorphosis, is framed by the final appearance of the ritornello and by a lively moresca that brings the audience back to their everyday world.\nThroughout the opera Monteverdi makes innovative use of polyphony, extending the rules beyond the conventions which composers normally observed in fidelity to Palestrina. He combines elements of the traditional 16th-century madrigal with the new monodic style where the text dominates the music and sinfonias and instrumental ritornellos illustrate the action.\n\"L'Arianna\".\nThe music for this opera is lost except for the \"Lamento d'Arianna\", which was published in the sixth book in 1614 as a five-voice madrigal; a separate monodic version was published in 1623. In its operatic context the lament depicts Arianna's various emotional reactions to her abandonment: sorrow, anger, fear, self-pity, desolation and a sense of futility. Throughout, indignation and anger are punctuated by tenderness, until a descending line brings the piece to a quiet conclusion.\nThe musicologist Suzanne Cusick writes that Monteverdi \"creat[ed] the lament as a recognizable genre of vocal chamber music and as a standard scene in opera\u00a0... that would become crucial, almost genre-defining, to the full-scale public operas of 17th-century Venice\". Cusick observes how Monteverdi is able to match in music the \"rhetorical and syntactical gestures\" in the text of Ottavio Rinuccini. The opening repeated words \"Lasciatemi morire\" (Let me die) are accompanied by a dominant seventh chord which Ringer describes as \"an unforgettable chromatic stab of pain\". Ringer suggests that the lament defines Monteverdi's innovative creativity in a manner similar to that in which the Prelude and the Liebestod in \"Tristan und Isolde\" announced Wagner's discovery of new expressive frontiers.\nRinuccini's full libretto, which has survived, was set in modern times by Alexander Goehr (\"Arianna\", 1995), including a version of Monteverdi's \"Lament\".\nVespers.\nThe \"Vespro della Beata Vergine\", Monteverdi's first published sacred music since the \"Madrigali spirituali\" of 1583, consists of 14 components: an introductory versicle and response, five psalms interspersed with five \"sacred concertos\" (Monteverdi's term), a hymn, and two Magnificat settings. Collectively these pieces fulfil the requirements for a Vespers service on any feast day of the Virgin. Monteverdi employs many musical styles; the more traditional features, such as cantus firmus, falsobordone and Venetian canzone, are mixed with the latest madrigal style, including echo effects and chains of dissonances. Some of the musical features used are reminiscent of \"L'Orfeo\", written slightly earlier for similar instrumental and vocal forces.\nIn this work the \"sacred concertos\" fulfil the role of the antiphons which divide the psalms in regular Vespers services. Their non-liturgical character has led writers to question whether they should be within the service, or indeed whether this was Monteverdi's intention. In some versions of Monteverdi's \"Vespers\" (for example, those of Denis Stevens) the concertos are replaced with antiphons associated with the Virgin, although John Whenham in his analysis of the work argues that the collection as a whole should be regarded as a single liturgical and artistic entity.\nAll the psalms, and the Magnificat, are based on melodically limited and repetitious Gregorian chant psalm tones, around which Monteverdi builds a range of innovative textures. This concertato style challenges the traditional cantus firmus, and is most evident in the \"Sonata sopra Sancta Maria\", written for eight string and wind instruments plus basso continuo, and a single soprano voice. Monteverdi uses modern rhythms, frequent metre changes and constantly varying textures; yet, according to John Eliot Gardiner, \"for all the virtuosity of its instrumental writing and the evident care which has gone into the combinations of timbre\", Monteverdi's chief concern was resolving the proper combination of words and music.\nThe actual musical ingredients of the Vespers were not novel to Mantua \u2013 concertato had been used by Lodovico Grossi da Viadana, a former choirmaster at the cathedral of Mantua, while the \"Sonata sopra\" had been anticipated by Archangelo Crotti in his \"Sancta Maria\" published in 1608. It is, writes Denis Arnold, Monteverdi's mixture of the various elements that makes the music unique. Arnold adds that the Vespers achieved fame and popularity only after their 20th-century rediscovery; they were not particularly regarded in Monteverdi's time.\nMadrigals 1614\u20131638: books 6, 7 and 8.\nSixth book.\nDuring his years in Venice Monteverdi published his sixth (1614), seventh (1619) and eighth (1638) books of madrigals. The sixth book consists of works written before the composer's departure from Mantua. Hans Redlich sees it as a transitional work, containing Monteverdi's last madrigal compositions in the manner of the \"prima pratica\", together with music which is typical of the new style of expression which Monteverdi had displayed in the dramatic works of 1607\u201308. The central theme of the collection is loss; the best-known work is the five-voice version of the \"Lamento d'Arianna\", which, says Massimo Ossi, gives \"an object lesson in the close relationship between monodic recitative and counterpoint\". The book contains Monteverdi's first settings of verses by Giambattista Marino, and two settings of Petrarch which Ossi considers the most extraordinary pieces in the volume, providing some \"stunning musical moments\".\nSeventh book.\nWhile Monteverdi had looked backwards in the sixth book, he moved forward in the seventh book from the traditional concept of the madrigal, and from monody, in favour of chamber duets. There are exceptions, such the two solo \"lettere amorose\" (love letters) \"Se i languidi miei sguardi\" and \"Se pur destina e vole\", written to be performed \"genere rapresentativo\" \u2013 acted as well as sung. Of the duets which are the main features of the volume, Chew highlights \"Ohim\u00e9, dov'\u00e8 il mio ben, dov'\u00e8 il mio core\", a romanesca in which two high voices express dissonances above a repetitive bass pattern. The book also contains large-scale ensemble works, and the ballet \"Tirsi e Clori\". This was the height of Monteverdi's \"Marino period\"; six of the pieces in the book are settings of the poet's verses. As Carter puts it, Monteverdi \"embraced Marino's madrigalian kisses and love-bites with\u00a0... the enthusiasm typical of the period\". Some commentators have opined that the composer should have had better poetic taste.\nEighth book.\nThe eighth book, subtitled \"Madrigali guerrieri, et amorosi\u00a0...\" (\"Madrigals of war and love\") is structured in two symmetrical halves, one for \"war\" and one for \"love\". Each half begins with a six-voice setting, followed by an equally large-scale Petrarch setting, then a series of duets mainly for tenor voices, and concludes with a theatrical number and a final ballet. The \"war\" half contains several items written as tributes to the emperor Ferdinand III, who had succeeded to the Habsburg throne in 1637. Many of Monteverdi's familiar poets \u2013 Strozzi, Rinuccini, Tasso, Marino, Guarini \u2013 are represented in the settings.\nIt is difficult to gauge when many of the pieces were composed, although the ballet \"Mascherata dell' ingrate\" that ends the book dates back to 1608 and the celebration of the Gonzaga-Savoy marriage. The \"Combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\", centrepiece of the \"war\" settings, had been written and performed in Venice in 1624; on its publication in the eighth book, Monteverdi explicitly linked it to his concept of \"concitato genera\" (otherwise \"stile concitato\" \u2013 \"aroused style\") that would \"fittingly imitate the utterance and the accents of a brave man who is engaged in warfare\", and implied that since he had originated this style, others had begun to copy it. The work employed for the first time instructions for the use of pizzicato string chords, and also evocations of fanfares and other sounds of combat.\nThe critic Andrew Clements describes the eighth book as \"a statement of artistic principles and compositional authority\", in which Monteverdi \"shaped and expanded the madrigal form to accommodate what he wanted to do\u00a0... the pieces collected in Book Eight make up a treasury of what music in the first half the 17th century could possibly express.\"\nOther Venetian music: 1614\u20131638.\nDuring this period of his Venetian residency, Monteverdi composed quantities of sacred music. Numerous motets and other short works were included in anthologies by local publishers such as Giulio Cesare Bianchi (a former student of Monteverdi) and Lorenzo Calvi, and others were published elsewhere in Italy and Austria. The range of styles in the motets is broad, from simple strophic arias with string accompaniment to full-scale declamations with an alleluia finale.\nMonteverdi retained emotional and political attachments to the Mantuan court and wrote for it, or undertook to write, large amounts of stage music including at least four operas. The ballet \"Tirsi e Clori\" survives through its inclusion in the seventh book, but the rest of the Mantuan dramatic music is lost. Many of the missing manuscripts may have disappeared in the wars that overcame Mantua in 1630. The most significant aspect of their loss, according to Carter, is the extent to which they might have provided musical links between Monteverdi's early Mantuan operas and those he wrote in Venice after 1638: \"Without these links\u00a0... it is hard to a produce a coherent account of his development as a composer for the stage\". Likewise, Janet Beat regrets that the 30-year gap hampers the study of how opera orchestration developed during those critical early years.\nApart from the madrigal books, Monteverdi's only published collection during this period was the volume of \"Scherzi musicale\" in 1632. For unknown reasons, the composer's name does not appear on the inscription, the dedication being signed by the Venetian printer Bartolomeo Magni; Carter surmises that the recently ordained Monteverdi may have wished to keep his distance from this secular collection. It mixes strophic continuo songs for solo voice with more complex works which employ continuous variation over repeated bass patterns. Chew selects the chaconne for two tenors, \"Zefiro torna e di soavi accenti\", as the outstanding item in the collection: \"[T]he greater part of this piece consists of repetitions of a bass pattern which ensures tonal unity of a simple kind, owing to its being framed as a simple cadence in a G major tonal type: over these repetitions, inventive variations unfold in virtuoso passage-work\".\nLate operas and final works.\n\"Main articles\": \"Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria\"; \"L'incoronazione di Poppea\"; \"Selva morale e spirituale\"\nThe last years of Monteverdi's life were much occupied with opera for the Venetian stage. Richard Taruskin, in his \"Oxford History of Western Music\", gave his chapter on this topic the title \"Opera from Monteverdi to Monteverdi.\" This wording, originally proposed humorously by the Italian music historian Nino Pirrotta, is interpreted seriously by Taruskin as indicating that Monteverdi is significantly responsible for the transformation of the opera genre from a private entertainment of the nobility (as with \"Orfeo\" in 1607), to what became a major commercial genre, as exemplified by his opera \"L'incoronazione di Poppea\" (1643). His two surviving operatic works of this period, \"Il ritorno d'Ulisse in patria\" and \"L'incoronazione\" are held by Arnold to be the first \"modern\" operas; \"Il ritorno\" is the first Venetian opera to depart from what Ellen Rosand terms \"the mythological pastoral\". However, David Johnson in the \"North American Review\" warns audiences not to expect immediate affinity with Mozart, Verdi or Puccini: \"You have to submit yourself to a much slower pace, to a much more chaste conception of melody, to a vocal style that is at first merely like dry declamation and only on repeated hearings begins to assume an extraordinary eloquence.\"\n\"Il ritorno\", says Carter, is clearly influenced by Monteverdi's earlier works. Penelope's lament in Act I is close in character to the lament from \"L'Arianna\", while the martial episodes recall \"Il combattimento\". \"Stile concitato\" is prominent in the fight scenes and in the slaying of Penelope's suitors. In \"L'incoronazione\", Monteverdi represents moods and situations by specific musical devices: triple metre stands for the language of love; arpeggios demonstrate conflict; \"stile concitato\" represents rage. There is continuing debate about how much of the extant \"L'incoronazione\" music is Monteverdi's original, and how much is the work of others (there are, for instance, traces of music by Francesco Cavalli).\nThe \"Selva morale e spirituale\" of 1641, and the posthumous \"Messa et salmi\" published in 1650 (which was edited by Cavalli), are selections of the sacred music that Monteverdi wrote for San Marco during his 30-year tenure \u2013 much else was likely written but not published. The \"Selva morale\" volume opens with a series of madrigal settings on moral texts, dwelling on themes such as \"the transitory nature of love, earthly rank and achievement, even existence itself\". They are followed by a Mass in conservative style (\"stile antico\"), the high point of which is an extended seven-voice \"Gloria\". Scholars believe that this might have been written to celebrate the end of the 1631 plague. The rest of the volume is made up of numerous psalm settings, two Magnificats and three \"Salve Reginas\". The \"Messa et salmi\" volume includes a \"stile antico\" Mass for four voices, a polyphonic setting of the psalm \"Laetatus Sum\", and a version of the Litany of Lareto that Monteverdi had originally published in 1620.\nThe posthumous ninth book of madrigals was published in 1651, a miscellany dating back to the early 1630s, some items being repeats of previously published pieces, such as the popular duet \"O sia tranquillo il mare\" from 1638. The book includes a trio for three sopranos, \"Come dolce oggi l'auretta\", which is the only surviving music from the 1630 lost opera \"Proserpina rapita\".\nHistorical perspective.\nIn his lifetime Monteverdi enjoyed considerable status among musicians and the public. This is evidenced by the scale of his funeral rites: \"[W]ith truly royal pomp a catafalque was erected in the Chiesa de Padrini Minori de Frari, decorated all in mourning, but surrounded with so many candles that the church resembled a night sky luminous with stars\". This glorification was transitory; Carter writes that in Monteverdi's day, music rarely survived beyond the circumstances of its initial performance and was quickly forgotten along with its creator. In this regard Monteverdi fared better than most. His operatic works were revived in several cities in the decade following his death; according to Severo Bonini, writing in 1651, every musical household in Italy possessed a copy of the \"Lamento d'Arianna\".\nThe German composer Heinrich Sch\u00fctz, who had studied in Venice under Giovanni Gabrieli shortly before Monteverdi's arrival there, possessed a copy of \"Il combattimento\" and himself took up elements of the \"stile concitato\". On his second visit to Venice in 1628\u20131629, Arnold believes, Sch\u00fctz absorbed the concepts of \"basso continuo\" and expressiveness of word-setting, but he opines that Sch\u00fctz was more directly influenced by the style of the younger generation of Venetian composers, including Grandi and Giovanni Rovetta (the eventual successor to Monteverdi at San Marco). Sch\u00fctz published a first book of \"Symphoniae sacrae\", settings of biblical texts in the style of \"seconda pratica\", in Venice in 1629. \"Es steh Gott auf\", from his \"Symphoniae sacrae II\", published in Dresden in 1647, contains specific quotations from Monteverdi.\nAfter the 1650s, Monteverdi's name quickly disappears from contemporary accounts, his music generally forgotten except for the \"Lamento\", the prototype of a genre that would endure well into the 18th century.\nInterest in Monteverdi revived in the late 18th and early 19th centuries among music scholars in Germany and Italy, although he was still regarded as essentially a historical curiosity. Wider interest in the music itself began in 1881, when Robert Eitner published a shortened version of the \"Orfeo\" score. Around this time Kurt Vogel scored the madrigals from the original manuscripts, but more critical interest was shown in the operas, following the discovery of the \"L'incoronazione\" manuscript in 1888 and that of \"Il ritorno\" in 1904. Largely through the efforts of Vincent d'Indy, all three operas were staged in one form or another, during the first quarter of the 20th century: \"L'Orfeo\" in May 1911, \"L'incoronazione\" in February 1913 and \"Il ritorno\" in May 1925.\nThe Italian nationalist poet Gabriele D'Annunzio lauded Monteverdi and in his novel \"Il fuoco\" (1900) wrote of \"\"il divino Claudio\"\u00a0... what a heroic soul, purely Italian in its essence!\" His vision of Monteverdi as the true founder of Italian musical lyricism was adopted by musicians who worked with the regime of Benito Mussolini (1922\u20131945), including Gian Francesco Malipiero, Luigi Dallapiccola, and , who contrasted Monteverdi with the decadence of the music of Richard Strauss, Claude Debussy and Igor Stravinsky.\nIn the years after the Second World War the operas began to be performed in the major opera houses, and eventually were established in the general repertory. The resuscitation of Monteverdi's sacred music took longer; he did not benefit from the Catholic Church's 19th-century revival of Renaissance music in the way that Palestrina did, perhaps, as Carter suggests, because Monteverdi was viewed chiefly as a secular composer. It was not until 1932 that the 1610 \"Vespers\" were published in a modern edition, followed by Redlich's revision two years later. Modern editions of the \"Selva morale\" and \"Missa e Salmi\" volumes were published respectively in 1940 and 1942.\nThe revival of public interest in Monteverdi's music gathered pace in the second half of the 20th century, reaching full spate in the general early-music revival of the 1970s, during which time the emphasis turned increasingly towards \"authentic\" performance using historical instruments. The magazine \"Gramophone\" notes over 30 recordings of the \"Vespers\" between 1976 and 2011, and 27 of \"Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\" between 1971 and 2013. Monteverdi's surviving operas are today regularly performed; the website Operabase notes 555 performances of the operas in 149 productions worldwide in the seasons 2011\u20132016, ranking Monteverdi at 30th position for all composers, and at 8th ranking for Italian opera composers. In 1985, Manfred H. Stattkus published an index to Monteverdi's works, the Stattkus-Verzeichnis, (revised in 2006) giving each composition an \"SV\" number, to be used for cataloguing and references.\nMonteverdi is lauded by modern critics as \"the most significant composer in late Renaissance and early Baroque Italy\"; \"one of the principal composers in the history of Western music\"; and, routinely, as the first great opera composer. These assessments reflect a contemporary perspective, since his music was largely unknown to the composers who followed him during an extensive period, spanning more than two centuries after his death. It is, as Redlich and others have pointed out, the composers of the 20th and 21st century who have rediscovered Monteverdi and sought to make his music a basis for their own. Possibly, as Chew suggests, they are attracted by Monteverdi's reputation as \"a Modern, a breaker of rules, against the Ancients, those who deferred to ancient authority\" \u2013 although the composer was, essentially, a pragmatist, \"showing what can only be described as an opportunistic and eclectic willingness to use whatever lay to hand for the purpose\". In a letter dated 16 October 1633, Monteverdi appears to endorse the view of himself as a \"modern\": \"I would rather be moderately praised for the new style than greatly praised for the ordinary\". However, Chew, in his final summation, sees the composer historically as facing both ways, willing to use modern techniques but while at the same time protective of his status as a competent composer in the \"stile antico\". Thus, says Chew, \"his achievement was both retrospective and progressive\". Monteverdi represents the late Renaissance era while simultaneously summing up much of the early Baroque. \"And in one respect in particular, his achievement was enduring: the effective projection of human emotions in music, in a way adequate for theatre as well as for chamber music.\""}
{"id": "6228", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6228", "title": "Celtic tribes of the British Isles", "text": ""}
{"id": "6229", "revid": "42959298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6229", "title": "Colossus computer", "text": "Colossus was a set of computers developed by British codebreakers in the years 1943\u20131945 to help in the cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher. Colossus used thermionic valves (vacuum tubes) to perform Boolean and counting operations. Colossus is thus regarded as the world's first programmable, electronic, digital computer, although it was programmed by switches and plugs and not by a stored program.\nColossus was designed by General Post Office (GPO) research telephone engineer Tommy Flowers based on plans developed by mathematician Max Newman at the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS) at Bletchley Park.\nAlan Turing's use of probability in cryptanalysis (see Banburismus) contributed to its design. It has sometimes been erroneously stated that Turing designed Colossus to aid the cryptanalysis of the Enigma. (Turing's machine that helped decode Enigma was the electromechanical Bombe, not Colossus.)\nThe prototype, Colossus Mark 1, was shown to be working in December 1943 and was in use at Bletchley Park by early 1944. An improved Colossus Mark 2 that used shift registers to run five times faster first worked on 1 June 1944, just in time for the Normandy landings on D-Day. Ten Colossi were in use by the end of the war and an eleventh was being commissioned. Bletchley Park's use of these machines allowed the Allies to obtain a vast amount of high-level military intelligence from intercepted radiotelegraphy messages between the German High Command (\"OKW\") and their army commands throughout occupied Europe.\nThe existence of the Colossus machines was kept secret until the mid-1970s. All but two machines were dismantled into such small parts that their use could not be inferred. The two retained machines were eventually dismantled in the 1960s. In January 2024, new photos were released by GCHQ that showed re-engineered Colossus in a very different environment from the Bletchley Park buildings, presumably at GCHQ Cheltenham. A functioning reconstruction of a Mark 2 Colossus was completed in 2008 by Tony Sale and a team of volunteers; it is on display in The National Museum of Computing at Bletchley Park.\nPurpose and origins.\nThe Colossus computers were used to help decipher intercepted radio teleprinter messages that had been encrypted using an unknown device. Intelligence information revealed that the Germans called the wireless teleprinter transmission systems \"S\u00e4gefisch\" (sawfish). This led the British to call encrypted German teleprinter traffic \"Fish\", and the unknown machine and its intercepted messages \"Tunny\" (tunafish).\nBefore the Germans increased the security of their operating procedures, British cryptanalysts diagnosed how the unseen machine functioned and built an imitation of it called \"British Tunny\".\nIt was deduced that the machine had twelve wheels and used a Vernam ciphering technique on message characters in the standard 5-bit ITA2 telegraph code. It did this by combining the plaintext characters with a stream of key characters using the XOR Boolean function to produce the ciphertext.\nIn August 1941, a blunder by German operators led to the transmission of two versions of the same message with identical machine settings. These were intercepted and worked on at Bletchley Park. First, John Tiltman, a very talented GC&amp;CS cryptanalyst, derived a keystream of almost 4000 characters. Then Bill Tutte, a newly arrived member of the Research Section, used this keystream to work out the logical structure of the Lorenz machine. He deduced that the twelve wheels consisted of two groups of five, which he named the \u03c7 (\"chi\") and \u03c8 (\"psi\") wheels, the remaining two he called \u03bc (\"mu\") or \"motor\" wheels. The \"chi\" wheels stepped regularly with each letter that was encrypted, while the \"psi\" wheels stepped irregularly, under the control of the motor wheels.\nWith a sufficiently random keystream, a Vernam cipher removes the natural language property of a plaintext message of having an uneven frequency distribution of the different characters, to produce a uniform distribution in the ciphertext. The Tunny machine did this well. However, the cryptanalysts worked out that by examining the frequency distribution of the character-to-character changes in the ciphertext, instead of the plain characters, there was a departure from uniformity which provided a way into the system. This was achieved by \"differencing\" in which each bit or character was XOR-ed with its successor. After Germany surrendered, allied forces captured a Tunny machine and discovered that it was the electromechanical Lorenz SZ (\"Schl\u00fcsselzusatzger\u00e4t\", cipher attachment) in-line cipher machine.\nIn order to decrypt the transmitted messages, two tasks had to be performed. The first was \"wheel breaking\", which was the discovery of the cam patterns for all the wheels. These patterns were set up on the Lorenz machine and then used for a fixed period of time for a succession of different messages. Each transmission, which often contained more than one message, was enciphered with a different start position of the wheels. Alan Turing invented a method of wheel-breaking that became known as Turingery. Turing's technique was further developed into \"Rectangling\", for which Colossus could produce tables for manual analysis. Colossi 2, 4, 6, 7 and 9 had a \"gadget\" to aid this process.\nThe second task was \"wheel setting\", which worked out the start positions of the wheels for a particular message and could only be attempted once the cam patterns were known. It was this task for which Colossus was initially designed. To discover the start position of the \"chi\" wheels for a message, Colossus compared two character streams, counting statistics from the evaluation of programmable Boolean functions. The two streams were the ciphertext, which was read at high speed from a paper tape, and the keystream, which was generated internally, in a simulation of the unknown German machine. After a succession of different Colossus runs to discover the likely \"chi\"-wheel settings, they were checked by examining the frequency distribution of the characters in the processed ciphertext. Colossus produced these frequency counts.\nDecryption processes.\nBy using differencing and knowing that the \"psi\" wheels did not advance with each character, Tutte worked out that trying just two differenced bits (impulses) of the \"chi\"-stream against the differenced ciphertext would produce a statistic that was non-random. This became known as Tutte's \"1+2 break in\". It involved calculating the following Boolean function:\nand counting the number of times it yielded \"false\" (zero). If this number exceeded a pre-defined threshold value known as the \"set total\", it was printed out. The cryptanalyst would examine the printout to determine which of the putative start positions was most likely to be the correct one for the \"chi\"-1 and \"chi\"-2 wheels.\nThis technique would then be applied to other pairs of, or single, impulses to determine the likely start position of all five \"chi\" wheels. From this, the de-\"chi\" (D) of a ciphertext could be obtained, from which the \"psi\" component could be removed by manual methods. If the frequency distribution of characters in the de-\"chi\" version of the ciphertext was within certain bounds, \"wheel setting\" of the \"chi\" wheels was considered to have been achieved, and the message settings and de-\"chi\" were passed to the \"Testery\". This was the section at Bletchley Park led by Major Ralph Tester where the bulk of the decrypting work was done by manual and linguistic methods.\nColossus could also derive the start position of the \"psi\" and motor wheels. The feasibility of utilizing this additional capability regularly was made possible in the last few months of the war when there were plenty of Colossi available and the number of Tunny messages had declined.\nDesign and construction.\nColossus was developed for the \"Newmanry\", the section headed by the mathematician Max Newman that was responsible for machine methods against the twelve-rotor Lorenz SZ40/42 on-line teleprinter cipher machine (code-named Tunny, for tunafish). The Colossus design arose out of a parallel project that produced a less-ambitious counting machine dubbed \"Heath Robinson\". Although the Heath Robinson machine proved the concept of machine analysis for this part of the process, it had serious limitations. The electro-mechanical parts were relatively slow and it was difficult to synchronise two looped paper tapes, one containing the enciphered message, and the other representing part of the keystream of the Lorenz machine. Also the tapes tended to stretch and break when being read at up to 2000 characters per second.\nTommy Flowers MBE was a senior electrical engineer and Head of the Switching Group at the Post Office Research Station at Dollis Hill. Prior to his work on Colossus, he had been involved with GC&amp;CS at Bletchley Park from February 1941 in an attempt to improve the Bombes that were used in the cryptanalysis of the German Enigma cipher machine. He was recommended to Max Newman by Alan Turing, who had been impressed by his work on the Bombes. The main components of the Heath Robinson machine were as follows.\nFlowers had been brought in to design the Heath Robinson's combining unit. He was not impressed by the system of a key tape that had to be kept synchronised with the message tape and, on his own initiative, he designed an electronic machine which eliminated the need for the key tape by having an electronic analogue of the Lorenz (Tunny) machine. He presented this design to Max Newman in February 1943, but the idea that the one to two thousand thermionic valves (vacuum tubes and thyratrons) proposed, could work together reliably, was greeted with great scepticism, so more Robinsons were ordered from Dollis Hill. Flowers, however, knew from his pre-war work that most thermionic valve failures occurred as a result of the thermal stresses at power-up, so not powering a machine down reduced failure rates to very low levels. Additionally, if the heaters were started at a low voltage then slowly brought up to full voltage, thermal stress was reduced. The valves themselves could be soldered-in to avoid problems with plug-in bases, which could be unreliable. Flowers persisted with the idea and obtained support from the Director of the Research Station, W Gordon Radley.\nFlowers and his team of some fifty people in the switching group spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building a machine that dispensed with the second tape of the Heath Robinson, by generating the wheel patterns electronically. Flowers used some of his own money for the project. This prototype, Mark 1 Colossus, contained 1,600 thermionic valves (tubes). It performed satisfactorily at Dollis Hill on 8 December 1943 and was dismantled and shipped to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January and re-assembled by Harry Fensom and Don Horwood. It was operational in January and it successfully attacked its first message on 5 February 1944. It was a large structure and was dubbed 'Colossus'. A memo held in the National Archives written by Max Newman on 18 January 1944 records that \"Colossus arrives today\".\nDuring the development of the prototype, an improved design had been developed \u2013 the Mark 2 Colossus. Four of these were ordered in March 1944 and by the end of April the number on order had been increased to twelve. Dollis Hill was put under pressure to have the first of these working by 1 June. Allen Coombs took over leadership of the production Mark 2 Colossi, the first of which \u2013 containing 2,400 valves \u2013 became operational at 08:00 on 1 June 1944, just in time for the Allied Invasion of Normandy on D-Day. Subsequently, Colossi were delivered at the rate of about one a month. By the time of V-E Day there were ten Colossi working at Bletchley Park and a start had been made on assembling an eleventh. Seven of the Colossi were used for 'wheel setting' and three for 'wheel breaking'.\nThe main units of the Mark 2 design were as follows.\nMost of the design of the electronics was the work of Tommy Flowers, assisted by William Chandler, Sidney Broadhurst and Allen Coombs; with Erie Speight and Arnold Lynch developing the photoelectric reading mechanism. Coombs remembered Flowers, having produced a rough draft of his design, tearing it into pieces that he handed out to his colleagues for them to do the detailed design and get their team to manufacture it. The Mark 2 Colossi were both five times faster and were simpler to operate than the prototype.\nData input to Colossus was by photoelectric reading of a paper tape transcription of the enciphered intercepted message. This was arranged in a continuous loop so that it could be read and re-read multiple times \u2013 there being no internal storage for the data. The design overcame the problem of synchronizing the electronics with the speed of the message tape by generating a clock signal from reading its sprocket holes. The speed of operation was thus limited by the mechanics of reading the tape. During development, the tape reader was tested up to 9700 characters per second (53\u00a0mph) before the tape disintegrated. So 5000 characters/second () was settled on as the speed for regular use. Flowers designed a 6-character shift register, which was used both for computing the delta function (\u0394Z) and for testing five different possible starting points of Tunny's wheels in the five processors. This five-way parallelism enabled five simultaneous tests and counts to be performed giving an effective processing speed of 25,000 characters per second. The computation used algorithms devised by W. T. Tutte and colleagues to decrypt a Tunny message.\nOperation.\nThe Newmanry was staffed by cryptanalysts, operators from the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS) \u2013 known as \"Wrens\" \u2013 and engineers who were permanently on hand for maintenance and repair. By the end of the war the staffing was 272 Wrens and 27 men.\nThe first job in operating Colossus for a new message was to prepare the paper tape loop. This was performed by the Wrens who stuck the two ends together using Bostik glue, ensuring that there was a 150-character length of blank tape between the end and the start of the message. Using a special hand punch they inserted a start hole between the third and fourth channels sprocket holes from the end of the blank section, and a stop hole between the fourth and fifth channels sprocket holes from the end of the characters of the message. These were read by specially positioned photocells and indicated when the message was about to start and when it ended. The operator would then thread the paper tape through the gate and around the pulleys of the bedstead and adjust the tension. The two-tape bedstead design had been carried on from Heath Robinson so that one tape could be loaded whilst the previous one was being run. A switch on the Selection Panel specified the \"near\" or the \"far\" tape.\nAfter performing various resetting and zeroizing tasks, the Wren operators would, under instruction from the cryptanalyst, operate the \"set total\" decade switches and the K2 panel switches to set the desired algorithm. They would then start the bedstead tape motor and lamp and, when the tape was up to speed, operate the master start switch.\nProgramming.\nHoward Campaigne, a mathematician and cryptanalyst from the US Navy's OP-20-G, wrote the following in a foreword to Flowers' 1983 paper \"The Design of Colossus\".\nColossus was not a stored-program computer. The input data for the five parallel processors was read from the looped message paper tape and the electronic pattern generators for the \"chi\", \"psi\" and motor wheels. The programs for the processors were set and held on the switches and jack panel connections. Each processor could evaluate a Boolean function and count and display the number of times it yielded the specified value of \"false\" (0) or \"true\" (1) for each pass of the message tape.\nInput to the processors came from two sources, the shift registers from tape reading and the thyratron rings that emulated the wheels of the Tunny machine. The characters on the paper tape were called Z and the characters from the Tunny emulator were referred to by the Greek letters that Bill Tutte had given them when working out the logical structure of the machine. On the selection panel, switches specified either Z or \u0394Z, either formula_2 or \u0394formula_2 and either formula_4 or \u0394formula_4 for the data to be passed to the jack field and 'K2 switch panel'. These signals from the wheel simulators could be specified as stepping on with each new pass of the message tape or not.\nThe K2 switch panel had a group of switches on the left-hand side to specify the algorithm. The switches on the right-hand side selected the counter to which the result was fed. The plugboard allowed less specialized conditions to be imposed. Overall the K2 switch panel switches and the plugboard allowed about five billion different combinations of the selected variables.\nAs an example: a set of runs for a message tape might initially involve two \"chi\" wheels, as in Tutte's 1+2 algorithm. Such a two-wheel run was called a long run, taking on average eight minutes unless the parallelism was utilised to cut the time by a factor of five. The subsequent runs might only involve setting one \"chi\" wheel, giving a short run taking about two minutes. Initially, after the initial long run, the choice of the next algorithm to be tried was specified by the cryptanalyst. Experience showed, however, that decision trees for this iterative process could be produced for use by the Wren operators in a proportion of cases.\nInfluence and fate.\nAlthough the Colossus was the first of the electronic digital machines with programmability, albeit limited by modern standards, it was not a general-purpose machine, being designed for a range of cryptanalytic tasks, most involving counting the results of evaluating Boolean algorithms.\nA Colossus computer was thus not a fully Turing complete machine. However, University of San Francisco professor Benjamin Wells has shown that if all ten Colossus machines made were rearranged in a specific cluster, then the entire set of computers could have simulated a universal Turing machine, and thus be Turing complete.\nColossus and the reasons for its construction were highly secret and remained so for 30 years after the War. Consequently, it was not included in the history of computing hardware for many years, and Flowers and his associates were deprived of the recognition they were due. All but two of the Colossi were dismantled after the war and parts returned to the Post Office. Some parts, sanitised as to their original purpose, were taken to Max Newman's Royal Society Computing Machine Laboratory at Manchester University. Two Colossi, along with two Tunny machines, were retained and moved to GCHQ's new headquarters at Eastcote in April 1946, and then to Cheltenham between 1952 and 1954. One of the Colossi, known as \"Colossus Blue\", was dismantled in 1959; the other in the 1960s. Tommy Flowers was ordered to destroy all documentation. He duly burnt them in a furnace and later said of that order:\nThe Colossi were adapted for other purposes, with varying degrees of success; in their later years they were used for training. Jack Good related how he was the first to use Colossus after the war, persuading the US National Security Agency that it could be used to perform a function for which they were planning to build a special-purpose machine. Colossus was also used to perform character counts on one-time pad tape to test for non-randomness.\nA small number of people who were associated with Colossus\u2014and knew that large-scale, reliable, high-speed electronic digital computing devices were feasible\u2014played significant roles in early computer work in the UK and probably in the US. However, being so secret, it had little direct influence on the development of later computers; it was EDVAC that was the seminal computer architecture of the time. In 1972, Herman Goldstine, who was unaware of Colossus and its legacy to the projects of people such as Alan Turing (ACE), Max Newman (Manchester computers) and Harry Huskey (Bendix G-15), wrote that,\nProfessor Brian Randell, who unearthed information about Colossus in the 1970s, commented on this, saying that:\nRandell's efforts started to bear fruit in the mid-1970s. The secrecy about Bletchley Park had been broken when Group Captain Winterbotham published his book \"The Ultra Secret\" in 1974. Randell was researching the history of computer science in Britain for a conference on the history of computing held at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, New Mexico on 10\u201315 June 1976, and got permission to present a paper on wartime development of the COLOSSI at the Post Office Research Station, Dollis Hill (in October 1975 the British Government had released a series of captioned photographs from the Public Record Office). The interest in the \"revelations\" in his paper resulted in a special evening meeting when Randell and Coombs answered further questions. Coombs later wrote that \"no member of our team could ever forget the fellowship, the sense of purpose and, above all, the breathless excitement of those days\". In 1977 Randell published an article \"The First Electronic Computer\" in several journals. \nIn October 2000, a 500-page technical report on the Tunny cipher and its cryptanalysis\u2014entitled \"General Report on Tunny\"\u2014was released by GCHQ to the national Public Record Office, and it contains a fascinating paean to Colossus by the cryptographers who worked with it:\nReconstruction.\nA team led by Tony Sale built a fully functional reconstruction of a Colossus Mark 2 between 1993 and 2008. In spite of the blueprints and hardware being destroyed, a surprising amount of material had survived, mainly in engineers' notebooks, but a considerable amount of it in the U.S. The optical tape reader might have posed the biggest problem, but Dr. Arnold Lynch, its original designer was able to redesign it to his own original specification. The reconstruction is on display, in the historically correct place for Colossus No. 9, at The National Museum of Computing, in H Block Bletchley Park in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire.\nIn November 2007, to celebrate the project completion and to mark the start of a fundraising initiative for The National Museum of Computing, a Cipher Challenge pitted the rebuilt Colossus against radio amateurs worldwide in being first to receive and decode three messages enciphered using the Lorenz SZ42 and transmitted from radio station DL0HNF in the \"Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum\" computer museum. The challenge was easily won by radio amateur Joachim Sch\u00fcth, who had carefully prepared for the event and developed his own signal processing and code-breaking code using Ada. The Colossus team were hampered by their wish to use World War II radio equipment, delaying them by a day because of poor reception conditions. Nevertheless, the victor's 1.4\u00a0GHz laptop, running his own code, took less than a minute to find the settings for all 12 wheels. The German codebreaker said: \"My laptop digested ciphertext at a speed of 1.2\u00a0million characters per second\u2014240 times faster than Colossus. If you scale the CPU frequency by that factor, you get an equivalent clock of 5.8\u00a0MHz for Colossus. That is a remarkable speed for a computer built in 1944.\"\nThe Cipher Challenge verified the successful completion of the rebuilding project. \"On the strength of today's performance Colossus is as good as it was six decades ago\", commented Tony Sale. \"We are delighted to have produced a fitting tribute to the people who worked at Bletchley Park and whose brainpower devised these fantastic machines which broke these ciphers and shortened the war by many months.\"\nOther meanings.\nThere was a fictional computer named \"Colossus\" in the 1970 film \"\" which was based on the 1966 novel \"Colossus\" by D. F. Jones. This was a coincidence as it pre-dates the public release of information about Colossus, or even its name.\nNeal Stephenson's novel \"Cryptonomicon\" (1999) also contains a fictional treatment of the historical role played by Turing and Bletchley Park."}
{"id": "6230", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6230", "title": "Canadian Shield", "text": "The Canadian Shield ( ), also called the Laurentian Shield or the Laurentian Plateau, is a geologic shield, a large area of exposed Precambrian igneous and high-grade metamorphic rocks. It forms the North American Craton (or Laurentia), the ancient geologic core of the North American continent. Glaciation has left the area with only a thin layer of soil, through which exposures of igneous bedrock resulting from its long volcanic history are frequently visible. As a deep, common, joined bedrock region in eastern and central Canada, the shield stretches north from the Great Lakes to the Arctic Ocean, covering over half of Canada and most of Greenland; it also extends south into the northern reaches of the continental United States.\nGeographical extent.\nThe Canadian Shield is a physiographic division comprising four smaller physiographic provinces: the Laurentian Upland, Kazan Region, Davis and James. The shield extends into the United States as the Adirondack Mountains (connected by the Frontenac Axis) and the Superior Upland. The Canadian Shield is a U-shaped subsection of the Laurentia craton signifying the area of greatest glacial impact (scraping down to bare rock) creating the thin soils. The age of the Canadian Shield is estimated to be 4.28 Ga. The Canadian Shield once had jagged peaks, higher than any of today's mountains, but millions of years of erosion have changed these mountains to rolling hills.\nThe Canadian Shield is a collage of Archean plates and accreted juvenile arc terranes and sedimentary basins of the Proterozoic Eon that were progressively amalgamated during the interval 2.45\u20131.24 Ga, with the most substantial growth period occurring during the Trans-Hudson orogeny, between c. 1.90\u20131.80 Ga. The Canadian Shield was the first part of North America to be permanently elevated above sea level and has remained almost wholly untouched by successive encroachments of the sea upon the continent. It is the Earth's greatest area of exposed Archean rock. The metamorphic base rocks are mostly from the Precambrian (between 4.5 Ga and 540 Ma) and have been repeatedly uplifted and eroded. Today it consists largely of an area of low relief above sea level with a few monadnocks and low mountain ranges (including the Laurentian Mountains) probably eroded from the plateau during the Cenozoic Era. During the Pleistocene Epoch, continental ice sheets depressed the land surface (creating Hudson Bay) but also tilted up its northeastern \"rim\" (the Torngat), scooped out thousands of lake basins, and carried away much of the region's soil. The northeastern portion, however, became tilted up so that, in northern Labrador and Baffin Island, the land rises to more than 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) above sea level.\nWhen the Greenland section is included, the Canadian Shield is approximately circular, bounded on the northeast by the northeast edge of Greenland, with Hudson Bay in the middle. It covers much of Greenland, all of Labrador and the Great Northern Peninsula of Newfoundland, most of Quebec north of the St. Lawrence River, much of Ontario including northern sections of the Ontario Peninsula, the Adirondack Mountains of New York, the northernmost part of Lower Michigan and all of Upper Michigan, northern Wisconsin, northeastern Minnesota, the central and northern portions of Manitoba, northern Saskatchewan, a small portion of northeastern Alberta, mainland Northwest Territories to the east of a line extended north from the Saskatchewan-Alberta border, most of Nunavut's mainland and, of its Arctic Archipelago, Baffin Island and significant bands through Somerset, Southampton, Devon and Ellesmere islands. In total, the exposed area of the shield covers approximately . The true extent of the shield is greater still and stretches from the Western Cordillera in the west to the Appalachians in the east and as far south as Texas, but these regions are overlaid with much younger rocks and sediment.\nGeology.\nThe Canadian Shield is among the oldest geologic areas on Earth, with regions dating from 2.5 to 4.2 billion years. The multitude of rivers and lakes in the region is classical example of a deranged drainage system, caused by the watersheds of the area being disturbed by glaciation and the effect of post-glacial rebound. The shield was originally an area of very large, very tall mountains (about ) with much volcanic activity, but the area was eroded to nearly its current topographic appearance of relatively low relief over 500 Ma. Erosion has exposed the roots of the mountains, which take the form of greenstone belts in which belts of volcanic rock that have been altered by metamorphism are surrounded by granitic rock. These belts range in age from 3.6 to 2.7 Ga. Much of the granitic rock belongs to the distinctive tonalite\u2013trondhjemite\u2013granodiorite family of rocks, which are characteristic of Archean continental crust. Many of Canada's major ore deposits are associated with greenstone belts.\nThe Sturgeon Lake Caldera in Kenora District, Ontario, is one of the world's best preserved mineralized Neoarchean caldera complexes, which is 2.7 Ga. The Canadian Shield also contains the Mackenzie dike swarm, which is the largest dike swarm known on Earth. The North American craton is the bedrock forming the heart of the North American continent, and the Canadian Shield is the largest exposed part of the craton's bedrock. The Canadian Shield is part of an ancient continent called Arctica, which was formed about 2.5 Ga during the Neoarchean era.\nMountains have deep roots and float on the denser mantle much like an iceberg at sea. As mountains erode, their roots rise and are eroded in turn. The rocks that now form the surface of the shield were once far below the Earth's surface. The high pressures and temperatures at those depths provided ideal conditions for mineralization. Although these mountains are now heavily eroded, many large mountains still exist in Canada's far north called the Arctic Cordillera. This is a vast, deeply dissected mountain range, stretching from northernmost Ellesmere Island to the northernmost tip of Labrador. The range's highest peak is Nunavut's Barbeau Peak at above sea level. Precambrian rock is the major component of the bedrock.\nEcology.\nThe current surface expression of the shield is one of very thin soil lying on top of the bedrock, with many bare outcrops. This arrangement was caused by severe glaciation during the ice ages that covered the shield and scraped the rock clean. The lowlands of the Canadian Shield have a very dense soil that is not suitable for forestation; it also contains many marshes and bogs (muskegs). The rest of the region has coarse soil that does not retain moisture well and is frozen with permafrost throughout the year. Forests are not as dense in the north.\nThe shield is covered in parts by vast boreal forests in the south that support natural ecosystems as well as a major logging industry. The boreal forest area gives way to the Eastern Canadian Shield taiga that covers northern Quebec and most of Labrador. The Midwestern Canadian Shield forests that run westwards from Northwestern Ontario have boreal forests that give way to taiga in the most northerly parts of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Hydrologic drainage is generally poor, the soil compacting effects of glaciation being one of the many causes. Tundra typically prevails in the northern regions. \nMany mammals such as beaver, caribou, white-tailed deer, moose, wolves, wolverines, weasels, mink, otters, grizzly bear, polar bears and black bears are present. In the case of polar bears (), the shield area contains many of their denning locations, such as the Wapusk National Park.\nThe many lakes and rivers on the shield contain a plentiful quantity of different sports fish species, including walleye, northern pike, lake trout, yellow perch, whitefish, brook trout, arctic grayling, and many types of baitfish. The water surfaces are also home to many waterfowl, most notably Canada geese, loons and gulls. The vast forests contain a myriad population of other birds, including ravens and crows, predatory birds and many songbirds.\nMining and economics.\nThe Canadian Shield is one of the world's richest areas in terms of mineral ores. It is filled with substantial deposits of nickel, gold, silver, and copper. There are many mining towns extracting these minerals. The largest, and one of the best known, is Sudbury, Ontario. Sudbury is an exception to the normal process of forming minerals in the shield since the Sudbury Basin is an ancient meteorite impact crater. Ejecta from the meteorite impact was found in the Rove Formation in May 2007. The nearby but less-known Temagami Magnetic Anomaly has striking similarities to the Sudbury Basin. This suggests it could be a second metal-rich impact crater. In northeastern Quebec, the giant Manicouagan Reservoir is the site of an extensive hydroelectric project (Manic-cinq, or Manic-5). This is one of the largest-known meteorite impact craters on Earth, though not as large as the Sudbury crater.\nThe Flin Flon greenstone belt in central Manitoba and east-central Saskatchewan \"is one of the largest Paleoproterozoic volcanic-hosted massive sulfide (VMS) districts in the world, containing 27 copper-zinc-(gold) deposits from which more than 183 million tonnes of sulfide have been mined.\" The portion in the Northwest Territories has recently been the site of several major diamond discoveries. The kimberlite pipes in which the diamonds are found are closely associated with cratons, which provide the deep lithospheric mantle required to stabilize diamond as a mineral. The kimberlite eruptions then bring the diamonds from over depth to the surface. The Ekati and Diavik mines are actively mining kimberlite diamonds."}
{"id": "6231", "revid": "45406993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6231", "title": "Comic book", "text": "A comic book, comic-magazine, or simply comic is a publication that consists of comics art in the form of sequential juxtaposed panels that represent individual scenes. Panels are often accompanied by descriptive prose and written narrative, usually dialogue contained in word balloons emblematic of the comics art form.\n\"Comic Cuts\" was a British comic published from 1890 to 1953. It was preceded by \"Ally Sloper's Half Holiday\" (1884), which is notable for its use of sequential cartoons to unfold narrative. These British comics existed alongside the popular lurid \"penny dreadfuls\" (such as \"Spring-heeled Jack\"), boys' \"story papers\" and the humorous \"Punch\" magazine, which was the first to use the term \"cartoon\" in its modern sense of a humorous drawing.\nThe first modern American-style comic book, \"\", was released in the U.S. in 1933 and was a reprinting of earlier newspaper humor comic strips, which had established many of the story-telling devices used in comics. The term \"comic book\" derives from American comic books once being a compilation of comic strips of a humorous tone; however, this practice was replaced by featuring stories of all genres, usually not humorous in tone.\nThe largest comic book market is Japan. By 1995, the manga market in Japan was valued at (), with annual sales of 1.9billion manga books ( volumes and manga magazines) in Japan, equivalent to 15issues per person. In 2020 the manga market in Japan reached a new record value of due to a fast growth of digital manga sales as well as an increase in print sales. The comic book market in the United States and Canada was valued at in 2016. , the largest comic book publisher in the United States is manga distributor Viz Media, followed by DC Comics and Marvel Comics featuring superhero comics franchises such as Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, Spider-Man, the Incredible Hulk, and the X-Men. The best-selling comic book categories in the US are juvenile children's fiction at 41%, manga at 28% and superhero comics at 10% of the market. Another major comic book market is France, where Franco-Belgian comics and Japanese manga each represent 40% of the market, followed by American comics at 10% market share.\nStructure.\nComic books heavily rely on their organization and visual presentation. Authors dedicate significant attention to aspects like page layout, size, orientation, and the positioning of panels. These characteristics are crucial for effectively conveying the content and messages within the comic book. Key components of comic books encompass panels, speech bubbles (also known as balloons), text lines, and characters. Speech balloons generally take the form of convex containers that hold character dialogue and are connected to the character via a tail element. The tail comprises an origin, path, tip, and directional point. The creation of comic books involves several essential steps: writing, drawing, and coloring. Various technological tools and methods are employed to craft comic books, incorporating concepts such as directions, axes, data, and metrics. Following these formatting guidelines, the process unfolds with writing, drawing, and coloring. In the United States, the term \"comic book\", is generally used for comics periodicals and trade paperbacks while \"graphic novel\" is the term used for standalone books.\nAmerican comic books.\nComics as a print medium have existed in the United States since the printing of \"The Adventures of Mr. Obadiah Oldbuck\" in 1842 in hardcover, making it the first known American prototype comic book. Proto-comics periodicals began appearing early in the 20th century, with the first comic standard-sized comic being \"Funnies on Parade\". \"Funnies on Parades\" was the first book that established the size, duration, and format of the modern comic book. Following this was, Dell Publishing's 36-page \"\" as the first true newsstand American comic book; Goulart, for example, calls it \"the cornerstone for one of the most lucrative branches of magazine publishing\". In 1905 G.W. Dillingham Company published 24 select strips by the cartoonist Gustave Verbeek in an anthology book called 'The Incredible Upside-Downs of Little Lady Lovekins and Old Man Muffaroo'. The introduction of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster's Superman in 1938 turned comic books into a major industry and ushered in the Golden Age of Comic Books. The Golden Age originated the archetype of the superhero. According to historian Michael A. Amundson, appealing comic-book characters helped ease young readers' fear of nuclear war and neutralize anxiety about the questions posed by atomic power.\nHistorians generally divide the timeline of the American comic book into eras. The Golden Age of Comic Books began in 1938, with the debut of Superman in Action Comics #1, published by Detective Comics (predecessor of DC Comics), which is generally considered the beginning of the modern comic book as it is known today. The Silver Age of Comic Books is generally considered to date from the first successful revival of the then-dormant superhero form, with the debut of the Flash in \"Showcase\" #4 (Oct. 1956). The Silver Age lasted through the late 1960s or early 1970s, during which time Marvel Comics revolutionized the medium with such naturalistic superheroes as Stan Lee and Jack Kirby's Fantastic Four and Lee and Steve Ditko's Spider-Man. The demarcation between the Silver Age and the following era, the Bronze Age of Comic Books, is less well-defined, with the Bronze Age running from the very early 1970s through the mid-1980s. The Modern Age of Comic Books runs from the mid-1980s to the present day.\nA significant event in the timeline of American comic books occurred when psychiatrist Fredric Wertham voiced his criticisms of the medium through his book \"Seduction of the Innocent\" (1954). This critique led to the involvement of the American Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency, which launched an investigation into comic books. Wertham argued that comic books were accountable for a surge in juvenile delinquency and posed a potential impact on a child's sexuality and moral values. In response to attention from the government and from the media, the US comic book industry set up the Comics Magazine Association of America. The CMAA instilled the Comics Code Authority in 1954 and drafted the self-censorship Comics Code that year, which required all comic books to go through a process of approval. It was not until the 1970s that comic books could be published without passing through the inspection of the CMAA. The Code was made formally defunct in November 2011.\nUnderground comic books.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, a surge of creativity emerged in what became known as underground comix. Published and distributed independently of the established comics industry, most of such comics reflected the youth counterculture and drug culture of the time. Underground comix \"reflected and commented on the social divisions and tensions of American society\". Many had an uninhibited, often irreverent style; their frank depictions of nudity, sex, profanity, and politics had no parallel outside their precursors, the pornographic and even more obscure \"Tijuana bibles\". Underground comics were almost never sold at newsstands, but rather in such youth-oriented outlets as head shops and record stores, as well as by mail order. The underground comics encouraged creators to publish their work independently so that they would have full ownership rights to their characters.\nFrank Stack's \"The Adventures of Jesus\", published under the name Foolbert Sturgeon, has been credited as the first underground comix; while R. Crumb and the crew of cartoonists who worked on \"Zap Comix\" popularized the form.\nAlternative comics.\nThe rise of comic book specialty stores in the late 1970s created and paralleled a dedicated market for \"independent\" or \"alternative comics\" in the US. The first such comics included the anthology series \"Star Reach\", published by comic book writer Mike Friedrich from 1974 to 1979, and Harvey Pekar's \"American Splendor\", which continued sporadic publication into the 21st century and which Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini adapted into a 2003 film. Some independent comics continued in the tradition of underground comics. While their content generally remained less explicit, others resembled the output of mainstream publishers in format and genre but were published by smaller artist-owned companies or by single artists. A few (notably \"RAW\") represented experimental attempts to bring comics closer to the status of fine art.\nDuring the 1970s the \"small press\" culture grew and diversified. By the 1980s, several independent publishers \u2013 such as Pacific, Eclipse, First, , and Fantagraphics \u2013 had started releasing a wide range of styles and formats\u2014from color-superhero, detective, and science-fiction comic books to black-and-white magazine-format stories of Latin American magical realism.\nA number of small publishers in the 1990s, changed the format and distribution of their comics to more closely resemble non-comics publishing. The \"minicomics\" form, an extremely informal version of self-publishing, arose in the 1980s and became increasingly popular among artists in the 1990s, despite reaching an even more limited audience than the small press.\nSmall publishers regularly releasing titles include Avatar Press, Hyperwerks, Raytoons, and Terminal Press, buoyed by such advances in printing technology as digital print-on-demand.\nGraphic novels.\nIn 1964, Richard Kyle coined the term \"graphic novel\".\nPrecursors of the form existed by the 1920s, which saw a revival of the medieval woodcut tradition by Belgian Frans Masereel, American Lynd Ward and others, including Stan Lee.\nIn 1947, Fawcett Publications published \"Comics Novel No. 1\", as the first in an intended series of these \"comics novels\". The story in the first issue was \"Anarcho, Dictator of Death\", a five chapter spy genre tale written by Otto Binder and drawn by Al Carreno. It is readable online in the Digital Comic Museum. The magazine never reached a second issue.\nIn 1950, St. John Publications produced the digest-sized, adult-oriented \"picture novel\" \"It Rhymes with Lust\", a 128-page digest by pseudonymous writer \"Drake Waller\" (Arnold Drake and Leslie Waller), penciler Matt Baker and inker Ray Osrin, touted as \"an original full-length novel\" on its cover. \"It Rhymes with Lust\" is also available to read online in the Digital Comic Museum.\nIn 1971, writer-artist Gil Kane and collaborators applied a paperback format to their \"comics novel\" \"Blackmark\". Will Eisner popularized the term \"graphic novel\" when he used it on the cover of the paperback edition of his work \"A Contract with God, and Other Tenement Stories\" in 1978 and, subsequently, the usage of the term began to increase.\nMarket size.\nIn 2017, the comic book market size for North America was just over $1\u00a0billion with digital sales being flat, book stores having a 1% decline, and comic book stores having a 10% decline over 2016. The global comic book market saw a substantial 12% growth in 2020, reaching a total worth of US$8.49\u00a0billion. This positive trajectory continued in 2021, with the market's annual valuation surging to US$9.21\u00a0billion. The rising popularity of comic books can be attributed to heightened global interest, driven significantly by collaborative efforts among diverse brands. These collaborations are geared towards producing more engaging and appealing comic content, contributing to the industry's continued growth.\nComic book collecting.\nThe 1970s saw the advent of specialty comic book stores. Initially, comic books were marketed by publishers to children because comic books were perceived as children's entertainment. However, with increasing recognition of comics as an art form and the growing pop culture presence of comic book conventions, they are now embraced by many adults.\nComic book collectors often exhibit a lifelong passion for the stories within comics, often focusing on specific superheroes and striving to gather a complete collection of a particular series. Comics are assigned sequential numbers, and the initial issue of a long-lasting comic book series tends to be both the scarcest and the most coveted among collectors. The introduction of a new character might occur within an existing title. For instance, the first appearance of Spider-Man took place in \"Amazing Fantasy\" #15. New characters were frequently introduced in this manner, waiting for an established audience before launching their own titles. Consequently, comics featuring the debut appearance of a significant character can sometimes be even more challenging to locate than the inaugural issue of that character's standalone series.\nSome rare comic books include copies of the unreleased \"Motion Picture Funnies Weekly\" #1 from 1939. Eight copies, plus one without a cover, emerged in the estate of the deceased publisher in 1974. The \"Pay Copy\" of this book sold for $43,125 in a 2005 Heritage auction.\nThe most valuable American comics have combined rarity and quality with the first appearances of popular and enduring characters. Four comic books have sold for over US$1\u00a0million , including two examples of \"Action Comics\" #1, the first appearance of Superman, both sold privately through online dealer ComicConnect.com in 2010, and \"Detective Comics\" #27, the first appearance of Batman, via public auction.\nUpdating the above price obtained for \"Action Comics\" #1, the first appearance of Superman, the highest sale on record for this book is $3.2\u00a0million, for a 9.0 copy. \nMisprints, promotional comic-dealer incentive printings, and issues with exceptionally low distribution tend to possess scarcity value in the comic book market. The rarest modern comic books include the original press run of \"The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen\" #5, which DC executive Paul Levitz recalled and pulped due to the appearance of a vintage Victorian era advertisement for \"Marvel Douche\", which the publisher considered offensive; only 100 copies exist, most of which have been CGC graded. (See Recalled comics for more pulped, recalled, and erroneous comics.)\nIn 2000, a company named Comics Guaranty (CGC) initiated the practice of \"slabbing\" comics, which involves encasing them within thick plastic cases and assigning them a numerical grade. This approach inspired the emergence of Comic Book Certification Service. Given the significance of condition in determining the value of rare comics, the concept of grading by an impartial company, one that does not engage in buying or selling comics, seemed promising. Nevertheless, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether the relatively high cost of this grading service is justified and whether it serves the interests of collectors or mainly caters to speculators seeking rapid profits, akin to trading in stocks or fine art. Comic grading has played a role in establishing standards for valuation, which online price guides such as GoCollect and GPAnalysis utilize to provide real-time market value information.\nCollectors also seek out the original artwork pages from comic books, which are perhaps the most rarefied items in the realm of comic book collecting. These pages hold unparalleled scarcity due to the fact that there exists only one unique page of artwork for every page that was printed and published.\nThe creation of these original artwork pages involves a collaborative effort: a writer crafts the story, a pencil artist designs the sequential panels on the page, an ink artist goes over the pencil with pen and ink, a letterer provides the dialogue and narration through hand-lettering, and finally, a colorist adds color as the final touch before the pages are sent to the printer.\nWhen the printer returns the original artwork pages, they are typically returned to the artists themselves. These artists sometimes opt to sell these pages at comic book conventions, in galleries, and at art shows centered around comic book art. The original pages from DC and Marvel, featuring the debut appearances of iconic characters such as Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, the Flash, Captain Marvel, Spider-Man, the Incredible Hulk, Iron Man, Captain America and the Mighty Thor are regarded as priceless treasures within the comic book world.\nHistory of race in U.S. comic books.\nMany early iterations of black characters in comics \"became variations on the 'single stereotypical image of Sambo'.\" Sambo was closely related to the coon stereotype but had some subtle differences. They are both a derogatory way of portraying black characters. \"The name itself, an abbreviation of raccoon, is dehumanizing. As with Sambo, the coon was portrayed as a lazy, easily frightened, chronically idle, inarticulate, buffoon.\" This portrayal \"was of course another attempt to solidify the intellectual inferiority of the black race through popular culture.\" However, in the 1940s there was a change in portrayal of black characters. \"A cursory glance...might give the impression that situations had improved for African Americans in comics.\" In many comics being produced in this time there was a major push for tolerance between races. \"These equality minded heroes began to spring to action just as African Americans were being asked to participate in the war effort.\"\nDuring this time, a government ran program, the Writers' War Board, became heavily involved in what would be published in comics. \"The Writers' War Board used comic books to shape popular perceptions of race and ethnicity...\" Not only were they using comic books as a means of recruiting all Americans, they were also using it as propaganda to \"[construct] a justification for race-based hatred of America's foreign enemies.\" The Writers' War Board created comics books that were meant to \"[promote] domestic racial harmony\". However, \"these pro-tolerance narratives struggled to overcome the popular and widely understood negative tropes used for decades in American mass culture...\". However, they were not accomplishing this agenda within all of their comics.\nIn the comic series \"Captain Marvel Adventures\", there was a character named Steamboat who embodied a collection of highly negative stereotypes prevalent during that period. The Writers' War Board did not request any alterations to this character despite the problematic portrayal. The removal of Steamboat from the series only came about due to the persistent advocacy of a black youth group based in New York City.\" Originally their request was refused by individuals working on the comic stating, \"\"Captain Marvel Adventures\" included many kinds of caricatures 'for the sake of humor'.\" The black youth group responded with \"this is not the Negro race, but your one-and-a-half millions readers will think it so.\" Afterwards, Steamboat disappeared from the comics all together. There was a comic created about the 99th Squadron, also known as the Tuskegee Airmen, an all-black air force unit. Instead of making the comic about their story, the comic was about Hop Harrigan. A white pilot who captures a Nazi, shows him videos of the 99th Squadron defeating his men and then reveals to the Nazi that his men were defeated by African Americans which infuriated him as he sees them as a less superior race and cannot believe they bested his men.\"The Tuskegee Airmen, and images of black aviators appear in just three of the fifty three panels... the pilots of the 99th Squadron have no dialogue and interact with neither Hop Harrigan nor his Nazi captive.\" During this time, they also used black characters in comic books as a means to invalidate the militant black groups that were fighting for equality within the U.S. \"Spider-Man 'made it clear that militant black power was not the remedy for racial injustice'.\" \"The Falcon openly criticized black behavior stating' maybe it's important us to cool things down-so we can protect the rights we been fightin' for'.\" This portrayal and character development of black characters can be partially blamed on the fact that, during this time, \"there had rarely been a black artist or writer allowed in a major comics company.\"\nAsian characters within comic books encountered similar prejudiced treatment as black characters did. They were subjected to dehumanizing depictions, with narratives often portraying them as \"incompetent and subhuman.\" In a 1944 edition of the publication \"United States Marines\", there was a story titled \"The Smell of the Monkeymen\". This narrative portrayed Japanese soldiers as brutish simians, and it depicted their concealed positions being betrayed by their repugnant body odor. Chinese characters received the same treatment. \"By the time the United States entered WWII, negative perceptions of Chinese were an established part of mass culture...\" However, concerned that the Japanese could use America's anti-Chinese material as propaganda they began \"to present a more positive image of America's Chinese allies...\" Just as they tried to show better representation for Black people in comics they did the same for Asian people. However, \"Japanese and Filipino characters were visually indistinguishable. Both groups have grotesque buckteeth, tattered clothing, and bright yellow skin.\" \"Publishers depicted America's Asian allies through derogatory images and language honed over the preceding decades.\" Asian characters were previously portrayed as, \"ghastly yellow demons\". During WWII, \"[every] major superhero worth his spandex devoted himself to the eradication of Asian invaders.\" There was \"a constant relay race in which one Asian culture merely handed off the baton of hatred to another with no perceptible changes in the manner in which the characters would be portrayed.\"\n\"The only specific depiction of a Hispanic superhero did not end well. In 1975, Marvel gave us Hector Ayala (a.k.a. The White Tiger).\" \"Although he fought for several years alongside the likes of much more popular heroes such as Spider-Man and Daredevil, he only lasted six years before sales of comics featuring him got so bad that Marvel had him retire. The most famous Hispanic character is Bane, a villain from Batman.\"\nThe Native American representation in comic books \"can be summed up in the noble savage stereotype\" \" a recurring theme...urged American indians to abandon their traditional hostility towards the United States. They were the ones painted as intolerant and disrespectful of the dominant concerns of white America\".\nEast Asian comics.\nJapanese manga.\nManga (\u6f2b\u753b) are comic books or graphic novels originating from Japan. Most manga conform to a style developed in Japan in the late 19th century, though the art form has a long prehistory in earlier Japanese art. The term \"manga\" is used in Japan to refer to both comics and cartooning in general. Outside Japan, the word is typically used to refer to comics originally published in the country.\nD\u014djinshi.\n, fan-made Japanese comics, operate in a far larger market in Japan than the American \"underground comix\" market; the largest d\u014djinshi fair, Comiket, attracts 500,000 visitors twice a year.\nKorean manhwa.\nManhwa (\ub9cc\ud654) are comic books or graphic novels originating from South Korea. The term \"manhwa\" is used in South Korea to refer to both comics and cartooning in general. Outside South Korea, the term usually refers to comics originally published in the country. Manhwa is greatly influenced by Japanese Manga comics though it differs from manga and manhua with its own distinct features.\nWebtoons.\nWebtoons have become popular in South Korea as a new way to read comics. Thanks in part to different censorship rules, color and unique visual effects, and optimization for easier reading on smartphones and computers. More manhwa have made the switch from traditional print manhwa to online webtoons thanks to better pay and more freedom than traditional print manhwa. The webtoon format has also expanded to other countries outside of Korea like China, Japan, Southeast Asia, and Western countries. Major webtoon distributors include Lezhin, Naver, and Kakao.\nEuropean comics.\nFranco-Belgian comics.\nFrance and Belgium have a long tradition in comics and comic books, often called \"BDs\" (an abbreviation of \"bandes dessin\u00e9es\", meaning literally \"drawn strips\") in French, and \"strips\" in Dutch or Flemish. Belgian comic books originally written in Dutch show the influence of the Francophone \"Franco-Belgian\" comics but have their own distinct style.\nBritish comics.\nAlthough \"Ally Sloper's Half Holiday\" (1884) was aimed at an adult market, publishers quickly targeted a younger demographic, which has led to most publications being for children and has created an association in the public's mind of comics as somewhat juvenile. \"The Guardian\" refers to Ally Sloper as \"one of the world's first iconic cartoon characters\", and \"as famous in Victorian Britain as Dennis the Menace would be a century later.\" British comics in the early 20th century typically evolved from illustrated penny dreadfuls of the Victorian era (featuring Sweeney Todd, Dick Turpin and \"Varney the Vampire\"). First published in the 1830s, penny dreadfuls were \"Britain's first taste of mass-produced popular culture for the young.\"\nThe two most popular British comic books, \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\", were first published by DC Thomson in the 1930s. By 1950 the weekly circulation of both reached 2\u00a0million. Explaining the enormous popularity of comics in the UK during this period, Anita O'Brien, director curator at London's Cartoon Museum, states: \"When comics like the Beano and Dandy were invented back in the 1930s \u2013 and through really to the 1950s and 60s \u2013 these comics were almost the only entertainment available to children.\" \"Dennis the Menace\" was created in the 1950s, which saw sales for \"The Beano\" soar. He features in the cover of \"The Beano\", with the BBC referring to him as the \"definitive naughty boy of the comic world.\"\nIn 1954, \"Tiger\" comics introduced \"Roy of the Rovers\", the hugely popular football based strip recounting the life of Roy Race and the team he played for, Melchester Rovers. The stock media phrase \"real 'Roy of the Rovers' stuff\" is often used by football writers, commentators and fans when describing displays of great skill, or surprising results that go against the odds, in reference to the dramatic storylines that were the strip's trademark. Other comic books such as \"Eagle\", \"Valiant\", \"Warrior\", \"Viz\" and \"2000 AD\" also flourished. Some comics, such as \"Judge Dredd\" and other \"2000 AD\" titles, have been published in a tabloid form. Underground comics and \"small press\" titles have also appeared in the UK, notably \"Oz\" and \"Escape Magazine\".\nThe content of \"Action\", another title aimed at children and launched in the mid-1970s, became the subject of discussion in the House of Commons. Although on a smaller scale than similar investigations in the US, such concerns led to a moderation of content published within British comics. Such moderation never became formalized to the extent of promulgating a code, nor did it last long. The UK has also established a healthy market in the reprinting and repackaging of material, notably material originating in the US. The lack of reliable supplies of American comic books led to a variety of black-and-white reprints, including Marvel's monster comics of the 1950s, Fawcett's Captain Marvel, and other characters such as Sheena, Mandrake the Magician, and the Phantom. Several reprint companies became involved in repackaging American material for the British market, notably the importer and distributor Thorpe &amp; Porter. Marvel Comics established a UK office in 1972. DC Comics and Dark Horse Comics also opened offices in the 1990s. The repackaging of European material has occurred less frequently, although \"The Adventures of Tintin\" and \"Asterix\" serials have been successfully translated and repackaged in softcover books. The number of European comics available in the UK has increased in the last two decades. The British company Cinebook, founded in 2005, has released English translated versions of many European series.\nIn the 1980s, a resurgence of British writers and artists gained prominence in mainstream comic books, which was dubbed the \"British Invasion\" in comic book history. These writers and artists brought with them their own mature themes and philosophy such as anarchy, controversy and politics common in British media. These elements would pave the way for mature and \"darker and edgier\" comic books and jump start the Modern Age of Comics. Writers included Alan Moore, famous for his \"V for Vendetta\", \"From Hell\", \"Watchmen\", \"Marvelman\", and \"The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen\"; Neil Gaiman with \"The Sandman\" mythos and \"Books of Magic\"; Warren Ellis, creator of \"Transmetropolitan\" and \"Planetary\"; and others such as Mark Millar, creator of \"Wanted\" and \"Kick-Ass\". The comic book series \"John Constantine, Hellblazer\", which is largely set in Britain and starring the magician John Constantine, paved the way for British writers such as Jamie Delano.\nThe English musician Peter Gabriel issued in 2000 The Story of OVO which was released in a CD-booklet-shaped comic book as part of the CD edition with the title \"OVO The Millennium Show\". The 2000 Millennium Dome Show based on it.\nAt Christmas, publishers repackage and commission material for comic annuals, printed and bound as hardcover A4-size books; \"Rupert\" supplies a famous example of the British comic annual. DC Thomson also repackages \"The Broons\" and \"Oor Wullie\" strips in softcover A4-size books for the holiday season.\nOn 19 March 2012, the British postal service, the Royal Mail, released a set of stamps depicting British comic book characters and series. The collection featured \"The Beano\", \"The Dandy\", \"Eagle\", \"The Topper\", \"Roy of the Rovers\", \"Bunty\", \"Buster\", \"Valiant\", \"Twinkle\" and \"2000 AD\".\nSpanish comics.\nIt has been stated that the 13th century \"Cantigas de Santa Mar\u00eda\" could be considered as the first Spanish \"comic\", although comic books (also known in Spain as \"historietas\" or \"tebeos\") made their debut around 1857. The magazine \"TBO\" was influential in popularizing the medium. After the Spanish Civil War, the Franco regime imposed strict censorship in all media: superhero comics were forbidden and as a result, comic heroes were based on historical fiction (in 1944 the medieval hero \"El Guerrero del Antifaz\" was created by Manuel Gago and another popular medieval hero, \"Capit\u00e1n Trueno\", was created in 1956 by V\u00edctor Mora and Miguel Ambrosio Zaragoza). Two publishing houses \u2014 Editorial Bruguera and Editorial Valenciana \u2014 dominated the Spanish comics market during its golden age (1950\u20131970). The most popular comics showed a recognizable style of slapstick humor (influenced by Franco-Belgian authors such as Franquin): Escobar's \"Carpanta\" and \"Zipi y Zape\", V\u00e1zquez's \"Las hermanas Gilda\" and \"Anacleto,\" Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez's \"Mortadelo y Filem\u00f3n\" and \"13. Rue del Percebe\" or Jan's \"Superl\u00f3pez\". After the end of the Francoist period, there was an increased interest in adult comics with magazines such as \"Totem\", \"El Jueves\", \"1984\", and \"El V\u00edbora,\" and works such as \"Paracuellos\" by Carlos Gim\u00e9nez.\nSpanish artists have traditionally worked in other markets finding great success, either in the American (e.g., Eisner Award winners Sergio Aragon\u00e9s, Salvador Larroca, Gabriel Hern\u00e1ndez Walta, Marcos Mart\u00edn or David Aja), the British (e.g., Carlos Ezquerra, co-creator of \"Judge Dredd\") or the Franco-Belgian one (e.g., Fauve d'Or winner or \"Blacksad\" authors Juan D\u00edaz Canales and Juanjo Guarnido).\nItalian comics.\nIn Italy, comics (known in Italian as \"fumetti\") made their debut as humor strips at the end of the 19th century, and later evolved into adventure stories. After World War II, however, artists like Hugo Pratt and Guido Crepax exposed Italian comics to an international audience. Popular comic books such as \"Diabolik\" or the \"Bonelli\" line\u2014namely \"Tex Willer\" or \"Dylan Dog\"\u2014remain best-sellers.\nMainstream comics are usually published on a monthly basis, in a black-and-white digest size format, with approximately 100 to 132 pages. Collections of classic material for the most famous characters, usually with more than 200 pages, are also common. Author comics are published in the French BD format, with an example being Pratt's \"Corto Maltese\".\nItalian cartoonists show the influence of comics from other countries, including France, Belgium, Spain, and Argentina. Italy is also famous for being one of the foremost producers of Walt Disney comic stories outside the US; Donald Duck's superhero alter ego, Paperinik, known in English as Superduck, was created in Italy.\nDistribution.\nThe comic book industry has struggled with distribution issues throughout its history, as numerous mainstream retailers have been hesitant to stock substantial quantities of the most engaging and sought-after comics. The smartphone and the tablet have turned out to be an ideal medium for online distribution.\nDigital distribution.\nOn 13 November 2007, Marvel Comics launched Marvel Digital Comics Unlimited, a subscription service allowing readers to read many comics from Marvel's history online. The service also includes periodic release new comics not available elsewhere. With the release of \"Avenging Spider-Man\" #1, Marvel also became the first publisher to provide free digital copies as part of the print copy of the comic book.\nWith the growing popularity of smartphones and tablets, many major publishers have begun releasing titles in digital form. The most popular platform is comiXology. Some platforms, such as Graphicly, have shut down.\nComic collections in libraries.\nNumerous libraries house extensive collections of comics in the form of graphic novels. This serves as a convenient means for the general public to become acquainted with the medium.\nGuinness World Records.\nIn 2015, the Japanese manga artist Eiichiro Oda was awarded the \"Guinness World Records\" title for having the \"Most copies published for the same comic book series by a single author\". His manga series \"One Piece\", which he writes and illustrates, has been serialized in the Japanese magazine \"Weekly Sh\u014dnen Jump\" since December 1997, and by 2015, 77 collected volumes had been released. \"Guinness World Records\" reported in their announcement that the collected volumes of the series had sold a total of 320,866,000 units. \"One Piece\" also holds the \"Guinness World Records\" title for \"Most copies published for the same manga series\".\nOn 5 August 2018, the \"Guinness World Records\" title for the \"Largest comic book ever published\" was awarded to the Brazilian comic book \"Turma da M\u00f4nica \u2014 O Maior Gibi do Mundo!\", published by Panini Comics Brasil and Mauricio de Sousa Produ\u00e7\u00f5es. The comic book measures . The 18-page comic book had a print run of 120 copies.\nWith the July 2021 publication of the 201st collected volume of his manga series \"Golgo 13\", Japanese manga artist Takao Saito was awarded the \"Guinness World Records\" title for \"Most volumes published for a single manga series.\" \"Golgo 13\" has been continuously serialized in the Japanese magazine \"Big Comic\" since October 1968, which also makes it the oldest manga still in publication."}
{"id": "6233", "revid": "43884646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6233", "title": "Connected space", "text": "In topology and related branches of mathematics, a connected space is a topological space that cannot be represented as the union of two or more disjoint non-empty open subsets. Connectedness is one of the principal topological properties that are used to distinguish topological spaces.\nA subset of a topological space formula_1 is a if it is a connected space when viewed as a subspace of formula_1.\nSome related but stronger conditions are path connected, simply connected, and formula_3-connected. Another related notion is \"locally connected\", which neither implies nor follows from connectedness.\nFormal definition.\nA topological space formula_1 is said to be if it is the union of two disjoint non-empty open sets. Otherwise, formula_1 is said to be connected. A subset of a topological space is said to be connected if it is connected under its subspace topology. Some authors exclude the empty set (with its unique topology) as a connected space, but this article does not follow that practice.\nFor a topological space formula_1 the following conditions are equivalent:\nHistorically this modern formulation of the notion of connectedness (in terms of no partition of formula_1 into two separated sets) first appeared (independently) with N.J. Lennes, Frigyes Riesz, and Felix Hausdorff at the beginning of the 20th century. See for details.\nConnected components.\nGiven some point formula_17 in a topological space formula_18 the union of any collection of connected subsets such that each contains formula_17 will once again be a connected subset. \nThe connected component of a point formula_17 in formula_1 is the union of all connected subsets of formula_1 that contain formula_23 it is the unique largest (with respect to formula_24) connected subset of formula_1 that contains formula_26 \nThe maximal connected subsets (ordered by inclusion formula_24) of a non-empty topological space are called the connected components of the space.\nThe components of any topological space formula_1 form a partition of\u00a0formula_1: they are disjoint, non-empty and their union is the whole space.\nEvery component is a closed subset of the original space. It follows that, in the case where their number is finite, each component is also an open subset. However, if their number is infinite, this might not be the case; for instance, the connected components of the set of the rational numbers are the one-point sets (singletons), which are not open. Proof: Any two distinct rational numbers formula_30 are in different components. Take an irrational number formula_31 and then set formula_32 and formula_33 Then formula_34 is a separation of formula_35 and formula_36. Thus each component is a one-point set.\nLet formula_37 be the connected component of formula_17 in a topological space formula_18 and formula_40 be the intersection of all clopen sets containing formula_17 (called quasi-component of formula_17). Then formula_43 where the equality holds if formula_1 is compact Hausdorff or locally connected.\nDisconnected spaces.\nA space in which all components are one-point sets is called '. Related to this property, a space formula_1 is called ' if, for any two distinct elements formula_17 and formula_47 of formula_1, there exist disjoint open sets formula_49 containing formula_17 and formula_51 containing formula_47 such that formula_1 is the union of formula_49 and formula_51. Clearly, any totally separated space is totally disconnected, but the converse does not hold. For example, take two copies of the rational numbers formula_56, and identify them at every point except zero. The resulting space, with the quotient topology, is totally disconnected. However, by considering the two copies of zero, one sees that the space is not totally separated. In fact, it is not even Hausdorff, and the condition of being totally separated is strictly stronger than the condition of being Hausdorff.\nExamples.\nAn example of a space that is not connected is a plane with an infinite line deleted from it. Other examples of disconnected spaces (that is, spaces which are not connected) include the plane with an annulus removed, as well as the union of two disjoint closed disks, where all examples of this paragraph bear the subspace topology induced by two-dimensional Euclidean space.\nPath connectedness.\nA ' is a stronger notion of connectedness, requiring the structure of a path. A path from a point formula_17 to a point formula_47 in a topological space formula_1 is a continuous function formula_89 from the unit interval formula_90 to formula_1 with formula_92 and formula_93. A ' of formula_1 is an equivalence class of formula_1 under the equivalence relation which makes formula_17 equivalent to formula_47 if and only if there is a path from formula_17 to formula_47. The space formula_1 is said to be path-connected (or pathwise connected or formula_101-connected) if there is exactly one path-component. For non-empty spaces, this is equivalent to the statement that there is a path joining any two points in formula_1. Again, many authors exclude the empty space.\nEvery path-connected space is connected. The converse is not always true: examples of connected spaces that are not path-connected include the extended long line formula_103 and the topologist's sine curve.\nSubsets of the real line formula_67 are connected if and only if they are path-connected; these subsets are the intervals and rays of formula_67.\nAlso, open subsets of formula_65 or formula_107 are connected if and only if they are path-connected.\nAdditionally, connectedness and path-connectedness are the same for finite topological spaces.\nArc connectedness.\nA space formula_1 is said to be arc-connected or arcwise connected if any two topologically distinguishable points can be joined by an arc, which is an embedding formula_109. An arc-component of formula_1 is a maximal arc-connected subset of formula_1; or equivalently an equivalence class of the equivalence relation of whether two points can be joined by an arc or by a path whose points are topologically indistinguishable.\nEvery Hausdorff space that is path-connected is also arc-connected; more generally this is true for a formula_112-Hausdorff space, which is a space where each image of a path is closed. An example of a space which is path-connected but not arc-connected is given by the line with two origins; its two copies of formula_113 can be connected by a path but not by an arc.\nIntuition for path-connected spaces does not readily transfer to arc-connected spaces. Let formula_1 be the line with two origins. The following are facts whose analogues hold for path-connected spaces, but do not hold for arc-connected spaces:\nLocal connectedness.\nA topological space is said to be locally connected at a point formula_17 if every neighbourhood of formula_17 contains a connected open neighbourhood. It is locally connected if it has a base of connected sets. It can be shown that a space formula_1 is locally connected if and only if every component of every open set of formula_1 is open.\nSimilarly, a topological space is said to be if it has a base of path-connected sets.\nAn open subset of a locally path-connected space is connected if and only if it is path-connected.\nThis generalizes the earlier statement about formula_65 and formula_107, each of which is locally path-connected. More generally, any topological manifold is locally path-connected.\nLocally connected does not imply connected, nor does locally path-connected imply path connected. A simple example of a locally connected (and locally path-connected) space that is not connected (or path-connected) is the union of two separated intervals in formula_67, such as formula_128.\nA classical example of a connected space that is not locally connected is the so-called topologist's sine curve, defined as formula_129, with the Euclidean topology induced by inclusion in formula_130.\nSet operations.\nThe intersection of connected sets is not necessarily connected.\nThe union of connected sets is not necessarily connected, as can be seen by considering formula_131.\nEach ellipse is a connected set, but the union is not connected, since it can be partitioned to two disjoint open sets formula_49 and formula_51.\nThis means that, if the union formula_1 is disconnected, then the collection formula_135 can be partitioned to two sub-collections, such that the unions of the sub-collections are disjoint and open in formula_1 (see picture). This implies that in several cases, a union of connected sets necessarily connected. In particular:\nThe set difference of connected sets is not necessarily connected. However, if formula_144 and their difference formula_145 is disconnected (and thus can be written as a union of two open sets formula_146 and formula_147), then the union of formula_148 with each such component is connected (i.e. formula_149 is connected for all formula_150).\nGraphs.\nGraphs have path connected subsets, namely those subsets for which every pair of points has a path of edges joining them.\nBut it is not always possible to find a topology on the set of points which induces the same connected sets. The 5-cycle graph (and any formula_3-cycle with formula_157 odd) is one such example.\nAs a consequence, a notion of connectedness can be formulated independently of the topology on a space. To wit, there is a category of connective spaces consisting of sets with collections of connected subsets satisfying connectivity axioms; their morphisms are those functions which map connected sets to connected sets . Topological spaces and graphs are special cases of connective spaces; indeed, the finite connective spaces are precisely the finite graphs.\nHowever, every graph can be canonically made into a topological space, by treating vertices as points and edges as copies of the unit interval (see topological graph theory#Graphs as topological spaces). Then one can show that the graph is connected (in the graph theoretical sense) if and only if it is connected as a topological space.\nStronger forms of connectedness.\nThere are stronger forms of connectedness for topological spaces, for instance: \nIn general, any path connected space must be connected but there exist connected spaces that are not path connected. The deleted comb space furnishes such an example, as does the above-mentioned topologist's sine curve."}
{"id": "6235", "revid": "1215811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6235", "title": "Cell nucleus", "text": "The cell nucleus (; : nuclei) is a membrane-bound organelle found in eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells usually have a single nucleus, but a few cell types, such as mammalian red blood cells, have no nuclei, and a few others including osteoclasts have many. The main structures making up the nucleus are the nuclear envelope, a double membrane that encloses the entire organelle and isolates its contents from the cellular cytoplasm; and the nuclear matrix, a network within the nucleus that adds mechanical support.\nThe cell nucleus contains nearly all of the cell's genome. Nuclear DNA is often organized into multiple chromosomes \u2013 long strands of DNA dotted with various proteins, such as histones, that protect and organize the DNA. The genes within these chromosomes are structured in such a way to promote cell function. The nucleus maintains the integrity of genes and controls the activities of the cell by regulating gene expression.\nBecause the nuclear envelope is impermeable to large molecules, nuclear pores are required to regulate nuclear transport of molecules across the envelope. The pores cross both nuclear membranes, providing a channel through which larger molecules must be actively transported by carrier proteins while allowing free movement of small molecules and ions. Movement of large molecules such as proteins and RNA through the pores is required for both gene expression and the maintenance of chromosomes. Although the interior of the nucleus does not contain any membrane-bound subcompartments, a number of nuclear bodies exist, made up of unique proteins, RNA molecules, and particular parts of the chromosomes. The best-known of these is the nucleolus, involved in the assembly of ribosomes.\nChromosomes.\nThe cell nucleus contains the majority of the cell's genetic material in the form of multiple linear DNA molecules organized into structures called chromosomes. Each human cell contains roughly two meters of DNA. During most of the cell cycle these are organized in a DNA-protein complex known as chromatin, and during cell division the chromatin can be seen to form the well-defined chromosomes familiar from a karyotype. A small fraction of the cell's genes are located instead in the mitochondria.\nThere are two types of chromatin. Euchromatin is the less compact DNA form, and contains genes that are frequently expressed by the cell. The other type, heterochromatin, is the more compact form, and contains DNA that is infrequently transcribed. This structure is further categorized into \"facultative\" heterochromatin, consisting of genes that are organized as heterochromatin only in certain cell types or at certain stages of development, and \"constitutive\" heterochromatin that consists of chromosome structural components such as telomeres and centromeres. During interphase the chromatin organizes itself into discrete individual patches, called \"chromosome territories\". Active genes, which are generally found in the euchromatic region of the chromosome, tend to be located towards the chromosome's territory boundary.\nAntibodies to certain types of chromatin organization, in particular, nucleosomes, have been associated with a number of autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus. These are known as anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and have also been observed in concert with multiple sclerosis as part of general immune system dysfunction.\nNuclear structures and landmarks.\nThe nucleus contains nearly all of the cell's DNA, surrounded by a network of fibrous intermediate filaments called the nuclear matrix, and is enveloped in a double membrane called the nuclear envelope. The nuclear envelope separates the fluid inside the nucleus, called the nucleoplasm, from the rest of the cell. The size of the nucleus is correlated to the size of the cell, and this ratio is reported across a range of cell types and species. In eukaryotes the nucleus in many cells typically occupies 10% of the cell volume. The nucleus is the largest organelle in animal cells. In human cells, the diameter of the nucleus is approximately six micrometres (\u03bcm).\nNuclear envelope and pores.\nThe nuclear envelope consists of two membranes, an inner and an outer nuclear membrane, perforated by nuclear pores. Together, these membranes serve to separate the cell's genetic material from the rest of the cell contents, and allow the nucleus to maintain an environment distinct from the rest of the cell. Despite their close apposition around much of the nucleus, the two membranes differ substantially in shape and contents. The inner membrane surrounds the nuclear content, providing its defining edge. Embedded within the inner membrane, various proteins bind the intermediate filaments that give the nucleus its structure. The outer membrane encloses the inner membrane, and is continuous with the adjacent endoplasmic reticulum membrane. As part of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, the outer nuclear membrane is studded with ribosomes that are actively translating proteins across membrane. The space between the two membranes is called the perinuclear space, and is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum lumen.\nIn a mammalian nuclear envelope there are between 3000 and 4000 nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) perforating the envelope. Each NPC contains an eightfold-symmetric ring-shaped structure at a position where the inner and outer membranes fuse. The number of NPCs can vary considerably across cell types; small glial cells only have about a few hundred, with large Purkinje cells having around 20,000. The NPC provides selective transport of molecules between the nucleoplasm and the cytosol. The nuclear pore complex is composed of approximately thirty different proteins known as nucleoporins. The pores are about 60\u201380 million daltons in molecular weight and consist of around 50 (in yeast) to several hundred proteins (in vertebrates). The pores are 100\u00a0nm in total diameter; however, the gap through which molecules freely diffuse is only about 9\u00a0nm wide, due to the presence of regulatory systems within the center of the pore. This size selectively allows the passage of small water-soluble molecules while preventing larger molecules, such as nucleic acids and larger proteins, from inappropriately entering or exiting the nucleus. These large molecules must be actively transported into the nucleus instead. Attached to the ring is a structure called the \"nuclear basket\" that extends into the nucleoplasm, and a series of filamentous extensions that reach into the cytoplasm. Both structures serve to mediate binding to nuclear transport proteins.\nMost proteins, ribosomal subunits, and some RNAs are transported through the pore complexes in a process mediated by a family of transport factors known as karyopherins. Those karyopherins that mediate movement into the nucleus are also called importins, whereas those that mediate movement out of the nucleus are called exportins. Most karyopherins interact directly with their cargo, although some use adaptor proteins. Steroid hormones such as cortisol and aldosterone, as well as other small lipid-soluble molecules involved in intercellular signaling, can diffuse through the cell membrane and into the cytoplasm, where they bind nuclear receptor proteins that are trafficked into the nucleus. There they serve as transcription factors when bound to their ligand; in the absence of a ligand, many such receptors function as histone deacetylases that repress gene expression.\nNuclear lamina.\nIn animal cells, two networks of intermediate filaments provide the nucleus with mechanical support: The nuclear lamina forms an organized meshwork on the internal face of the envelope, while less organized support is provided on the cytosolic face of the envelope. Both systems provide structural support for the nuclear envelope and anchoring sites for chromosomes and nuclear pores.\nThe nuclear lamina is composed mostly of lamin proteins. Like all proteins, lamins are synthesized in the cytoplasm and later transported to the nucleus interior, where they are assembled before being incorporated into the existing network of nuclear lamina. Lamins found on the cytosolic face of the membrane, such as emerin and nesprin, bind to the cytoskeleton to provide structural support. Lamins are also found inside the nucleoplasm where they form another regular structure, known as the \"nucleoplasmic veil\", that is visible using fluorescence microscopy. The actual function of the veil is not clear, although it is excluded from the nucleolus and is present during interphase. Lamin structures that make up the veil, such as LEM3, bind chromatin and disrupting their structure inhibits transcription of protein-coding genes.\nLike the components of other intermediate filaments, the lamin monomer contains an alpha-helical domain used by two monomers to coil around each other, forming a dimer structure called a coiled coil. Two of these dimer structures then join side by side, in an antiparallel arrangement, to form a tetramer called a \"protofilament\". Eight of these protofilaments form a lateral arrangement that is twisted to form a ropelike \"filament\". These filaments can be assembled or disassembled in a dynamic manner, meaning that changes in the length of the filament depend on the competing rates of filament addition and removal.\nMutations in lamin genes leading to defects in filament assembly cause a group of rare genetic disorders known as \"laminopathies\". The most notable laminopathy is the family of diseases known as progeria, which causes the appearance of premature aging in those with the condition. The exact mechanism by which the associated biochemical changes give rise to the aged phenotype is not well understood.\nNucleolus.\nThe nucleolus is the largest of the discrete densely stained, membraneless structures known as nuclear bodies found in the nucleus. It forms around tandem repeats of rDNA, DNA coding for ribosomal RNA (rRNA). These regions are called nucleolar organizer regions (NOR). The main roles of the nucleolus are to synthesize rRNA and assemble ribosomes. The structural cohesion of the nucleolus depends on its activity, as ribosomal assembly in the nucleolus results in the transient association of nucleolar components, facilitating further ribosomal assembly, and hence further association. This model is supported by observations that inactivation of rDNA results in intermingling of nucleolar structures.\nIn the first step of ribosome assembly, a protein called RNA polymerase I transcribes rDNA, which forms a large pre-rRNA precursor. This is cleaved into two large rRNA subunits \u2013 5.8S, and 28S, and a small rRNA subunit 18S. The transcription, post-transcriptional processing, and assembly of rRNA occurs in the nucleolus, aided by small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) molecules, some of which are derived from spliced introns from messenger RNAs encoding genes related to ribosomal function. The assembled ribosomal subunits are the largest structures passed through the nuclear pores.\nWhen observed under the electron microscope, the nucleolus can be seen to consist of three distinguishable regions: the innermost \"fibrillar centers\" (FCs), surrounded by the \"dense fibrillar component\" (DFC) (that contains fibrillarin and nucleolin), which in turn is bordered by the \"granular component\" (GC) (that contains the protein nucleophosmin). Transcription of the rDNA occurs either in the FC or at the FC-DFC boundary, and, therefore, when rDNA transcription in the cell is increased, more FCs are detected. Most of the cleavage and modification of rRNAs occurs in the DFC, while the latter steps involving protein assembly onto the ribosomal subunits occur in the GC.\nSplicing speckles.\nSpeckles are subnuclear structures that are enriched in pre-messenger RNA splicing factors and are located in the interchromatin regions of the nucleoplasm of mammalian cells.\nAt the fluorescence-microscope level they appear as irregular, punctate structures, which vary in size and shape, and when examined by electron microscopy they are seen as clusters of interchromatin granules. Speckles are dynamic structures, and both their protein and RNA-protein components can cycle continuously between speckles and other nuclear locations, including active transcription sites. Speckles can work with p53 as enhancers of gene activity to directly enhance the activity of certain genes. Moreover, speckle-associating and non-associating p53 gene targets are functionally distinct.\nStudies on the composition, structure and behaviour of speckles have provided a model for understanding the functional compartmentalization of the nucleus and the organization of the gene-expression machinery splicing snRNPs and other splicing proteins necessary for pre-mRNA processing. Because of a cell's changing requirements, the composition and location of these bodies changes according to mRNA transcription and regulation via phosphorylation of specific proteins. The splicing speckles are also known as nuclear speckles (nuclear specks), splicing factor compartments (SF compartments), interchromatin granule clusters (IGCs), and B snurposomes.\nB snurposomes are found in the amphibian oocyte nuclei and in \"Drosophila melanogaster\" embryos. B snurposomes appear alone or attached to the Cajal bodies in the electron micrographs of the amphibian nuclei. While nuclear speckles were originally thought to be storage sites for the splicing factors, a more recent study demonstrated that organizing genes and pre-mRNA substrates near speckles increases the kinetic efficiency of pre-mRNA splicing, ultimately boosting protein levels by modulation of splicing.\nCajal bodies and gems.\nA nucleus typically contains between one and ten compact structures called Cajal bodies or coiled bodies (CB), whose diameter measures between 0.2\u00a0\u03bcm and 2.0\u00a0\u03bcm depending on the cell type and species. When seen under an electron microscope, they resemble balls of tangled thread and are dense foci of distribution for the protein coilin. CBs are involved in a number of different roles relating to RNA processing, specifically small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and small nuclear RNA (snRNA) maturation, and histone mRNA modification.\nSimilar to Cajal bodies are Gemini of Cajal bodies, or gems, whose name is derived from the Gemini constellation in reference to their close \"twin\" relationship with CBs. Gems are similar in size and shape to CBs, and in fact are virtually indistinguishable under the microscope. Unlike CBs, gems do not contain small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), but do contain a protein called survival of motor neuron (SMN) whose function relates to snRNP biogenesis. Gems are believed to assist CBs in snRNP biogenesis, though it has also been suggested from microscopy evidence that CBs and gems are different manifestations of the same structure. Later ultrastructural studies have shown gems to be twins of Cajal bodies with the difference being in the coilin component; Cajal bodies are SMN positive and coilin positive, and gems are SMN positive and coilin negative.\nOther nuclear bodies.\nBeyond the nuclear bodies first described by Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal above (e.g., nucleolus, nuclear speckles, Cajal bodies) the nucleus contains a number of other nuclear bodies. These include polymorphic interphase karyosomal association (PIKA), promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) bodies, and paraspeckles. Although little is known about a number of these domains, they are significant in that they show that the nucleoplasm is not a uniform mixture, but rather contains organized functional subdomains.\nOther subnuclear structures appear as part of abnormal disease processes. For example, the presence of small intranuclear rods has been reported in some cases of nemaline myopathy. This condition typically results from mutations in actin, and the rods themselves consist of mutant actin as well as other cytoskeletal proteins.\nPIKA and PTF domains.\nPIKA domains, or polymorphic interphase karyosomal associations, were first described in microscopy studies in 1991. Their function remains unclear, though they were not thought to be associated with active DNA replication, transcription, or RNA processing. They have been found to often associate with discrete domains defined by dense localization of the transcription factor PTF, which promotes transcription of small nuclear RNA (snRNA).\nPML-nuclear bodies.\nPromyelocytic leukemia protein (PML-nuclear bodies) are spherical bodies found scattered throughout the nucleoplasm, measuring around 0.1\u20131.0\u00a0\u03bcm. They are known by a number of other names, including nuclear domain 10 (ND10), Kremer bodies, and PML oncogenic domains. PML-nuclear bodies are named after one of their major components, the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML). They are often seen in the nucleus in association with Cajal bodies and cleavage bodies. Pml-/- mice, which are unable to create PML-nuclear bodies, develop normally without obvious ill effects, showing that PML-nuclear bodies are not required for most essential biological processes.\nParaspeckles.\nDiscovered by Fox et al. in 2002, paraspeckles are irregularly shaped compartments in the interchromatin space of the nucleus. First documented in HeLa cells, where there are generally 10\u201330 per nucleus, paraspeckles are now known to also exist in all human primary cells, transformed cell lines, and tissue sections. Their name is derived from their distribution in the nucleus; the \"para\" is short for parallel and the \"speckles\" refers to the splicing speckles to which they are always in close proximity.\nParaspeckles sequester nuclear proteins and RNA and thus appear to function as a molecular sponge that is involved in the regulation of gene expression. Furthermore, paraspeckles are dynamic structures that are altered in response to changes in cellular metabolic activity. They are transcription dependent and in the absence of RNA Pol II transcription, the paraspeckle disappears and all of its associated protein components (PSP1, p54nrb, PSP2, CFI(m)68, and PSF) form a crescent shaped perinucleolar cap in the nucleolus. This phenomenon is demonstrated during the cell cycle. In the cell cycle, paraspeckles are present during interphase and during all of mitosis except for telophase. During telophase, when the two daughter nuclei are formed, there is no RNA Pol II transcription so the protein components instead form a perinucleolar cap.\nPerichromatin fibrils.\nPerichromatin fibrils are visible only under electron microscope. They are located next to the transcriptionally active chromatin and are hypothesized to be the sites of active pre-mRNA processing.\nClastosomes.\nClastosomes are small nuclear bodies (0.2\u20130.5\u00a0\u03bcm) described as having a thick ring-shape due to the peripheral capsule around these bodies. This name is derived from the Greek \"klastos\" (\u03ba\u03bb\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2), broken and \"soma\" (\u03c3\u1ff6\u03bc\u03b1), body. Clastosomes are not typically present in normal cells, making them hard to detect. They form under high proteolytic conditions within the nucleus and degrade once there is a decrease in activity or if cells are treated with proteasome inhibitors. The scarcity of clastosomes in cells indicates that they are not required for proteasome function. Osmotic stress has also been shown to cause the formation of clastosomes. These nuclear bodies contain catalytic and regulatory subunits of the proteasome and its substrates, indicating that clastosomes are sites for degrading proteins.\nFunction.\nThe nucleus provides a site for genetic transcription that is segregated from the location of translation in the cytoplasm, allowing levels of gene regulation that are not available to prokaryotes. The main function of the cell nucleus is to control gene expression and mediate the replication of DNA during the cell cycle.\nCell compartmentalization.\nThe nuclear envelope allows control of the nuclear contents, and separates them from the rest of the cytoplasm where necessary. This is important for controlling processes on either side of the nuclear membrane: In most cases where a cytoplasmic process needs to be restricted, a key participant is removed to the nucleus, where it interacts with transcription factors to downregulate the production of certain enzymes in the pathway. This regulatory mechanism occurs in the case of glycolysis, a cellular pathway for breaking down glucose to produce energy. Hexokinase is an enzyme responsible for the first step of glycolysis, forming glucose-6-phosphate from glucose. At high concentrations of fructose-6-phosphate, a molecule made later from glucose-6-phosphate, a regulator protein removes hexokinase to the nucleus, where it forms a transcriptional repressor complex with nuclear proteins to reduce the expression of genes involved in glycolysis.\nIn order to control which genes are being transcribed, the cell separates some transcription factor proteins responsible for regulating gene expression from physical access to the DNA until they are activated by other signaling pathways. This prevents even low levels of inappropriate gene expression. For example, in the case of NF-\u03baB-controlled genes, which are involved in most inflammatory responses, transcription is induced in response to a signal pathway such as that initiated by the signaling molecule TNF-\u03b1, binds to a cell membrane receptor, resulting in the recruitment of signalling proteins, and eventually activating the transcription factor NF-\u03baB. A nuclear localisation signal on the NF-\u03baB protein allows it to be transported through the nuclear pore and into the nucleus, where it stimulates the transcription of the target genes.\nThe compartmentalization allows the cell to prevent translation of unspliced mRNA. Eukaryotic mRNA contains introns that must be removed before being translated to produce functional proteins. The splicing is done inside the nucleus before the mRNA can be accessed by ribosomes for translation. Without the nucleus, ribosomes would translate newly transcribed (unprocessed) mRNA, resulting in malformed and nonfunctional proteins.\nReplication.\nThe main function of the cell nucleus is to control gene expression and mediate the replication of DNA during the cell cycle. It has been found that replication happens in a localised way in the cell nucleus. In the S phase of interphase of the cell cycle; replication takes place. Contrary to the traditional view of moving replication forks along stagnant DNA, a concept of \"replication factories\" emerged, which means replication forks are concentrated towards some immobilised 'factory' regions through which the template DNA strands pass like conveyor belts.\nGene expression.\nGene expression first involves transcription, in which DNA is used as a template to produce RNA. In the case of genes encoding proteins, that RNA produced from this process is messenger RNA (mRNA), which then needs to be translated by ribosomes to form a protein. As ribosomes are located outside the nucleus, mRNA produced needs to be exported.\nSince the nucleus is the site of transcription, it also contains a variety of proteins that either directly mediate transcription or are involved in regulating the process. These proteins include helicases, which unwind the double-stranded DNA molecule to facilitate access to it, RNA polymerases, which bind to the DNA promoter to synthesize the growing RNA molecule, topoisomerases, which change the amount of supercoiling in DNA, helping it wind and unwind, as well as a large variety of transcription factors that regulate expression.\nProcessing of pre-mRNA.\nNewly synthesized mRNA molecules are known as primary transcripts or pre-mRNA. They must undergo post-transcriptional modification in the nucleus before being exported to the cytoplasm; mRNA that appears in the cytoplasm without these modifications is degraded rather than used for protein translation. The three main modifications are 5' capping, 3' polyadenylation, and RNA splicing. While in the nucleus, pre-mRNA is associated with a variety of proteins in complexes known as heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs). Addition of the 5' cap occurs co-transcriptionally and is the first step in post-transcriptional modification. The 3' poly-adenine tail is only added after transcription is complete.\nRNA splicing, carried out by a complex called the spliceosome, is the process by which introns, or regions of DNA that do not code for protein, are removed from the pre-mRNA and the remaining exons connected to re-form a single continuous molecule. This process normally occurs after 5' capping and 3' polyadenylation but can begin before synthesis is complete in transcripts with many exons. Many pre-mRNAs can be spliced in multiple ways to produce different mature mRNAs that encode different protein sequences. This process is known as alternative splicing, and allows production of a large variety of proteins from a limited amount of DNA.\nDynamics and regulation.\nNuclear transport.\nThe entry and exit of large molecules from the nucleus is tightly controlled by the nuclear pore complexes. Although small molecules can enter the nucleus without regulation, macromolecules such as RNA and proteins require association karyopherins called importins to enter the nucleus and exportins to exit. \"Cargo\" proteins that must be translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus contain short amino acid sequences known as nuclear localization signals, which are bound by importins, while those transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm carry nuclear export signals bound by exportins. The ability of importins and exportins to transport their cargo is regulated by GTPases, enzymes that hydrolyze the molecule guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to release energy. The key GTPase in nuclear transport is Ran, which is bound to either GTP or GDP (guanosine diphosphate), depending on whether it is located in the nucleus or the cytoplasm. Whereas importins depend on RanGTP to dissociate from their cargo, exportins require RanGTP in order to bind to their cargo.\nNuclear import depends on the importin binding its cargo in the cytoplasm and carrying it through the nuclear pore into the nucleus. Inside the nucleus, RanGTP acts to separate the cargo from the importin, allowing the importin to exit the nucleus and be reused. Nuclear export is similar, as the exportin binds the cargo inside the nucleus in a process facilitated by RanGTP, exits through the nuclear pore, and separates from its cargo in the cytoplasm.\nSpecialized export proteins exist for translocation of mature mRNA and tRNA to the cytoplasm after post-transcriptional modification is complete. This quality-control mechanism is important due to these molecules' central role in protein translation. Mis-expression of a protein due to incomplete excision of exons or mis-incorporation of amino acids could have negative consequences for the cell; thus, incompletely modified RNA that reaches the cytoplasm is degraded rather than used in translation.\nAssembly and disassembly.\nDuring its lifetime, a nucleus may be broken down or destroyed, either in the process of cell division or as a consequence of apoptosis (the process of programmed cell death). During these events, the structural components of the nucleus\u00a0\u2014 the envelope and lamina\u00a0\u2014 can be systematically degraded.\nIn most cells, the disassembly of the nuclear envelope marks the end of the prophase of mitosis. However, this disassembly of the nucleus is not a universal feature of mitosis and does not occur in all cells. Some unicellular eukaryotes (e.g., yeasts) undergo so-called closed mitosis, in which the nuclear envelope remains intact. In closed mitosis, the daughter chromosomes migrate to opposite poles of the nucleus, which then divides in two. The cells of higher eukaryotes, however, usually undergo open mitosis, which is characterized by breakdown of the nuclear envelope. The daughter chromosomes then migrate to opposite poles of the mitotic spindle, and new nuclei reassemble around them.\nAt a certain point during the cell cycle in open mitosis, the cell divides to form two cells. In order for this process to be possible, each of the new daughter cells must have a full set of genes, a process requiring replication of the chromosomes as well as segregation of the separate sets. This occurs by the replicated chromosomes, the sister chromatids, attaching to microtubules, which in turn are attached to different centrosomes. The sister chromatids can then be pulled to separate locations in the cell. In many cells, the centrosome is located in the cytoplasm, outside the nucleus; the microtubules would be unable to attach to the chromatids in the presence of the nuclear envelope. Therefore, the early stages in the cell cycle, beginning in prophase and until around prometaphase, the nuclear membrane is dismantled. Likewise, during the same period, the nuclear lamina is also disassembled, a process regulated by phosphorylation of the lamins by protein kinases such as the CDC2 protein kinase. Towards the end of the cell cycle, the nuclear membrane is reformed, and around the same time, the nuclear lamina are reassembled by dephosphorylating the lamins.\nHowever, in dinoflagellates, the nuclear envelope remains intact, the centrosomes are located in the cytoplasm, and the microtubules come in contact with chromosomes, whose centromeric regions are incorporated into the nuclear envelope (the so-called closed mitosis with extranuclear spindle). In many other protists (e.g., ciliates, sporozoans) and fungi, the centrosomes are intranuclear, and their nuclear envelope also does not disassemble during cell division.\nApoptosis is a controlled process in which the cell's structural components are destroyed, resulting in death of the cell. Changes associated with apoptosis directly affect the nucleus and its contents, for example, in the condensation of chromatin and the disintegration of the nuclear envelope and lamina. The destruction of the lamin networks is controlled by specialized apoptotic proteases called caspases, which cleave the lamin proteins and, thus, degrade the nucleus' structural integrity. Lamin cleavage is sometimes used as a laboratory indicator of caspase activity in assays for early apoptotic activity. Cells that express mutant caspase-resistant lamins are deficient in nuclear changes related to apoptosis, suggesting that lamins play a role in initiating the events that lead to apoptotic degradation of the nucleus. Inhibition of lamin assembly itself is an inducer of apoptosis.\nThe nuclear envelope acts as a barrier that prevents both DNA and RNA viruses from entering the nucleus. Some viruses require access to proteins inside the nucleus in order to replicate and/or assemble. DNA viruses, such as herpesvirus replicate and assemble in the cell nucleus, and exit by budding through the inner nuclear membrane. This process is accompanied by disassembly of the lamina on the nuclear face of the inner membrane.\nDisease-related dynamics.\nInitially, it has been suspected that immunoglobulins in general and autoantibodies in particular do not enter the nucleus. Now there is a body of evidence that under pathological conditions (e.g. lupus erythematosus) IgG can enter the nucleus.\nNuclei per cell.\nMost eukaryotic cell types usually have a single nucleus, but some have no nuclei, while others have several. This can result from normal development, as in the maturation of mammalian red blood cells, or from faulty cell division.\nAnucleated cells.\nAn anucleated cell contains no nucleus and is, therefore, incapable of dividing to produce daughter cells. The best-known anucleated cell is the mammalian red blood cell, or erythrocyte, which also lacks other organelles such as mitochondria, and serves primarily as a transport vessel to ferry oxygen from the lungs to the body's tissues. Erythrocytes mature through erythropoiesis in the bone marrow, where they lose their nuclei, organelles, and ribosomes. The nucleus is expelled during the process of differentiation from an erythroblast to a reticulocyte, which is the immediate precursor of the mature erythrocyte. The presence of mutagens may induce the release of some immature \"micronucleated\" erythrocytes into the bloodstream. Anucleated cells can also arise from flawed cell division in which one daughter lacks a nucleus and the other has two nuclei.\nIn flowering plants, this condition occurs in sieve tube elements.\nMultinucleated cells.\nMultinucleated cells contain multiple nuclei. Most acantharean species of protozoa and some fungi in mycorrhizae have naturally multinucleated cells. Other examples include the intestinal parasites in the genus \"Giardia\", which have two nuclei per cell. Ciliates have two kinds of nuclei in a single cell, a somatic macronucleus and a germline micronucleus. In humans, skeletal muscle cells, also called myocytes and syncytium, become multinucleated during development; the resulting arrangement of nuclei near the periphery of the cells allows maximal intracellular space for myofibrils. Other multinucleate cells in the human are osteoclasts a type of bone cell. Multinucleated and binucleated cells can also be abnormal in humans; for example, cells arising from the fusion of monocytes and macrophages, known as giant multinucleated cells, sometimes accompany inflammation and are also implicated in tumor formation.\nA number of dinoflagellates are known to have two nuclei. Unlike other multinucleated cells these nuclei contain two distinct lineages of DNA: one from the dinoflagellate and the other from a symbiotic diatom.\nEvolution.\nAs the major defining characteristic of the eukaryotic cell, the nucleus's evolutionary origin has been the subject of much speculation. Four major hypotheses have been proposed to explain the existence of the nucleus, although none have yet earned widespread support.\nThe first model known as the \"syntrophic model\" proposes that a symbiotic relationship between the archaea and bacteria created the nucleus-containing eukaryotic cell. (Organisms of the Archaeal and Bacterial domains have no cell nucleus.) It is hypothesized that the symbiosis originated when ancient archaea similar to modern methanogenic archaea, invaded and lived within bacteria similar to modern myxobacteria, eventually forming the early nucleus. This theory is analogous to the accepted theory for the origin of eukaryotic mitochondria and chloroplasts, which are thought to have developed from a similar endosymbiotic relationship between proto-eukaryotes and aerobic bacteria. One possibility is that the nuclear membrane arose as a new membrane system following the origin of mitochondria in an archaebacterial host. The nuclear membrane may have served to protect the genome from damaging reactive oxygen species produced by the protomitochondria. The archaeal origin of the nucleus is supported by observations that archaea and eukarya have similar genes for certain proteins, including histones. Observations that myxobacteria are motile, can form multicellular complexes, and possess kinases and G proteins similar to eukarya, support a bacterial origin for the eukaryotic cell.\nA second model proposes that proto-eukaryotic cells evolved from bacteria without an endosymbiotic stage. This model is based on the existence of modern Planctomycetota bacteria that possess a nuclear structure with primitive pores and other compartmentalized membrane structures. A similar proposal states that a eukaryote-like cell, the , evolved first and phagocytosed archaea and bacteria to generate the nucleus and the eukaryotic cell.\nThe most controversial model, known as \"viral eukaryogenesis\", posits that the membrane-bound nucleus, along with other eukaryotic features, originated from the infection of a prokaryote by a virus. The suggestion is based on similarities between eukaryotes and viruses such as linear DNA strands, mRNA capping, and tight binding to proteins (analogizing histones to viral envelopes). One version of the proposal suggests that the nucleus evolved in concert with phagocytosis to form an early cellular \"predator\". Another variant proposes that eukaryotes originated from early archaea infected by poxviruses, on the basis of observed similarity between the DNA polymerases in modern poxviruses and eukaryotes. It has been suggested that the unresolved question of the evolution of sex could be related to the viral eukaryogenesis hypothesis.\nA more recent proposal, the \"exomembrane hypothesis\", suggests that the nucleus instead originated from a single ancestral cell that evolved a second exterior cell membrane; the interior membrane enclosing the original cell then became the nuclear membrane and evolved increasingly elaborate pore structures for passage of internally synthesized cellular components such as ribosomal subunits.\nHistory.\nThe nucleus was the first organelle to be discovered. What is most likely the oldest preserved drawing dates back to the early microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632\u20131723). He observed a \"lumen\", the nucleus, in the red blood cells of salmon. Unlike mammalian red blood cells, those of other vertebrates still contain nuclei.\nThe nucleus was also described by Franz Bauer in 1804 and in more detail in 1831 by Scottish botanist Robert Brown in a talk at the Linnean Society of London. Brown was studying orchids under the microscope when he observed an opaque area, which he called the \"areola\" or \"nucleus\", in the cells of the flower's outer layer. He did not suggest a potential function.\nIn 1838, Matthias Schleiden proposed that the nucleus plays a role in generating cells, thus he introduced the name \"cytoblast\" (\"cell builder\"). He believed that he had observed new cells assembling around \"cytoblasts\". Franz Meyen was a strong opponent of this view, having already described cells multiplying by division and believing that many cells would have no nuclei. The idea that cells can be generated de novo, by the \"cytoblast\" or otherwise, contradicted work by Robert Remak (1852) and Rudolf Virchow (1855) who decisively propagated the new paradigm that cells are generated solely by cells (\"\"). The function of the nucleus remained unclear.\nBetween 1877 and 1878, Oscar Hertwig published several studies on the fertilization of sea urchin eggs, showing that the nucleus of the sperm enters the oocyte and fuses with its nucleus. This was the first time it was suggested that an individual develops from a (single) nucleated cell. This was in contradiction to Ernst Haeckel's theory that the complete phylogeny of a species would be repeated during embryonic development, including generation of the first nucleated cell from a \"monerula\", a structureless mass of primordial protoplasm (\"Urschleim\"). Therefore, the necessity of the sperm nucleus for fertilization was discussed for quite some time. However, Hertwig confirmed his observation in other animal groups, including amphibians and molluscs. Eduard Strasburger produced the same results for plants in 1884. This paved the way to assign the nucleus an important role in heredity. In 1873, August Weismann postulated the equivalence of the maternal and paternal germ \"cells\" for heredity. The function of the nucleus as carrier of genetic information became clear only later, after mitosis was discovered and the Mendelian rules were rediscovered at the beginning of the 20th century; the chromosome theory of heredity was therefore developed."}
{"id": "6236", "revid": "85019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6236", "title": "Chardonnay socialist", "text": ""}
{"id": "6237", "revid": "48124406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6237", "title": "Christmas", "text": "Christmas is an annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ, observed primarily on December 25 as a religious and cultural celebration among billions of people around the world. A liturgical feast central to Christianity, Christmas preparation begins on the First Sunday of Advent and it is followed by Christmastide, which historically in the West lasts twelve days and culminates on Twelfth Night. Christmas Day is a public holiday in many countries, is observed religiously by a majority of Christians, as well as celebrated culturally by many non-Christians, and forms an integral part of the annual holiday season.\nThe traditional Christmas narrative recounted in the New Testament, known as the Nativity of Jesus, says that Jesus was born in Bethlehem, in accordance with messianic prophecies. When Joseph and Mary arrived in the city, the inn had no room, and so they were offered a stable where the Christ Child was soon born, with angels proclaiming this news to shepherds, who then spread the word.\nThere are different hypotheses regarding the date of Jesus's birth. In the early fourth century, the church fixed the date as December 25, the date of the winter solstice in the Roman Empire. It is nine months after Annunciation on March 25, also the Roman date of the spring equinox. Most Christians celebrate on December 25 in the Gregorian calendar, which has been adopted almost universally in the civil calendars used in countries throughout the world. However, part of the Eastern Christian Churches celebrate Christmas on December 25 of the older Julian calendar, which currently corresponds to January 7 in the Gregorian calendar. For Christians, celebrating that God came into the world in the form of man to atone for the sins of humanity is more important than knowing Jesus's exact birth date.\nThe customs associated with Christmas in various countries have a mix of pre-Christian, Christian, and secular themes and origins. Popular holiday traditions include gift giving; completing an Advent calendar or Advent wreath; Christmas music and caroling; watching Christmas movies; viewing a Nativity play; an exchange of Christmas cards; attending church services; a special meal; and displaying various Christmas decorations, including Christmas trees, Christmas lights, nativity scenes, poinsettias, garlands, wreaths, mistletoe, and holly. Additionally, several related and often interchangeable figures, known as Santa Claus, Father Christmas, Saint Nicholas, and Christkind, are associated with bringing gifts to children during the Christmas season and have their own body of traditions and lore. Because gift-giving and many other aspects of the Christmas festival involve heightened economic activity, the holiday has become a significant event and a key sales period for retailers and businesses. Over the past few centuries, Christmas has had a steadily growing economic effect in many regions of the world.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"Christmas\" is a shortened form of 'Christ's Mass'. The word is recorded as in 1038 and in 1131. (genitive ) is from the Greek (, 'Christ'), a translation of the Hebrew (, 'Messiah'), meaning 'anointed'; and is from the Latin , the celebration of the Eucharist.\nThe form \"Christenmas\" was also used during some periods, but is now considered archaic and dialectal. The term derives from Middle English , meaning 'Christian mass'. \"Xmas\" is an abbreviation of \"Christmas\" found particularly in print, based on the initial letter chi (\u03a7) in the Greek , although some style guides discourage its use. This abbreviation has precedent in Middle English (where is another abbreviation of the Greek word).\nOther names.\nThe holiday has had various other English names throughout its history. The Anglo-Saxons referred to the feast as \"midwinter\", or, more rarely, as (from the Latin below). \"Nativity\", meaning 'birth', is from the Latin . In Old English, ('Yule') referred to the period corresponding to December and January, which was eventually equated with Christian Christmas. 'Noel' (also 'Nowel' or 'Nowell', as in \"The First Nowell\") entered English in the late 14th century and is from the Old French or , itself ultimately from the Latin meaning 'birth (day)'.\n\"Koleda\" is the traditional Slavic name for Christmas and the period from Christmas to Epiphany or, more generally, to Slavic Christmas-related rituals, some dating to pre-Christian times.\nNativity.\nThe gospels of Luke and Matthew describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem to the Virgin Mary. In the Gospel of Luke, Joseph and Mary travel from Nazareth to Bethlehem in order to be counted for a census, and Jesus is born there and placed in a manger. Angels proclaim him a savior for all people, and three shepherds come to adore him. In the Gospel of Matthew, by contrast, three magi follow a star to Bethlehem to bring gifts to Jesus, born the king of the Jews. King Herod orders the massacre of all the boys less than two years old in Bethlehem, but the family flees to Egypt and later returns to Nazareth.\nHistory.\nEarly and medieval era.\nIn the 2nd century, the \"earliest church records\" indicate that \"Christians were remembering and celebrating the birth of the Lord\", an \"observance [that] sprang up organically from the authentic devotion of ordinary believers\"; although \"they did not agree upon a set date\". The earliest document to place Jesus's birthday on December 25 is the Chronograph of 354 (also called the Calendar of Filocalus), which also names it as the birthday of Sol Invictus (the 'Invincible Sun').\nLiturgical historians generally agree that this part of the text was written in Rome in AD 336. This is consistent with the assertion that the date was formally set by Pope Julius I, bishop of Rome from 337 to 352. Though Christmas did not appear on the lists of festivals given by the early Christian writers Irenaeus and Tertullian, the early Church Fathers John Chrysostom, Augustine of Hippo, and Jerome attested to December 25 as the date of Christmas toward the end of the fourth century. December 25 was the traditional date of the winter solstice in the Roman Empire, where most Christians lived, and the Roman festival (birthday of Sol Invictus) had been held on this date since 274 AD.\nIn the East, the birth of Jesus was celebrated in connection with the Epiphany on January 6. This holiday was not primarily about Christ's birth, but rather his baptism. Christmas was promoted in the East as part of the revival of Orthodox Christianity that followed the death of the pro-Arian Emperor Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. The feast was introduced in Constantinople in 379, in Antioch by John Chrysostom towards the end of the fourth century, probably in 388, and in Alexandria in the following century. The Georgian Iadgari demonstrates that Christmas was celebrated in Jerusalem by the sixth century.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, Christmas Day was overshadowed by Epiphany, which in western Christianity focused on the visit of the magi. However, the medieval calendar was dominated by Christmas-related holidays. The forty days before Christmas became the \"forty days of St. Martin\" (which began on November 11, the feast of St. Martin of Tours), now known as Advent. In Italy, former Saturnalian traditions were attached to Advent. Around the 12th century, these traditions transferred again to the Twelve Days of Christmas (December 25 \u2013 January 5); a time that appears in the liturgical calendars as Christmastide or Twelve Holy Days.\nIn 567, the Council of Tours put in place the season of Christmastide, proclaiming \"the twelve days from Christmas to Epiphany as a sacred and festive season, and established the duty of Advent fasting in preparation for the feast\". This was done in order to solve the \"administrative problem for the Roman Empire as it tried to coordinate the solar Julian calendar with the lunar calendars of its provinces in the east\".\nThe prominence of Christmas Day increased gradually after Charlemagne was crowned Emperor on Christmas Day in 800. King Edmund the Martyr was anointed on Christmas in 855 and King William I of England was crowned on Christmas Day 1066.\nBy the High Middle Ages, the holiday had become so prominent that chroniclers routinely noted where various magnates celebrated Christmas. King Richard II of England hosted a Christmas feast in 1377 at which 28 oxen and 300 sheep were eaten. The Yule boar was a common feature of medieval Christmas feasts. Caroling also became popular, and was originally performed by a group of dancers who sang. The group was composed of a lead singer and a ring of dancers that provided the chorus. Various writers of the time condemned caroling as lewd, indicating that the unruly traditions of Saturnalia and Yule may have continued in this form. \"Misrule\"\u2014drunkenness, promiscuity, gambling\u2014was also an important aspect of the festival. In England, gifts were exchanged on New Year's Day (a custom at the royal court), and there was special Christmas ale.\nChristmas during the Middle Ages was a public festival that incorporated ivy, holly, and other evergreens. Christmas gift-giving during the Middle Ages was usually between people with legal relationships, such as tenant and landlord. The annual indulgence in eating, dancing, singing, sporting, and card playing escalated in England, and by the 17th century the Christmas season featured lavish dinners, elaborate masques, and pageants. In 1607, King James I insisted that a play be acted on Christmas night and that the court indulge in games. It was during the Reformation in 16th\u201317th-century Europe that many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or \"Christkindl\", and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nFollowing the Protestant Reformation, many of the new denominations, including the Anglican Church and Lutheran Church, continued to celebrate Christmas. In 1629, the Anglican poet John Milton penned \"On the Morning of Christ's Nativity\", a poem that has since been read by many during Christmastide. Donald Heinz, a professor at California State University, Chico, states that Martin Luther \"inaugurated a period in which Germany would produce a unique culture of Christmas, much copied in North America\". Among the congregations of the Dutch Reformed Church, Christmas was celebrated as one of the principal evangelical feasts.\nHowever, in 17th century England, some groups such as the Puritans strongly condemned the celebration of Christmas, considering it a Catholic invention and the \"trappings of popery\" or the \"rags of the Beast\". In contrast, the established Anglican Church \"pressed for a more elaborate observance of feasts, penitential seasons, and saints' days. The calendar reform became a major point of tension between the Anglican party and the Puritan party\". The Catholic Church also responded, promoting the festival in a more religiously oriented form. King Charles I of England directed his noblemen and gentry to return to their landed estates in midwinter to keep up their old-style Christmas generosity. Following the Parliamentarian victory over Charles I during the English Civil War, England's Puritan rulers banned Christmas in 1647.\nProtests followed as pro-Christmas rioting broke out in several cities and for weeks Canterbury was controlled by the rioters, who decorated doorways with holly and shouted royalist slogans. Football, among the sports the Puritans banned on a Sunday, was also used as a rebellious force: when Puritans outlawed Christmas in England in December 1647 the crowd brought out footballs as a symbol of festive misrule. The book, \"The Vindication of Christmas\" (London, 1652), argued against the Puritans, and makes note of Old English Christmas traditions, dinner, roast apples on the fire, card playing, dances with \"plow-boys\" and \"maidservants\", old Father Christmas and carol singing. During the ban, semi-clandestine religious services marking Christ's birth continued to be held, and people sang carols in secret.\nIt was restored as a legal holiday in England with the Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 when Puritan legislation was declared null and void, with Christmas again freely celebrated in England. Many Calvinist clergymen disapproved of Christmas celebration. As such, in Scotland, the Presbyterian Church of Scotland discouraged the observance of Christmas, and though James VI commanded its celebration in 1618, attendance at church was scant. The Parliament of Scotland officially abolished the observance of Christmas in 1640, claiming that the church had been \"purged of all superstitious observation of days\". Whereas in England, Wales and Ireland Christmas Day is a common law holiday, having been a customary holiday since time immemorial, it was not until 1871 that it was designated a bank holiday in Scotland. Following the Restoration of Charles II, \"Poor Robin's Almanack\" contained the lines: \"Now thanks to God for Charles return, / Whose absence made old Christmas mourn. / For then we scarcely did it know, / Whether it Christmas were or no\". The diary of James Woodforde, from the latter half of the 18th century, details the observance of Christmas and celebrations associated with the season over a number of years.\nAs in England, Puritans in Colonial America staunchly opposed the observation of Christmas. The Pilgrims of New England pointedly spent their first December 25 in the New World working normally. Puritans such as Cotton Mather condemned Christmas both because scripture did not mention its observance and because Christmas celebrations of the day often involved boisterous behavior. Many non-Puritans in New England deplored the loss of the holidays enjoyed by the laboring classes in England. Christmas observance was outlawed in Boston in 1659. The ban on Christmas observance was revoked in 1681 by English governor Edmund Andros, but it was not until the mid-19th century that celebrating Christmas became fashionable in the Boston region.\nAt the same time, Christian residents of Virginia and New York observed the holiday freely. Pennsylvania Dutch settlers, predominantly Moravian settlers of Bethlehem, Nazareth, and Lititz in Pennsylvania and the Wachovia settlements in North Carolina, were enthusiastic celebrators of Christmas. The Moravians in Bethlehem had the first Christmas trees in America as well as the first Nativity Scenes. Christmas fell out of favor in the United States after the American Revolution, when it was considered an English custom.\nGeorge Washington attacked Hessian (German) mercenaries on the day after Christmas during the Battle of Trenton on December 26, 1776, Christmas being much more popular in Germany than in America at this time.\nWith the atheistic Cult of Reason in power during the era of Revolutionary France, Christian Christmas religious services were banned and the three kings cake was renamed the \"equality cake\" under anticlerical government policies.\n19th century.\nIn the early 19th century, Christmas festivities and services became widespread with the rise of the Oxford Movement in the Church of England that emphasized the centrality of Christmas in Christianity and charity to the poor, along with Washington Irving, Charles Dickens, and other authors emphasizing family, children, kind-heartedness, gift-giving, and Santa Claus (for Irving), or Father Christmas (for Dickens).\nIn the early-19th century, writers imagined Tudor-period Christmas as a time of heartfelt celebration. In 1843, Charles Dickens wrote the novel \"A Christmas Carol\", which helped revive the \"spirit\" of Christmas and seasonal merriment. Its instant popularity played a major role in portraying Christmas as a holiday emphasizing family, goodwill, and compassion.\nDickens sought to construct Christmas as a family-centered festival of generosity, linking \"worship and feasting, within a context of social reconciliation\". Superimposing his humanitarian vision of the holiday, in what has been termed \"Carol Philosophy\", Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit. A prominent phrase from the tale, \"Merry Christmas\", was popularized following the appearance of the story. This coincided with the appearance of the Oxford Movement and the growth of Anglo-Catholicism, which led a revival in traditional rituals and religious observances.\nThe term \"Scrooge\" became a synonym for miser, with the phrase \"Bah! Humbug!\" becoming emblematic of a dismissive attitude of the festive spirit. In 1843, the first commercial Christmas card was produced by Sir Henry Cole. The revival of the Christmas Carol began with William Sandys's \"Christmas Carols Ancient and Modern\" (1833), with the first appearance in print of \"The First Noel\", \"I Saw Three Ships\", \"Hark the Herald Angels Sing\" and \"God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen\", popularized in Dickens's \"A Christmas Carol\".\nIn Britain, the Christmas tree was introduced in the early 19th century by the German-born Queen Charlotte. In 1832, the future Queen Victoria wrote about her delight at having a Christmas tree, hung with lights, ornaments, and presents placed round it. After her marriage to her German cousin Prince Albert, by 1841 the custom became more widespread throughout Britain. An image of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle created a sensation when it was published in the \"Illustrated London News\" in 1848. A modified version of this image was published in \"Godey's Lady's Book\", Philadelphia in 1850. By the 1870s, putting up a Christmas tree had become common in America.\nIn America, interest in Christmas had been revived in the 1820s by several short stories by Washington Irving which appear in his \"The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.\" and \"Old Christmas\". Irving's stories depicted harmonious warm-hearted English Christmas festivities he experienced while staying in Aston Hall, Birmingham, England, that had largely been abandoned, and he used the tract \"Vindication of Christmas\" (1652) of Old English Christmas traditions, that he had transcribed into his journal as a format for his stories.\nIn 1822, Clement Clarke Moore wrote the poem \"A Visit From St. Nicholas\" (popularly known by its first line: \"Twas the Night Before Christmas\"). The poem helped popularize the tradition of exchanging gifts, and seasonal Christmas shopping began to assume economic importance. This also started the cultural conflict between the holiday's spiritual significance and its associated commercialism that some see as corrupting the holiday. In her 1850 book \"The First Christmas in New England\", Harriet Beecher Stowe includes a character who complains that the true meaning of Christmas was lost in a shopping spree.\nWhile the celebration of Christmas was not yet customary in some regions in the U.S., Henry Wadsworth Longfellow detected \"a transition state about Christmas here in New England\" in 1856. \"The old puritan feeling prevents it from being a cheerful, hearty holiday; though every year makes it more so\". In Reading, Pennsylvania, a newspaper remarked in 1861, \"Even our presbyterian friends who have hitherto steadfastly ignored Christmas\u2014threw open their church doors and assembled in force to celebrate the anniversary of the Savior's birth.\"\nThe First Congregational Church of Rockford, Illinois, \"although of genuine Puritan stock\", was 'preparing for a grand Christmas jubilee', a news correspondent reported in 1864. By 1860, fourteen states including several from New England had adopted Christmas as a legal holiday. In 1875, Louis Prang introduced the Christmas card to Americans. He has been called the \"father of the American Christmas card\". On June 28, 1870, Christmas was formally declared a United States federal holiday.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nDuring the First World War and particularly (but not exclusively) in 1914, a series of informal truces took place for Christmas between opposing armies. The truces, which were organised spontaneously by fighting men, ranged from promises not to shoot (shouted at a distance in order to ease the pressure of war for the day) to friendly socializing, gift giving and even sport between enemies. These incidents became a well known and semi-mythologised part of popular memory. They have been described as a symbol of common humanity even in the darkest of situations and used to demonstrate to children the ideals of Christmas.\nUnder the state atheism of the Soviet Union, after its foundation in 1917, Christmas celebrations\u2014along with other Christian holidays\u2014were prohibited in public. During the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, the League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, such as the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays, including Easter; the League established an antireligious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement. At the height of this persecution, in 1929, on Christmas Day, children in Moscow were encouraged to spit on crucifixes as a protest against the holiday. Instead, the importance of the holiday and all its trappings, such as the Christmas tree and gift-giving, was transferred to the New Year. It was not until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 that the persecution ended and Orthodox Christmas became a state holiday again for the first time in Russia after seven decades.\nIn 1991, the Gubbio Christmas Tree, in Italy, 650 meters high and decorated with over 700 lights, entered the Guinness Book of Records as the tallest Christmas tree in the world. European History Professor Joseph Perry wrote that likewise, in Nazi Germany, \"because Nazi ideologues saw organized religion as an enemy of the totalitarian state, propagandists sought to deemphasize\u2014or eliminate altogether\u2014the Christian aspects of the holiday\" and that \"Propagandists tirelessly promoted numerous Nazified Christmas songs, which replaced Christian themes with the regime's racial ideologies\".\nAs Christmas celebrations began to spread globally even outside traditional Christian cultures, several Muslim-majority countries began to ban the observance of Christmas, claiming it undermined Islam. In 2023, public Christmas celebrations were cancelled in Bethlehem, the city synonymous with the birth of Jesus. Palestinian leaders of various Christian denominations cited the ongoing Israel\u2013Hamas war in their unanimous decision to cancel celebrations.\nObservance and traditions.\nChristmas Day is celebrated as a major festival and public holiday in countries around the world, including many whose populations are mostly non-Christian. In some non-Christian areas, periods of former colonial rule introduced the celebration (e.g. Hong Kong); in others, Christian minorities or foreign cultural influences have led populations to observe the holiday. Countries such as Japan, where Christmas is popular despite there being only a small number of Christians, have adopted many of the cultural aspects of Christmas, such as gift-giving, decorations, and Christmas trees. A similar example is in Turkey, being Muslim-majority and with a small number of Christians, where Christmas trees and decorations tend to line public streets during the festival.\nMany popular customs associated with Christmas developed independently of the commemoration of Jesus's birth, with some claiming that certain elements are Christianized and have origins in pre-Christian festivals that were celebrated by pagan populations who were later converted to Christianity; other scholars reject these claims and affirm that Christmas customs largely developed in a Christian context. The prevailing atmosphere of Christmas has also continually evolved since the holiday's inception, ranging from a sometimes raucous, drunken, carnival-like state in the Middle Ages, to a tamer family-oriented and children-centered theme introduced in a 19th-century transformation. The celebration of Christmas was banned on more than one occasion within certain groups, such as the Puritans and Jehovah's Witnesses (who do not celebrate birthdays in general), due to concerns that it was too unbiblical. Celtic winter herbs such as mistletoe and ivy, and the custom of kissing under a mistletoe, are common in modern Christmas celebrations in the English-speaking countries.\nThe pre-Christian Germanic peoples\u2014including the Anglo-Saxons and the Norse\u2014celebrated a winter festival called Yule, held in the late December to early January period, yielding modern English \"yule\", today used as a synonym for \"Christmas\". In Germanic language-speaking areas, numerous elements of modern Christmas folk custom and iconography may have originated from Yule, including the Yule log, Yule boar, and the Yule goat. Often leading a ghostly procession through the sky (the Wild Hunt), the long-bearded god Odin is referred to as \"the Yule one\" and \"Yule father\" in Old Norse texts, while other gods are referred to as \"Yule beings\". On the other hand, as there are no reliable existing references to a Christmas log prior to the 16th century, the burning of the Christmas block may have been an early modern invention by Christians unrelated to the pagan practice.\nAmong countries with a strong Christian tradition, a variety of Christmas celebrations have developed that incorporate regional and local cultures. For example, in eastern Europe Christmas celebrations incorporated pre-Christian traditions such as the Koleda, which shares parallels with the Christmas carol.\nChurch attendance.\nChristmas Day (inclusive of its vigil, Christmas Eve), is a Festival in the Lutheran Churches, a solemnity in the Roman Catholic Church, and a Principal Feast of the Anglican Communion. Other Christian denominations do not rank their feast days but nevertheless place importance on Christmas Eve/Christmas Day, as with other Christian feasts like Easter, Ascension Day, and Pentecost. As such, for Christians, attending a Christmas Eve or Christmas Day church service plays an important part in the recognition of the Christmas season. Christmas, along with Easter, is the period of highest annual church attendance. A 2010 survey by LifeWay Christian Resources found that six in ten Americans attend church services during this time. In the United Kingdom, the Church of England reported an estimated attendance of 2.5million people at Christmas services in 2015.\nDecorations.\nNativity scenes are known from 10th-century Rome. They were popularised by Saint Francis of Assisi from 1223, quickly spreading across Europe. Different types of decorations developed across the Christian world, dependent on local tradition and available resources, and can vary from simple representations of the crib to far more elaborate sets \u2013 renowned manger scene traditions include the colourful in Poland, which imitate Krak\u00f3w's historical buildings as settings, the elaborate Italian (, and ), or the Proven\u00e7al cr\u00e8ches in southern France, using hand-painted terracotta figurines called . In certain parts of the world, notably Sicily, living nativity scenes following the tradition of Saint Francis are a popular alternative to static cr\u00e8ches. The first commercially produced decorations appeared in Germany in the 1860s, inspired by paper chains made by children. In countries where a representation of the Nativity scene is very popular, people are encouraged to compete and create the most original or realistic ones. Within some families, the pieces used to make the representation are considered a valuable family heirloom.\nThe traditional colors of Christmas decorations are red, green, and gold. Red symbolizes the blood of Jesus, which was shed in his crucifixion; green symbolizes eternal life, and in particular the evergreen tree, which does not lose its leaves in the winter; and gold is the first color associated with Christmas, as one of the three gifts of the Magi, symbolizing royalty.\nThe Christmas tree was first used by German Lutherans in the 16th century, with records indicating that a Christmas tree was placed in the Cathedral of Strassburg in 1539, under the leadership of the Protestant Reformer, Martin Bucer. In the United States, these \"German Lutherans brought the decorated Christmas tree with them; the Moravians put lighted candles on those trees\". When decorating the Christmas tree, many individuals place a star at the top of the tree symbolizing the Star of Bethlehem, a fact recorded by \"The School Journal\" in 1897. Professor David Albert Jones of Oxford University writes that in the 19th century, it became popular for people to also use an angel to top the Christmas tree in order to symbolize the angels mentioned in the accounts of the Nativity of Jesus. Additionally, in the context of a Christian celebration of Christmas, the Christmas tree, being evergreen in colour, is symbolic of Christ, who offers eternal life; the candles or lights on the tree represent the Light of the World\u2014Jesus\u2014born in Bethlehem. Christian services for family use and public worship have been published for the blessing of a Christmas tree, after it has been erected. The Christmas tree is considered by some as Christianisation of pagan tradition and ritual surrounding the Winter Solstice, which included the use of evergreen boughs, and an adaptation of pagan tree worship; according to eighth-century biographer \u00c6ddi Stephanus, Saint Boniface (634\u2013709), who was a missionary in Germany, took an ax to an oak tree dedicated to Thor and pointed out a fir tree, which he stated was a more fitting object of reverence because it pointed to heaven and it had a triangular shape, which he said was symbolic of the Trinity. The English language phrase \"Christmas tree\" is first recorded in 1835 and represents an importation from the German language.\nSince the 16th century, the poinsettia, a native plant from Mexico, has been associated with Christmas carrying the Christian symbolism of the Star of Bethlehem; in that country it is known in Spanish as the \"Flower of the Holy Night\". Other popular holiday plants include holly, mistletoe, red amaryllis, and Christmas cactus. Along with a Christmas tree, the interior of a home may be decorated with these plants, along with garlands and evergreen foliage. The display of Christmas villages has also become a tradition in many homes this season. The outside of houses may be decorated with lights and sometimes with illuminated sleighs, snowmen, and other Christmas figures. Mistletoe features prominently in European myth and folklore (for example, the legend of Baldr); it is an evergreen parasitic plant that grows on trees, especially apple and poplar, and turns golden when it is dried. It is customary to hang a sprig of mistletoe in the house at Christmas, and anyone standing underneath it may be kissed. \nOther traditional decorations include bells, candles, candy canes, stockings, wreaths, and angels. The wreaths and candles in each window are a more traditional Christmas display. The concentric assortment of leaves, usually from an evergreen, make up Christmas wreaths. Candles in each window are meant to demonstrate that Christians believe that Jesus Christ is the ultimate light of the world.\nChristmas lights and banners may be hung along streets, music played by speakers, and Christmas trees placed in prominent places. It is common in many parts of the world for town squares and consumer shopping areas to sponsor and display decorations. Rolls of brightly colored paper with secular or religious Christmas motifs are manufactured to wrap gifts. In some countries, Christmas decorations are traditionally taken down on Twelfth Night.\nNativity play.\nThe tradition of the Nativity scene comes from Italy. One of the earliest representation in art of the nativity was found in the early Christian Roman catacomb of Saint Valentine. It dates to about AD 380. Another, of similar date, is beneath the pulpit in Sant'Ambrogio, Milan.\nFor the Christian celebration of Christmas, the viewing of the Nativity play is one of the oldest Christmastime traditions, with the first reenactment of the Nativity of Jesus taking place in A.D. 1223 in the Italian town of Greccio. In that year, Francis of Assisi assembled a Nativity scene outside of his church in Italy and children sang Christmas carols celebrating the birth of Jesus.\nEach year, this grew larger, and people travelled from afar to see Francis' depiction of the Nativity of Jesus that came to feature drama and music. Nativity plays eventually spread throughout all of Europe, where they remain popular. Christmas Eve and Christmas Day church services often came to feature Nativity plays, as did schools and theatres. In France, Germany, Mexico, and Spain, Nativity plays are often reenacted outdoors in the streets.\nMusic and carols.\nThe earliest extant specifically Christmas hymns appear in fourth-century Rome. Latin hymns such as , written by Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, were austere statements of the theological doctrine of the Incarnation in opposition to Arianism. (\"Of the Father's love begotten\") by the Spanish poet Prudentius ( 413) is still sung in some churches today. In the 9th and 10th centuries, the Christmas \"Sequence\" or \"Prose\" was introduced in North European monasteries, developing under Bernard of Clairvaux into a sequence of rhymed stanzas. In the 12th century the Parisian monk Adam of St. Victor began to derive music from popular songs, introducing something closer to the traditional Christmas carol. Christmas carols in English appear in a 1426 work of John Awdlay who lists twenty five \"caroles of Cristemas\", probably sung by groups of 'wassailers', who went from house to house.\nThe songs now known specifically as carols were originally communal folk songs sung during celebrations such as \"harvest tide\" as well as Christmas. It was only later that carols began to be sung in church. Traditionally, carols have often been based on medieval chord patterns, and it is this that gives them their uniquely characteristic musical sound. Some carols like \"Personent hodie\", \"Good King Wenceslas\", and can be traced directly back to the Middle Ages. They are among the oldest musical compositions still regularly sung. (O Come all ye faithful) appeared in its current form in the mid-18th century.\nThe singing of carols increased in popularity after the Protestant Reformation in the Lutheran areas of Europe, as the Reformer Martin Luther wrote carols and encouraged their use in worship, in addition to spearheading the practice of caroling outside the Mass. The 18th-century English reformer Charles Wesley, a founder of Methodism, understood the importance of music to Christian worship. In addition to setting many psalms to melodies, he wrote texts for at least three Christmas carols. The best known was originally entitled \"Hark! How All the Welkin Rings\", later renamed \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing\".\nChristmas seasonal songs of a secular nature emerged in the late 18th century. The Welsh melody for \"Deck the Halls\" dates from 1794, with the lyrics added by Scottish musician Thomas Oliphant in 1862, and the American \"Jingle Bells\" was copyrighted in 1857. Other popular carols include \"The First Noel\", \"God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen\", \"The Holly and the Ivy\", \"I Saw Three Ships\", \"In the Bleak Midwinter\", \"Joy to the World\", \"Once in Royal David's City\" and \"While Shepherds Watched Their Flocks\". In the 19th and 20th centuries, African American spirituals and songs about Christmas, based in their tradition of spirituals, became more widely known. An increasing number of seasonal holiday songs were commercially produced in the 20th century, including jazz and blues variations. In addition, there was a revival of interest in early music, from groups singing folk music, such as The Revels, to performers of early medieval and classical music.\nOne of the most ubiquitous festive songs is \"We Wish You a Merry Christmas\", which originates from the West Country of England in the 1930s. Radio has covered Christmas music from variety shows from the 1940s and 1950s, as well as modern-day stations that exclusively play Christmas music from late November through December 25. Hollywood movies have featured new Christmas music, such as \"White Christmas\" in \"Holiday Inn\" and \"Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer\". Traditional carols have also been included in Hollywood films, such as \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing\" in \"It's a Wonderful Life\" (1946), and \"Silent Night\" in \"A Christmas Story\".\nTraditional cuisine.\nA special Christmas family meal is traditionally an important part of the holiday's celebration, and the food served varies greatly from country to country. Some regions have special meals for Christmas Eve, such as Sicily, where 12 kinds of fish are served. In the United Kingdom and countries influenced by its traditions, a standard Christmas meal includes turkey, goose or other large bird, gravy, potatoes, vegetables, sometimes bread, and cider. Special desserts are also prepared, such as Christmas pudding, mince pies, fruit cake and Yule log cake.\nIn Poland and Scandinavia, fish is often used for the traditional main course, but richer meat such as lamb is increasingly served. In Sweden, it is common with a special variety of sm\u00f6rg\u00e5sbord, where ham, meatballs, and herring play a prominent role. In Germany, France, and Austria, goose and pork are favored. Beef, ham, and chicken in various recipes are popular worldwide. The Maltese traditionally serve \"Imbuljuta tal-Qastan\", a chocolate and chestnuts beverage, after Midnight Mass and throughout the Christmas season. Slovenes prepare the traditional Christmas bread potica, \"b\u00fbche de No\u00ebl\" in France, \"panettone\" in Italy, and elaborate tarts and cakes. \"Panettone\", an Italian type of sweet bread and fruitcake, originally from Milan, Italy, usually prepared and enjoyed for Christmas and New Year in Western, Southern, and Southeastern Europe, as well as in South America, Eritrea, Australia and North America.\nThe eating of sweets and chocolates has become popular worldwide, and sweeter Christmas delicacies include the German \"stollen\", marzipan cake or candy, and Jamaican rum fruit cake. As one of the few fruits traditionally available to northern countries in winter, oranges have been long associated with special Christmas foods. Eggnog is a sweetened dairy-based beverage traditionally made with milk, cream, sugar, and whipped eggs (which gives it a frothy texture). Spirits such as brandy, rum, or bourbon are often added. The finished serving is often garnished with a sprinkling of ground cinnamon or nutmeg.\nCards.\nChristmas cards are illustrated messages of greeting exchanged between friends and family members during the weeks preceding Christmas Day. The traditional greeting reads \"wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year\", much like that of the first commercial Christmas card, produced by Sir Henry Cole in London in 1843. The custom of sending them has become popular among a wide cross-section of people with the emergence of the modern trend towards exchanging E-cards.\nChristmas cards are purchased in considerable quantities and feature artwork, commercially designed and relevant to the season. The content of the design might relate directly to the Christmas narrative, with depictions of the Nativity of Jesus, or Christian symbols such as the Star of Bethlehem, or a white dove, which can represent both the Holy Spirit and Peace on Earth. Other Christmas cards are more secular and can depict Christmas traditions, figures such as Santa Claus, objects directly associated with Christmas such as candles, holly, and baubles, or a variety of images associated with the season, such as Christmastide activities, snow scenes, and the wildlife of the northern winter.\nCommemorative stamps.\nA number of nations have issued commemorative stamps at Christmastide. Postal customers will often use these stamps to mail Christmas cards, and they are popular with philatelists. These stamps are regular postage stamps, unlike Christmas seals, and are valid for postage year-round. They usually go on sale sometime between early October and early December and are printed in considerable quantities.\nChristmas seals.\nChristmas seals were first issued to raise funding to fight and bring awareness to tuberculosis. The first Christmas seal was issued in Denmark in 1904, and since then other countries have issued their own Christmas seals.\nGift giving.\nThe exchanging of gifts is one of the core aspects of the modern Christmas celebration, making it the most profitable time of year for retailers and businesses throughout the world. On Christmas, people exchange gifts based on the Christian tradition associated with Saint Nicholas, and the gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh which were given to the baby Jesus by the Magi. The practice of gift giving in the Roman celebration of Saturnalia may have influenced Christian customs, but on the other hand the Christian \"core dogma of the Incarnation, however, solidly established the giving and receiving of gifts as the structural principle of that recurrent yet unique event\", because it was the Biblical Magi, \"together with all their fellow men, who received the gift of God through man's renewed participation in the divine life\". However, Thomas J. Talley holds that the Roman Emperor Aurelian placed the alternate festival on December 25 in order to compete with the growing rate of the Christian Church, which had already been celebrating Christmas on that date first.\nGift-bearing figures.\nA number of figures are associated with Christmas and the seasonal giving of gifts. Among these are Father Christmas, also known as Santa Claus (derived from the Dutch for Saint Nicholas), P\u00e8re No\u00ebl, and the Weihnachtsmann; Saint Nicholas or Sinterklaas; the Christkind; Kris Kringle; Joulupukki; tomte/nisse; Babbo Natale; Saint Basil; and Ded Moroz. The Scandinavian tomte (also called nisse) is sometimes depicted as a gnome instead of Santa Claus.\nThe best known of these figures today is red-dressed Santa Claus, of diverse origins. The name 'Santa Claus' can be traced back to the Dutch ('Saint Nicholas'). Nicholas was a 4th-century Greek bishop of Myra, a city in the Roman province of Lycia, whose ruins are from modern Demre in southwest Turkey. Among other saintly attributes, he was noted for the care of children, generosity, and the giving of gifts. His feast day, December 6, came to be celebrated in many countries with the giving of gifts.\nSaint Nicholas traditionally appeared in bishop's attire, accompanied by helpers, inquiring about the behaviour of children during the past year before deciding whether they deserved a gift or not. By the 13th century, Saint Nicholas was well known in the Netherlands, and the practice of gift-giving in his name spread to other parts of central and southern Europe. At the Reformation in 16th- and 17th-century Europe, many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or , corrupted in English to 'Kris Kringle', and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.\nThe modern popular image of Santa Claus, however, was created in the United States, and in particular in New York. The transformation was accomplished with the aid of notable contributors including Washington Irving and the German-American cartoonist Thomas Nast (1840\u20131902). Following the American Revolutionary War, some of the inhabitants of New York City sought out symbols of the city's non-English past. New York had originally been established as the Dutch colonial town of New Amsterdam and the Dutch Sinterklaas tradition was reinvented as Saint Nicholas.\nCurrent tradition in several Latin American countries (such as Venezuela and Colombia) holds that while Santa makes the toys, he then gives them to the Baby Jesus, who is the one who actually delivers them to the children's homes, a reconciliation between traditional religious beliefs and the iconography of Santa Claus imported from the United States.\nIn Italy's South Tyrol, Austria, the Czech Republic, Southern Germany, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Slovakia, and Switzerland, the Christkind (Je\u017e\u00ed\u0161ek in Czech, J\u00e9zuska in Hungarian and Je\u017ei\u0161ko in Slovak) brings the presents. Greek children get their presents from Saint Basil on New Year's Eve, the eve of that saint's liturgical feast. The German St. Nikolaus is not identical with the Weihnachtsmann (who is the German version of Santa Claus / Father Christmas). St. Nikolaus wears a bishop's dress and still brings small gifts (usually candies, nuts, and fruits) on December 6 and is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht. Although many parents around the world routinely teach their children about Santa Claus and other gift bringers, some have come to reject this practice, considering it deceptive.\nMultiple gift-giver figures exist in Poland, varying between regions and individual families. St Nicholas () dominates Central and North-East areas, the Starman () is most common in Greater Poland, Baby Jesus () is unique to Upper Silesia, with the Little Star () and the Little Angel () being common in the South and the South-East. Grandfather Frost () is less commonly accepted in some areas of Eastern Poland. It is worth noting that across all of Poland, St Nicholas is the gift giver on Saint Nicholas Day on December 6.\nSport.\nChristmas during the Middle Ages was a public festival with annual indulgences included the sporting. When Puritans outlawed Christmas in England in December 1647 the crowd brought out footballs as a symbol of festive misrule. The Orkney Christmas Day Ba' tradition continues. In the former top tier of English football, home and away Christmas Day and Boxing Day double headers were often played guaranteeing football clubs large crowds by allowing many working people their only chance to watch a game. Champions Preston North End faced Aston Villa on Christmas Day 1889 and the last December 25 fixture was in 1965 in England, Blackpool beating Blackburn Rovers 4\u20132. One of the most memorable images of the Christmas truce during World War I was the games of football played between the opposing sides on Christmas Day 1914.\nMore recently, in the United States, both NFL and NBA have held fixtures on Christmas Day.\nChristmas in China.\nDuring the late Qing dynasty the \"Shanghai News\" referred to Christmas by a variety of terms. In 1872 it initially called Christmas \"Jesus' birthday\" (), but from 1873 to 1881 it used terms such as \"Western countries' Winter Solstice\" () and \"Western peoples' Winter Solstice\" (), before finally settling on \"Foreign Winter Solstice\" () from 1882 onwards. This term was gradually replaced by the now standard term \"Festival of the birth of the Holy One\" () during the early years of the twentieth century.\nScandinavia and the Nordics.\nIn Scandinavia\u2014Denmark, Norway, Sweden\u2014where Lutheranism is dominant, Christmas (\"jul\") is celebrated on 24 December.In Sweden, it is traditional for companies to host a Christmas buffet lunch (julbord or jullunch) for their employees a week before Christmas. To prevent food poisoning during the holiday season, Swedish newspapers annually publish reports and laboratory tests warning the public to avoid leaving cold cuts, mayonnaise, and other perishable foods at room temperature to prevent spoilage. Christmas in Sweden is a time to indulge in festive meals, with roasted ham being the centerpiece of the feast. However, the exact day for enjoying this treat varies across regions, with each area having its own traditions. Another well-established custom in Sweden is tuning in to watch a special Disney television program at precisely 3 p.m. on December 24.\nIn Norway, the Christmas feast is held on December 24, with each region offering its own special dishes for Christmas dinner. After the meal, \"Julenissen\" (where \"jule\" means Christmas and \"nissen\" refers to a mythical elf in Norwegian folklore) brings gifts to well-behaved children. Following a quiet family gathering on December 25, another grand celebration takes place on Boxing Day, December 26, where children go door-to-door visiting neighbors and receiving treats.\nChoice of date.\nTheories.\nThere are several theories as to why December 25 was chosen as the date for Christmas. However, theology professor Susan Roll notes that \"no liturgical historian [...] goes so far as to deny that it has any sort of relation with the sun, the winter solstice and the popularity of solar worship in the later Roman Empire\". The early Church linked Jesus Christ to the Sun and referred to him as the 'Sun of Righteousness' () prophesied by Malachi. In the early fifth century, Augustine of Hippo and Maximus of Turin preached that it was fitting to celebrate Christ's birth at the winter solstice, because it marked the point when the hours of daylight begin to grow.\nThe 'history of religions' or 'substitution' theory suggests that the Church chose December 25 as Christ's birthday () to appropriate the Roman winter solstice festival (birthday of , the 'Invincible Sun'), held on this date since 274 AD; before the earliest evidence of Christmas on that date. Gary Forsythe, Professor of Ancient History, says that the followed \"the seven-day period of the (December 17\u201323), Rome's most joyous holiday season since Republican times, characterized by parties, banquets, and exchanges of gifts\". Roll says that \"the specific nature of the relation\" between Christmas and the \"Natalis Solis Invicti\" has not yet been \"conclusively proven from extant texts\".\nThe 'calculation theory' suggests that December 25 was calculated as nine months after a date chosen for Jesus's conception: 25 March, the Roman date of the spring equinox, which later became the Feast of the Annunciation.\nDate according to Julian calendar.\nSome jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church, including those of Russia, Georgia, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Jerusalem, mark feasts using the older Julian calendar. , there is a difference of 13 days between the Julian calendar and the modern Gregorian calendar, which is used internationally for most secular purposes. As a result, December 25 on the Julian calendar currently corresponds to January 7 on the calendar used by most governments and people in everyday life. Therefore, the aforementioned Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the day that is internationally considered to be January 7.\nHowever, following the Council of Constantinople in 1923, other Orthodox Christians, such as those belonging to the jurisdictions of Constantinople, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Antioch, Alexandria, Albania, Cyprus, Finland, and the Orthodox Church in America, among others, began using the Revised Julian calendar, which at present corresponds exactly to the Gregorian calendar. Therefore, these Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the same day that is internationally considered to be December 25.\nA further complication is added by the fact that the Armenian Apostolic Church continues the original ancient Eastern Christian practice of celebrating the birth of Christ not as a separate holiday, but on the same day as the celebration of his baptism (Theophany), which is on January 6. This is a public holiday in Armenia, and it is held on the same day that is internationally considered to be January 6, because since 1923 the Armenian Church in Armenia has used the Gregorian calendar.\nHowever, there is also a small Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem, which maintains the traditional Armenian custom of celebrating the birth of Christ on the same day as Theophany (January 6), but uses the Julian calendar for the determination of that date. As a result, this church celebrates \"Christmas\" (more properly called Theophany) on the day that is considered January 19 on the Gregorian calendar in use by the majority of the world.\nFollowing the 2022 invasion of its territory by Russia, Ukraine officially moved its Christmas date from January 7 to December 25, to distance itself from the Russian Orthodox Church that had supported Russia's invasion. This followed the Orthodox Church of Ukraine formally adopting the Revised Julian calendar for fixed feasts and solemnities.\nTable of dates.\nThere are four different dates used by different Christian groups to mark the birth of Christ, given in the table below.\nEconomy.\nChristmas is typically a peak selling season for retailers in many nations around the world; sales increase dramatically during this time as people purchase gifts, decorations, and supplies to celebrate. In the United States, the \"Christmas shopping season\" starts as early as October. In Canada, merchants begin advertising campaigns before Halloween (October 31) and step up their marketing following Remembrance Day on November 11. In the UK and Ireland, the Christmas shopping season starts from mid-November, around the time when high street Christmas lights are turned on. A concept devised by retail entrepreneur David Lewis, the first Christmas grotto opened in Lewis's department store in Liverpool, England in 1879. In the United States, it has been calculated that a quarter of all personal spending takes place during the Christmas/holiday shopping season. Figures from the US Census Bureau reveal that expenditure in department stores nationwide rose from $20.8billion in November 2004 to $31.9billion in December 2004, an increase of 54 percent. In other sectors, the pre-Christmas increase in spending was even greater, there being a November\u2013December buying surge of 100 percent in bookstores and 170 percent in jewelry stores. In the same year employment in American retail stores rose from 1.6million to 1.8million in the two months leading up to Christmas. Industries completely dependent on Christmas include Christmas cards, of which 1.9billion are sent in the United States each year, and live Christmas trees, of which 20.8million were cut in the US in 2002. In the UK in 2010, up to \u00a38billion was expected to be spent online at Christmas, approximately a quarter of total retail festive sales.\nIn most Western nations, Christmas Day is the least active day of the year for business and commerce; almost all retail, commercial and institutional businesses are closed, and almost all industries cease activity (more than any other day of the year), whether laws require such or not. In England and Wales, the Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 prevents all large shops from trading on Christmas Day. Similar legislation was approved in Scotland in 2007. Film studios release many high-budget movies during the holiday season, including Christmas films, fantasy movies or high-tone dramas with high production values to hopes of maximizing the chance of nominations for the Academy Awards.\nOne economist's analysis calculates that despite increased overall spending, Christmas is a deadweight loss under orthodox microeconomic theory, because of the effect of gift-giving. This loss is calculated as the difference between what the gift giver spent on the item and what the gift receiver would have paid for the item. It is estimated that in 2001, Christmas resulted in a $4billion deadweight loss in the US alone. Because of complicating factors, this analysis is sometimes used to discuss possible flaws in current microeconomic theory. Other deadweight losses include the effects of Christmas on the environment and the fact that material gifts are often perceived as white elephants, imposing cost for upkeep and storage and contributing to clutter.\nControversies.\nChristmas has been the subject of controversy and attacks from various sources, both Christian and non-Christian. Historically, it was prohibited by Puritans during their ascendency in the Commonwealth of England (1647\u20131660) and in Colonial New England where the Puritans outlawed the celebration of Christmas in 1659 on the grounds that Christmas was not mentioned in Scripture and therefore violated the Reformed regulative principle of worship. The Parliament of Scotland, which was dominated by Presbyterians, passed a series of acts outlawing the observance of Christmas between 1637 and 1690; Christmas Day did not become a public holiday in Scotland until 1871. Today, some conservative Reformed denominations such as the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland and the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America likewise reject the celebration of Christmas based on the regulative principle and what they see as its non-Scriptural origin. Celebrating Christmas is banned in the Jehovah's Witnesses, as the Governing Body believes that Christmas is originally pagan and again that it is without basis in Scripture. Christmas celebrations have also been prohibited by atheist states such as the Soviet Union and more recently majority Muslim states such as Somalia, Tajikistan and Brunei.\nSome Christians and organizations such as Pat Robertson's American Center for Law and Justice cite alleged attacks on Christmas (dubbing them a \"war on Christmas\"). Such groups claim that any specific mention of the term \"Christmas\" or its religious aspects is being increasingly censored, avoided, or discouraged by a number of advertisers, retailers, government (prominently schools), and other public and private organizations. One controversy is the occurrence of Christmas trees being renamed Holiday trees. In the U.S. there has been a tendency to replace the greeting \"Merry Christmas\" with \"Happy Holidays\", which is considered inclusive at the time of the Jewish celebration of Hanukkah. In the U.S., and Canada, where the use of the term \"Holidays\" is most prevalent, opponents have denounced its usage and avoidance of using the term \"Christmas\" as being politically correct. In 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in \"Lynch v. Donnelly\" that a Christmas display (which included a Nativity scene) owned and displayed by the city of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, did not violate the First Amendment. American Muslim scholar Abdul Malik Mujahid has said that Muslims must treat Christmas with respect, even if they disagree with it.\nThe government of the People's Republic of China officially espouses state atheism, and has conducted antireligious campaigns to this end. In December 2018, officials raided Christian churches prior to Christmastide and coerced them to close; Christmas trees and Santa Clauses were also forcibly removed."}
{"id": "6239", "revid": "20530117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6239", "title": "Contraction mapping", "text": " In mathematics, a contraction mapping, or contraction or contractor, on a metric space (\"M\",\u2009\"d\") is a function \"f\" from \"M\" to itself, with the property that there is some real number formula_1 such that for all \"x\" and \"y\" in \"M\",\nThe smallest such value of \"k\" is called the Lipschitz constant of \"f\". Contractive maps are sometimes called Lipschitzian maps. If the above condition is instead satisfied for\n\"k\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a01, then the mapping is said to be a non-expansive map.\nMore generally, the idea of a contractive mapping can be defined for maps between metric spaces. Thus, if (\"M\",\u2009\"d\") and (\"N\",\u2009\"d\"') are two metric spaces, then formula_3 is a contractive mapping if there is a constant formula_1 such that\nfor all \"x\" and \"y\" in \"M\".\nEvery contraction mapping is Lipschitz continuous and hence uniformly continuous (for a Lipschitz continuous function, the constant \"k\" is no longer necessarily less than 1).\nA contraction mapping has at most one fixed point. Moreover, the Banach fixed-point theorem states that every contraction mapping on a non-empty complete metric space has a unique fixed point, and that for any \"x\" in \"M\" the iterated function sequence \"x\", \"f\"\u2009(\"x\"), \"f\"\u2009(\"f\"\u2009(\"x\")), \"f\"\u2009(\"f\"\u2009(\"f\"\u2009(\"x\"))), ... converges to the fixed point. This concept is very useful for iterated function systems where contraction mappings are often used. Banach's fixed-point theorem is also applied in proving the existence of solutions of ordinary differential equations, and is used in one proof of the inverse function theorem.\nContraction mappings play an important role in dynamic programming problems.\nFirmly non-expansive mapping.\nA non-expansive mapping with formula_6 can be generalized to a firmly non-expansive mapping in a Hilbert space formula_7 if the following holds for all \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_7:\nwhere\nThis is a special case of formula_11 averaged nonexpansive operators with formula_12. A firmly non-expansive mapping is always non-expansive, via the Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality.\nThe class of firmly non-expansive maps is closed under convex combinations, but not compositions. This class includes proximal mappings of proper, convex, lower-semicontinuous functions, hence it also includes orthogonal projections onto non-empty closed convex sets. The class of firmly nonexpansive operators is equal to the set of resolvents of maximally monotone operators. Surprisingly, while iterating non-expansive maps has no guarantee to find a fixed point (e.g. multiplication by -1), firm non-expansiveness is sufficient to guarantee global convergence to a fixed point, provided a fixed point exists. More precisely, if formula_13, then for any initial point formula_14, iterating\nformula_15\nyields convergence to a fixed point formula_16. This convergence might be weak in an infinite-dimensional setting.\nSubcontraction map.\nA subcontraction map or subcontractor is a map \"f\" on a metric space (\"M\",\u2009\"d\") such that\nIf the image of a subcontractor \"f\" is compact, then \"f\" has a fixed point.\nLocally convex spaces.\nIn a locally convex space (\"E\",\u2009\"P\") with topology given by a set \"P\" of seminorms, one can define for any \"p\"\u2009\u2208\u2009\"P\" a \"p\"-contraction as a map \"f\" such that there is some \"k\"\"p\" &lt; 1 such that \u2264 . If \"f\" is a \"p\"-contraction for all \"p\"\u2009\u2208\u2009\"P\" and (\"E\",\u2009\"P\") is sequentially complete, then \"f\" has a fixed point, given as limit of any sequence \"x\"\"n\"+1 = \"f\"(\"x\"\"n\"), and if (\"E\",\u2009\"P\") is Hausdorff, then the fixed point is unique."}
{"id": "6240", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6240", "title": "Celtic language", "text": ""}
{"id": "6242", "revid": "968370392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6242", "title": "On-sight climbing", "text": ""}
{"id": "6243", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6243", "title": "Cascade Mountain Range", "text": ""}
{"id": "6246", "revid": "49085700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6246", "title": "Covalent bond", "text": "A covalent bond is a chemical bond that involves the sharing of electrons to form electron pairs between atoms. These electron pairs are known as shared pairs or bonding pairs. The stable balance of attractive and repulsive forces between atoms, when they share electrons, is known as covalent bonding. For many molecules, the sharing of electrons allows each atom to attain the equivalent of a full valence shell, corresponding to a stable electronic configuration. In organic chemistry, covalent bonding is much more common than ionic bonding.\nCovalent bonding also includes many kinds of interactions, including \u03c3-bonding, \u03c0-bonding, metal-to-metal bonding, agostic interactions, bent bonds, three-center two-electron bonds and three-center four-electron bonds. The term \"covalent bond\" dates from 1939. The prefix \"co-\" means \"jointly, associated in action, partnered to a lesser degree, \" etc.; thus a \"co-valent bond\", in essence, means that the atoms share \"valence\", such as is discussed in valence bond theory.\nIn the molecule , the hydrogen atoms share the two electrons via covalent bonding. Covalency is greatest between atoms of similar electronegativities. Thus, covalent bonding does not necessarily require that the two atoms be of the same elements, only that they be of comparable electronegativity. Covalent bonding that entails the sharing of electrons over more than two atoms is said to be delocalized.\nHistory.\nThe term \"covalence\" in regard to bonding was first used in 1919 by Irving Langmuir in a \"Journal of the American Chemical Society\" article entitled \"The Arrangement of Electrons in Atoms and Molecules\". Langmuir wrote that \"we shall denote by the term \"covalence\" the number of pairs of electrons that a given atom shares with its neighbors.\"\nThe idea of covalent bonding can be traced several years before 1919 to Gilbert N. Lewis, who in 1916 described the sharing of electron pairs between atoms (and in 1926 he also coined the term \"photon\" for the smallest unit of radiant energy). He introduced the \"Lewis notation\" or \"electron dot notation\" or \"Lewis dot structure\", in which valence electrons (those in the outer shell) are represented as dots around the atomic symbols. Pairs of electrons located between atoms represent covalent bonds. Multiple pairs represent multiple bonds, such as double bonds and triple bonds. An alternative form of representation, not shown here, has bond-forming electron pairs represented as solid lines.\nLewis proposed that an atom forms enough covalent bonds to form a full (or closed) outer electron shell. In the diagram of methane shown here, the carbon atom has a valence of four and is, therefore, surrounded by eight electrons (the octet rule), four from the carbon itself and four from the hydrogens bonded to it. Each hydrogen has a valence of one and is surrounded by two electrons (a duet rule) \u2013 its own one electron plus one from the carbon. The numbers of electrons correspond to full shells in the quantum theory of the atom; the outer shell of a carbon atom is the \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a02 shell, which can hold eight electrons, whereas the outer (and only) shell of a hydrogen atom is the \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01 shell, which can hold only two.\nWhile the idea of shared electron pairs provides an effective qualitative picture of covalent bonding, quantum mechanics is needed to understand the nature of these bonds and predict the structures and properties of simple molecules. Walter Heitler and Fritz London are credited with the first successful quantum mechanical explanation of a chemical bond (molecular hydrogen) in 1927. Their work was based on the valence bond model, which assumes that a chemical bond is formed when there is good overlap between the atomic orbitals of participating atoms.\nTypes of covalent bonds.\nAtomic orbitals (except for s orbitals) have specific directional properties leading to different types of covalent bonds. Sigma (\u03c3) bonds are the strongest covalent bonds and are due to head-on overlapping of orbitals on two different atoms. A single bond is usually a \u03c3 bond. Pi (\u03c0) bonds are weaker and are due to lateral overlap between p (or d) orbitals. A double bond between two given atoms consists of one \u03c3 and one \u03c0 bond, and a triple bond is one \u03c3 and two \u03c0 bonds.\nCovalent bonds are also affected by the electronegativity of the connected atoms which determines the chemical polarity of the bond. Two atoms with equal electronegativity will make nonpolar covalent bonds such as H\u2013H. An unequal relationship creates a polar covalent bond such as with H\u2212Cl. However polarity also requires geometric asymmetry, or else dipoles may cancel out, resulting in a non-polar molecule.\nCovalent structures.\nThere are several types of structures for covalent substances, including individual molecules, molecular structures, macromolecular structures and giant covalent structures. Individual molecules have strong bonds that hold the atoms together, but generally, there are negligible forces of attraction between molecules. Such covalent substances are usually gases, for example, HCl, SO2, CO2, and CH4. In molecular structures, there are weak forces of attraction. Such covalent substances are low-boiling-temperature liquids (such as ethanol), and low-melting-temperature solids (such as iodine and solid CO2). Macromolecular structures have large numbers of atoms linked by covalent bonds in chains, including synthetic polymers such as polyethylene and nylon, and biopolymers such as proteins and starch. Network covalent structures (or giant covalent structures) contain large numbers of atoms linked in sheets (such as graphite), or 3-dimensional structures (such as diamond and quartz). These substances have high melting and boiling points, are frequently brittle, and tend to have high electrical resistivity. Elements that have high electronegativity, and the ability to form three or four electron pair bonds, often form such large macromolecular structures.\nOne- and three-electron bonds.\nBonds with one or three electrons can be found in radical species, which have an odd number of electrons. The simplest example of a 1-electron bond is found in the dihydrogen cation, . One-electron bonds often have about half the bond energy of a 2-electron bond, and are therefore called \"half bonds\". However, there are exceptions: in the case of dilithium, the bond is actually stronger for the 1-electron than for the 2-electron Li2. This exception can be explained in terms of hybridization and inner-shell effects.\nThe simplest example of three-electron bonding can be found in the helium dimer cation, . It is considered a \"half bond\" because it consists of only one shared electron (rather than two); in molecular orbital terms, the third electron is in an anti-bonding orbital which cancels out half of the bond formed by the other two electrons. Another example of a molecule containing a 3-electron bond, in addition to two 2-electron bonds, is nitric oxide, NO. The oxygen molecule, O2 can also be regarded as having two 3-electron bonds and one 2-electron bond, which accounts for its paramagnetism and its formal bond order of 2. Chlorine dioxide and its heavier analogues bromine dioxide and iodine dioxide also contain three-electron bonds.\nMolecules with odd-electron bonds are usually highly reactive. These types of bond are only stable between atoms with similar electronegativities.\nResonance.\nThere are situations whereby a single Lewis structure is insufficient to explain the electron configuration in a molecule and its resulting experimentally-determined properties, hence a superposition of structures is needed. The same two atoms in such molecules can be bonded differently in different Lewis structures (a single bond in one, a double bond in another, or even none at all), resulting in a non-integer bond order. The nitrate ion is one such example with three equivalent structures. The bond between the nitrogen and each oxygen is a double bond in one structure and a single bond in the other two, so that the average bond order for each N\u2013O interaction is = .\nAromaticity.\nIn organic chemistry, when a molecule with a planar ring obeys H\u00fcckel's rule, where the number of \u03c0 electrons fit the formula 4\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a02 (where \"n\" is an integer), it attains extra stability and symmetry. In benzene, the prototypical aromatic compound, there are 6 \u03c0 bonding electrons (\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01, 4\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a02\u00a0=\u00a06). These occupy three delocalized \u03c0 molecular orbitals (molecular orbital theory) or form conjugate \u03c0 bonds in two resonance structures that linearly combine (valence bond theory), creating a regular hexagon exhibiting a greater stabilization than the hypothetical 1,3,5-cyclohexatriene.\nIn the case of heterocyclic aromatics and substituted benzenes, the electronegativity differences between different parts of the ring may dominate the chemical behavior of aromatic ring bonds, which otherwise are equivalent.\nHypervalence.\nCertain molecules such as xenon difluoride and sulfur hexafluoride have higher coordination numbers than would be possible due to strictly covalent bonding according to the octet rule. This is explained by the three-center four-electron bond (\"3c\u20134e\") model which interprets the molecular wavefunction in terms of non-bonding highest occupied molecular orbitals in molecular orbital theory and resonance of sigma bonds in valence bond theory.\nElectron deficiency.\nIn three-center two-electron bonds (\"3c\u20132e\") three atoms share two electrons in bonding. This type of bonding occurs in boron hydrides such as diborane (B2H6), which are often described as electron deficient because there are not enough valence electrons to form localized (2-centre 2-electron) bonds joining all the atoms. However, the more modern description using 3c\u20132e bonds does provide enough bonding orbitals to connect all the atoms so that the molecules can instead be classified as electron-precise.\nEach such bond (2 per molecule in diborane) contains a pair of electrons which connect the boron atoms to each other in a banana shape, with a proton (the nucleus of a hydrogen atom) in the middle of the bond, sharing electrons with both boron atoms. In certain cluster compounds, so-called four-center two-electron bonds also have been postulated.\nQuantum mechanical description.\nAfter the development of quantum mechanics, two basic theories were proposed to provide a quantum description of chemical bonding: valence bond (VB) theory and molecular orbital (MO) theory. A more recent quantum description is given in terms of atomic contributions to the electronic density of states.\nComparison of VB and MO theories.\nThe two theories represent two ways to build up the electron configuration of the molecule. For valence bond theory, the atomic hybrid orbitals are filled with electrons first to produce a fully bonded valence configuration, followed by performing a linear combination of contributing structures (resonance) if there are several of them. In contrast, for molecular orbital theory, a linear combination of atomic orbitals is performed first, followed by filling of the resulting molecular orbitals with electrons.\nThe two approaches are regarded as complementary, and each provides its own insights into the problem of chemical bonding. As valence bond theory builds the molecular wavefunction out of localized bonds, it is more suited for the calculation of bond energies and the understanding of reaction mechanisms. As molecular orbital theory builds the molecular wavefunction out of delocalized orbitals, it is more suited for the calculation of ionization energies and the understanding of spectral absorption bands.\nAt the qualitative level, both theories contain incorrect predictions. Simple (Heitler\u2013London) valence bond theory correctly predicts the dissociation of homonuclear diatomic molecules into separate atoms, while simple (Hartree\u2013Fock) molecular orbital theory incorrectly predicts dissociation into a mixture of atoms and ions. On the other hand, simple molecular orbital theory correctly predicts H\u00fcckel's rule of aromaticity, while simple valence bond theory incorrectly predicts that cyclobutadiene has larger resonance energy than benzene.\nAlthough the wavefunctions generated by both theories at the qualitative level do not agree and do not match the stabilization energy by experiment, they can be corrected by configuration interaction. This is done by combining the valence bond covalent function with the functions describing all possible ionic structures or by combining the molecular orbital ground state function with the functions describing all possible excited states using unoccupied orbitals. It can then be seen that the simple molecular orbital approach overestimates the weight of the ionic structures while the simple valence bond approach neglects them. This can also be described as saying that the simple molecular orbital approach neglects electron correlation while the simple valence bond approach overestimates it.\nModern calculations in quantum chemistry usually start from (but ultimately go far beyond) a molecular orbital rather than a valence bond approach, not because of any intrinsic superiority in the former but rather because the MO approach is more readily adapted to numerical computations. Molecular orbitals are orthogonal, which significantly increases the feasibility and speed of computer calculations compared to nonorthogonal valence bond orbitals.\nCovalency from atomic contribution to the electronic density of states.\nEvaluation of bond covalency is dependent on the basis set for approximate quantum-chemical methods such as COOP (crystal orbital overlap population), COHP (Crystal orbital Hamilton population), and BCOOP (Balanced crystal orbital overlap population). To overcome this issue, an alternative formulation of the bond covalency can be provided in this way.\nThe mass center of an atomic orbital formula_1 with quantum numbers for atom A is defined as\nwhere formula_3 is the contribution of the atomic orbital formula_4 of the atom A to the total electronic density of states of the solid\nwhere the outer sum runs over all atoms A of the unit cell. The energy window is chosen in such a way that it encompasses all of the relevant bands participating in the bond. If the range to select is unclear, it can be identified in practice by examining the molecular orbitals that describe the electron density along with the considered bond.\nThe relative position of the mass center of formula_6 levels of atom A with respect to the mass center of formula_7 levels of atom B is given as\nwhere the contributions of the magnetic and spin quantum numbers are summed. According to this definition, the relative position of the A levels with respect to the B levels is\nwhere, for simplicity, we may omit the dependence from the principal quantum number in the notation referring to \nIn this formalism, the greater the value of the higher the overlap of the selected atomic bands, and thus the electron density described by those orbitals gives a more covalent bond. The quantity is denoted as the \"covalency\" of the bond, which is specified in the same units of the energy .\nAnalogous effect in nuclear systems.\nAn analogous effect to covalent binding is believed to occur in some nuclear systems, with the difference that the shared fermions are quarks rather than electrons. High energy proton-proton scattering cross-section indicates that quark interchange of either u or d quarks is the dominant process of the nuclear force at short distance. In particular, it dominates over the Yukawa interaction where a meson is exchanged. Therefore, covalent binding by quark interchange is expected to be the dominating mechanism of nuclear binding at small distance when the bound hadrons have covalence quarks in common."}
{"id": "6247", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6247", "title": "Condensation polymer", "text": "In polymer chemistry, condensation polymers are any kind of polymers whose process of polymerization involves a condensation reaction (i.e. a small molecule, such as water or methanol, is produced as a byproduct). Natural proteins as well as some common plastics such as nylon and PETE are formed in this way. Condensation polymers are formed by polycondensation, when the polymer is formed by condensation reactions between species of all degrees of polymerization, or by condensative chain polymerization, when the polymer is formed by sequential addition of monomers to an active site in a chain reaction. The main alternative forms of polymerization are chain polymerization and polyaddition, both of which give addition polymers.\nCondensation polymerization is a form of step-growth polymerization. Linear polymers are produced from bifunctional monomers, i.e. compounds with two reactive end-groups. Common condensation polymers include polyesters, polyamides such as nylon, polyacetals, and proteins.\nPolyamides.\nOne important class of condensation polymers are polyamides. They arise from the reaction of carboxylic acid and an amine. Examples include nylons and proteins. When prepared from amino-carboxylic acids, e.g. amino acids, the stoichiometry of the polymerization includes co-formation of water:\nWhen prepared from diamines and dicarboxylic acids, e.g. the production of nylon 66, the polymerization produces two molecules of water per repeat unit:\nPolyesters.\nAnother important class of condensation polymers are polyesters. They arise from the reaction of a carboxylic acid and an alcohol. An example is polyethyleneterephthalate, the common plastic PETE (recycling #1 in the USA):\nSafety and environmental considerations.\nCondensation polymers tend to be more biodegradable than addition polymers. The peptide or ester bonds between monomers can be hydrolysed, especially in the presence of catalysts or bacterial enzymes."}
{"id": "6249", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6249", "title": "Timeline of computing", "text": "Timeline of computing presents events in the history of computing organized by year and grouped into six topic areas: predictions and concepts, first use and inventions, hardware systems and processors, operating systems, programming languages, and new application areas.\nDetailed computing timelines: before 1950, 1950\u20131979, 1980\u20131989, 1990\u20131999, 2000\u20132009, 2010\u20132019, 2020\u2013present"}
{"id": "6250", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6250", "title": "Colorado Springs, Colorado", "text": "Colorado Springs is a city in and the county seat of El Paso County, Colorado, United States. It is the most populous city in El Paso County, with a population of 478,961 at the 2020 census, a 15.02% increase since 2010. Colorado Springs is the second-most populous city and the most extensive city in the state of Colorado, and the 39th-most-populous city in the United States. It is the principal city of the Colorado Springs metropolitan area, which had 755,105 residents in 2020, and the second-most prominent city of the Front Range Urban Corridor. It is located in east-central Colorado on Fountain Creek, south of Denver.\nAt the city stands over above sea level. Colorado Springs is near the base of Pikes Peak, which rises above sea level on the eastern edge of the Southern Rocky Mountains. The city is the largest city north of Mexico above in elevation.\nHistory.\nThe Ute, Arapaho and Cheyenne peoples were the first recorded inhabiting the area which would become Colorado Springs. Part of the territory included in the United States' 1803 Louisiana Purchase, the current city area was designated part of the 1854 Kansas Territory. In 1859, after the first local settlement was established, it became part of the Jefferson Territory on October 24 and of El Paso County on November 28. Colorado City at the Front Range confluence of Fountain and Camp creeks was \"formally organized on August13, 1859\" during the Pikes Peak Gold Rush. It served as the capital of the Colorado Territory from November 5, 1861, until August 14, 1862, when the capital was moved to Golden, before it was finally moved to Denver in 1867. So many immigrants from England had settled in Colorado Springs by the early 1870s that Colorado Springs was locally referred to as \"Little London\". In 1871 the Colorado Springs Company laid out the towns of La Font (later called Manitou Springs) and Fountain Colony, upstream and downstream respectively, of Colorado City. Within a year, Fountain Colony was renamed Colorado Springs and officially incorporated. The El Paso County seat shifted from Colorado City in 1873 to the Town of Colorado Springs. On December 1, 1880, Colorado Springs expanded northward with two annexations.\nThe second period of annexations was during 188990, and included Seavey's Addition, West Colorado Springs, East End, and another North End addition. In 1891 the Broadmoor Land Company built the Broadmoor suburb, which included the Broadmoor Casino, and by December 12, 1895, the city had \"four Mining Exchanges and 275 mining brokers.\" By 1898, the city was designated into quadrants by the north-south Cascade Avenue and the east-west Washington/Pikes Peak avenues.\nFrom 1899 to 1901 Tesla Experimental Station operated on Knob Hill, and aircraft flights to the Broadmoor's neighboring fields began in 1919. Alexander Airport north of the city opened in 1925, and in 1927 the original Colorado Springs Municipal Airport land was purchased east of the city.\nThe city's military presence began during World War II, beginning with Camp Carson (now the 135,000-acre Fort Carson base) that was established in 1941. During the war, the United States Army Air Forces leased land adjacent to the municipal airfield, naming it Peterson Field in December 1942.\nIn November 1950, Ent Air Force Base was selected as the Cold War headquarters for Air Defense Command (ADC). The former WWII Army Air Base, Peterson Field, which had been inactivated at the end of the war, was re-opened in 1951 as a U.S. Air Force base. \u00a0North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) was established as a hardened command and control center within the Cheyenne Mountain Complex during the Cold War.\nBetween 1965 and 1968, the University of Colorado Colorado Springs, Pikes Peak State College and Colorado Technical University were established in or near the city. In 1977 most of the former Ent AFB became a US Olympic training center. The Libertarian Party was founded within the city in the 1970s.\nOn October 1, 1981, the Broadmoor Addition, Cheyenne Canon, Ivywild, Skyway, and Stratton Meadows were annexed after the Colorado Supreme Court \"overturned a district court decision that voided the annexation\". Further annexations expanding the city include the Nielson Addition and Vineyard Commerce Park Annexation in September 2008.\nOn June 23, 2012, the Waldo Canyon fire began northwest of the city. The fire ended up destroying 347 homes and killing two people in the city. In total, over 32,000 residents had to be evacuated. At the time the fire was the most destructive in state history until it was surpassed by the Black Forest Fire the following year.\nGeography.\nThe city lies in a semi-arid Steppe region,with the Southern Rocky Mountains to the west, the Palmer Divide to the north, high plains further east, and high desert lands to the south when leaving Fountain and approaching Pueblo. Colorado Springs is or one hour and five minutes south of Denver by car using I-25.\nColorado Springs has the greatest total area of any municipality in Colorado. At the 2020 United States Census, the city had a total area of including of water.\nClimate.\nColorado Springs has a cooler, dry-winter monsoon influenced continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dwa\"/\"Cwa\"), and its location just east of the Rocky Mountains affords it the rapid warming influence from chinook winds during winter but also subjects it to drastic day-to-day variability in weather conditions. The city has abundant sunshine year-round, averaging 243 sunny days per year, and receives approximately of annual precipitation. Due to unusually low precipitation for several years after flooding in 1999, Colorado Springs enacted lawn water restrictions in 2002. These were lifted in 2005 but permanently reinstated in December 2019.\nColorado Springs is one of the most active lightning strike areas in the United States. This natural phenomenon led Nikola Tesla to select Colorado Springs as the preferred location to build his lab and study electricity.\nSeasonal climate.\nDecember is typically the coldest month, averaging . Historically, January had been the coldest month, but, in recent years, December has had both lower daily maxima and minima. Typically, there are 5.2 nights with sub- lows and 23.6 days where the high does not rise above freezing.\nSnowfall is usually moderate and remains on the ground briefly because of direct sun, with the city receiving per season, although the mountains to the west often receive in excess of triple that amount; March is the snowiest month in the region, both by total accumulation and number of days with measurable snowfall. In addition, 8 of the top 10 heaviest 24-hour snowfalls have occurred from March to May. Summers are warm, with July, the warmest month, averaging , and 18 days of + highs annually. Due to the high elevation and aridity, nights are usually relatively cool and rarely does the low remain above . Dry weather generally prevails, but brief afternoon thunderstorms are common, especially in July and August when the city receives the majority of its annual rainfall, due to the North American monsoon.\nThe first autumn freeze and the last freeze in the spring, on average, occur on October 2 and May 6, respectively; the average window for measurable snowfall (\u2265) is October 21 through April 25. Extreme temperatures range from on June 26, 2012 and most recently on June 21, 2016, down to on February 1, 1951, and December 9, 1919.\nDemographics.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, the population of the city of Colorado Springs was 478,961 (40th most populous U.S. city), the population of the Colorado Springs Metropolitan Statistical Area was 755,105 (79th most populous MSA), and the population of the Front Range Urban Corridor was 5,055,344.\nits more black people than 26,000 at least 100k alone\n2010 census.\nAs of the April 2010 census, 78.8% of the population of the city was White (non-Hispanic Whites were 70.7% of the population, compared with 86.6% in 1970), 16.1% Hispanic or Latino of any race (compared with 7.4% in 1970), 6.3% Black or African American, 3.0% Asian, 1.0% descended from indigenous peoples of the Americas, 0.3% descended from indigenous Hawaiians and other Pacific islanders, 5.5% of some other race, and 5.1% of two or more races. Mexican Americans made up 14.6% of the city's population, compared with 9.1% in 1990. The median age in the city was 35 years.\nEconomy.\nColorado Springs's economy is driven primarily by the military, the high-tech industry, and tourism, in that order. The city is experiencing growth in the service sectors. In June 2019, before the COVID-19 pandemic, the unemployment rate was 3.3%. The state's unemployment rate in June 2022 was 3.4% compared to 3.6% for the nation.\nMilitary.\n, there are nearly 45,000 active-duty troops in Colorado Springs. There are more than 100,000 veterans and thousands of reservists. The military and defense contractors supply more than 40% of the Pikes Peak region's economy.\nColorado Springs is home to the Peterson Space Force Base, Schriever Space Force Base, Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station, U.S. Space Command, and Space Operations Command\u2014 the largest contingent of space service military installations. They are responsible for intelligence gathering, space operations, and cyber missions.\nPeterson Space Force Base is responsible for the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) and the United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) headquarters, Space Operations Command, and Space Deltas 2, 3, and 7. Located at Peterson is the 302nd Airlift Wing, an Air Force Reserve unit, that transports passengers and cargo and fights wildfires.\nSchriever Space Force Base is responsible for Joint Task Force-Space Defense and Space Deltas 6, 8, and 9. The NORAD and USNORTHCOM Alternate Command Center is located at the Cheyenne Mountain Complex. Within the mountain complex, the Cheyenne Mountain Space Force Station has been operated by Space Operations Command. On January 13, 2021, the Air Force announced a new permanent home for Space Command, moving it from Colorado Springs to Huntsville, Alabama in 2026, but the decision could be reversed by Congress.\nArmy divisions are trained and stationed at Fort Carson. The United States Air Force Academy was established after World War II, on land donated by the City of Colorado Springs.\nDefense industry.\nThe defense industry forms a significant part of the Colorado Springs economy, with some of the city's largest employers being defense contractors. Some defense corporations have left or downsized city campuses, but slight growth has been recorded. Significant defense corporations in the city include Northrop Grumman, Boeing, General Dynamics, L3Harris Technologies, SAIC, ITT, Lockheed Martin, and Bluestaq. The Space Foundation is based in Colorado Springs.\nHigh-tech industry.\nA large percentage of Colorado Springs's economy is still based on manufacturing high-tech and complex electronic equipment. The high-tech sector in the Colorado Springs area has decreased its overall presence from 2000 to 2006 (from around 21,000 to around 8,000), with notable reductions in information technology and complex electronic equipment. Current trends project the high-tech employment ratio will continue to decrease.\nHigh-tech corporations offering fibre-optics to the premises connections within the city include: Lumen Technologies, Comcast and other providers as of 2023. Hewlett-Packard still has some sales, support, and SAN storage engineering center for the computer industry. Storage Networking Industry Association is the home of the SNIA Technology Center. Keysight Technologies, spun off in 2014 from Agilent, which was itself spun off from HP in 1999 as an independent, publicly traded company, has its oscilloscope research and development division based in Colorado Springs. Intel had 250 employees in 2009. The Intel facility is now used for the centralized unemployment offices, social services, El Paso county offices, and a bitcoin mining facility. Microchip Technology (formerly Atmel), is a chip fabrication organization. The Apple Inc. facility was sold to Sanmina-SCI in 1996.\nCulture and contemporary life.\nTourism.\nAlmost immediately following the arrival of railroads beginning in 1871, the city's location at the base of Pikes Peak and the Rocky Mountains made it a popular tourism destination. Tourism is the third largest employer in the Pikes Peak region, accounting for more than 16,000 jobs. In 2018, 23 million day and overnight visitors came to the area, contributing $2.4\u00a0billion in revenue.\nColorado Springs has more than 55 attractions and activities in the area, including Garden of the Gods park, United States Air Force Academy, the ANA Money Museum, Cheyenne Mountain Zoo, Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center at Colorado College, Old Colorado City, The National Museum of World War II Aviation, and the U.S. Olympic &amp; Paralympic Training Center. In 2020, the United States Olympic &amp; Paralympic Museum opened; the Flying W Ranch Chuckwagon Dinner &amp; Western Show reopened in 2020. A new Pikes Peak Summit Complex opened at the summit in 2021. The Manitou and Pikes Peak Railway also reopened in 2021.\nThe downtown Colorado Springs Visitor Information Center offers free area information to leisure and business travelers. The Cultural Office of the Pikes Peak Region (COPPeR), also downtown, supports and advocates for the arts throughout the Pikes Peak Region. It operates the PeakRadar website to communicate city events.\nAnnual cultural events.\nColorado Springs is home to the annual Colorado Springs Labor Day Lift Off, a hot air balloon festival that takes place over Labor Day weekend at the city's Memorial Park.\nOther annual events include: a comic book convention and science fiction convention called GalaxyFest in February, a pride parade called PrideFest in July, the Greek Festival, the Pikes Peak Ascent and Marathon, and the Steers &amp; Beers Whiskey and Beer Festival in August, and the Emma Crawford Coffin Races and Festival in nearby Manitou Springs and Arts Month in October.\nThe Colorado Springs Festival of Lights Parade is held the first Saturday in December. The parade is held on Tejon Street in Downtown Colorado Springs.\nBreweries.\nIn 2017, Colorado had the third-most craft breweries at 348. Breweries and microbreweries have become popular in Colorado Springs, which hosts over 30 of them.\nReligious institutions.\nAlthough houses of worship of almost every major world religion are within the city, Colorado Springs has in particular attracted a large influx of Evangelical Christians and Christian organizations in recent years. At one time Colorado Springs was the national headquarters for 81 different religious organizations, earning the city the tongue-in-cheek nicknames \"the Evangelical Vatican\" and \"The Christian Mecca\".\nReligious groups with regional or international headquarters in Colorado Springs include:\nMarijuana.\nAlthough Colorado voters approved Colorado Amendment 64, a constitutional amendment in 2012 legalizing retail sales of marijuana for recreational purposes, the Colorado Springs city council voted not to permit retail shops in the city, as was allowed in the amendment. Medical marijuana outlets continue to operate in Colorado Springs. In 2015, there were 91 medical marijuana clinics in the city, which reported sales of $59.6\u00a0million in 2014, up 11 percent from the previous year but without recreational marijuana shops. On April 26, 2016, Colorado Springs city council decided to extend the current six-month moratorium to eighteen months with no new licenses to be granted until May 2017. A scholarly paper suggested the city would give up $25.4\u00a0million in tax revenue and fees if the city continued to thwart the industry from opening within the city limits. As of March 1, 2018, there were 131 medical marijuana centers and no recreational cannabis stores. As of 2019 Colorado Springs is still one of seven towns that have only allowed for medical marijuana.\nIn popular culture.\nColorado Springs has been the subject of or setting for many books, films and television shows, and is a frequent backdrop for political thrillers and military-themed stories because of its many military installations and vital importance to the United States' continental defense. Notable television series using the city as a setting include \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\", \"Homicide Hunter\" and the \"Stargate\" series \"Stargate SG-1\", as well as the films \"WarGames\", \"The Prestige\", and \"BlacKkKlansman\".\nIn a North Korean propaganda video released in April 2013, Colorado Springs was singled out as one of four targets for a missile strike. The video failed to pinpoint Colorado Springs on the map, instead showing a spot somewhere in Louisiana.\nSports.\nOlympic sports.\nColorado Springs, dubbed Olympic City USA, is home to the United States Olympic &amp; Paralympic Training Center and the headquarters of the United States Olympic &amp; Paralympic Committee and the United States Anti-Doping Agency.\nFurther, over 50 national sports organizations (non-Olympic) headquarter in Colorado Springs. These include the National Strength and Conditioning Association, Sports Incubator, a various non-Olympic Sports (such as USA Ultimate), and more.\nColorado Springs and Denver hosted the 1962 World Ice Hockey Championships.\nThe city has a long association with the sport of figure skating, having hosted the U.S. Figure Skating Championships six times and the World Figure Skating Championships five times. It is home to the World Figure Skating Museum and Hall of Fame and the Broadmoor Skating Club, a notable training center for the sport. In recent years, the Broadmoor World Arena has hosted skating events such as Skate America and the Four Continents Figure Skating Championships.\nBaseball.\nColorado Springs is home to a professional baseball team, The Rocky Mountain Vibes who are a member of the Pioneer League an MLB Partner League\nPikes Peak International Hill Climb.\nThe Pikes Peak International Hill Climb (PPIHC), also known as \"The Race to the Clouds,\" is an annual invitational automobile and motorcycle hill climb to the summit of Pikes Peak, every year on the last Sunday of June. The highway wasn't completely paved until 2011.\nLocal collegiate teams.\nThe local colleges feature many sports teams. Notable among them are several nationally competitive NCAA Division I teams: United States Air Force Academy (Falcons) Football, Basketball and Hockey and Colorado College (Tigers) Hockey, and Women's Soccer.\nRodeo.\nColorado Springs was the original headquarters of the Professional Bull Riders (PBR) from its founding in 1992 until 2005, when the organization was moved to Pueblo.\nParks, trails and open space.\nThe city's Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services manage 136 neighborhood parks, eight community parks, seven regional parks, and five sports complexes, totaling . They also manage of trails, of which are park trails and are urban. There are of open space in 48 open-space areas.\nParks.\nGarden of the Gods is on Colorado Springs's western edge. It is a National Natural Landmark, with red/orange sandstone rock formations often viewed against a backdrop of the snow-capped Pikes Peak. This park is free to the public and offers many recreational opportunities, such as hiking, rock climbing, cycling, horseback riding and tours. It offers a variety of annual events, one of the most popular of which is the Starlight Spectacular, a recreational bike ride held every summer to benefit the Trails and Open Space Coalition of Colorado Springs.\nColorado Springs has several major city parks, such as Palmer Park, America the Beautiful Park in downtown, Memorial Park, which includes many sports fields, an indoor swimming pool and skating rink, a skateboard bowl and two half-pipes, and Monument Valley Park, which has walking and biking paths, an outdoor swimming pool and pickleball courts. Monument Valley Park also has Tahama Spring, the original spring in Colorado Springs. Austin Bluffs Park affords a place of recreation in eastern Colorado Springs. El Paso County Regional Parks include Bear Creek Regional Park, Bear Creek Dog Park, Fox Run Regional Park and Fountain Creek Regional Park and Nature Center. Ponderosa pine (\"Pinus ponderosa\"), Gambel oak (\"Quercus gambelii\"), narrowleaf yucca (\"Yucca angustissima\", syn. \"Yucca glauca\") and prickly pear cactus (\"Opuntia macrorhiza\").\nTrails.\nThree trails, the New Santa Fe Regional Trail, Pikes Peak Greenway and Fountain Creek Regional Trail, form a continuous path from Palmer Lake, through Colorado Springs, to Fountain, Colorado. The majority of the trail between Palmer Lake and Fountain is a soft surface breeze gravel trail. A major segment of the trail within the Colorado Springs city limits is paved. The trails, except Monument Valley Park trails, may be used for equestrian traffic. Motorized vehicles are not allowed on the trails. Many of the trails are interconnected, having main spine trails, like the Pikes Peak Greenway, that lead to secondary trails.\nGovernment.\nOn November 2, 2010, Colorado Springs voters adopted a council-strong mayor form of government. The City of Colorado Springs transitioned to the new system of government in 2011. Under the council-strong mayor system of government, the mayor is the chief executive and the city council is the legislative branch. The mayor is a full-time elected position and not a member of the council. The council has nine members, six of whom represent one of six equally populated districts each. The remaining three members are elected at-large.\nColorado Springs City Hall was built from 1902 to 1904 on land donated by W. S. Stratton.\nCity Council.\nThe Colorado Springs City Council consists of nine elected officials, six of whom represent districts and three of whom represent the city at-large.\nPolitics.\nIn 2017 Caleb Hannan wrote in \"Politico\" that Colorado Springs was \"staunchly Republican\", \"a right-wing counterweight to liberal Boulder\", and that a study ranked it \"the fourth most conservative city in America\". In 2016 Hannan wrote that downtown Colorado Springs had a different political vibe from the overall area's and that there were \"superficial signs of changing demographics\". Since 2020, Colorado Springs has continued to shift towards the political center. In 2022, Governor Jared Polis won the city in his bid for reelection. In the 2023 mayoral election, independent candidate Yemi Mobolade handily won the race and became the first elected non-Republican mayor of the city.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPublic schools\nThe public education in the city is divided into several school districts: \nPrivate schools\nIn addition the state of Colorado runs the Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind, a residential school for people up to age 21 and established in 1874, in the city.\nHigher education.\nState institutions offering bachelors and graduate degree programs in Colorado Springs include the University of Colorado Colorado Springs (UCCS) with more than 12,000 students and Pikes Peak State College which offers mostly two-year degree associate degrees. The United States Air Force Academy is a federal institution offering bachelor's degrees for officer candidates.\nPrivate non-profit institutions include Colorado College established in 1874 with about 2,000 undergraduates. Colorado Christian University has its Colorado Springs Center in the city.\nPrivate for-profit institutions include Colorado Technical University whose main campus is in Colorado Springs and IntelliTec College a technical training school.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways and roads.\nInterstate highways.\nColorado Springs is primarily served by one interstate highway. I-25 runs north and south through Colorado, and traverses the city for nearly , entering the city south of Circle Drive and exiting north of North Gate Boulevard. In El Paso County it is known as Ronald Reagan Highway.\nState and U.S. highways.\nA number of state and U.S. highways serve the city. State Highway 21 is a major east side semi-expressway from Black Forest to Fountain, known locally and co-signed as Powers Boulevard. State Highway 83 runs north\u2013south from central Denver to northern Colorado Springs. State Highway 94 runs east\u2013west from western Cheyenne County to eastern Colorado Springs where it terminates at US 24. US 24 is a major route through the city and county, providing access to Woodland Park via Ute Pass to the west and downtown, Nob Hill and numerous suburbs to the east. It is co-signed with Platte Ave after SH 21 and originally carried local traffic through town. The Martin Luther King Jr Bypass runs from I-25 near Circle Drive along Fountain Blvd to SH 21, then east again. State Highway 115 begins in Ca\u00f1on City, traveling north along the western edge of Fort Carson; when it reaches the city limits it merges with Nevada Avenue, a signed Business Route of US 85. US 85 and SH 115 are concurrent between Lake Avenue and I-25. US 85 enters the city at Fountain and was signed at Venetucci Blvd, Lake Avenue, and Nevada Avenue at various points in history; however most of US 85 is concurrent with I-25 and is not signed.\nCounty and city roads.\nIn November 2015, voters in Colorado Springs overwhelmingly passed ballot measure 2C, dedicating funds from a temporary sales tax increase to much needed road and infrastructure improvements over five years. This temporary increase is estimated to bring in approximately $50\u00a0million annually, which will be used solely to improve roads and infrastructure. The ballot measure passed by a margin of approximately 65\u201335%.\nIn 2004, the voters of Colorado Springs and El Paso County established the Pikes Peak Rural Transportation Authority.\nIn early 2010, the city of Colorado Springs approved an expansion of the northernmost part of Powers Boulevard to create an Interstate 25 bypass commonly referred to as the Copper Ridge Expansion.\nAirport.\nColorado Springs Airport (COS; ICAO: KCOS) has been in operation since 1925. It is the second-largest commercial airport in the state, after Denver International Airport (DEN; ICAO: KDEN). It covers of land at an elevation of approximately . COS is considered to be a joint-use civilian and military airport, as Peterson Space Force Base is a tenant of the airport. It has three paved runways: 17L/35R is , the runway 17R/35L is and the runway 13/31 is . The airport handled 2,134,618 passengers in 2022, and is served by American, Avelo, Delta, Southwest, Sun Country, and United.\nRailroads.\nFreight service is provided by Union Pacific and BNSF.\nOnce an important hub, the city was once served by four Class 1 railroads, as well as a number of smaller operators, some of which were narrow gauge, and an extensive streetcar system, the Colorado Springs and Interurban Railway.\nCurrently there is no intercity passenger service; the last remaining services connecting the Front Range cities ceased with the formation of Amtrak in 1971. Front Range Passenger Rail is a current proposal (as of 2023) to link the cities from Pueblo in the south, north to Fort Collins and possibly Cheyenne, Wyoming.\nBicycling.\nAs of 2017, Colorado Springs has of bike lanes and of paved trails. PikeRide is a local electric bike-share program that operates in urban core, Old Colorado City, and Manitou Springs.\nIn April 2018, the Colorado Springs City Council approved a Bike Master Plan. The vision of the city's Bike Master Plan is \"a healthy and vibrant Colorado Springs where bicycling is one of many transportation options for a large portion of the population, and where a well-connected and well-maintained network of urban trails, single-track, and on-street infrastructure offers a bicycling experience for present and future generations that is safe, convenient, and fun for getting around, getting in shape, or getting away.\" \nBike lanes in Colorado Springs have not been deployed without controversy. According to \"The Gazette\", their readers \"have mixed feelings for new bike lanes.\" In December 2016, the City removed a bike lane along Research Parkway due to overwhelming opposition; an online survey found that 80.5% of respondents opposed the bike lane. \"The Gazette\" has stated that since the Bike Master Plan was adopted by city council, \"no issue has elicited more argument in \"The Gazette\" pages,\" and due to this immense public interest, on February 25, 2019, \"The Gazette\" hosted a town hall meeting called \"Battle of the Bike Lanes\".\nWalkability.\nA 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Colorado Springs 34th most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities.\nBuses.\nMountain Metropolitan Transit (commonly referred to as MMT) is the primary public transportation provider for the Colorado Springs metropolitan region. MMT operates thirty-four bus routes, providing service for Colorado Springs, Manitou Springs, and Security-Widefield. The Downtown Terminal is the system's main hub, with the Citadel Mall, PPSC, and Chapel Hills Mall acting as secondary transfer stations.\nMountain Metro Mobility is an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) federally mandated complementary ADA paratransit service, which provides demand-response service for individuals with mobility needs that prevent them from using the fixed-route bus system.\nIntercity bus service is available through the state-ran Bustang service and Greyhound. Bustang runs frequent trips to Denver, and daily trips to Lamar via Pueblo.\nNeighborhoods and Historic Places.\nSee also \nSister cities.\nColorado Springs' sister cities are:\nColorado Springs's sister city organization began when it became partners with Fujiyoshida. The \"torii\" gate erected to commemorate the relationship stands at the corner of Bijou Street and Nevada Avenue, and is one of the city's most recognizable landmarks. The \"torii\" gate, crisscrossed bridge and shrine, in the median between Platte and Bijou Streets downtown, were a gift to Colorado Springs, erected in 1966 by the Rotary Club of Colorado Springs to celebrate the friendship between the two communities. A plaque near the \"torii\" gate states that \"the purpose of the sister city relationship is to promote understanding between the people of our two countries and cities\". The Fujiyoshida Student exchange program has become an annual event.\nIn 2006 and 2010, the Bankstown TAP (Talent Advancement Program) performed with the Youth Symphony and the Colorado Springs Children's Chorale as part of the annual \"In Harmony\" program. A notable similarity between Colorado Springs and its sister cities is their geographic positions: three of the seven cities are near the foot of a major mountain or mountain range, as is Colorado Springs."}
{"id": "6251", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6251", "title": "Professional certification", "text": "Professional certification, trade certification, or professional designation, often called simply \"certification\" or \"qualification\", is a designation earned by a person to assure qualification to perform a job or task. Not all certifications that use post-nominal letters are an acknowledgement of educational achievement, or an agency appointed to safeguard the public interest.\nOverview.\nA certification is a third-party attestation of an individual's level of knowledge or proficiency in a certain industry or profession. They are granted by authorities in the field, such as professional societies and universities, or by private certificate-granting agencies. Most certifications are time-limited; some expire after a period of time (e.g., the lifetime of a product that requires certification for use), while others can be renewed indefinitely as long as certain requirements are met. Renewal usually requires ongoing education to remain up-to-date on advancements in the field, evidenced by earning the specified number of continuing education credits (CECs), or continuing education units (CEUs), from approved professional development courses.\nMany certification programs are affiliated with professional associations, trade organizations, or private vendors interested in raising industry standards. Certification programs are often created or endorsed by professional associations, but are typically completely independent from membership organizations. Certifications are very common in fields such as aviation, construction, technology, environment, and other industrial sectors, as well as healthcare, business, real estate, and finance.\nAccording to \"The Guide to National Professional Certification Programs\" (1997) by Phillip Barnhart, \"certifications are portable, since they do not depend on one company's definition of a certain job\" and they provide potential employers with \"an impartial, third-party endorsement of an individual's professional knowledge and experience\".\nCertification is different from professional licensure. In the United States, licenses are typically issued by state agencies, whereas certifications are usually awarded by professional societies or educational institutes. Obtaining a certificate is voluntary in some fields, but in others, certification from a government-accredited agency may be legally required to perform certain jobs or tasks. In other countries, licenses are typically granted by professional societies or universities and require a certificate after about three to five years and so on thereafter. The assessment process for certification may be more comprehensive than that of licensure, though sometimes the assessment process is very similar or even the same, despite differing in terms of legal status.\nThe American National Standards Institute (ANSI) defines the standard for being a certifying agency as meeting the following two requirements:\nThe Institute for Credentialing Excellence (ICE) is a U.S.-based organization that sets standards for the accreditation of personnel certification and certificate programs based on the \"Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing\", a joint publication of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), the American Psychological Association (APA), and the National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME). Many members of the Association of Test Publishers (ATP) are also certification organizations.\nCategorization.\nThere are three general types of certification. Listed in order of development level and portability, they are: corporate (internal), product-specific, and profession-wide.\nCorporate, or \"internal\" certifications, are made by a corporation or low-stakes organization for internal purposes. For example, a corporation might require a one-day training course for all sales personnel, after which they receive a certificate. While this certificate has limited portability \u2013 to other corporations, for example \u2013 it is the most simple to develop.\nProduct-specific certifications are more involved, and are intended to be referenced to a product across all applications. This approach is very prevalent in the information technology (IT) industry, where personnel are certified on a version of software or hardware. This type of certification is portable across locations (for example, different corporations that use that software), but not across other products. Another example could be the certifications issued for shipping personnel, which are under international standards even for the recognition of the certification body, under the International Maritime Organization (IMO).\nThe most general type of certification is profession-wide. Certification in the medical profession is often offered by particular specialties. In order to apply professional standards, increase the level of practice, and protect the public, a professional organization might establish a certification. This is intended to be portable to all places a certified professional might work. Of course, this generalization increases the cost of such a program; the process to establish a legally defensible assessment of an entire profession is very extensive. An example of this is a certified public accountant\u00a0(CPA), which would not be certified for just one corporation or one piece of accountancy software but for general work in the profession.\nProfessional certificates awarded by tertiary education providers.\nMany tertiary education providers grant professional certificates as an award for the completion of an educational program. The curriculum of a professional certificate is most often in a focused subject matter. Many professional certificates have the same curriculum as master's degrees in the same subject. Many other professional certificates offer the same courses as master's degrees in the same subject, but require the student to take fewer total courses to complete the program. Some professional certificates have a curriculum that more closely resembles a baccalaureate major in the same field. The typical professional certificate program is between 200 and 300 class-hours in size. It is uncommon for a program to be larger or smaller than that. Most professional certificate programs are open enrollment, but some have admissions processes. A few universities put some of their professional certificates into a subclass they refer to as advanced professional certificates.\nAdvanced professional certificate.\n\"Advanced professional certificates\" are professional credentials designed to help professionals enhance their job performance and marketability in their respective fields. In many other countries, certificates are qualifications in higher education. In the United States, a certificate may be offered by an institute of higher education. These certificates usually signify that a student has reached a standard of knowledge of a certain vocational subject. Certificate programs can be completed more quickly than associate degrees and often do not have general education requirements.\nAn advanced professional certificate is a result of an educational process designed for individuals. Certificates are designed for both newcomers to the industry as well as seasoned professionals. Certificates are awarded by an educational program or academic institution. Completion of a certificate program indicates completion of a course or series of courses with a specific concentration that is different from an educational degree program. Course content for an advanced certificate is set forth through a variety of sources i.e. faculty, committee, instructors, and other subject matter experts in a related field. The end goal of an advanced professional certificate is so that professionals may demonstrate knowledge of course content at the end of a set period in time.\nAreas of certification.\nAccountancy, auditing and finance.\nThere are many professional bodies for accountants and auditors throughout the world; some of them are legally recognized in their jurisdictions.\nPublic accountants are the accountancy and control experts that are legally certified in different jurisdictions to work in public practices, certifying accounts as statutory auditors, eventually selling advice and services to other individuals and businesses. Today, however, many work within private corporations, financial industry, and government bodies.\nAccounting and external auditing.\nCf. Accountancy qualifications and regulation\nAviation.\nAviators are certified through theoretical and in-flight examinations. Requirements for certifications are quite equal in most countries and are regulated by each National Aviation Authority. The existing certificates or pilot licenses are:\nLicensing in these categories require not only examinations but also a minimum number of flight hours. All categories are available for Fixed-Wing Aircraft (airplanes) and Rotatory-Wing Aircraft (helicopters). Within each category, aviators may also obtain certifications in:\nUsually, aviators must be certified also in their log books for the type and model of aircraft they are allowed to fly. Currency checks as well as regular medical check-ups with a frequency of 6 months, 12 months, or 36 months, depending on the type of flying permitted, are obligatory. An aviator can fly only if holding:\nIn Europe, the ANSP, ATCO &amp; ANSP technicians are certified according to EUROCONTROL Safety Regulatory Requirement (ESARRs) (according to EU regulation 2096/2005 \"Common Requirements\").\nCommunications.\nIn the United States, several communications certifications are conferred by the Electronics Technicians Association.\nComputer technology.\nCertification is often used in the professions of software engineering and information technology.\nDance.\nConferred by the\u00a0International Dance Council CID\u00a0at\u00a0UNESCO, the International Certification of Dance Studies is awarded to students who have completed 150 hours of classes in a specific form of dance for Level 1. Another 150 hours are required for Level 2 and so on till Level 10. This is the only international certification for dance since the\u00a0International Dance Council CID\u00a0is the official body for all forms of dance; it is usually given in addition to local or national certificates, that is why it is colloquially called \"the dancer's passport\". Students cannot apply for this certification directly \u2013 they have to ask their school to apply on their behalf. This certification is awarded free of charge, there is no cost other than membership fees.\nInternational Dance Council CID\u00a0at\u00a0UNESCO\u00a0administers the\u00a0International Certification of Dance Studies.\nElectronics.\nIn the United States, several electronics certifications are provided by the Electronics Technicians Association.\nEmergency management.\nThe Federal Emergency Management Agency's EMI offers credentials and training opportunities for United States citizens. Students do not have to be employed by FEMA or be federal employees for some of the programs.\nEngineering.\nProfessional engineering is any act of planning, designing, composing, measuring, evaluating, inspecting, advising, reporting, directing or supervising, or managing any of the foregoing, that requires the application of engineering principles and that concerns the safeguarding of life, health, property, economic interests, the public interest or the environment.\nEvent planning.\nEvent planning includes budgeting, scheduling, site selection, acquiring necessary permits, coordinating transportation and parking, arranging for speakers or entertainers, arranging decor, event security, catering, coordinating with third-party vendors, and emergency plans.\nWarehousing management.\nA warehouse management system (WMS) is a part of the supply chain and primarily aims to control the movement and storage of materials within a warehouse and process the associated transactions, including shipping, receiving, putaway and picking. The systems also direct and optimize stock putaway based on real-time information about the status of bin utilization. A WMS monitors the progress of products through the warehouse. It involves the physical warehouse infrastructure, tracking systems, and communication between product stations.\nMore precisely, warehouse management involves the receipt, storage and movement of goods, (normally finished goods), to intermediate storage locations or to a final customer. In the multi-echelon model for distribution, there may be multiple levels of warehouses. This includes a central warehouse, a regional warehouses (serviced by the central warehouse) and potentially retail warehouses (serviced by the regional warehouses).\nExplosive atmospheres.\nIECEx covers the specialized field of explosion protection associated with the use of equipment in areas where flammable gases, liquids and combustible dusts may be present. This system provides the assurance that equipment is manufactured to meet safety standards, and that services such as installation, repair and overhaul also comply with IEC International Standards on 60079 series. The UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe), cited IECEx as one example of a practice model for the verification of conformity to IEC Standards, for European smaller countries with no certification schemes for such equipment. It published a \"Common Regulatory Framework\" as a suggestion for those countries implementing a certification program for the explosive atmospheres' segment.\nInsurance and risk management.\nIn the United States, insurance professionals are licensed separately by each state. Many individuals seek one or more certifications to distinguish themselves from their peers.\nLanguage education.\nTESOL is a large field of employment with widely varying degrees of regulation. Most provision worldwide is through the state school system of each individual country, and as such, the instructors tend to be trained primary- or secondary school teachers who are native speakers of the language of their pupils, and not of English. Though native speakers of English have been working in non-English speaking countries in this capacity for years, it was not until the last twenty-five years or so that there was any widespread focus on training particularly for this field. Previously, workers in this sort of job were people engaging in backpacker tourism hoping to earn some extra travel money or well-educated professionals in other fields volunteering, or retired people. These sort of people are certainly still to be found, but there are many who consider TESOL their main profession.\nOne of the problems facing these full-time teachers is the absence of an international governing body for the certification or licensure of English language teachers. However, Cambridge University and its subsidiary body UCLES are pioneers in trying to get some degree of accountability and quality control to consumers of English courses, through their CELTA and DELTA programs. Trinity College London has equivalent programs, the CertTESOL and the LTCL DipTESOL. They offer initial certificates in teaching, in which candidates are trained in language awareness and classroom techniques, and given a chance to practice teaching, after which feedback is reported. Both institutions have as a follow-up a professional diploma, usually taken after a year or two in the field. Although the initial certificate is available to anyone with a high school education, the diploma is meant to be a post-graduate qualification and can in fact be incorporated into a master's degree program.\nLegal affairs.\nAn increasing number of attorneys are choosing to be recognized as having special expertise in certain fields of law. According to the American Bar Association, a lawyer who is a certified specialist has been recognized by an independent professional certifying organization as having an enhanced level of skill and expertise, as well as substantial involvement in an established legal specialty. These organizations require a lawyer to demonstrate special training, experience and knowledge to ensure that the lawyer's recognition is meaningful and reliable. Lawyer conduct with regard to specialty certification is regulated by the states.\nLegal administrators vary in their day-to-day responsibilities and job requirements. The Association of Legal Administrators (ALA) is the credentialing body of the Certified Legal Manager (CLM) certification program. CLMs are recognized as administrators who have passed a comprehensive examination and have met other eligibility requirements.:\nLogistics and transport.\nLogistician is the profession in the logistics and transport sectors, including sea, air, land and rail modes. Professional qualification for logisticians usually carries post-nominal letters.\nCertification granting bodies include, but are not limited to, Institute for Supply Management (ISM), Association for Operations Management (APICS), Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport (CILT), International Society of Logistics (SOLE), Canadian Institute of Traffic and Transportation (CITT), and Allied Council for Commerce and Logistics (ACCL).\nManagement Consulting.\nManagement consulting is the practice of providing consulting services to organizations to improve their performance or in any way to assist in achieving any sort of organizational objectives.\nThe profession's primary certification is the \"Certified Management Consultant\" (CMC) designation.\nCertification granting bodies are the approximately 50 Institutes of Management Consulting belonging to the International Council of Management Consulting Institutes (ICMCI). \nMinisters.\nChurches have their own process of who may use various religious titles. Protestant churches typically require a Masters of Divinity, accreditation by the denomination and ordination by the local church in order for a minister to become a \"Reverend\". Those qualifications may or may not also give government authorization to solemnize marriages.\nMedicine.\nBoard certification is the process by which a physician in the United States documents by written, practical or computer based testing, illustrating a mastery of knowledge and skills that define a particular area of medical specialization. The American Board of Medical Specialties, a not-for-profit organization, assists 24 approved medical specialty boards in the development and use of standards in the ongoing evaluation and certification of physicians.\nMedical specialty certification in the United States is a voluntary process. While medical licensure sets the minimum competency requirements to diagnose and treat patients, it is not specialty specific. Board certification demonstrates a physician's exceptional expertise in a particular specialty or sub-specialty of medical practice.\nPatients, physicians, health care providers, insurers and quality organizations regard certification as an important measure of a physician's knowledge, experience and skills to provide quality health care within a given specialty.\nOther professional certifications include certifications such as medical licenses, Membership of the Royal College of Physicians, Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada, nursing board certification, diplomas in social work. The Commission for Certification in Geriatric Pharmacy certifies pharmacists that are knowledgeable about principles of geriatric pharmacotherapy and the provision of pharmaceutical care to the elderly. Additional certifying bodies relating to the medical field include:\nPeer support.\nNCPRP stands for \"National Certified Peer Recovery Professional\", and the NCPRP credential and exam were developed in collaboration with the International Certification Board of Recovery Professionals (ICBRP) and is currently being administered by PARfessionals.\nPARfessionals is a professional organization and all of the available courses are professional development and pre-certification courses.\nThe NCPRP credential and exam focus primarily on the concept of peer recovery through mental health and addiction recovery. It has the main purpose of training student-candidates on how to become peer recovery professionals who can provide guidance, knowledge or assistance for individuals who have had similar experiences.\nEach student-candidate must complete several key steps which include initial registration; the pre-certification review course; and all applicable sections of the official application in order to become eligible to complete the final step, which is the NCPRP certification exam.\nThe NCPRP credential is obtained once a participant successfully passes the NCPRP certification exam by the second attempt and is valid for five years.\nProject management.\nOrganizations that offer various certifications include:\nPublic relations.\nIn the US, the Universal Accreditation Board, an organization composed of the Public Relations Society of America, the Agricultural Relations Council, the National School Public Relations Association, the Religious Communicators Council and other public relations professional societies, administers the Accreditation in Public Relations (APR), a voluntary certification program for public relations practitioners.\nReal estate management.\nThe Building Owners and Managers Association and the International Facility Management Association offer professional certifications for the operation and management of commercial properties.\nSales.\nOrganizations offering certification include:\nCriticisms.\nPolitical commentators have criticized professional or occupational licensing, especially medical and legal licensing, for restricting the supply of services and therefore making them more expensive, often putting them out of reach of the poor."}
{"id": "6255", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6255", "title": "Carl Menger", "text": "Carl Menger von Wolfensgr\u00fcn (; ; 28 February 1840 \u2013 26 February 1921) was an Austrian economist who contributed to the marginal theory of value. Menger is considered the founder of the Austrian school of economics. \nIn building his marginalist approach, Menger rejected many established views of classical economics. He directly disputed the view of the \"German school\" that economic theory could be derived from history. Departing from the cost-of-production theory of value\u2014the prevailing theory of Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx\u2014Menger's subjective theory of value emphasized role of mutual agreement in deriving prices. Although he had few readers outside Vienna until late in his career, disciples including Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk and Friedrich von Wieser brought his theories into wider readership. Friedrich Hayek wrote that the Austrian school's \"fundamental ideas belong fully and wholly to Carl Menger.\"\nMenger began his career as a lawyer and business journalist, during which he saw inconsistencies between existing economic theory and how buyers reasoned. After formal training in economics, he taught at the University of Vienna from 1872 to 1903. He became a private tutor and confidant to Rudolf von Habsburg, the crown prince of Austria. \nBiography.\nFamily and education.\nCarl Menger von Wolfensgr\u00fcn was born in the city of Neu-Sandez in the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria, Austrian Empire, which is now Nowy S\u0105cz in Poland. He was the son of a wealthy family of minor nobility; his father, Anton Menger, was a lawyer. His mother, Caroline Ger\u017cabek, was the daughter of a wealthy Bohemian merchant. He had two brothers, Anton and Max, both prominent as lawyers. His son, Karl Menger, was a mathematician who taught for many years at Illinois Institute of Technology.\nAfter attending Gymnasium, he studied law at the universities of Prague and Vienna and later received a doctorate in jurisprudence from the Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w. In the 1860s Menger left school and enjoyed a stint as a journalist reporting and analyzing market news, first at the \"Lemberger Zeitung\" in Lemberg, Austrian Galicia (now Lviv, Ukraine) and later at the in Vienna.\nCareer.\nDuring the course of his newspaper work, he noticed a discrepancy between what the classical economics he was taught in school said about price determination and what real world market participants believed. In 1867 Menger began a study of political economy which culminated in 1871 with the publication of his \"Principles of Economics\" (), thus becoming the father of the Austrian school of economics. It was in this work that he challenged classical cost-based theories of value with his theory of marginality \u2013 that price is determined at the margin.\nIn 1872 Menger was enrolled into the law faculty at the University of Vienna and spent the next several years teaching finance and political economy both in seminars and lectures to a growing number of students. In 1873, he received the university's chair of economic theory at the very young age of 33.\nIn 1876 Menger began tutoring Archduke Rudolf von Habsburg, the crown prince of Austria, in political economy and statistics. For two years, Menger accompanied the prince during his travels, first through continental Europe and then later through the British Isles. He is also thought to have assisted the crown prince in the composition of a pamphlet, published anonymously in 1878, which was highly critical of the higher Austrian aristocracy. His association with the prince would last until Rudolf's suicide in 1889.\nIn 1878 Rudolf's father, Emperor Franz Joseph, appointed Menger to the chair of political economy at Vienna. The title of \"Hofrat\" was conferred on him, and he was appointed to the Austrian in 1900.\nDispute with the historical school.\nEnsconced in his professorship, he set about refining and defending the positions he took and methods he utilized in \"Principles\", the result of which was the 1883 publication of \"Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special Reference to Economics\" (\"\"). The book caused a firestorm of debate, during which members of the historical school of economics began to derisively call Menger and his students the \"Austrian school\" to emphasize their departure from mainstream German economic thought \u2013 the term was specifically used in an unfavourable review by Gustav von Schmoller.\nIn 1884 Menger responded with the pamphlet \"The Errors of Historicism in German Economics\" and launched the infamous , or methodological debate, between the historical school and the Austrian school. During this time Menger began to attract like-minded disciples who would go on to make their own mark on the field of economics, most notably Eugen von B\u00f6hm-Bawerk, and Friedrich von Wieser.\nIn the late 1880s, Menger was appointed to head a commission to reform the Austrian monetary system. Over the course of the next decade, he authored a plethora of articles which would revolutionize monetary theory, including \"The Theory of Capital\" (1888) and \"Money\" (1892). Largely due to his pessimism about the state of German scholarship, Menger resigned his professorship in 1903 to concentrate on study.\nEconomics.\nMenger used his subjective theory of value to arrive at what he considered one of the most powerful insights in economics: \"both sides gain from exchange.\" Unlike William Jevons, Menger did not believe that goods provide \"utils,\" or units of utility. Rather, he wrote, goods are valuable because they serve various uses whose importance differs. Menger also came up with an explanation of how money develops that is still accepted by some schools of thought today.\nMoney.\nMenger believed that gold and silver were the precious metals that were adopted as money for their unique attributes like costliness, durability, and easy preservation, making them the \"most popular vehicle for hoarding as well as the goods most highly favoured in commerce.\" Menger showed that \"their special saleableness\" tended to make their bid-ask spread tighter than any other market good, which led to their adoption as a general medium of exchange and evolution in many societies as money."}
{"id": "6256", "revid": "1653549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6256", "title": "List of cartoonists", "text": "This is a list of cartoonists, visual artists who specialize in drawing cartoons. This list includes only notable cartoonists and is not meant to be exhaustive. Note that the word 'cartoon' only took on its modern sense after its use in Punch magazine in the 1840s - artists working earlier than that are more correctly termed 'caricaturists',"}
{"id": "6258", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6258", "title": "Civilization", "text": "A civilization (also spelled civilisation in British English) is any complex society characterized by the development of the state, social stratification, urbanization, and symbolic systems of communication beyond signed or spoken languages (namely, writing systems and graphic arts).\nCivilizations include features such as agriculture, architecture, infrastructure, technological advancement, currency, taxation, regulation, and specialization of labour.\nHistorically, a civilization has often been understood as a larger and \"more advanced\" culture, in implied contrast to smaller, supposedly less advanced cultures. In this broad sense, a civilization contrasts with non-centralized tribal societies, including the cultures of nomadic pastoralists, Neolithic societies, or hunter-gatherers; however, sometimes it also contrasts with the cultures found within civilizations themselves. Civilizations are organized densely-populated settlements divided into hierarchical social classes with a ruling elite and a subordinate urban and rural populations, which engage in intensive agriculture, mining, small-scale manufacture and trade. Civilization concentrates power, extending human control over the rest of the nature, including over other human beings.\nThe word \"civilization\" relates to the Latin or 'city'. As the National Geographic Society has explained it: \"This is why the most basic definition of the word \"civilization\" is 'a society made up of cities.'\"\nThe earliest emergence of civilizations is generally connected with the final stages of the Neolithic Revolution in West Asia, culminating in the relatively rapid process of urban revolution and state formation, a political development associated with the appearance of a governing elite.\nHistory of the concept.\nThe English word \"civilization\" comes from the French ('civilized'), from ('civil'), related to ('citizen') and ('city'). The fundamental treatise is Norbert Elias's \"The Civilizing Process\" (1939), which traces social mores from medieval courtly society to the early modern period. In \"The Philosophy of Civilization\" (1923), Albert Schweitzer outlines two opinions: one purely material and the other material and ethical. He said that the world crisis was from humanity losing the ethical idea of civilization, \"the sum total of all progress made by man in every sphere of action and from every point of view in so far as the progress helps towards the spiritual perfecting of individuals as the progress of all progress\".\nRelated words like \"civility\" developed in the mid-16th century. The abstract noun \"civilization\", meaning \"civilized condition\", came in the 1760s, again from French. The first known use in French is in 1757, by Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau, and the first use in English is attributed to Adam Ferguson, who in his 1767 \"Essay on the History of Civil Society\" wrote, \"Not only the individual advances from infancy to manhood but the species itself from rudeness to civilisation\". The word was therefore opposed to barbarism or rudeness, in the active pursuit of progress characteristic of the Age of Enlightenment.\nIn the late 1700s and early 1800s, during the French Revolution, \"civilization\" was used in the singular, never in the plural, and meant the progress of humanity as a whole. This is still the case in French. The use of \"civilizations\" as a countable noun was in occasional use in the 19th century, but has become much more common in the later 20th century, sometimes just meaning culture (itself in origin an uncountable noun, made countable in the context of ethnography). Only in this generalized sense does it become possible to speak of a \"medieval civilization\", which in Elias's sense would have been an oxymoron. Using the terms \"civilization\" and \"culture\" as equivalents are controversial and generally rejected so that for example some types of culture are not normally described as civilizations.\nAlready in the 18th century, civilization was not always seen as an improvement. One historically important distinction between culture and civilization is from the writings of Rousseau, particularly his work about education, \"\". Here, civilization, being more rational and socially driven, is not fully in accord with human nature, and \"human wholeness is achievable only through the recovery of or approximation to an original discursive or pre-rational natural unity\" (see noble savage). From this, a new approach was developed, especially in Germany, first by Johann Gottfried Herder and later by philosophers such as Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. This sees cultures as natural organisms, not defined by \"conscious, rational, deliberative acts\", but a kind of pre-rational \"folk spirit\". Civilization, in contrast, though more rational and more successful in material progress, is unnatural and leads to \"vices of social life\" such as guile, hypocrisy, envy and avarice. In World War II, Leo Strauss, having fled Germany, argued in New York that this opinion of civilization was behind Nazism and German militarism and nihilism.\nCharacteristics.\nSocial scientists such as V. Gordon Childe have named a number of traits that distinguish a civilization from other kinds of society. Civilizations have been distinguished by their means of subsistence, types of livelihood, settlement patterns, forms of government, social stratification, economic systems, literacy and other cultural traits. Andrew Nikiforuk argues that \"civilizations relied on shackled human muscle. It took the energy of slaves to plant crops, clothe emperors, and build cities\" and considers slavery to be a common feature of pre-modern civilizations.\nAll civilizations have depended on agriculture for subsistence, with the possible exception of some early civilizations in Peru which may have depended upon maritime resources.\nThe traditional \"surplus model\" postulates that cereal farming results in accumulated storage and a surplus of food, particularly when people use intensive agricultural techniques such as artificial fertilization, irrigation and crop rotation. It is possible but more difficult to accumulate horticultural production, and so civilizations based on horticultural gardening have been very rare. Grain surpluses have been especially important because grain can be stored for a long time.\nResearch from the \"Journal of Political Economy\" contradicts the surplus model. It postulates that horticultural gardening was more productive than cereal farming. However, only cereal farming produced civilization because of the appropriability of yearly harvest. Rural populations that could only grow cereals could be taxed allowing for a taxing elite and urban development. This also had a negative effect on rural population, increasing relative agricultural output per farmer. Farming efficiency created food surplus and sustained the food surplus through decreasing rural population growth in favour of urban growth. Suitability of highly productive roots and tubers was in fact a curse of plenty, which prevented the emergence of states and impeded economic development.\nA surplus of food permits some people to do things besides producing food for a living: early civilizations included soldiers, artisans, priests and priestesses, and other people with specialized careers. A surplus of food results in a division of labour and a more diverse range of human activity, a defining trait of civilizations. However, in some places hunter-gatherers have had access to food surpluses, such as among some of the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest and perhaps during the Mesolithic Natufian culture. It is possible that food surpluses and relatively large scale social organization and division of labour predates plant and animal domestication.\nCivilizations have distinctly different settlement patterns from other societies. The word \"civilization\" is sometimes defined as \"living in cities\". Non-farmers tend to gather in cities to work and to trade.\nCompared with other societies, civilizations have a more complex political structure, namely the state. State societies are more stratified than other societies; there is a greater difference among the social classes. The ruling class, normally concentrated in the cities, has control over much of the surplus and exercises its will through the actions of a government or bureaucracy. Morton Fried, a conflict theorist and Elman Service, an integration theorist, have classified human cultures based on political systems and social inequality. This system of classification contains four categories.\nEconomically, civilizations display more complex patterns of ownership and exchange than less organized societies. Living in one place allows people to accumulate more personal possessions than nomadic people. Some people also acquire landed property, or private ownership of the land. Because a percentage of people in civilizations do not grow their own food, they must trade their goods and services for food in a market system, or receive food through the levy of tribute, redistributive taxation, tariffs or tithes from the food producing segment of the population. Early human cultures functioned through a gift economy supplemented by limited barter systems. By the early Iron Age, contemporary civilizations developed money as a medium of exchange for increasingly complex transactions. In a village, the potter makes a pot for the brewer and the brewer compensates the potter by giving him a certain amount of beer. In a city, the potter may need a new roof, the roofer may need new shoes, the cobbler may need new horseshoes, the blacksmith may need a new coat and the tanner may need a new pot. These people may not be personally acquainted with one another and their needs may not occur all at the same time. A monetary system is a way of organizing these obligations to ensure that they are fulfilled. From the days of the earliest monetarized civilizations, monopolistic controls of monetary systems have benefited the social and political elites.\nThe transition from simpler to more complex economies does not necessarily mean an improvement in the living standards of the populace. For example, although the Middle Ages is often portrayed as an era of decline from the Roman Empire, studies have shown that the average stature of males in the Middle Ages (c. 500 to 1500 CE) was greater than it was for males during the preceding Roman Empire and the succeeding Early Modern Period (c. 1500 to 1800 CE). Also, the Plains Indians of North America in the 19th century were taller than their \"civilized\" American and European counterparts. The average stature of a population is a good measurement of the adequacy of its access to necessities, especially food, and its freedom from disease.\nWriting, developed first by people in Sumer, is considered a hallmark of civilization and \"appears to accompany the rise of complex administrative bureaucracies or the conquest state\". Traders and bureaucrats relied on writing to keep accurate records. Like money, the writing was necessitated by the size of the population of a city and the complexity of its commerce among people who are not all personally acquainted with each other. However, writing is not always necessary for civilization, as shown by the Inca civilization of the Andes, which did not use writing at all but except for a complex recording system consisting of knotted strings of different lengths and colours: the \"Quipus\", and still functioned as a civilized society.\nAided by their division of labour and central government planning, civilizations have developed many other diverse cultural traits. These include organized religion, development in the arts, and countless new advances in science and technology.\nAssessments of what level of civilization a polity has reached are based on comparisons of the relative importance of agricultural as opposed to trading or manufacturing capacities, the territorial extensions of its power, the complexity of its division of labour, and the carrying capacity of its urban centres. Secondary elements include a developed transportation system, writing, standardized measurement, currency, contractual and tort-based legal systems, art, architecture, mathematics, scientific understanding, metallurgy, political structures, and organized religion.\nAs a contrast with other societies.\nThe idea of civilization implies a progression or development from a previous \"uncivilized\" state. Traditionally, cultures that defined themselves as \"civilized\" often did so in contrast to other societies or human groupings viewed as less civilized, calling the latter barbarians, savages, and primitives. Indeed, the modern Western idea of civilization developed as a contrast to the indigenous cultures European settlers encountered during the European colonization of the Americas and Australia. The term \"primitive,\" though once used in anthropology, has now been largely condemned by anthropologists because of its derogatory connotations and because it implies that the cultures it refers to are relics of a past time that do not change or progress.\nBecause of this, societies regarding themselves as \"civilized\" have sometimes sought to dominate and assimilate \"uncivilized\" cultures into a \"civilized\" way of living. In the 19th century, the idea of European culture as \"civilized\" and superior to \"uncivilized\" non-European cultures was fully developed, and civilization became a core part of European identity. The idea of civilization can also be used as a justification for dominating another culture and dispossessing a people of their land. For example, in Australia, British settlers justified the displacement of Indigenous Australians by observing that the land appeared uncultivated and wild, which to them reflected that the inhabitants were not civilized enough to \"improve\" it. The behaviours and modes of subsistence that characterize civilization have been spread by colonization, invasion, religious conversion, the extension of bureaucratic control and trade, and by the introduction of new technologies to cultures that did not previously have them. Though aspects of culture associated with civilization can be freely adopted through contact between cultures, since early modern times Eurocentric ideals of \"civilization\" have been widely imposed upon cultures through coercion and dominance. These ideals complemented a philosophy that assumed there were innate differences between \"civilized\" and \"uncivilized\" peoples.\nCultural identity.\n\"Civilization\" can also refer to the culture of a complex society, not just the society itself. Every society, civilization or not, has a specific set of ideas and customs, and a certain set of manufactures and arts that make it unique. Civilizations tend to develop intricate cultures, including a state-based decision-making apparatus, a literature, professional art, architecture, organized religion and complex customs of education, coercion and control associated with maintaining the elite.\nThe intricate culture associated with civilization has a tendency to spread to and influence other cultures, sometimes assimilating them into the civilization, a classic example being Chinese civilization and its influence on nearby civilizations such as Korea, Japan and Vietnam Many civilizations are actually large cultural spheres containing many nations and regions. The civilization in which someone lives is that person's broadest cultural identity.\nIt is precisely the protection of this cultural identity that is becoming increasingly important nationally and internationally. According to international law, the United Nations and UNESCO try to set up and enforce relevant rules. The aim is to preserve the cultural heritage of humanity and also the cultural identity, especially in the case of war and armed conflict. According to Karl von Habsburg, President of Blue Shield International, the destruction of cultural assets is also part of psychological warfare. The target of the attack is often the opponent's cultural identity, which is why symbolic cultural assets become a main target. It is also intended to destroy the particularly sensitive cultural memory (museums, archives, monuments, etc.), the grown cultural diversity, and the economic basis (such as tourism) of a state, region or community.\nMany historians have focused on these broad cultural spheres and have treated civilizations as discrete units. Early twentieth-century philosopher Oswald Spengler, uses the German word \"Kultur\", \"culture\", for what many call a \"civilization\". Spengler believed a civilization's coherence is based on a single primary cultural symbol. Cultures experience cycles of birth, life, decline, and death, often supplanted by a potent new culture, formed around a compelling new cultural symbol. Spengler states civilization is the beginning of the decline of a culture as \"the most external and artificial states of which a species of developed humanity is capable\".\nThis \"unified culture\" concept of civilization also influenced the theories of historian Arnold J. Toynbee in the mid-twentieth century. Toynbee explored civilization processes in his multi-volume \"A Study of History\", which traced the rise and, in most cases, the decline of 21 civilizations and five \"arrested civilizations\". Civilizations generally declined and fell, according to Toynbee, because of the failure of a \"creative minority\", through moral or religious decline, to meet some important challenge, rather than mere economic or environmental causes.\nSamuel P. Huntington defines civilization as \"the highest cultural grouping of people and the broadest level of cultural identity people have short of that which distinguishes humans from other species\".\nComplex systems.\nAnother group of theorists, making use of systems theory, looks at a civilization as a complex system, i.e., a framework by which a group of objects can be analysed that work in concert to produce some result. Civilizations can be seen as networks of cities that emerge from pre-urban cultures and are defined by the economic, political, military, diplomatic, social and cultural interactions among them. Any organization is a complex social system and a civilization is a large organization. Systems theory helps guard against superficial and misleading analogies in the study and description of civilizations.\nSystems theorists look at many types of relations between cities, including economic relations, cultural exchanges and political/diplomatic/military relations. These spheres often occur on different scales. For example, trade networks were, until the nineteenth century, much larger than either cultural spheres or political spheres. Extensive trade routes, including the Silk Road through Central Asia and Indian Ocean sea routes linking the Roman Empire, Persian Empire, India and China, were well established 2000 years ago when these civilizations scarcely shared any political, diplomatic, military, or cultural relations. The first evidence of such long-distance trade is in the ancient world. During the Uruk period, Guillermo Algaze has argued that trade relations connected Egypt, Mesopotamia, Iran and Afghanistan. Resin found later in the Royal Cemetery at Ur is suggested was traded northwards from Mozambique.\nMany theorists argue that the entire world has already become integrated into a single \"world system\", a process known as globalization. Different civilizations and societies all over the globe are economically, politically, and even culturally interdependent in many ways. There is debate over when this integration began, and what sort of integration \u2013 cultural, technological, economic, political, or military-diplomatic \u2013 is the key indicator in determining the extent of a civilization. David Wilkinson has proposed that economic and military-diplomatic integration of the Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations resulted in the creation of what he calls the \"Central Civilization\" around 1500 BCE. Central Civilization later expanded to include the entire Middle East and Europe, and then expanded to a global scale with European colonization, integrating the Americas, Australia, China and Japan by the nineteenth century. According to Wilkinson, civilizations can be culturally heterogeneous, like the Central Civilization, or homogeneous, like the Japanese civilization. What Huntington calls the \"clash of civilizations\" might be characterized by Wilkinson as a clash of cultural spheres within a single global civilization. Others point to the Crusading movement as the first step in globalization. The more conventional viewpoint is that networks of societies have expanded and shrunk since ancient times, and that the current globalized economy and culture is a product of recent European colonialism.\nHistory.\nThe notion of human history as a succession of \"civilizations\" is an entirely modern one. In the European Age of Discovery, emerging Modernity was put into stark contrast with the Neolithic and Mesolithic stage of the cultures of many of the peoples they encountered. Nonetheless, developments in the Neolithic stage, such as agriculture and sedentary settlement, were critical to the development of modern conceptions of civilization.\nUrban Revolution.\nThe Natufian culture in the Levantine corridor provides the earliest case of a Neolithic Revolution, with the planting of cereal crops attested from 11,000 BCE. The earliest neolithic technology and lifestyle were established first in Western Asia (for example at G\u00f6bekli Tepe, from about 9,130 BCE), later in the Yellow River and Yangtze basins in China (for example the Peiligang and Pengtoushan cultures), and from these cores spread across Eurasia. Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest civilizations developing from 7,400 years ago. This area has been evaluated by Beverley Milton-Edwards as having \"inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the building of the earliest cities and the development of written cursive script\". Similar pre-civilized \"neolithic revolutions\" also began independently from 7,000 BCE in northwestern South America (the Caral-Supe civilization) and in Mesoamerica. The Black Sea area served as a cradle of European civilization. The site of Solnitsata \u2013 a prehistoric fortified (walled) stone settlement (prehistoric proto-city) (5500\u20134200 BCE) \u2013 is believed by some archaeologists to be the oldest known town in present-day Europe.\nThe 8.2 Kiloyear Arid Event and the 5.9 Kiloyear Inter-pluvial saw the drying out of semiarid regions and a major spread of deserts. This climate change shifted the cost-benefit ratio of endemic violence between communities, which saw the abandonment of unwalled village communities and the appearance of walled cities, seen by some as a characteristic of early civilizations.\nThis \"urban revolution\"\u2014a term introduced by Childe in the 1930s\u2014from the 4th millennium BCE, marked the beginning of the accumulation of transferable economic surpluses, which helped economies and cities develop. Urban revolutions were associated with the state monopoly of violence, the appearance of a warrior, or soldier, class and endemic warfare (a state of continual or frequent warfare), the rapid development of hierarchies, and the use of human sacrifice.\nThe civilized urban revolution in turn was dependent upon the development of sedentism, the domestication of grains, plants and animals, the permanence of settlements and development of lifestyles that facilitated economies of scale and accumulation of surplus production by particular social sectors. The transition from \"complex cultures\" to \"civilizations\", while still disputed, seems to be associated with the development of state structures, in which power was further monopolized by an elite ruling class who practiced human sacrifice.\nTowards the end of the Neolithic period, various elitist Chalcolithic civilizations began to rise in various \"cradles\" from around 3600 BCE beginning with Mesopotamia, expanding into large-scale kingdoms and empires in the course of the Bronze Age (Akkadian Empire, Indus Valley Civilization, Old Kingdom of Egypt, Neo-Sumerian Empire, Middle Assyrian Empire, Babylonian Empire, Hittite Empire, and to some degree the territorial expansions of the Elamites, Hurrians, Amorites and Ebla).\nOutside the Old World, development took place independently in the Pre-Columbian Americas. Urbanization in the Caral-Supe civilization in what is now coastal Peru began about 3500 BCE. In North America, the Olmec civilization emerged about 1200 BCE; the oldest known Mayan city, located in what is now Guatemala, dates to about 750 BCE. and Teotihuacan (near the modern Mexico City) was one of the largest cities in the world in 350 CE, with a population of about 125,000.\nAxial Age.\nThe Bronze Age collapse was followed by the Iron Age around 1200 BCE, during which a number of new civilizations emerged, culminating in a period from the 8th to the 3rd century BCE which Karl Jaspers termed the Axial Age, presented as a critical transitional phase leading to classical civilization.\nModernity.\nA major technological and cultural transition to modernity began approximately 1500 CE in Western Europe, and from this beginning new approaches to science and law spread rapidly around the world, incorporating earlier cultures into the technological and industrial society of the present.\nFall of civilizations.\nCivilizations are traditionally understood as ending in one of two ways; either through incorporation into another expanding civilization (e.g. as Ancient Egypt was incorporated into Hellenistic Greek, and subsequently Roman civilizations), or by collapsing and reverting to a simpler form of living, as happens in so-called Dark Ages.\nThere have been many explanations put forward for the collapse of civilization. Some focus on historical examples, and others on general theory.\nFuture.\nAccording to political scientist Samuel P. Huntington, the 21st century will be characterized by a clash of civilizations, which he believes will replace the conflicts between nation-states and ideologies that were prominent in the 19th and 20th centuries. However, this viewpoint been strongly challenged by others such as Edward Said, Muhammed Asadi and Amartya Sen. Ronald Inglehart and Pippa Norris have argued that the \"true clash of civilizations\" between the Muslim world and the West is caused by the Muslim rejection of the West's more liberal sexual values, rather than a difference in political ideology, although they note that this lack of tolerance is likely to lead to an eventual rejection of (true) democracy. In \"Identity and Violence\" Sen questions if people should be divided along the lines of a supposed \"civilization\", defined by religion and culture only. He argues that this ignores the many others identities that make up people and leads to a focus on differences.\nCultural Historian Morris Berman argues in \"Dark Ages America: the End of Empire\" that in the corporate consumerist United States, the very factors that once propelled it to greatness\u2015extreme individualism, territorial and economic expansion, and the pursuit of material wealth\u2015have pushed the United States across a critical threshold where collapse is inevitable. Politically associated with over-reach, and as a result of the environmental exhaustion and polarization of wealth between rich and poor, he concludes the current system is fast arriving at a situation where continuation of the existing system saddled with huge deficits and a hollowed-out economy is physically, socially, economically and politically impossible. Although developed in much more depth, Berman's thesis is similar in some ways to that of Urban Planner, Jane Jacobs who argues that the five pillars of United States culture are in serious decay: community and family; higher education; the effective practice of science; taxation and government; and the self-regulation of the learned professions. The corrosion of these pillars, Jacobs argues, is linked to societal ills such as environmental crisis, racism and the growing gulf between rich and poor.\nCultural critic and author Derrick Jensen argues that modern civilization is directed towards the domination of the environment and humanity itself in an intrinsically harmful, unsustainable, and self-destructive fashion. Defending his definition both linguistically and historically, he defines civilization as \"a culture... that both leads to and emerges from the growth of cities\", with \"cities\" defined as \"people living more or less permanently in one place in densities high enough to require the routine importation of food and other necessities of life\". This need for civilizations to import ever more resources, he argues, stems from their over-exploitation and diminution of their own local resources. Therefore, civilizations inherently adopt imperialist and expansionist policies and, to maintain these, highly militarized, hierarchically structured, and coercion-based cultures and lifestyles.\nThe Kardashev scale classifies civilizations based on their level of technological advancement, specifically measured by the amount of energy a civilization is able to harness. The scale is only hypothetical, but it puts energy consumption in a cosmic perspective. The Kardashev scale makes provisions for civilizations far more technologically advanced than any currently known to exist.\nNon-human civilizations.\nThe current scientific consensus is that human beings are the only animal species with the cognitive ability to create civilizations that has emerged on Earth. A recent thought experiment, the silurian hypothesis, however, considers whether it would \"be possible to detect an industrial civilization in the geological record\" given the paucity of geological information about eras before the quaternary.\nAstronomers speculate about the existence of communicating with intelligent civilizations within and beyond the Milky Way galaxy, usually using variants of the Drake equation. They conduct searches for such intelligences \u2013 such as for technological traces, called \"technosignatures\".&lt;ref name=\"10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.02.029\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The proposed proto-scientific field \"xenoarchaeology\" is concerned with the study of artifact remains of non-human civilizations to reconstruct and interpret past lives of alien societies if such get discovered and confirmed scientifically."}
{"id": "6259", "revid": "1412854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6259", "title": "Civilization (video game)", "text": "Sid Meier's Civilization is a 1991 turn-based strategy 4X video game developed and published by MicroProse. The game was originally developed for MS-DOS running on a PC, and it has undergone numerous revisions for various platforms. The player is tasked with leading an entire human civilization over the course of several millennia by controlling various areas such as urban development, exploration, government, trade, research, and military. The player can control individual units and advance the exploration, conquest and settlement of the game's world. The player can also make such decisions as setting forms of government, tax rates and research priorities. The player's civilization is in competition with other computer-controlled civilizations, with which the player can enter diplomatic relationships that can either end in alliances or lead to war.\n\"Civilization\" was designed by Sid Meier and Bruce Shelley following the successes of \"Silent Service\", \"Sid Meier's Pirates!\" and \"Railroad Tycoon\". \"Civilization\" has sold 1.5 million copies since its release and is considered one of the most influential computer games in history due to its establishment of the 4X genre. In addition to its commercial and critical success, the game has been deemed pedagogically valuable due to its presentation of historical relationships, and one of the greatest video games ever made by several publications. A multiplayer remake, Sid Meier's CivNet, was released for the PC in 1995. \"Civilization\" was followed by several sequels starting with \"Civilization II\", with similar or modified scenarios.\nGameplay.\n\"Civilization\" is a turn-based single-player strategy game. The player takes on the role of the ruler of a civilization, starting with one (or occasionally two) settler units, and attempts to build an empire in competition with two to seven other civilizations. The game requires a fair amount of micromanagement (although less than other simulation games). Along with the larger tasks of exploration, warfare and diplomacy, the player has to make decisions about where to build new cities, which improvements or units to build in each city, which advances in knowledge should be sought (and at what rate), and how to transform the land surrounding the cities for maximum benefit. From time to time the player's towns may be harassed by barbarians, units with no specific nationality and no named leader. These threats only come from huts, unclaimed land or sea, so that over time and turns of exploration, there are fewer and fewer places from which barbarians will emanate.\nBefore the game begins, the player chooses which historical or current civilization to play. In contrast to later games in the \"Civilization\" series, this is largely a cosmetic choice, affecting titles, city names, musical heralds, and color. The choice does affect their starting position on the \"Play on Earth\" map, and thus different resources in one's initial cities, but has no effect on starting position when starting a random world game or a customized world game. The player's choice of civilization also prevents the computer from being able to play as that civilization or the other civilization of the same color, and since computer-controlled opponents display certain traits of their civilizations this affects gameplay as well. The Aztecs are both fiercely expansionist and generally extremely wealthy, for example. Other civilizations include the Americans, the Mongols, and Romans. Each civilization is led by a famous historical figure, such as Mahatma Gandhi for India.\nThe scope of \"Civilization\" is larger than most other games. The game begins in 4000 BC, before the Bronze Age, and can last through to AD 2100 (on the easiest setting) with Space Age and \"future technologies\". At the start of the game there are no cities anywhere in the world: the player controls one or two settler units, which can be used to found new cities in appropriate sites (and those cities may build other settler units, which can go out and found new cities, thus expanding the empire). Settlers can also alter terrain, build improvements such as mines and irrigation, build roads to connect cities, and later in the game they can construct railroads which offer unlimited movement.\nAs time advances, new technologies are developed; these technologies are the primary way in which the game changes and grows. At the start, players choose from advances such as pottery, the wheel, and the alphabet to, near the end of the game, nuclear fission and spaceflight. Players can gain a large advantage if their civilization is the first to learn a particular technology (the secrets of flight, for example) and put it to use in a military or other context. Most advances give access to new units, city improvements or derivative technologies: for example, the chariot unit becomes available after the wheel is developed, and the granary building becomes available to build after pottery is developed. The whole system of advancements from beginning to end is called the technology tree, or simply the Tech tree; this concept has been adopted in many other strategy games. Since only one tech may be \"researched\" at any given time, the order in which technologies are chosen makes a considerable difference in the outcome of the game and generally reflects the player's preferred style of gameplay.\nPlayers can also build \"Wonders of the World\" in each of the epochs of the game, subject only to obtaining the prerequisite knowledge. These wonders are important achievements of society, science, culture and defense, ranging from the Pyramids and the Great Wall in the Ancient age, to Copernicus' Observatory and Magellan's Expedition in the middle period, up to the Apollo program, the United Nations, and the Manhattan Project in the modern era. Each wonder can only be built once in the world, and requires a lot of resources to build, far more than most other city buildings or units. Wonders provide unique benefits to the controlling civilization. For example, Magellan's Expedition increases the movement rate of naval units. Wonders typically affect either the city in which they are built (for example, the Colossus), every city on the continent (for example, J.S. Bach's Cathedral), or the civilization as a whole (for example, Darwin's Voyage). Some wonders are made obsolete by new technologies.\nThe game can be won by conquering all other civilizations or by winning the space race by reaching the star system of Alpha Centauri.\nDevelopment.\nPrior \"Civilization\"-named games.\nBritish designer Francis Tresham released his \"Civilization\" board game in 1980 under his company Hartland Trefoil. Avalon Hill had obtained the rights to publish it in the United States in 1981.\nThere were at least two attempts to make a computerized version of Tresham's game prior to 1990. Danielle Bunten Berry planned to start work on the game after completing \"M.U.L.E.\" in 1983, and again in 1985, after completing \"The Seven Cities of Gold\" at Electronic Arts. In 1983 Bunten and producer Joe Ybarra opted to first do \"Seven Cities of Gold\". The success of \"Seven Cities\" in 1985 in turn led to a sequel, \"Heart of Africa\". Bunten never returned to the idea of \"Civilization\". Don Daglow, designer of \"Utopia\", the first simulation game, began work programming a version of \"Civilization\" in 1987. He dropped the project, however, when he was offered an executive position at Broderbund, and never returned to the game.\nDevelopment at MicroProse.\nSid Meier and Bill Stealey co-founded MicroProse in 1982 to develop flight simulators and other military strategy video games based on Stealey's past experiences as a United States Air Force pilot. Around 1989, Meier wanted to expand his repertoire beyond these types of games, as just having finished \"F-19 Stealth Fighter\" (1988, 1990), he said \"Everything I thought was cool about a flight simulator had gone into that game.\" He took to heart the success of the new god game genre, in particular \"SimCity\" (1989) and \"Populous\" (1989). Specifically with \"SimCity\", Meier recognized that video games could still be entertaining based on building something up. By then, Meier was not an official employee of MicroProse but worked under contract where the company paid him upfront for game development, a large payment on delivery of the game, and additional royalties on each game of his sold.\nMicroProse had hired a number of Avalon Hill game designers, including Bruce Shelley. Among other works, Shelley had been responsible for adapting the railroad-based \"1829\" board game developed by Tresham into \"\". Shelley had joined MicroProse finding that the board game market was weakening in contrast to the video game market, and initially worked on \"F-19 Stealth Fighter\". Meier recognized Shelley's abilities and background in game design and took him on as personal assistant designer to brainstorm new game ideas. The two initially worked on ideas for \"Covert Action\", but had put these aside when they came up with the concepts for \"Railroad Tycoon\" (1990), based loosely on the \"1829\"/\"1830\" board games. \"Railroad Tycoon\" was generally well received at its release, but the title did not fit within the nature of flight simulators and military strategy from MicroProse's previous catalog. Meier and Shelley had started a sequel to \"Railroad Tycoon\" shortly after its release, but Stealey canceled the project.\nOne positive aspect both had taken from \"Railroad Tycoon\" was the idea of multiple smaller systems working together at the same time and the player having to manage them. Both Meier and Shelley recognized that the complex interactions between these systems led players to \"make a lot of interesting decisions\", and that ruling a whole civilization would readily work well with these underlying systems. Some time later, both discussed their love of the original \"Empire\" computer games, and Meier challenged Shelley to give him ten things he would change about \"Empire\"; Shelley provided him with twelve. Around May 1990, Meier presented Shelley with a 5-1/4\" floppy disk which contained the first prototype of \"Civilization\" based on their past discussions and Shelley's list.\nMeier described his development process as sculpting with clay. His prototype took elements from \"Empire\", \"Railroad Tycoon\", \"SimCity\" and the \"Civilization\" board game. This initial version of this game was a real-time simulation, with the player defining zones for their population to grow similar to zoning in \"SimCity\". Meier and Shelley went back and forth with this, with Shelley providing suggestions based on his playthrough and acting as the game's producer, and Meier coding and reworking the game to address these points, and otherwise without involvement of other MicroProse staff. During this period, Stealey and the other managers became concerned that this game did not fit MicroProse's general catalog as strategy computer games had not yet proven successful. A few months into the development, Stealey requested them to put the project on hold and complete \"Covert Action\", after which they could go back to their new game. Meier and Shelley completed \"Covert Action\" which was published in 1990.\nOnce \"Covert Action\" was released, Meier and Shelley returned to the prototype. The time away from the project allowed them to recognize that the real-time aspect was not working well, and reworked the game to become turn-based and dropped the zoning aspect, a change that Meier described as \"like tossing the clay in the trash and getting a new lump\". They incorporated elements of city management and military aspect from \"Empire\", including creating individual military units as well as settler units that replaced the functionality of the zoning approach. Meier felt adding military and combat to the game was necessary: \"The game really isn't about being civilized. The competition is what makes the game fun and the players play their best. At times, you have to make the player uncomfortable for the good of the player.\" Meier also opted to include a technology tree that would help to open the game to many more choices to the player as it continued, creating a non-linear experience. Meier felt players would be able to use the technology tree to adopt a style of play and from which they could use technologies to barter with the other opponents. While the game relies on established recorded history, Meier admitted he did not spend much time in research, usually only to assure the proper chronology or spellings; Shelley noted that they wanted to design for fun, not accuracy, and that \"Everything we needed was pretty much available in the children\u2019s section of the library.\"\n\"Computer Gaming World\" reported in 1994 that \"Sid Meier has stated on numerous occasions that he emphasizes the 'fun parts' of a simulation and throws out the rest\". Meier described the process as \"Add another bit [of clay]\u2014no, that went too far. Scrape it off\". He eliminated the potential for any civilization to fall on its own, believing this would be punishing to the player. \"Though historically accurate\", Meier said, \"The moment the Krakatoa volcano blew up, or the bubonic plague came marching through, all anybody wanted to do was reload from a\nsaved game\". Meier omitted multiplayer alliances because the computer used them too effectively, causing players to think that it was cheating. He said that by contrast, minefields and minesweepers caused the computer to do \"stupid things\u00a0... If you've got a feature that makes the AI look stupid, take it out. It's more important not to have stupid AI than to have good AI\". Meier also omitted jets and helicopters because he thought players would not find obtaining new technologies in the endgame useful, and online multiplayer support because of the small number of online players (\"if you had friends, you wouldn't need to play computer games\"); he also did not believe that online play worked well with turn-based play. The game was developed for the IBM PC platform, which at the time had support for both 16-color EGA to 256-color VGA; Meier opted to support both 16-color and 256-color graphics to allow the game to run on both EGA/Tandy and VGA/MCGA systems.\n\"I\u2019ve never been able to decide if it was a mistake to keep Civ isolated as long as I did\", Meier wrote; while \"as many eyes as possible\" are beneficial during development, Meier and Shelley worked very quickly together, combining the roles of playtester, game designer, and programmer. Meier and Shelley neared the end of their development and started presenting the game to the rest of MicroProse for feedback towards publication. This process was slowed by the current vice president of development, who had taken over Meier's former position at the company. This vice president did not receive any financial bonuses for successful publication of Meier's games due to Meier's contract terms, forgoing any incentive to provide the needed resources to finish the game. The management had also expressed issue with the lack of a firm completion date, as according to Shelley, Meier would consider a game completed only when he felt he had completed it. Eventually the two got the required help for publication, with Shelley overseeing these processes and Meier making the necessary coding changes.\n\"One of my big rules has always been, 'double it, or cut it in half, Meier wrote. He cut the map's size in half less than a month before \"Civilization\" release after playtesting revealed that the previous size was too large and made for boring and repetitive gameplay. Other automated features, like city management, were modified to require more player involvement. They also eliminated a secondary branch of the technology tree with minor skills like beer brewing, and spent time reworking the existing technologies and units to make sure they felt appropriate and did not break the game. Most of the game was originally developed with art crafted by Meier, and MicroProse's art department helped to create most of the final assets, though some of Meier's original art was used. Shelley wrote out the \"Civilopedia\" entries for all the elements of the game and the game's large manual.\nThe name \"Civilization\" came late in the development process. MicroProse recognized at this point the 1980 \"Civilization\" board game may conflict with their video game, as it shared a similar theme including the technology tree. Meier had noted the board game's influence but considered it not as great as \"Empire\" or \"SimCity\", while others have noted significant differences that made the video game far different from the board game such as the non-linearity introduced by Meier's technology tree. To avoid any potential legal issues, MicroProse negotiated a license to use the \"Civilization\" name from Avalon Hill. The addition of Meier's name to the title was from a current practice established by Stealey to attach games like \"Civilization\" that diverged from MicroProse's past catalog to Meier's name, so that players that played Meier's combat simulators and recognized Meier's name would give these new games a try. This approach worked, according to Meier, and he would continue this naming scheme for other titles in the future as a type of branding.\nBy the time the game was completed and ready for release, Meier estimated that it had cost $170,000 in development. \"Civilization\" was released in September 1991. Because of the animosity that MicroProse's management had towards Meier's games, there was very little promotion of the title, though interest in the game through word-of-mouth helped to boost sales. Following the release on the IBM PC, the game was ported to other platforms; Meier and Shelley provided this code to contractors hired by MicroProse to complete the ports.\n\"CivNet\".\n\"Civilization\" was released with only single-player support, with the player working against multiple computer opponents. In 1991, Internet or online gaming was still in its infancy, so this option was not considered in \"Civilization\" release. Over the next few years, as home Internet accessibility took off, MicroProse looked to develop an online version of \"Civilization\". This led to the 1995 release of \"Sid Meier's CivNet\". \"CivNet\" allowed for up to seven players to play the game, with computer opponents available to obtain up to six active civilizations. Games could be played either on a turn-based mode, or in a simultaneous mode where each player took their turn at the same time and only progressing to the next turn once all players have confirmed being finished that turn. The game, in addition to better support for Windows 3.1 and Windows 95, supported connectivity through LAN, primitive Internet play, modem, and direct serial link, and included a local hotseat mode. \"CivNet\" also included a map editor and a \"king builder\" to allow a player to customize the names and looks of their civilization as seen by other players.\nAccording to Brian Reynolds, who led the development of \"Civilization II\", MicroProse \"sincerely believed that \"CivNet\" was going to be a much more important product\" than the next single-player \"Civilization\" game that he and Jeff Briggs had started working on. Reynolds said that because their project was seen as a side effort with little risk, they were able to innovate new ideas into \"Civilization II\". As a net result, \"CivNet\" was generally overshadowed by \"Civilization II\" which was released in the following year.\nPost-release.\n\"Civilization\" critical success created a \"golden period of MicroProse\" where there was more potential for similar strategy games to succeed, according to Meier. This put stress on the company's direction and culture. Stealey wanted to continue to pursue the military-themed titles, while Meier wanted to continue his success with simulation games. Shelley left MicroProse in 1992 and joined Ensemble Studios, where he used his experience with \"Civilization\" to design the \"Age of Empires\" games. Stealey had pushed MicroProse to develop console and arcade-based versions of their games, but this put the company into debt, and Stealey eventually sold the company to Spectrum HoloByte in 1993; Spectrum HoloByte kept MicroProse as a separate company on acquisition.\nMeier would continue and develop \"Civilization II\" along with Brian Reynolds, who served in a similar role to Shelley as design assistant, as well as help from Jeff Briggs and Douglas Kaufman. This game was released in early 1996, and is considered the first sequel of any Sid Meier game. Stealey eventually sold his shares in MicroProse and left the company, and Spectrum HoloByte opted to consolidate the two companies under the name MicroProse in 1996, eliminating numerous positions at MicroProse in the process. As a result, Meier, Briggs, and Reynolds all opted to leave the company and founded Firaxis, which by 2005 became a subsidiary of Take-Two. After a number of acquisitions and legal actions, the \"Civilization\" brand (both as a board game and video game) is now owned by Take-Two, and Firaxis, under Meier's oversight, continues to develop games in the \"Civilization\" series.\nReception.\n\"Civilization\" has been called one of the most important strategy games of all time, and has a loyal following of fans. This high level of interest has led to the creation of a number of free and open source versions and inspired similar games by other commercial developers.\n\"Computer Gaming World\" stated that \"a new Olympian in the genre of god games has truly emerged\", comparing \"Civilization\" importance to computer games to that of the wheel. The game was reviewed in 1992 in \"Dragon\" #183 by Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser in \"The Role of Computers\" column. The reviewers gave the game 5 out of 5 stars and commented that: \"\"Civilization\" is one of the highest dollar-to-play-ratio entertainments we've enjoyed. The scope is enormous, the strategies border on being limitless, the excitement is genuinely high, and the experience is worth every dime of the game's purchase price.\"\nJim Trunzo reviewed \"Civilization\" in \"White Wolf\" #31 (May/June, 1992) and stated that \"\"Civilization\" should have great appeal to the plotters and thinkers, those who like challenges on a global scale. 'Might makes right' addicts should stick to games less cerebral.\"\nJeff Koke reviewed \"Civilization\" in \"Pyramid\" #2 (July/Aug., 1993), and stated that \"Ultimately, there are games that are a lot flashier than \"Civilization\", with cool graphics and animation, but there aren't many - or any - in my book that have the ability to absorb the player so totally and to provide an interesting, unique outcome each and every time it's played.\"\n\"Civilization\" won the Origins Award in the category Best Military or Strategy Computer Game of 1991. A 1992 \"Computer Gaming World\" survey of wargames with modern settings gave the game five stars out of five, describing it as \"more addictive than crack\u00a0... so rich and textured that the documentation is incomplete\". In 1992 the magazine named it the Overall Game of the Year, in 1993 added the game to its Hall of Fame, and in 1996 chose \"Civilization\" as the best game of all time:\nA critic for \"Next Generation\" judged the Super NES version to be a disappointing port, with a cumbersome menu system (particularly that the \"City\" and \"Production\" windows are on separate screens), an unintuitive button configuration, and ugly scaled down graphics. However, he gave it a positive recommendation due to the strong gameplay and strategy of the original game: \"if you've never taken a crack at this game before, be prepared to lose hours, even days, trying to conquer those pesky Babylonians.\" Sir Garnabus of \"GamePro\", in contrast, was pleased with the Super NES version's interface, and said the graphics and audio are above that of a typical strategy game. He also said the game stood out among the Super NES's generally action-oriented library.\nIn 1996, Computer Gaming World listed it as the best game of all time. In 2000, GameSpot rated \"Civilization\" as the tenth most influential video game of all time. It was also ranked at fourth place on \"IGN\" 2000 list of the top PC games of all time. In 2004, readers of \"Retro Gamer\" voted it as the 29th top retro game. In 2007, it was named one of the 16 most influential games in history at a German technology and games trade show Telespiele. In Poland, it was included in the retrospective lists of the best Amiga games by Wirtualna Polska (ranked ninth) and \"CHIP\" (ranked fifth). In 2012, \"Time\" named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time. In 1994, \"PC Gamer US\" named \"Civilization\" the second best computer game ever. The editors wrote, \"The depth of strategies possible is impressive, and the look and feel of the game will keep you playing and exploring for months. Truly a remarkable title.\" That same year, \"PC Gamer UK\" named its Windows release the sixth best computer game of all time, calling it Sid Meier's \"crowning glory\".\nOn March 12, 2007, \"The New York Times\" reported on a list of the ten most important video games of all time, the so-called game canon, including \"Civilization\".\nBy the release of \"Civilization II\" in 1996, \"Civilization\" had sold over 850,000 copies. By 2001, sales had reached 1 million copies. Shelley stated in a 2016 interview that \"Civilization\" had sold 1.5 million copies.\nIn 2022, The Strong National Museum of Play inducted \"Sid Meier\u2019s Civilization\" to its World Video Game Hall of Fame.\nLegacy.\nThere have been several sequels to \"Civilization\", including \"Civilization II\" (1996), \"Civilization III\" (2001), \"Civilization IV\" (2005), \"Civilization Revolution\" (2008), \"Civilization V\" (2010), and \"Civilization VI\" in 2016. In 1994, Meier produced a similar game titled \"Colonization\".\n\"Civilization\" is generally considered the first major game in the genre of \"4X\", with the four \"X\"s equating to \"explore, expand, exploit, and exterminate\", a term developed by Alan Emrich in promoting 1993's \"Master of Orion\". While other video games with the principles of 4X had been released prior to \"Civilization\", future 4X games would attribute some of their basic design principles to \"Civilization\".\nA famous supposed bug in the original game - later debunked - is that a computer-controlled Gandhi, normally a highly peaceful leader, could become a nuclear warmonger if provoked. It was theorized that the game started Gandhi's \"aggression value\" at 1 out of a maximum 255 possible for an 8-bit unsigned integer, making a computer-controlled Gandhi tend to avoid armed conflict. However, once a civilization achieves democracy as its form of government, its leader's aggression value falls by 2. Under normal arithmetic principles, Gandhi's \"1\" would be reduced to \"-1\", but because the value is an 8-bit unsigned integer, it supposedly wraps around to \"255\", causing Gandhi to suddenly become the most aggressive opponent in the game.\nInterviewed in 2019, developer Brian Reynolds said with \"99.99% certainty\" that this story was apocryphal, recalling Gandhi's coded aggression level as being no lower than other peaceful leaders in the game, and doubting that a wraparound would have had the effect described. He noted that all leaders in the game become \"pretty ornery\" after their acquisition of nuclear weapons, and suggested that this behaviour simply seemed more surprising and memorable when it happened to Gandhi. Meier, in his autobiography, stated \"That kind of bug comes from something called unsigned characters, which are not the default in the C programming language, and not something I used for the leader traits. Brian Reynolds wrote Civ II in C++, and he didn't use them, either. We received no complaints about a Gandhi bug when either game came out, nor did we send out any revisions for one. Gandhi's military aggressiveness score remained at 1 throughout the game.\" He then explains the overflow error story was made up in 2012. It spread from there to a Wikia entry, then eventually to Reddit, and was picked up by news sites like Kotaku and Geek.com. The story may have originated from the fact that 2010's \"Civilization V\" was deliberately written with Gandhi having an affinity for nuclear weapons, added as a joke by developer Jon Shafer. The misinformation around this bug led to the meme known as \"Nuclear Gandhi\".\nAnother relic of \"Civilization\" was the nature of combat where a military unit from earlier civilization periods could remain in play through modern times, gaining combat bonuses due to veteran proficiency, leading to these primitive units easily beating out modern technology against all common sense, with the common example of a veteran phalanx unit able to fend off a battleship. Meier noted that this resulted from not anticipating how players would use units, expecting them to have used their forces more like a war-based board game to protect borders and maintain zones of control rather than creating \"stacks of doom\". Future civilization games have had many changes in combat systems to prevent such oddities, though these games do allow for such random victories.\nThe 1999 game \"Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri\" was also created by Meier and is in the same genre, but with a futuristic/space theme; many of the interface and gameplay innovations in this game eventually made their way into \"Civilization III\" and \"IV\". \"Alpha Centauri\" is not actually a sequel to \"Civilization\", despite beginning with the same event that ends \"Civilization\" and \"Civilization II\": a crewed spacecraft from Earth arrives in the Alpha Centauri star system. Firaxis' 2014 game \"\", although bearing the name of the main series, is a reimagining of \"Alpha Centauri\" running on the engine of \"Civilization V\".\nA 1994 \"Computer Gaming World\" survey of space war games stated that \"the lesson of this incredibly popular wargame has not been lost on the software community, and technological research popped up all over the place in 1993\", citing \"Spaceward Ho!\" and \"Master of Orion\" as examples. That year MicroProse published \"Master of Magic\", a similar game but embedded in a medieval-fantasy setting where instead of technologies the player (a powerful wizard) develops spells, among other things. In 1999, Activision released \"\", a sequel of sorts to \"Civilization II\" but created by a completely different design team. \"Call to Power\" spawned a sequel in 2000, but by then Activision had sold the rights to the \"Civilization\" name and could only call it \"Call to Power II\".\nAn open source clone of \"Civilization\" has been developed under the name of \"Freeciv\", with the slogan \"'Cause civilization should be free.\" This game can be configured to match the rules of either \"Civilization\" or \"Civilization II\". Another game that partially clones \"Civilization\" is a public domain game called \"C-evo\"."}
{"id": "6260", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6260", "title": "Claude Debussy", "text": "(Achille) Claude Debussy (;&lt;!--SEE TALK PAGE"}
{"id": "6261", "revid": "44078518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6261", "title": "Charles Baxter (author)", "text": "Charles Morley Baxter (born May 13, 1947) is an American novelist, essayist, and poet.\nBiography.\nBaxter was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, to John and Mary Barber (Eaton) Baxter. He graduated from Macalester College in Saint Paul in 1969. In 1974 he received his PhD in English from the University at Buffalo with a thesis on Djuna Barnes, Malcolm Lowry, and Nathanael West.\nBaxter taught high school in Pinconning, Michigan for a year before beginning his university teaching career at Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan. He then moved to the University of Michigan, where for many years he directed the Creative Writing MFA program. He was a visiting professor of creative writing at the University of Iowa and at Stanford. He taught at the University of Minnesota and in the Warren Wilson College MFA Program for Writers. He retired in 2020. \nHe was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1985. He received the PEN/Malamud Award in 2021 for Excellence in the Short Story.\nHe married teacher Martha Ann Hauser in 1976, and has a son. Baxter and Hauser separated."}
{"id": "6262", "revid": "6675779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6262", "title": "Ceres", "text": "Ceres most commonly refers to:\nCeres may also refer to:"}
{"id": "6263", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6263", "title": "Charles Robert Darwin", "text": ""}
{"id": "6266", "revid": "869314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6266", "title": "Climate Change", "text": ""}
{"id": "6267", "revid": "47894655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6267", "title": "Cultural imperialism", "text": "Cultural imperialism (also cultural colonialism) comprises the cultural dimensions of imperialism. The word \"imperialism\" describes practices in which a country engages culture (language, tradition, ritual, politics, economics) to create and maintain unequal social and economic relationships among social groups. Cultural imperialism often uses wealth, media power and violence to implement the system of cultural hegemony that legitimizes imperialism.\nCultural imperialism may take various forms, such as an attitude, a formal policy, or military action\u2014insofar as each of these reinforces the empire's cultural hegemony. Research on the topic occurs in scholarly disciplines, and is especially prevalent in communication and media studies, education, foreign policy, history, international relations, linguistics, literature, post-colonialism, science, sociology, social theory, environmentalism, and sports.\nCultural imperialism may be distinguished from the natural process of cultural diffusion. The spread of culture around the world is referred to as cultural globalization.\nBackground and definitions.\nAlthough the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" has a 1921 reference to the \"cultural imperialism of the Russians\", John Tomlinson, in his book on the subject, writes that the term emerged in the 1960s and has been a focus of research since at least the 1970s. Terms such as \"media imperialism\", \"structural imperialism\", \"cultural dependency and domination\", \"cultural synchronization\", \"electronic colonialism\", \"ideological imperialism\", and \"economic imperialism\" have all been used to describe the same basic notion of cultural imperialism.\nThe term refers largely to the exercise of power in a cultural relationship in which the principles, ideas, practices, and values of a powerful, invading society are imposed upon indigenous cultures in the occupied areas. The process is often used to describe examples of when the compulsory practices of the cultural traditions of the imperial social group are implemented upon a conquered social group. The process is also present when powerful nations are able to flood the information and media space with their ideas, limiting countries and communities ability to compete and expose people to locally created content.\nCultural imperialism has been called a process that intends to transition the \"cultural symbols of the invading communities from 'foreign' to 'natural,\"domestic, comments Jeffrey Herlihy-Mera. He described the process as being carried out in three phases by merchants, then the military, then politicians. While the third phase continues \"in perpetuity\", cultural imperialism tends to be \"gradual, contested (and continues to be contested), and is by nature incomplete. The partial and imperfect configuration of this ontology takes an implicit conceptualization of reality and attempts\u2014and often fails\u2014to elide other forms of collective existence.\" In order to achieve that end, cultural engineering projects strive to \"isolate residents within constructed spheres of symbols\" such that they (eventually, in some cases after several generations) abandon other cultures and identify with the new symbols. \"The broader intended outcome of these interventions might be described as a common recognition of \"possession\" of the land itself (on behalf of the organizations publishing and financing the images).\"\nFor Herbert Schiller, cultural imperialism refers to the American Empire's \"coercive and persuasive agencies, and their capacity to promote and universalize an American 'way of life' in other countries without any reciprocation of influence.\" According to Schiller, cultural imperialism \"pressured, forced and bribed\" societies to integrate with the U.S.'s expansive capitalist model but also incorporated them with attraction and persuasion by winning \"the mutual consent, even solicitation of the indigenous rulers.\" He continues remarks that it is:the sum processes by which a society is brought into the modern [U.S.-centered] world system and how its dominating stratum is attracted, pressured, forced, and sometimes bribed into shaping social institutions to correspond to, or even promote, the values and structures of the dominating centres of the system. The public media are the foremost example of operating enterprises that are used in the penetrative process. For penetration on a significant scale the media themselves must be captured by the dominating/penetrating power. This occurs largely through the commercialization of broadcasting.The historical contexts, iterations, complexities, and politics of Schiller's foundational and substantive theorization of cultural imperialism in international communication and media studies are discussed in detail by political economy of communication researchers Richard Maxwell, Vincent Mosco, Graham Murdock, and Tanner Mirrlees.\nDowning and Sreberny-Mohammadi state: \"Cultural imperialism signifies the dimensions of the process that go beyond economic exploitation or military force. In the history of colonialism, (i.e., the form of imperialism in which the government of the colony is run directly by foreigners), the educational and media systems of many Third World countries have been set up as replicas of those in Britain, France, or the United States and carry their values. Western advertising has made further inroads, as have architectural and fashion styles. Subtly but powerfully, the message has often been insinuated that Western cultures are superior to the cultures of the Third World.\"\nPoststructuralism.\nIn poststructuralist and postcolonial theory, \"cultural imperialism\" is often understood as the cultural legacy of Western colonialism, or forms of social action contributing to the continuation of Western hegemony. To some outside of the realm of this discourse, the term is critiqued as being unclear, unfocused, and/or contradictory in nature.\nThe work of French philosopher and social theorist Michel Foucault has heavily influenced use of the term \"cultural imperialism,\" particularly his philosophical interpretation of power and his concept of governmentality. Following an interpretation of power similar to that of Machiavelli, Foucault defines power as immaterial, as a \"certain type of relation between individuals\" that has to do with complex strategic social positions that relate to the subject's ability to control its environment and influence those around itself. According to Foucault, power is intimately tied with his conception of truth. \"Truth\", as he defines it, is a \"system of ordered procedures for the production, regulation, distribution, circulation, and operation of statements\" which has a \"circular relation\" with systems of power. Therefore, inherent in systems of power, is always \"truth\", which is culturally specific, inseparable from ideology which often coincides with various forms of hegemony. \"Cultural imperialism\" may be an example of this.\nFoucault's interpretation of governance is also very important in constructing theories of transnational power structure. In his lectures at the , Foucault often defines governmentality as the broad art of \"governing\", which goes beyond the traditional conception of governance in terms of state mandates, and into other realms such as governing \"a household, souls, children, a province, a convent, a religious order, a family\". This relates directly back to Machiavelli's treatise on how to retain political power at any cost, \"The Prince\", and Foucault's aforementioned conceptions of truth and power. (i.e. various subjectivities are created through power relations that are culturally specific, which lead to various forms of culturally specific governmentality such as neoliberal governmentality.)\nPost-colonialism.\nEdward Sa\u00efd is a founding figure of postcolonialism, established with the book \"Orientalism\" (1978), a humanist critique of The Enlightenment, which criticises Western knowledge of \"The East\"\u2014specifically the English and the French constructions of what is and what is not \"Oriental\". Whereby said \"knowledge\" then led to cultural tendencies towards a binary opposition of the Orient vs. the Occident, wherein one concept is defined in opposition to the other concept, and from which they emerge as of unequal value. In \"Culture and Imperialism\" (1993), the sequel to \"Orientalism\", Sa\u00efd proposes that, despite the formal end of the \"age of empire\" after the Second World War (1939\u20131945), colonial imperialism left a cultural legacy to the (previously) colonised peoples, which remains in their contemporary civilisations; and that said American \"cultural imperialism\" is very influential in the international systems of power.\nIn \"Can the Subaltern Speak?\" Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak critiques common representations in the West of the Sati, as being controlled by authors other than the participants (specifically English colonizers and Hindu leaders). Because of this, Spivak argues that the subaltern, referring to the communities that participate in the Sati, are not able to represent themselves through their own voice. Spivak says that cultural imperialism has the power to disqualify or erase the knowledge and mode of education of certain populations that are low on the social and economic hierarchy.\nIn \"A Critique of Postcolonial Reason\", Spivak argues that Western philosophy has a history of not only exclusion of the subaltern from discourse, but also does not allow them to occupy the space of a fully human subject.\nContemporary ideas and debate.\n\"Cultural imperialism\" can refer to either the forced acculturation of a subject population, or to the voluntary embracing of a foreign culture by individuals who do so of their own free will. Since these are two very different referents, the validity of the term has been called into question.\nCultural influence can be seen by the \"receiving\" culture as either a threat to or an enrichment of its cultural identity. It seems therefore useful to distinguish between cultural imperialism as an (active or passive) attitude of superiority, and the position of a culture or group that seeks to complement its own cultural production, considered partly deficient, with imported products.\nThe imported products or services can themselves represent, or be associated with, certain values (such as consumerism). According to one argument, the \"receiving\" culture does not necessarily perceive this link, but instead absorbs the foreign culture passively through the use of the foreign goods and services. Due to its somewhat concealed, but very potent nature, this hypothetical idea is described by some experts as \"banal imperialism\". For example, it is argued that while \"American companies are accused of wanting to control 95 percent of the world's consumers\", \"cultural imperialism involves much more than simple consumer goods; it involved the dissemination of American principles such as freedom and democracy\", a process which \"may sound appealing\" but which \"masks a frightening truth: many cultures around the world are disappearing due to the overwhelming influence of corporate and cultural America\".\nSome believe that the newly globalised economy of the late 20th and early 21st century has facilitated this process through the use of new information technology. This kind of cultural imperialism is derived from what is called \"soft power\". The theory of electronic colonialism extends the issue to global cultural issues and the impact of major multi-media conglomerates, ranging from Paramount, WarnerMedia, AT&amp;T, Disney, News Corp, to Google and Microsoft with the focus on the hegemonic power of these mainly United States\u2013based communication giants.\nCultural diversity.\nOne of the reasons often given for opposing any form of cultural imperialism, voluntary or otherwise, is the preservation of cultural diversity, a goal seen by some as analogous to the preservation of ecological diversity. Proponents of this idea argue either that such diversity is valuable in itself, to preserve human historical heritage and knowledge, or instrumentally valuable because it makes available more ways of solving problems and responding to catastrophes, natural or otherwise.\nAfrican colonisation.\nOf all the areas of the world that scholars have claimed to be adversely affected by imperialism, Africa is probably the most notable. In the expansive \"age of imperialism\" of the nineteenth century, scholars have argued that European colonisation in Africa has led to the elimination of many various cultures, worldviews, and epistemologies, particularly through neocolonisation of public education. This, arguably has led to uneven development, and further informal forms of social control having to do with culture and imperialism. A variety of factors, scholars argue, lead to the elimination of cultures, worldviews, and epistemologies, such as \"de-linguicization\" (replacing native African languages with European ones), devaluing ontologies that are not explicitly individualistic, and at times going as far as to not only define Western culture itself as science, but that non-Western approaches to science, the Arts, indigenous culture, etc. are not even knowledge. One scholar, Ali A. Abdi, claims that imperialism inherently \"involve[s] extensively interactive regimes and heavy contexts of identity deformation, misrecognition, loss of self-esteem, and individual and social doubt in self-efficacy.\" Therefore, all imperialism would always, already be cultural.\nNeoliberalism.\nNeoliberalism is often critiqued by sociologists, anthropologists, and cultural studies scholars as being culturally imperialistic. Critics of neoliberalism, at times, claim that it is the newly predominant form of imperialism. Other scholars, such as Elizabeth Dunn and Julia Elyachar have claimed that neoliberalism requires and creates its own form of governmentality.\nIn Dunn's work, \"Privatizing Poland\", she argues that the expansion of the multinational corporation, Gerber, into Poland in the 1990s imposed Western, neoliberal governmentality, ideologies, and epistemologies upon the post-soviet persons hired. Cultural conflicts occurred most notably the company's inherent individualistic policies, such as promoting competition among workers rather than cooperation, and in its strong opposition to what the company owners claimed was bribery.\nIn Elyachar's work, \"Markets of Dispossession\", she focuses on ways in which, in Cairo, NGOs along with INGOs and the state promoted neoliberal governmentality through schemas of economic development that relied upon \"youth microentrepreneurs\". Youth microentrepreneurs would receive small loans to build their own businesses, similar to the way that microfinance supposedly operates. Elyachar argues though, that these programs not only were a failure, but that they shifted cultural opinions of value (personal and cultural) in a way that favoured Western ways of thinking and being.\nDevelopment studies.\nOften, methods of promoting development and social justice are critiqued as being imperialistic in a cultural sense. For example, Chandra Mohanty has critiqued Western feminism, claiming that it has created a misrepresentation of the \"third world woman\" as being completely powerless, unable to resist male dominance. Thus, this leads to the often critiqued narrative of the \"white man\" saving the \"brown woman\" from the \"brown man\". Other, more radical critiques of development studies, have to do with the field of study itself. Some scholars even question the intentions of those developing the field of study, claiming that efforts to \"develop\" the Global South were never about the South itself. Instead, these efforts, it is argued, were made in order to advance Western development and reinforce Western hegemony.\nMedia effects studies.\nThe core of cultural imperialism thesis is integrated with the political-economy traditional approach in media effects research. Critics of cultural imperialism commonly claim that non-Western cultures, particularly from the Third World, will forsake their traditional values and lose their cultural identities when they are solely exposed to Western media. Nonetheless, Michael B. Salwen, in his book \"Critical Studies in Mass Communication\" (1991), claims that cross-consideration and integration of empirical findings on cultural imperialist influences is very critical in terms of understanding mass media in the international sphere. He recognises both of contradictory contexts on cultural imperialist impacts. \nThe first context is where cultural imperialism imposes socio-political disruptions on developing nations. Western media can distort images of foreign cultures and provoke personal and social conflicts to developing nations in some cases. \nAnother context is that peoples in developing nations resist to foreign media and preserve their cultural attitudes. Although he admits that outward manifestations of Western culture may be adopted, but the fundamental values and behaviours remain still. Furthermore, positive effects might occur when male-dominated cultures adopt the \"liberation\" of women with exposure to Western media and it stimulates ample exchange of cultural exchange.\nCriticisms of \"cultural imperialism theory\".\nCritics of scholars who discuss cultural imperialism have a number of critiques. \"Cultural imperialism\" is a term that is only used in discussions where cultural relativism and constructivism are generally taken as true. (One cannot critique promoting Western values if one believes that said values are good. Similarly, one cannot argue that Western epistemology is unjustly promoted in non-Western societies if one believes that those epistemologies are good.) Therefore, those who disagree with cultural relativism and/or constructivism may critique the employment of the term, \"cultural imperialism\" on those terms.\nJohn Tomlinson provides a critique of cultural imperialism theory and reveals major problems in the way in which the idea of cultural, as opposed to economic or political, imperialism is formulated. In his book \"Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction\", he delves into the much debated \"media imperialism\" theory. Summarizing research on the Third World's reception of American television shows, he challenges the cultural imperialism argument, conveying his doubts about the degree to which US shows in developing nations actually carry US values and improve the profits of US companies. Tomlinson suggests that cultural imperialism is growing in some respects, but local transformation and interpretations of imported media products propose that cultural diversification is not at an end in global society. He explains that one of the fundamental conceptual mistakes of cultural imperialism is to take for granted that the distribution of cultural goods can be considered as cultural dominance. He thus supports his argument highly criticising the concept that Americanization is occurring through global overflow of American television products. He points to a myriad of examples of television networks who have managed to dominate their domestic markets and that domestic programs generally top the ratings. He also doubts the concept that cultural agents are passive receivers of information. He states that movement between cultural/geographical areas always involves translation, mutation, adaptation, and the creation of hybridity.\nOther key critiques are that the term is not defined well, and employs further terms that are not defined well, and therefore lacks explanatory power, that \"cultural imperialism\" is hard to measure, and that the theory of a legacy of colonialism is not always true.\nDealing with cultural dominance.\nDavid Rothkopf, managing director of Kissinger Associates and an adjunct professor of international affairs at Columbia University (who also served as a senior U.S. Commerce Department official in the Clinton Administration), wrote about cultural imperialism in his provocatively titled \"In Praise of Cultural Imperialism?\" in the summer 1997 issue of \"Foreign Policy\" magazine. Rothkopf says that the United States should embrace \"cultural imperialism\" as in its self-interest. But his definition of cultural imperialism stresses spreading the values of tolerance and openness to cultural change in order to avoid war and conflict between cultures as well as expanding accepted technological and legal standards to provide free traders with enough security to do business with more countries. Rothkopf's definition almost exclusively involves allowing individuals in other nations to accept or reject foreign cultural influences. He also mentions, but only in passing, the use of the English language and consumption of news and popular music and film as cultural dominance that he supports. Rothkopf additionally makes the point that globalisation and the Internet are accelerating the process of cultural influence.\nCulture is sometimes used by the organisers of society\u2014politicians, theologians, academics, and families\u2014to impose and ensure order, the rudiments of which change over time as need dictates. One need only look at the 20th century's genocides. In each one, leaders used culture as a political front to fuel the passions of their armies and other minions and to justify their actions among their people.\nRothkopf then cites genocide and s in Armenia, Russia, the Holocaust, Cambodia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda and East Timor as examples of culture (in some cases expressed in the ideology of \"political culture\" or religion) being misused to justify violence. He also acknowledges that cultural imperialism in the past has been guilty of forcefully eliminating the cultures of natives in the Americas and in Africa, or through use of the Inquisition, \"and during the expansion of virtually every empire.\" The most important way to deal with cultural influence in any nation, according to Rothkopf, is to promote tolerance and allow, or even promote, cultural diversities that are compatible with tolerance and to eliminate those cultural differences that cause violent conflict:\nCultural dominance can also be seen in the 1930s in Australia where the Aboriginal Assimilation Policy acted as an attempt to wipe out the Native Australian people. The British settlers tried to biologically alter the skin colour of the Australian Aboriginal people through mixed breeding with white people. The policy also made attempts to forcefully conform the Aborigines to western ideas of dress and education.\nIn history.\nAlthough the term was popularised in the 1960s, and was used by its original proponents to refer to cultural hegemonies in a post-colonial world, cultural imperialism has also been used to refer to times further in the past.\nAntiquity.\nThe Ancient Greeks are known for spreading their culture around the Mediterranean and Near East through trade and conquest. During the Archaic Period, the burgeoning Greek city-states established settlements and colonies across the Mediterranean Sea, especially in Sicily and southern Italy, influencing the Etruscan and Roman peoples of the region. In the late fourth century BC, Alexander the Great conquered Persian and Indian territories all the way to the Indus River Valley and Punjab, spreading Greek religion, art, and science along the way. This resulted in the rise of Hellenistic kingdoms and cities across Egypt, the Near East, Central Asia, and Northwest India where Greek culture fused with the cultures of the indigenous peoples. The Greek influence prevailed even longer in science and literature, where medieval Muslim scholars in the Middle East studied the writings of Aristotle for scientific learning.\nThe Roman Empire was also an early example of cultural imperialism. Early Rome, in its conquest of Italy, assimilated the people of Etruria by replacing the Etruscan language with Latin, which led to the demise of that language and many aspects of Etruscan civilisation. Cultural Romanization was imposed on many parts of Rome's empire by \"many regions receiving Roman culture unwillingly, as a form of cultural imperialism.\" For example, when Greece was conquered by the Roman armies, Rome set about altering the culture of Greece to conform with Roman ideals. For instance, the Greek habit of stripping naked, in public, for exercise, was looked on askance by Roman writers, who considered the practice to be a cause of the Greeks' effeminacy and enslavement. The Roman example has been linked to modern instances of European imperialism in African countries, bridging the two instances with Slavoj Zizek's discussions of 'empty signifiers'. The Pax Romana was secured in the empire, in part, by the \"forced acculturation of the culturally diverse populations that Rome had conquered.\"\nBritish Empire.\nBritish worldwide expansion in the 18th and 19th centuries was an economic and political phenomenon. However, \"there was also a strong social and cultural dimension to it, which Rudyard Kipling termed the 'white man's burden'.\" One of the ways this was carried out was by religious proselytising, by, amongst others, the London Missionary Society, which was \"an agent of British cultural imperialism.\" Another way, was by the imposition of educational material on the colonies for an \"imperial curriculum\". Robin A. Butlin writes, \"The promotion of empire through books, illustrative materials, and educational syllabuses was widespread, part of an education policy geared to cultural imperialism\". This was also true of science and technology in the empire. Douglas M. Peers and Nandini Gooptu note that \"Most scholars of colonial science in India now prefer to stress the ways in which science and technology worked in the service of colonialism, as both a 'tool of empire' in the practical sense and as a vehicle for cultural imperialism. In other words, science developed in India in ways that reflected colonial priorities, tending to benefit Europeans at the expense of Indians, while remaining dependent on and subservient to scientific authorities in the colonial metropolis.\" British sports were spread across the Empire partially as a way of encouraging British values and cultural uniformity, though this was tempered by the fact that colonised peoples gained a sense of nationalistic pride by defeating the British in their own sports.\nThe analysis of cultural imperialism carried out by Edward Said drew principally from a study of the British Empire. According to Danilo Raponi, the cultural imperialism of the British in the 19th century had a much wider effect than only in the British Empire. He writes, \"To paraphrase Said, I see cultural imperialism as a complex cultural hegemony of a country, Great Britain, that in the 19th century had no rivals in terms of its ability to project its power across the world and to influence the cultural, political and commercial affairs of most countries. It is the 'cultural hegemony' of a country whose power to export the most fundamental ideas and concepts at the basis of its understanding of 'civilisation' knew practically no bounds.\" In this, for example, Raponi includes Italy.\nOther pre-Second World War examples.\nThe New Cambridge Modern History writes about the cultural imperialism of Napoleonic France. Napoleon used the Institut de France \"as an instrument for transmuting French universalism into cultural imperialism.\" Members of the institute (who included Napoleon), descended upon Egypt in 1798. \"Upon arrival they organised themselves into an Institute of Cairo. The Rosetta Stone is their most famous find. The science of Egyptology is their legacy.\"\nAfter the First World War, Germans were worried about the extent of French influence in the occupied Rhineland, which under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles was under Allied control from 1918 to 1930. An early use of the term appeared in an essay by Paul Ruhlmann (as \"Peter Hartmann\") at that date, entitled \"French Cultural Imperialism on the Rhine\".\nNorth American colonisation.\nKeeping in line with the trends of international imperialistic endeavours, the expansion of Canadian and American territory in the 19th century saw cultural imperialism employed as a means of control over indigenous populations. This, when used in conjunction of more traditional forms of ethnic cleansing and genocide in the United States, saw devastating, lasting effects on indigenous communities.\nIn 2017 Canada celebrated its 150-year anniversary of the confederating of three British colonies. As Catherine Murton Stoehr points out in \"Origins\", a publication organised by the history departments of Ohio State University and Miami University, the occasion came with remembrance of Canada's treatment of First Nations people.\nNumerous policies focused on indigenous persons came into effect shortly thereafter. Most notable is the use of residential schools across Canada as a means to remove indigenous persons from their culture and instill in them the beliefs and values of the majorised colonial hegemony. The policies of these schools, as described by Ward Churchill in his book \"Kill the Indian, Save the Man\", were to forcefully assimilate students who were often removed with force from their families. These schools forbid students from using their native languages and participating in their own cultural practices. Residential schools were largely run by Christian churches, operating in conjunction with Christian missions with minimal government oversight. The book, \"Stolen Lives: The Indigenous peoples of Canada and the Indian Residentials Schools\", describes this form of operation: \"The government provided little leadership, and the clergy in charge were left to decide what to teach and how to teach it. Their priority was to impart the teachings of their church or order\u2014not to provide a good education that could help students in their post-graduation lives.\" In a \"New York Times\" op-ed, Gabrielle Scrimshaw describes her grandparents being forced to send her mother to one of these schools or risk imprisonment. After hiding her mother on \"school pick up day\" so as to avoid sending their daughter to institutions whose abuse was well known at the time (mid-20th century). Scrimshaw's mother was left with limited options for further education she says and is today illiterate as a result. Scrimshaw explains, \"Seven generations of my ancestors went through these schools. Each new family member enrolled meant a compounding of abuse and a steady loss of identity, culture and hope. My mother was the last generation. the experience left her broken, and like so many, she turned to substances to numb these pains.\" A report, republished by CBC News, estimates nearly 6,000 children died in the care of these schools.\nThe colonisation of native peoples in North America remains active today despite the closing of the majority of residential schools. This form of cultural imperialism continues in the use of Native Americans as mascots for schools and athletic teams. Jason Edward Black, a professor and chair in the Department of Communication Studies at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, describes how the use of Native Americans as mascots furthers the colonial attitudes of the 18th and 19th centuries.\nIn \"Deciphering Pocahontas\", Kent Ono and Derek Buescher wrote: \"Euro-American culture has made a habit of appropriating, and redefining what is 'distinctive' and constitutive of Native Americans.\"\nNazi colonialism.\n\"Cultural imperialism\" has also been used in connection with the expansion of German influence under the Nazis in the middle of the twentieth century. Alan Steinweis and Daniel Rogers note that even before the Nazis came to power, \"Already in the Weimar Republic, German academic specialists on eastern Europe had contributed through their publications and teaching to the legitimization of German territorial revanchism and cultural imperialism. These scholars operated primarily in the disciplines of history, economics, geography, and literature.\" In the area of music, Michael Kater writes that during the WWII German occupation of France, Hans Rosbaud, a German conductor based by the Nazi regime in Strasbourg, became \"at least nominally, a servant of Nazi cultural imperialism directed against the French.\"\nIn Italy during the war, Germany pursued \"a European cultural front that gravitates around German culture\". The Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels set up the European Union of Writers, \"one of Goebbels's most ambitious projects for Nazi cultural hegemony. Presumably a means of gathering authors from Germany, Italy, and the occupied countries to plan the literary life of the new Europe, the union soon emerged as a vehicle of German cultural imperialism.\" For other parts of Europe, Robert Gerwarth, writing about cultural imperialism and Reinhard Heydrich, states that the \"Nazis' Germanization project was based on a historically unprecedented programme of racial stock-taking, theft, expulsion and murder.\" Also, \"The full integration of the [Czech] Protectorate into this New Order required the complete Germanization of the Protectorate's cultural life and the eradication of indigenous Czech and Jewish culture.\"\nThe actions by Nazi Germany reflect on the notion of race and culture playing a significant role in imperialism. The idea that there is a distinction between the Germans and the Jews has created the illusion of Germans believing they were superior to the Jewish inferiors, the notion of us/them and self/others.\nWestern imperialism.\nCultural imperialism manifests in the Western world in the form legal system to include commodification and marketing of indigenous resources (example medicinal, spiritual or artistic) and genetic resources (example human DNA).\nAmericanization.\nThe terms \"McDonaldization\", \"Disneyization\" and \"Cocacolonization\" have been coined to describe the spread of Western cultural influence, especially after the end of the Cold War.\nThere are many countries affected by the US and their pop-culture. For example, the film industry in Nigeria referred to as \"Nollywood\" being the second largest as it produces more films annually than the United States, their films are shown across Africa. Another term that describes the spread of Western cultural influence is \"Hollywoodization\" it is when American culture is promoted through Hollywood films which can culturally affect the viewers of Hollywood films."}
{"id": "6269", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6269", "title": "Clock wipe", "text": ""}
