{"id": "8378", "revid": "84417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8378", "title": "Dipole", "text": "In physics, a dipole () is an electromagnetic phenomenon which occurs in two ways:\nDipoles, whether electric or magnetic, can be characterized by their dipole moment, a vector quantity. For the simple electric dipole, the electric dipole moment points from the negative charge towards the positive charge, and has a magnitude equal to the strength of each charge times the separation between the charges. (To be precise: for the definition of the dipole moment, one should always consider the \"dipole limit\", where, for example, the distance of the generating charges should \"converge\" to 0 while simultaneously, the charge strength should \"diverge\" to infinity in such a way that the product remains a positive constant.)\nFor the magnetic (dipole) current loop, the magnetic dipole moment points through the loop (according to the right hand grip rule), with a magnitude equal to the current in the loop times the area of the loop.\nSimilar to magnetic current loops, the electron particle and some other fundamental particles have magnetic dipole moments, as an electron generates a magnetic field identical to that generated by a very small current loop. However, an electron's magnetic dipole moment is not due to a current loop, but to an intrinsic property of the electron. The electron may also have an \"electric\" dipole moment though such has yet to be observed (see electron electric dipole moment).\nA permanent magnet, such as a bar magnet, owes its magnetism to the intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of the electron. The two ends of a bar magnet are referred to as poles (not to be confused with monopoles, see Classification below) and may be labeled \"north\" and \"south\". In terms of the Earth's magnetic field, they are respectively \"north-seeking\" and \"south-seeking\" poles: if the magnet were freely suspended in the Earth's magnetic field, the north-seeking pole would point towards the north and the south-seeking pole would point towards the south. The dipole moment of the bar magnet points from its magnetic south to its magnetic north pole. In a magnetic compass, the north pole of a bar magnet points north. However, that means that Earth's geomagnetic north pole is the \"south\" pole (south-seeking pole) of its dipole moment and vice versa.\nThe only known mechanisms for the creation of magnetic dipoles are by current loops or quantum-mechanical spin since the existence of magnetic monopoles has never been experimentally demonstrated.\nClassification.\nA \"physical dipole\" consists of two equal and opposite point charges: in the literal sense, two poles. Its field at large distances (i.e., distances large in comparison to the separation of the poles) depends almost entirely on the dipole moment as defined above. A \"point (electric) dipole\" is the limit obtained by letting the separation tend to 0 while keeping the dipole moment fixed. The field of a point dipole has a particularly simple form, and the order-1 term in the multipole expansion is precisely the point dipole field.\nAlthough there are no known magnetic monopoles in nature, there are magnetic dipoles in the form of the quantum-mechanical spin associated with particles such as electrons (although the accurate description of such effects falls outside of classical electromagnetism). A theoretical magnetic \"point dipole\" has a magnetic field of exactly the same form as the electric field of an electric point dipole. A very small current-carrying loop is approximately a magnetic point dipole; the magnetic dipole moment of such a loop is the product of the current flowing in the loop and the (vector) area of the loop.\nAny configuration of charges or currents has a 'dipole moment', which describes the dipole whose field is the best approximation, at large distances, to that of the given configuration. This is simply one term in the multipole expansion when the total charge (\"monopole moment\") is 0\u2014as it \"always\" is for the magnetic case, since there are no magnetic monopoles. The dipole term is the dominant one at large distances: Its field falls off in proportion to , as compared to for the next (quadrupole) term and higher powers of for higher terms, or for the monopole term.\nMolecular dipoles.\nMany molecules have such dipole moments due to non-uniform distributions of positive and negative charges on the various atoms. Such is the case with polar compounds like hydrogen fluoride (HF), where electron density is shared unequally between atoms. Therefore, a molecule's dipole is an electric dipole with an inherent electric field that should not be confused with a magnetic dipole, which generates a magnetic field.\nThe physical chemist Peter J. W. Debye was the first scientist to study molecular dipoles extensively, and, as a consequence, dipole moments are measured in the non-SI unit named \"debye\" in his honor.\nFor molecules there are three types of dipoles:\nMore generally, an induced dipole of \"any\" polarizable charge distribution \"\u03c1\" (remember that a molecule has a charge distribution) is caused by an electric field external to \"\u03c1\". This field may, for instance, originate from an ion or polar molecule in the vicinity of \"\u03c1\" or may be macroscopic (e.g., a molecule between the plates of a charged capacitor). The size of the induced dipole moment is equal to the product of the strength of the external field and the dipole polarizability of \"\u03c1\".\nDipole moment values can be obtained from measurement of the dielectric constant. Some typical gas phase values given with the unit debye are:\nPotassium bromide (KBr) has one of the highest dipole moments because it is an ionic compound that exists as a molecule in the gas phase.\nThe overall dipole moment of a molecule may be approximated as a vector sum of bond dipole moments. As a vector sum it depends on the relative orientation of the bonds, so that from the dipole moment information can be deduced about the molecular geometry.\nFor example, the zero dipole of CO2 implies that the two C=O bond dipole moments cancel so that the molecule must be linear. For H2O the O\u2212H bond moments do not cancel because the molecule is bent. For ozone (O3) which is also a bent molecule, the bond dipole moments are not zero even though the O\u2212O bonds are between similar atoms. This agrees with the Lewis structures for the resonance forms of ozone which show a positive charge on the central oxygen atom.\nAn example in organic chemistry of the role of geometry in determining dipole moment is the \"cis\" and \"trans\" isomers of 1,2-dichloroethene. In the \"cis\" isomer the two polar C\u2212Cl bonds are on the same side of the C=C double bond and the molecular dipole moment is 1.90\u00a0D. In the \"trans\" isomer, the dipole moment is zero because the two C\u2212Cl bonds are on opposite sides of the C=C and cancel (and the two bond moments for the much less polar C\u2212H bonds also cancel).\nAnother example of the role of molecular geometry is boron trifluoride, which has three polar bonds with a difference in electronegativity greater than the traditionally cited threshold of 1.7 for ionic bonding. However, due to the equilateral triangular distribution of the fluoride ions centered on and in the same plane as the boron cation, the symmetry of the molecule results in its dipole moment being zero.\nQuantum-mechanical dipole operator.\nConsider a collection of \"N\" particles with charges \"qi\" and position vectors r\"i\". For instance, this collection may be a molecule consisting of electrons, all with charge \u2212\"e\", and nuclei with charge \"eZi\", where \"Zi\" is the atomic number of the \"i\"\u2009th nucleus.\nThe dipole observable (physical quantity) has the quantum mechanical dipole operator:\nNotice that this definition is valid only for neutral atoms or molecules, i.e. total charge equal to zero. In the ionized case, we have\nwhere formula_3 is the center of mass of the molecule/group of particles.\nAtomic dipoles.\nA non-degenerate (\"S\"-state) atom can have only a zero permanent dipole. This fact follows quantum mechanically from the inversion symmetry of atoms. All 3 components of the dipole operator are antisymmetric under inversion with respect to the nucleus,\nwhere formula_5 is the dipole operator and formula_6 is the inversion operator.\nThe permanent dipole moment of an atom in a non-degenerate state (see degenerate energy level) is given as the expectation (average) value of the dipole operator,\nwhere formula_8 is an \"S\"-state, non-degenerate, wavefunction, which is symmetric or antisymmetric under inversion: formula_9. Since the product of the wavefunction (in the ket) and its complex conjugate (in the bra) is always symmetric under inversion and its inverse,\nit follows that the expectation value changes sign under inversion. We used here the fact that formula_11, being a symmetry operator, is unitary: formula_12 and by definition the Hermitian adjoint formula_13 may be moved from bra to ket and then becomes formula_14. Since the only quantity that is equal to minus itself is the zero, the expectation value vanishes,\nIn the case of open-shell atoms with degenerate energy levels, one could define a dipole moment by the aid of the first-order Stark effect. This gives a non-vanishing dipole (by definition proportional to a non-vanishing first-order Stark shift) only if some of the wavefunctions belonging to the degenerate energies have opposite parity; i.e., have different behavior under inversion. This is a rare occurrence, but happens for the excited H-atom, where 2s and 2p states are \"accidentally\" degenerate (see article Laplace\u2013Runge\u2013Lenz vector for the origin of this degeneracy) and have opposite parity (2s is even and 2p is odd).\nField of a static magnetic dipole.\nMagnitude.\nThe far-field strength, \"B\", of a dipole magnetic field is given by\nwhere\nConversion to cylindrical coordinates is achieved using and\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the perpendicular distance from the \"z\"-axis. Then,\nVector form.\nThe field itself is a vector quantity:\nwhere\nThis is \"exactly\" the field of a point dipole, \"exactly\" the dipole term in the multipole expansion of an arbitrary field, and \"approximately\" the field of any dipole-like configuration at large distances.\nMagnetic vector potential.\nThe vector potential A of a magnetic dipole is\nwith the same definitions as above.\nField from an electric dipole.\nThe electrostatic potential at position r due to an electric dipole at the origin is given by:\nwhere p is the (vector) dipole moment, and \"\u0454\"0 is the permittivity of free space.\nThis term appears as the second term in the multipole expansion of an arbitrary electrostatic potential \u03a6(r). If the source of \u03a6(r) is a dipole, as it is assumed here, this term is the only non-vanishing term in the multipole expansion of \u03a6(r). The electric field from a dipole can be found from the gradient of this potential:\nThis is of the same form of the expression for the magnetic field of a point magnetic dipole, ignoring the delta function. \nIn a real electric dipole, however, the charges are physically separate and the electric field diverges or converges at the point charges. \nThis is different to the magnetic field of a real magnetic dipole which is continuous everywhere. The delta function represents the strong field pointing in the opposite direction between the point charges, which is often omitted since one is rarely interested in the field at the dipole's position. \nFor further discussions about the internal field of dipoles, see or \"\".\nTorque on a dipole.\nSince the direction of an electric field is defined as the direction of the force on a positive charge, electric field lines point away from a positive charge and toward a negative charge.\nWhen placed in a homogeneous electric or magnetic field, equal but opposite forces arise on each side of the dipole creating a torque }:\nfor an electric dipole moment p (in coulomb-meters), or\nfor a magnetic dipole moment m (in ampere-square meters).\nThe resulting torque will tend to align the dipole with the applied field, which in the case of an electric dipole, yields a potential energy of\nThe energy of a magnetic dipole is similarly\nDipole radiation.\nIn addition to dipoles in electrostatics, it is also common to consider an electric or magnetic dipole that is oscillating in time. It is an extension, or a more physical next-step, to spherical wave radiation.\nIn particular, consider a harmonically oscillating electric dipole, with angular frequency \"\u03c9\" and a dipole moment \"p\"0 along the \u1e91 direction of the form\nIn vacuum, the exact field produced by this oscillating dipole can be derived using the retarded potential formulation as:\nFor \u00a0\u226b\u00a01, the far-field takes the simpler form of a radiating \"spherical\" wave, but with angular dependence embedded in the cross-product:\nThe time-averaged Poynting vector\nis not distributed isotropically, but concentrated around the directions lying perpendicular to the dipole moment, as a result of the non-spherical electric and magnetic waves. In fact, the spherical harmonic function (sin \"\u03b8\") responsible for such toroidal angular distribution is precisely the \"l\"\u00a0=\u00a01 \"p\" wave.\nThe total time-average power radiated by the field can then be derived from the Poynting vector as\nNotice that the dependence of the power on the fourth power of the frequency of the radiation is in accordance with the Rayleigh scattering, and the underlying effects why the sky consists of mainly blue colour.\nA circular polarized dipole is described as a superposition of two linear dipoles."}
{"id": "8379", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8379", "title": "Dipole-dipole bond", "text": ""}
{"id": "8380", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8380", "title": "Dipole\u2013dipole attraction", "text": ""}
{"id": "8382", "revid": "83784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8382", "title": "Delocalised", "text": ""}
{"id": "8385", "revid": "2970138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8385", "title": "Dry beer", "text": ""}
{"id": "8386", "revid": "47012757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8386", "title": "Dynamics", "text": "Dynamics (from Greek \u03b4\u03c5\u03bd\u03b1\u03bc\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 \"dynamikos\" \"powerful\", from \u03b4\u03cd\u03bd\u03b1\u03bc\u03b9\u03c2 \"dynamis\" \"power\") or dynamic may refer to:\nComputer science and mathematics.\nInternet\nMathematics"}
{"id": "8387", "revid": "1268663503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8387", "title": "Draught beer", "text": "Draught beer, also spelt draft, is beer served from a cask or keg rather than from a bottle or can. Draught beer served from a pressurised keg is also known as \nName.\nUntil Joseph Bramah patented the beer engine in 1785, beer was served directly from the barrel and carried to the customer. The Old English \"\" (\"carry; pull\") developed into a series of related words including \"drag\", \"draw\", and \"draught\". By the time Bramah's beer pumps became popular, the use of the term \"draught\" to refer to the acts of serving or drinking beer was well established and transferred easily to beer served via the hand pumps. In time, the word came to be restricted to only such beer. The usual spelling is now \"draught\" in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand and more commonly \"draft\" in North America, although it can be spelled either way. Regardless of spelling, the word is pronounced or depending on the region the speaker is from.\nCanned draught is beer served from a pressurised container featuring a widget. Smooth flow (also known as cream flow, nitrokeg, or smooth) is the name brewers give to draught beers pressurised with a partial nitrogen gas blend.\nHistory.\nIn 1691, an article in the \"London Gazette\" mentioned John Lofting, who held a patent for a fire engine: \"The said patentee has also projected a very useful engine for starting of beer, and other liquors which will draw from 20 to 30 barrels an hour, which are completely fixed with brass joints and screws at reasonable rates\".\nIn the early 20th century, draught beer started to be served from pressurised containers. Artificial carbonation was introduced in the United Kingdom in 1936, with Watney's experimental pasteurised beer Red Barrel. Though this method of serving beer did not take hold in the UK until the late 1950s, it did become the favored method in the rest of Europe, where it is known by such terms as \"en pression\". The carbonation method of serving beer subsequently spread to the rest of the world; by the early 1970s the term \"draught beer\" almost exclusively referred to beer served under pressure as opposed to the traditional cask or barrel beer.\nIn Britain, the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) was founded in 1971 to protect traditional\u2014unpressurised\u2014beer and brewing methods. The group devised the term \"real ale\" to differentiate between beer served from the cask and beer served under pressure. The term \"real ale\" has since been expanded to include bottle-conditioned beer.\nKeg beer.\nKeg beer is often filtered and/or pasteurised, both of which are processes that render the yeast inactive.\nIn brewing parlance, a keg is different from a cask. A cask has a tap hole near the edge of the top, and a spile hole on the side used for conditioning the unfiltered and unpasteurised beer. A keg has a single opening in the centre of the top to which a flow pipe is attached. Kegs are artificially pressurised after fermentation with carbon dioxide or a mixture of carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas or especially in Czech Republic solely compressed air.\n\"Keg\" has become a term of contempt used by some, particularly in the UK, since the 1960s when pasteurised draught beers started replacing traditional cask beers.\nKeg beer was replacing traditional cask ale in all parts of the UK, primarily because it requires less care to handle. Since 1971, CAMRA has conducted a consumer campaign on behalf of those who prefer traditional cask beer. CAMRA has lobbied the British Parliament to ensure support for cask ale and microbreweries have sprung up to serve those consumers who prefer traditional cask beer.\nPressurised CO2 in the keg's headspace maintains carbonation in the beer. The CO2 pressure varies depending on the amount of CO2 already in the beer and the keg storage temperature. Occasionally the CO2 gas is blended with nitrogen gas. CO2 / nitrogen blends are used to allow a higher operating pressure in complex dispensing systems.\nNitrogen is used under high pressure when dispensing dry stouts (such as Guinness) and other creamy beers because it displaces CO2 to (artificially) form a rich tight head and a less carbonated taste. This makes the beer feel smooth on the palate and gives a foamy appearance. Premixed bottled gas for creamy beers is usually 75% nitrogen and 25% CO2. This premixed gas, which only works well with creamy beers, is often referred to as Guinness Gas, Beer Gas, or Aligal (an Air Liquide brand name). Using \"Beer Gas\" with other beer styles can cause the last 5% to 10% of the beer in each keg to taste very flat and lifeless. In the UK, the term \"keg beer\" would imply the beer is pasteurised, in contrast to unpasteurised cask ale. Some of the newer microbreweries may offer a nitro keg stout which is filtered but not pasteurised.\nStorage and serving temperature.\nCask beer should be stored and served at a cellar temperature of . Once a cask is opened, it should be consumed within three days. Keg beer is given additional cooling just prior to being served either by flash coolers or a remote cooler in the cellar. This chills the beer to temperatures between .\nCanned and bottled \"draught\".\nThe words \"draft\" and \"draught\" have been used as marketing terms to describe canned or bottled beers, implying that they taste and appear like beers from a cask or keg. Commercial brewers use this as a marketing tool although it is incorrect to call any beer not drawn from a cask or keg \"draught\". Two examples are Miller Genuine Draft, a pale lager which is produced using a cold filtering system, and Guinness stout in patented \"Draught-flow\" cans and bottles. Guinness is an example of beers that use a nitrogen widget to create a smooth beer with a dense head. Guinness has recently replaced the widget system from their bottled \"draught\" beer with a coating of cellulose fibres on the inside of the bottle. Statements indicate a new development in bottling technology that enables the mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide to be present in the beer without using a widget, making it according to Guinness \"more drinkable\" from the bottle.\nIn East Asian countries, such as China and Japan, the term \"draft beer\" () applied to canned or bottled beer indicates that the beer is not pasteurised (though it may be filtered), giving it a fresher taste but shorter shelf-life than conventional packaged beers."}
{"id": "8388", "revid": "45406993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8388", "title": "Director", "text": "Director may refer to:"}
{"id": "8389", "revid": "46641770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8389", "title": "Major depressive disorder", "text": "Major depressive disorder (MDD), also known as clinical depression, is a mental disorder characterized by at least two weeks of pervasive low mood, low self-esteem, and loss of interest or pleasure in normally enjoyable activities. Introduced by a group of US clinicians in the mid-1970s, the term was adopted by the American Psychiatric Association for this symptom cluster under mood disorders in the 1980 version of the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM-III), and has become widely used since. The disorder causes the second-most years lived with disability, after lower back pain. \nThe diagnosis of major depressive disorder is based on the person's reported experiences, behavior reported by family or friends, and a mental status examination. There is no laboratory test for the disorder, but testing may be done to rule out physical conditions that can cause similar symptoms. The most common time of onset is in a person's 20s, with females affected about three times as often as males. The course of the disorder varies widely, from one episode lasting months to a lifelong disorder with recurrent major depressive episodes.\nThose with major depressive disorder are typically treated with psychotherapy and antidepressant medication. Medication appears to be effective, but the effect may be significant only in the most severely depressed. Hospitalization (which may be involuntary) may be necessary in cases with associated self-neglect or a significant risk of harm to self or others. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be considered if other measures are not effective.\nMajor depressive disorder is believed to be caused by a combination of genetic, environmental, and psychological factors, with about 40% of the risk being genetic. Risk factors include a family history of the condition, major life changes, childhood traumas, environmental lead exposure, certain medications, chronic health problems, and substance use disorders. It can negatively affect a person's personal life, work life, or education, and cause issues with a person's sleeping habits, eating habits, and general health. \nSigns and symptoms.\nA person having a major depressive episode usually exhibits a low mood, which pervades all aspects of life, and an inability to experience pleasure in previously enjoyable activities. Depressed people may be preoccupied with or ruminate over thoughts and feelings of worthlessness, inappropriate guilt or regret, helplessness or hopelessness.\nOther symptoms of depression include poor concentration and memory, withdrawal from social situations and activities, reduced sex drive, irritability, and thoughts of death or suicide. Insomnia is common; in the typical pattern, a person wakes very early and cannot get back to sleep. Hypersomnia, or oversleeping, can also happen, as well as day-night rhythm disturbances, such as diurnal mood variation. Some antidepressants may also cause insomnia due to their stimulating effect. In severe cases, depressed people may have psychotic symptoms. These symptoms include delusions or, less commonly, hallucinations, usually unpleasant. People who have had previous episodes with psychotic symptoms are more likely to have them with future episodes.\nA depressed person may report multiple physical symptoms such as fatigue, headaches, or digestive problems; physical complaints are the most common presenting problem in developing countries, according to the World Health Organization's criteria for depression. Appetite often decreases, resulting in weight loss, although increased appetite and weight gain occasionally occur.\nMajor depression significantly affects a person's family and personal relationships, work or school life, sleeping and eating habits, and general health. Family and friends may notice agitation or lethargy. Older depressed people may have cognitive symptoms of recent onset, such as forgetfulness, and a more noticeable slowing of movements.\nDepressed children may often display an irritable rather than a depressed mood; most lose interest in school and show a steep decline in academic performance. Diagnosis may be delayed or missed when symptoms are interpreted as \"normal moodiness\". Elderly people may not present with classical depressive symptoms. Diagnosis and treatment is further complicated in that the elderly are often simultaneously treated with a number of other drugs, and often have other concurrent diseases.\nCause.\nThe etiology of depression is not yet fully understood. The biopsychosocial model proposes that biological, psychological, and social factors all play a role in causing depression. The diathesis\u2013stress model specifies that depression results when a preexisting vulnerability, or diathesis, is activated by stressful life events. The preexisting vulnerability can be either genetic, implying an interaction between nature and nurture, or schematic, resulting from views of the world learned in childhood. American psychiatrist Aaron Beck suggested that a triad of automatic and spontaneous negative thoughts about the self, the world or environment, and the future may lead to other depressive signs and symptoms.\nGenetics.\nGenes play a major role in the development of depression. Family and twin studies find that nearly 40% of individual differences in risk for major depressive disorder can be explained by genetic factors. Like most psychiatric disorders, major depressive disorder is likely influenced by many individual genetic changes. In 2018, a genome-wide association study discovered 44 genetic variants linked to risk for major depression; a 2019 study found 102 variants in the genome linked to depression. However, it appears that major depression is less heritable compared to bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Research focusing on specific candidate genes has been criticized for its tendency to generate false positive findings. There are also other efforts to examine interactions between life stress and polygenic risk for depression.\nOther health problems.\nDepression can also arise after a chronic or terminal medical condition, such as HIV/AIDS or asthma, and may be labeled \"secondary depression\". It is unknown whether the underlying diseases induce depression through effect on quality of life, or through shared etiologies (such as degeneration of the basal ganglia in Parkinson's disease or immune dysregulation in asthma). Depression may also be iatrogenic (the result of healthcare), such as drug-induced depression. Therapies associated with depression include interferons, beta-blockers, isotretinoin, contraceptives, cardiac agents, anticonvulsants, antimigraine drugs, antipsychotics, and hormonal agents such as gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH agonist). Celiac disease is another possible contributing factor.\nSubstance use in early age is associated with increased risk of developing depression later in life. Depression occurring after giving birth is called postpartum depression and is thought to be the result of hormonal changes associated with pregnancy. Seasonal affective disorder, a type of depression associated with seasonal changes in sunlight, is thought to be triggered by decreased sunlight.\nVitamin B2, B6 and B12 deficiency may cause depression in females.\nEnvironmental.\nAdverse childhood experiences (incorporating childhood abuse, neglect and family dysfunction) markedly increase the risk of major depression, especially if more than one type. Childhood trauma also correlates with severity of depression, poor responsiveness to treatment and length of illness. Some are more susceptible than others to developing mental illness such as depression after trauma, and various genes have been suggested to control susceptibility. Couples in unhappy marriages have a higher risk of developing clinical depression.\nThere appears to be a link between air pollution and depression and suicide. There may be an association between long-term PM2.5 exposure and depression, and a possible association between short-term PM10 exposure and suicide.\nPathophysiology.\nThe pathophysiology of depression is not completely understood, but current theories center around monoaminergic systems, the circadian rhythm, immunological dysfunction, HPA-axis dysfunction and structural or functional abnormalities of emotional circuits.\nDerived from the effectiveness of monoaminergic drugs in treating depression, the monoamine theory posits that insufficient activity of monoamine neurotransmitters is the primary cause of depression. Evidence for the monoamine theory comes from multiple areas. First, acute depletion of tryptophan\u2014a necessary precursor of serotonin and a monoamine\u2014can cause depression in those in remission or relatives of people who are depressed, suggesting that decreased serotonergic neurotransmission is important in depression. Second, the correlation between depression risk and polymorphisms in the 5-HTTLPR gene, which codes for serotonin receptors, suggests a link. Third, decreased size of the locus coeruleus, decreased activity of tyrosine hydroxylase, increased density of alpha-2 adrenergic receptor, and evidence from rat models suggest decreased adrenergic neurotransmission in depression. Furthermore, decreased levels of homovanillic acid, altered response to dextroamphetamine, responses of depressive symptoms to dopamine receptor agonists, decreased dopamine receptor D1 binding in the striatum, and polymorphism of dopamine receptor genes implicate dopamine, another monoamine, in depression. Lastly, increased activity of monoamine oxidase, which degrades monoamines, has been associated with depression. However, the monoamine theory is inconsistent with observations that serotonin depletion does not cause depression in healthy persons, that antidepressants instantly increase levels of monoamines but take weeks to work, and the existence of atypical antidepressants which can be effective despite not targeting this pathway.\nOne proposed explanation for the therapeutic lag, and further support for the deficiency of monoamines, is a desensitization of self-inhibition in raphe nuclei by the increased serotonin mediated by antidepressants. However, disinhibition of the dorsal raphe has been proposed to occur as a result of \"decreased\" serotonergic activity in tryptophan depletion, resulting in a depressed state mediated by increased serotonin. Further countering the monoamine hypothesis is the fact that rats with lesions of the dorsal raphe are not more depressive than controls, the finding of increased jugular 5-HIAA in people who are depressed that normalized with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment, and the preference for carbohydrates in people who are depressed. Already limited, the monoamine hypothesis has been further oversimplified when presented to the general public. A 2022 review found no consistent evidence supporting the serotonin hypothesis, linking serotonin levels and depression.\nHPA-axis abnormalities have been suggested in depression given the association of CRHR1 with depression and the increased frequency of dexamethasone test non-suppression in people who are depressed. However, this abnormality is not adequate as a diagnosis tool, because its sensitivity is only 44%. These stress-related abnormalities are thought to be the cause of hippocampal volume reductions seen in people who are depressed. Furthermore, a meta-analysis yielded decreased dexamethasone suppression, and increased response to psychological stressors. Further abnormal results have been obscured with the cortisol awakening response, with increased response being associated with depression.\nThere is also a connection between the gut microbiome and the central nervous system, otherwise known as the Gut-Brain axis, which is a two-way communication system between the brain and the gut. Experiments have shown that microbiota in the gut can play an important role in depression as people with MDD often have gut-brain dysfunction. One analysis showed that those with MDD have different bacteria living in their guts. Bacteria \"Bacteroidetes\" and \"Firmicutes\" were most affected in people with MDD, and they are also impacted in people with irritable bowel syndrome. Another study showed that people with IBS have a higher chance of developing depression, which shows the two are connected. There is even evidence suggesting that altering the microbes in the gut can have regulatory effects on developing depression.\nTheories unifying neuroimaging findings have been proposed. The first model proposed is the limbic-cortical model, which involves hyperactivity of the ventral paralimbic regions and hypoactivity of frontal regulatory regions in emotional processing. Another model, the cortico-striatal model, suggests that abnormalities of the prefrontal cortex in regulating striatal and subcortical structures result in depression. Another model proposes hyperactivity of salience structures in identifying negative stimuli, and hypoactivity of cortical regulatory structures resulting in a negative emotional bias and depression, consistent with emotional bias studies.\nImmune pathogenesis theories on depression.\nThe newer field of psychoneuroimmunology, the study between the immune system and the nervous system and emotional state, suggests that cytokines may impact depression.\nImmune system abnormalities have been observed, including increased levels of cytokines -cells produced by immune cells that affect inflammation- involved in generating sickness behavior, creating a pro-inflammatory profile in MDD. Some people with depression have increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and some have decreased levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines. Research suggests that treatments can reduce pro-inflammatory cell production, like the experimental treatment of ketamine with treatment-resistant depression. With this, in MDD, people will more likely have a Th-1 dominant immune profile, which is a pro-inflammatory profile. This suggests that there are components of the immune system affecting the pathology of MDD.\nAnother way cytokines can affect depression is in the kynurenine pathway, and when this is overactivated, it can cause depression. This can be due to too much microglial activation and too little astrocytic activity. When microglia get activated, they release pro-inflammatory cytokines that cause an increase in the production of COX2. This, in turn, causes the production of PGE2, which is a prostaglandin, and this catalyzes the production of indolamine, IDO. IDO causes tryptophan to get converted into kynurenine and kynurenine becomes quinolinic acid. Quinolinic acid is an agonist for NMDA receptors, so it activates the pathway. Studies have shown that the post-mortem brains of patients with MDD have higher levels of quinolinic acid than people who did not have MDD. With this, researchers have also seen that the concentration of quinolinic acid correlates to the severity of depressive symptoms.\nDiagnosis.\nAssessment.\nA diagnostic assessment may be conducted by a suitably trained general practitioner, or by a psychiatrist or psychologist, who records the person's current circumstances, biographical history, current symptoms, family history, and alcohol and drug use. The assessment also includes a mental state examination, which is an assessment of the person's current mood and thought content, in particular the presence of themes of hopelessness or pessimism, self-harm or suicide, and an absence of positive thoughts or plans. Specialist mental health services are rare in rural areas, and thus diagnosis and management is left largely to primary-care clinicians. This issue is even more marked in developing countries. Rating scales are not used to diagnose depression, but they provide an indication of the severity of symptoms for a time period, so a person who scores above a given cut-off point can be more thoroughly evaluated for a depressive disorder diagnosis. Several rating scales are used for this purpose; these include the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, the Beck Depression Inventory or the Suicide Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised.\nPrimary-care physicians have more difficulty with underrecognition and undertreatment of depression compared to psychiatrists. These cases may be missed because for some people with depression, physical symptoms often accompany depression. In addition, there may also be barriers related to the person, provider, and/or the medical system. Non-psychiatrist physicians have been shown to miss about two-thirds of cases, although there is some evidence of improvement in the number of missed cases.\nA doctor generally performs a medical examination and selected investigations to rule out other causes of depressive symptoms. These include blood tests measuring TSH and thyroxine to exclude hypothyroidism; basic electrolytes and serum calcium to rule out a metabolic disturbance; and a full blood count including ESR to rule out a systemic infection or chronic disease. Adverse affective reactions to medications or alcohol misuse may be ruled out, as well. Testosterone levels may be evaluated to diagnose hypogonadism, a cause of depression in men. Vitamin D levels might be evaluated, as low levels of vitamin D have been associated with greater risk for depression. Subjective cognitive complaints appear in older depressed people, but they can also be indicative of the onset of a dementing disorder, such as Alzheimer's disease. Cognitive testing and brain imaging can help distinguish depression from dementia. A CT scan can exclude brain pathology in those with psychotic, rapid-onset or otherwise unusual symptoms. No biological tests confirm major depression. In general, investigations are not repeated for a subsequent episode unless there is a medical indication.\nDSM and ICD criteria.\nThe most widely used criteria for diagnosing depressive conditions are found in the American Psychiatric Association's \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM) and the World Health Organization's \"International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems\" (ICD). The latter system is typically used in European countries, while the former is used in the US and many other non-European nations, and the authors of both have worked towards conforming one with the other. Both DSM and ICD mark out typical (main) depressive symptoms. The most recent edition of the DSM is the Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR), and the most recent edition of the ICD is the Eleventh Edition (ICD-11).\nUnder mood disorders, ICD-11 classifies major depressive disorder as either \"single episode depressive disorder\" (where there is no history of depressive episodes, or of mania) or \"recurrent depressive disorder\" (where there is a history of prior episodes, with no history of mania). ICD-11 symptoms, present nearly every day for at least two weeks, are a depressed mood or anhedonia, accompanied by other symptoms such as \"difficulty concentrating, feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, changes in appetite or sleep, psychomotor agitation or retardation, and reduced energy or fatigue.\" These symptoms must affect work, social, or domestic activities. The ICD-11 system allows further specifiers for the current depressive episode: the severity (mild, moderate, severe, unspecified); the presence of psychotic symptoms (with or without psychotic symptoms); and the degree of remission if relevant (currently in partial remission, currently in full remission). These two disorders are classified as \"Depressive disorders\", in the category of \"Mood disorders\".\nAccording to DSM-5, at least one of the symptoms is either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. Depressed mood occurs nearly every day as subjective feelings like sadness, emptiness, and hopelessness or observations made by others (e.g. appears tearful). Loss of interest or pleasure occurs in all, or almost all activities of the day, nearly every day. These symptoms, as well as five out of the nine more specific symptoms listed, must frequently occur for more than two weeks (to the extent in which it impairs functioning) for the diagnosis. Major depressive disorder is classified as a mood disorder in the DSM-5. The diagnosis hinges on the presence of single or recurrent major depressive episodes. Further qualifiers are used to classify both the episode itself and the course of the disorder. The category Unspecified Depressive Disorder is diagnosed if the depressive episode's manifestation does not meet the criteria for a major depressive episode.\nMajor depressive episode.\nA major depressive episode is characterized by the presence of a severely depressed mood that persists for at least two weeks. Episodes may be isolated or recurrent and are categorized as mild (few symptoms in excess of minimum criteria), moderate, or severe (marked impact on social or occupational functioning). An episode with psychotic features\u2014commonly referred to as \"psychotic depression\"\u2014is automatically rated as severe. If the person has had an episode of mania or markedly elevated mood, a diagnosis of bipolar disorder is made instead. Depression without mania is sometimes referred to as \"unipolar\" because the mood remains at one emotional state or \"pole\".\nBereavement is not an exclusion criterion in the DSM-5, and it is up to the clinician to distinguish between normal reactions to a loss and MDD. Excluded are a range of related diagnoses, including dysthymia, which involves a chronic but milder mood disturbance; recurrent brief depression, consisting of briefer depressive episodes; minor depressive disorder, whereby only some symptoms of major depression are present; and adjustment disorder with depressed mood, which denotes low mood resulting from a psychological response to an identifiable event or stressor.\nSubtypes.\nThe DSM-5 recognizes six further subtypes of MDD, called \"specifiers\", in addition to noting the length, severity and presence of psychotic features:\nDifferential diagnoses.\nTo confirm major depressive disorder as the most likely diagnosis, other potential diagnoses must be considered, including dysthymia, adjustment disorder with depressed mood, or bipolar disorder. Dysthymia is a chronic, milder mood disturbance in which a person reports a low mood almost daily over a span of at least two years. The symptoms are not as severe as those for major depression, although people with dysthymia are vulnerable to secondary episodes of major depression (sometimes referred to as \"double depression\"). Adjustment disorder with depressed mood is a mood disturbance appearing as a psychological response to an identifiable event or stressor, in which the resulting emotional or behavioral symptoms are significant but do not meet the criteria for a major depressive episode.\nOther disorders need to be ruled out before diagnosing major depressive disorder. They include depressions due to physical illness, medications, and substance use disorders. Depression due to physical illness is diagnosed as a mood disorder due to a general medical condition. This condition is determined based on history, laboratory findings, or physical examination. When the depression is caused by a medication, non-medical use of a psychoactive substance, or exposure to a toxin, it is then diagnosed as a specific mood disorder (previously called \"substance-induced mood disorder\").\nScreening and prevention.\nPreventive efforts may result in decreases in rates of the condition of between 22 and 38%. Since 2016, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has recommended screening for depression among those over the age 12; though a 2005 Cochrane review found that the routine use of screening questionnaires has little effect on detection or treatment. Screening the general population is not recommended by authorities in the UK or Canada.\nBehavioral interventions, such as interpersonal therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy, are effective at preventing new onset depression. Because such interventions appear to be most effective when delivered to individuals or small groups, it has been suggested that they may be able to reach their large target audience most efficiently through the Internet.\nThe Netherlands mental health care system provides preventive interventions, such as the \"Coping with Depression\" course (CWD) for people with sub-threshold depression. The course is claimed to be the most successful of psychoeducational interventions for the treatment and prevention of depression (both for its adaptability to various populations and its results), with a risk reduction of 38% in major depression and an efficacy as a treatment comparing favorably to other psychotherapies.\nManagement.\nThe most common and effective treatments for depression are psychotherapy, medication, and electroconvulsive therapy (ECT); a combination of treatments is the most effective approach when depression is resistant to treatment. American Psychiatric Association treatment guidelines recommend that initial treatment should be individually tailored based on factors including severity of symptoms, co-existing disorders, prior treatment experience, and personal preference. Options may include pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, exercise, ECT, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or light therapy. Antidepressant medication is recommended as an initial treatment choice in people with mild, moderate, or severe major depression, and should be given to all people with severe depression unless ECT is planned. There is evidence that collaborative care by a team of health care practitioners produces better results than routine single-practitioner care.\nPsychotherapy is the treatment of choice (over medication) for people under 18, and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), third wave CBT and interpersonal therapy may help prevent depression. The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2004 guidelines indicate that antidepressants should not be used for the initial treatment of mild depression because the risk-benefit ratio is poor. The guidelines recommend that antidepressants treatment in combination with psychosocial interventions should be considered for:\nThe guidelines further note that antidepressant treatment should be continued for at least six months to reduce the risk of relapse, and that SSRIs are better tolerated than tricyclic antidepressants.\nTreatment options are more limited in developing countries, where access to mental health staff, medication, and psychotherapy is often difficult. Development of mental health services is minimal in many countries; depression is viewed as a phenomenon of the developed world despite evidence to the contrary, and not as an inherently life-threatening condition. There is insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of psychological versus medical therapy in children.\nLifestyle.\nPhysical exercise has been found to be effective for major depression, and may be recommended to people who are willing, motivated, and healthy enough to participate in an exercise program as treatment. It is equivalent to the use of medications or psychological therapies in most people. In older people it does appear to decrease depression. Sleep and diet may also play a role in depression, and interventions in these areas may be an effective add-on to conventional methods. In observational studies, smoking cessation has benefits in depression as large as or larger than those of medications.\nTalking therapies.\nTalking therapy (psychotherapy) can be delivered to individuals, groups, or families by mental health professionals, including psychotherapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, counselors, and psychiatric nurses. A 2012 review found psychotherapy to be better than no treatment but not other treatments. With more complex and chronic forms of depression, a combination of medication and psychotherapy may be used. There is moderate-quality evidence that psychological therapies are a useful addition to standard antidepressant treatment of treatment-resistant depression in the short term. Psychotherapy has been shown to be effective in older people. Successful psychotherapy appears to reduce the recurrence of depression even after it has been stopped or replaced by occasional booster sessions.\nThe most-studied form of psychotherapy for depression is CBT, which teaches clients to challenge self-defeating, but enduring ways of thinking (cognitions) and change counter-productive behaviors. CBT can perform as well as antidepressants in people with major depression. CBT has the most research evidence for the treatment of depression in children and adolescents, and CBT and interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) are preferred therapies for adolescent depression. In people under 18, according to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, medication should be offered only in conjunction with a psychological therapy, such as CBT, interpersonal therapy, or family therapy. Several variables predict success for cognitive behavioral therapy in adolescents: higher levels of rational thoughts, less hopelessness, fewer negative thoughts, and fewer cognitive distortions. CBT is particularly beneficial in preventing relapse. Cognitive behavioral therapy and occupational programs (including modification of work activities and assistance) have been shown to be effective in reducing sick days taken by workers with depression. Several variants of cognitive behavior therapy have been used in those with depression, the most notable being rational emotive behavior therapy, and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Mindfulness-based stress reduction programs may reduce depression symptoms. Mindfulness programs also appear to be a promising intervention in youth. Problem solving therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, and interpersonal therapy are effective interventions in the elderly.\nPsychoanalysis is a school of thought, founded by Sigmund Freud, which emphasizes the resolution of unconscious mental conflicts. Psychoanalytic techniques are used by some practitioners to treat clients presenting with major depression. A more widely practiced therapy, called psychodynamic psychotherapy, is in the tradition of psychoanalysis but less intensive, meeting once or twice a week. It also tends to focus more on the person's immediate problems, and has an additional social and interpersonal focus. In a meta-analysis of three controlled trials of Short Psychodynamic Supportive Psychotherapy, this modification was found to be as effective as medication for mild to moderate depression.\nAntidepressants.\nConflicting results have arisen from studies that look at the effectiveness of antidepressants in people with acute, mild to moderate depression. A review commissioned by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) concluded that there is strong evidence that SSRIs, such as escitalopram, paroxetine, and sertraline, have greater efficacy than placebo on achieving a 50% reduction in depression scores in moderate and severe major depression, and that there is some evidence for a similar effect in mild depression. Similarly, a Cochrane systematic review of clinical trials of the generic tricyclic antidepressant amitriptyline concluded that there is strong evidence that its efficacy is superior to placebo. Antidepressants work less well for the elderly than for younger individuals with depression.\nTo find the most effective antidepressant medication with minimal side-effects, the dosages can be adjusted, and if necessary, combinations of different classes of antidepressants can be tried. Response rates to the first antidepressant administered range from 50 to 75%, and it can take at least six to eight weeks from the start of medication to improvement. Antidepressant medication treatment is usually continued for 16 to 20 weeks after remission, to minimize the chance of recurrence, and even up to one year of continuation is recommended. People with chronic depression may need to take medication indefinitely to avoid relapse.\nSSRIs are the primary medications prescribed, owing to their relatively mild side-effects, and because they are less toxic in overdose than other antidepressants. People who do not respond to one SSRI can be switched to another antidepressant, and this results in improvement in almost 50% of cases. Another option is to augment the atypical antidepressant bupropion to the SSRI as an adjunctive treatment. Venlafaxine, an antidepressant with a different mechanism of action, may be modestly more effective than SSRIs. However, venlafaxine is not recommended in the UK as a first-line treatment because of evidence suggesting its risks may outweigh benefits, and it is specifically discouraged in children and adolescents as it increases the risk of suicidal thoughts or attempts.\nFor children and adolescents with moderate-to-severe depressive disorder, fluoxetine seems to be the best treatment (either with or without cognitive behavioural therapy) but more research is needed to be certain. Sertraline, escitalopram, duloxetine might also help in reducing symptoms. Some antidepressants have not been shown to be effective. Medications are not recommended in children with mild disease.\nThere is also insufficient evidence to determine effectiveness in those with depression complicated by dementia. Any antidepressant can cause low blood sodium levels; nevertheless, it has been reported more often with SSRIs. It is not uncommon for SSRIs to cause or worsen insomnia; the sedating atypical antidepressant mirtazapine can be used in such cases.\nIrreversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors, an older class of antidepressants, have been plagued by potentially life-threatening dietary and drug interactions. They are still used only rarely, although newer and better-tolerated agents of this class have been developed. The safety profile is different with reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitors, such as moclobemide, where the risk of serious dietary interactions is negligible and dietary restrictions are less strict.\nIt is unclear whether antidepressants affect a person's risk of suicide. For children, adolescents, and probably young adults between 18 and 24 years old, there is a higher risk of both suicidal ideations and suicidal behavior in those treated with SSRIs. For adults, it is unclear whether SSRIs affect the risk of suicidality. One review found no connection; another an increased risk; and a third no risk in those 25\u201365 years old and a decreased risk in those more than 65. A black box warning was introduced in the United States in 2007 on SSRIs and other antidepressant medications due to the increased risk of suicide in people younger than 24 years old. Similar precautionary notice revisions were implemented by the Japanese Ministry of Health.\nOther medications and supplements.\nThe combined use of antidepressants plus benzodiazepines demonstrates improved effectiveness when compared to antidepressants alone, but these effects may not endure. The addition of a benzodiazepine is balanced against possible harms and other alternative treatment strategies when antidepressant mono-therapy is considered inadequate.\nFor treatment-resistant depression, adding on the atypical antipsychotic brexpiprazole for short-term or acute management may be considered. Brexpiprazole may be effective for some people, however, the evidence as of 2023 supporting its use is weak and this medication has potential adverse effects including weight gain and akathisia. Brexpiprazole has not been sufficiently studied in older people or children and the use and effectiveness of this adjunctive therapy for longer term management is not clear.\nKetamine may have a rapid antidepressant effect lasting less than two weeks; there is limited evidence of any effect after that, common acute side effects, and longer-term studies of safety and adverse effects are needed. A nasal spray form of esketamine was approved by the FDA in March 2019 for use in treatment-resistant depression when combined with an oral antidepressant; risk of substance use disorder and concerns about its safety, serious adverse effects, tolerability, effect on suicidality, lack of information about dosage, whether the studies on it adequately represent broad populations, and escalating use of the product have been raised by an international panel of experts.\nNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and cytokine inhibitors are effective in treating depression. For instance, Celecoxib, an NSAID, is a selective COX-2 inhibitor\u2013 which is an enzyme that helps in the production of pain and inflammation. In recent clinical trials, this NSAID has been shown helpful with treatment-resistant depression as it helps inhibit proinflammatory signaling.\nStatins, which are anti-inflammatory medications prescribed to lower cholesterol levels, have also been shown to have antidepressant effects. When prescribed for patients already taking SSRIs, this add-on treatment was shown to improve anti-depressant effects of SSRIs when compared to the placebo group. With this, statins have been shown to be effective in preventing depression in some cases too.\nThere is insufficient high quality evidence to suggest omega-3 fatty acids are effective in depression. There is limited evidence that vitamin D supplementation is of value in alleviating the symptoms of depression in individuals who are vitamin D-deficient. Lithium appears effective at lowering the risk of suicide in those with bipolar disorder and unipolar depression to nearly the same levels as the general population. There is a narrow range of effective and safe dosages of lithium thus close monitoring may be needed. Low-dose thyroid hormone may be added to existing antidepressants to treat persistent depression symptoms in people who have tried multiple courses of medication. Limited evidence suggests stimulants, such as amphetamine and modafinil, may be effective in the short term, or as adjuvant therapy. Also, it is suggested that folate supplements may have a role in depression management. There is tentative evidence for benefit from testosterone in males.\nElectroconvulsive therapy.\nElectroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a standard psychiatric treatment in which seizures are electrically induced in a person with depression to provide relief from psychiatric illnesses. ECT is used with informed consent as a last line of intervention for major depressive disorder. A round of ECT is effective for about 50% of people with treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, whether it is unipolar or bipolar. Follow-up treatment is still poorly studied, but about half of people who respond relapse within twelve months. Aside from effects in the brain, the general physical risks of ECT are similar to those of brief general anesthesia. Immediately following treatment, the most common adverse effects are confusion and memory loss. ECT is considered one of the least harmful treatment options available for severely depressed pregnant women.\nA usual course of ECT involves multiple administrations, typically given two or three times per week, until the person no longer has symptoms. ECT is administered under anesthesia with a muscle relaxant. Electroconvulsive therapy can differ in its application in three ways: electrode placement, frequency of treatments, and the electrical waveform of the stimulus. These three forms of application have significant differences in both adverse side effects and symptom remission. After treatment, drug therapy is usually continued, and some people receive maintenance ECT.\nECT appears to work in the short term via an anticonvulsant effect mostly in the frontal lobes, and longer term via neurotrophic effects primarily in the medial temporal lobe.\nOther.\nTranscranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) or deep transcranial magnetic stimulation is a noninvasive method used to stimulate small regions of the brain. TMS was approved by the FDA for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder (trMDD) in 2008 and as of 2014 evidence supports that it is probably effective. The American Psychiatric Association, the Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Disorders, and the Royal Australia and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists have endorsed TMS for trMDD. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is another noninvasive method used to stimulate small regions of the brain with a weak electric current. Several meta-analyses have concluded that active tDCS was useful for treating depression.\nThere is a small amount of evidence that sleep deprivation may improve depressive symptoms in some individuals, with the effects usually showing up within a day. This effect is usually temporary. Besides sleepiness, this method can cause a side effect of mania or hypomania. There is insufficient evidence for Reiki and dance movement therapy in depression. Cannabis is specifically not recommended as a treatment.\nThe microbiome of people with major depressive disorder differs from that of healthy people, and probiotic and synbiotic treatment may achieve a modest depressive symptom reduction. With this, fecal microbiota transplants (FMT) are being researched as add-on therapy treatments for people who do not respond to typical therapies. It has been shown that the patient's depressive symptoms improved, with minor gastrointestinal issues, after a FMT, with improvements in symptoms lasting at least 4 weeks after the transplant.\nPrognosis.\nStudies have shown that 80% of those with a first major depressive episode will have at least one more during their life, with a lifetime average of four episodes. Other general population studies indicate that around half those who have an episode recover (whether treated or not) and remain well, while the other half will have at least one more, and around 15% of those experience chronic recurrence. Studies recruiting from selective inpatient sources suggest lower recovery and higher chronicity, while studies of mostly outpatients show that nearly all recover, with a median episode duration of 11 months. Around 90% of those with severe or psychotic depression, most of whom also meet criteria for other mental disorders, experience recurrence. Cases when outcome is poor are associated with inappropriate treatment, severe initial symptoms including psychosis, early age of onset, previous episodes, incomplete recovery after one year of treatment, pre-existing severe mental or medical disorder, and family dysfunction.\nA high proportion of people who experience full symptomatic remission still have at least one not fully resolved symptom after treatment. Recurrence or chronicity is more likely if symptoms have not fully resolved with treatment. Current guidelines recommend continuing antidepressants for four to six\u00a0months after remission to prevent relapse. Evidence from many randomized controlled trials indicates continuing antidepressant medications after recovery can reduce the chance of relapse by 70% (41% on placebo vs. 18% on antidepressant). The preventive effect probably lasts for at least the first 36\u00a0months of use.\nMajor depressive episodes often resolve over time, whether or not they are treated. Outpatients on a waiting list show a 10\u201315% reduction in symptoms within a few months, with approximately 20% no longer meeting the full criteria for a depressive disorder. The median duration of an episode has been estimated to be 23 weeks, with the highest rate of recovery in the first three months. According to a 2013 review, 23% of untreated adults with mild to moderate depression will remit within 3 months, 32% within 6 months and 53% within 12 months.\nAbility to work.\nDepression may affect people's ability to work. The combination of usual clinical care and support with return to work (like working less hours or changing tasks) probably reduces sick leave by 15%, and leads to fewer depressive symptoms and improved work capacity, reducing sick leave by an annual average of 25 days per year. Helping depressed people return to work without a connection to clinical care has not been shown to have an effect on sick leave days. Additional psychological interventions (such as online cognitive behavioral therapy) lead to fewer sick days compared to standard management only. Streamlining care or adding specific providers for depression care may help to reduce sick leave.\nLife expectancy and the risk of suicide.\nDepressed individuals have a shorter life expectancy than those without depression, in part because people who are depressed are at risk of dying of suicide. About 50% of people who die of suicide have a mood disorder such as major depression, and the risk is especially high if a person has a marked sense of hopelessness or has both depression and borderline personality disorder. About 2\u20138% of adults with major depression die by suicide. In the US, the lifetime risk of suicide associated with a diagnosis of major depression is estimated at 7% for men and 1% for women, even though suicide attempts are more frequent in women.\nDepressed people also have a higher rate of dying from other causes. There is a 1.5- to 2-fold increased risk of cardiovascular disease, independent of other known risk factors, and is itself linked directly or indirectly to risk factors such as smoking and obesity. People with major depression are less likely to follow medical recommendations for treating and preventing cardiovascular disorders, further increasing their risk of medical complications. Cardiologists may not recognize underlying depression that complicates a cardiovascular problem under their care.\nEpidemiology.\nMajor depressive disorder affected approximately 163\u00a0million people in 2017 (2% of the global population). The percentage of people who are affected at one point in their life varies from 7% in Japan to 21% in France. In most countries the number of people who have depression during their lives falls within an 8\u201318% range. Lifetime rates are higher in the developed world (15%) compared to the developing world (11%).\nIn the United States, 8.4% of adults (21\u00a0million individuals) have at least one episode within a year-long period; the probability of having a major depressive episode is higher for females than males (10.5% to 6.2%), and highest for those aged 18 to 25 (17%). 15% of adolescents, ages 12 to 17, in America are also affected by depression, which is equal to 3.7 million teenagers. Among individuals reporting two or more races, the US prevalence is highest. Out of all the people suffering from MDD, only about 35% seek help from a professional for their disorder.\nMajor depression is about twice as common in women as in men, although it is unclear why this is so, and whether factors unaccounted for are contributing to this. The relative increase in occurrence is related to pubertal development rather than chronological age, reaches adult ratios between the ages of 15 and 18, and appears associated with psychosocial more than hormonal factors. In 2019, major depressive disorder was identified (using either the DSM-IV-TR or ICD-10) in the Global Burden of Disease Study as the fifth most common cause of years lived with disability and the 18th most common for disability-adjusted life years.\nPeople are most likely to develop their first depressive episode between the ages of 30 and 40, and there is a second, smaller peak of incidence between ages 50 and 60. The risk of major depression is increased with neurological conditions such as stroke, Parkinson's disease, or multiple sclerosis, and during the first year after childbirth (Postpartum depression). It is also more common after cardiovascular illnesses, and is related more to those with a poor cardiac disease outcome than to a better one. Depressive disorders are more common in urban populations than in rural ones and the prevalence is increased in groups with poorer socioeconomic factors, e.g., homelessness. Depression is common among those over 65 years of age and increases in frequency beyond this age. The risk of depression increases in relation to the frailty of the individual. Depression is one of the most important factors which negatively impact quality of life in adults, as well as the elderly. Both symptoms and treatment among the elderly differ from those of the rest of the population.\nMajor depression was the leading cause of disease burden in North America and other high-income countries, and the fourth-leading cause worldwide as of 2006. In the year 2030, it is predicted to be the second-leading cause of disease burden worldwide after HIV, according to the WHO. Delay or failure in seeking treatment after relapse and the failure of health professionals to provide treatment are two barriers to reducing disability.\nComorbidity.\nMajor depression frequently co-occurs with other psychiatric problems. The 1990\u201392 \"National Comorbidity Survey\" (US) reported that half of those with major depression also have lifetime anxiety and its associated disorders, such as generalized anxiety disorder. Anxiety symptoms can have a major impact on the course of a depressive illness, with delayed recovery, increased risk of relapse, greater disability and increased suicidal behavior. Depressed people have increased rates of alcohol and substance use, particularly dependence, and around a third of individuals diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) develop comorbid depression. Post-traumatic stress disorder and depression often co-occur. Depression may also coexist with ADHD, complicating the diagnosis and treatment of both. Depression is also frequently comorbid with alcohol use disorder and personality disorders. Depression can also be exacerbated during particular months (usually winter) in those with seasonal affective disorder. While overuse of digital media has been associated with depressive symptoms, using digital media may also improve mood in some situations.\nDepression and pain often co-occur. One or more pain symptoms are present in 65% of people who have depression, and anywhere from 5 to 85% of people who are experiencing pain will also have depression, depending on the setting\u2014a lower prevalence in general practice, and higher in specialty clinics. Depression is often underrecognized, and therefore undertreated, in patients presenting with pain. Depression often coexists with physical disorders common among the elderly, such as stroke, other cardiovascular diseases, Parkinson's disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.\nHistory.\nThe Ancient Greek physician Hippocrates described a syndrome of melancholia (, ) as a distinct disease with particular mental and physical symptoms; he characterized all \"fears and despondencies, if they last a long time\" as being symptomatic of the ailment. It was a similar but far broader concept than today's depression; prominence was given to a clustering of the symptoms of sadness, dejection, and despondency, and often fear, anger, delusions and obsessions were included.\nThe term \"depression\" itself was derived from the Latin verb , meaning \"to press down\". From the 14th century, \"to depress\" meant to subjugate or to bring down in spirits. It was used in 1665 in English author Richard Baker's \"Chronicle\" to refer to someone having \"a great depression of spirit\", and by English author Samuel Johnson in a similar sense in 1753. The term also came into use in physiology and economics. An early usage referring to a psychiatric symptom was by French psychiatrist Louis Delasiauve in 1856, and by the 1860s it was appearing in medical dictionaries to refer to a physiological and metaphorical lowering of emotional function. Since Aristotle, melancholia had been associated with men of learning and intellectual brilliance, a hazard of contemplation and creativity. However, by the 19th century, this association has largely shifted and melancholia became more commonly linked with women.\nAlthough \"melancholia\" remained the dominant diagnostic term, \"depression\" gained increasing currency in medical treatises and was a synonym by the end of the century; German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin may have been the first to use it as the overarching term, referring to different kinds of melancholia as \"depressive states\". Freud likened the state of melancholia to mourning in his 1917 paper \"Mourning and Melancholia\". He theorized that objective loss, such as the loss of a valued relationship through death or a romantic break-up, results in subjective loss as well; the depressed individual has identified with the object of affection through an unconscious, narcissistic process called the \"libidinal cathexis\" of the ego. Such loss results in severe melancholic symptoms more profound than mourning; not only is the outside world viewed negatively but the ego itself is compromised. The person's decline of self-perception is revealed in his belief of his own blame, inferiority, and unworthiness. He also emphasized early life experiences as a predisposing factor. Adolf Meyer put forward a mixed social and biological framework emphasizing \"reactions\" in the context of an individual's life, and argued that the term \"depression\" should be used instead of \"melancholia\". The first version of the \"DSM\" (\"DSM-I\", 1952) contained \"depressive reaction\" and the \"DSM-II\" (1968) \"depressive neurosis\", defined as an excessive reaction to internal conflict or an identifiable event, and also included a depressive type of manic-depressive psychosis within Major affective disorders.\nThe term \"unipolar\" (along with the related term \"bipolar\") was coined by the neurologist and psychiatrist Karl Kleist, and subsequently used by his disciples Edda Neele and Karl Leonhard.\nThe term \"Major depressive disorder\" was introduced by a group of US clinicians in the mid-1970s as part of proposals for diagnostic criteria based on patterns of symptoms (called the \"Research Diagnostic Criteria\", building on earlier Feighner Criteria), and was incorporated into the \"DSM-III\" in 1980. The American Psychiatric Association added \"major depressive disorder\" to the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (\"DSM-III\"), as a split of the previous depressive neurosis in the \"DSM-II\", which also encompassed the conditions now known as dysthymia and adjustment disorder with depressed mood. To maintain consistency the ICD-10 used the same criteria, with only minor alterations, but using the \"DSM\" diagnostic threshold to mark a \"mild depressive episode\", adding higher threshold categories for moderate and severe episodes. The ancient idea of \"melancholia\" still survives in the notion of a melancholic subtype.\nThe new definitions of depression were widely accepted, albeit with some conflicting findings and views. There have been some continued empirically based arguments for a return to the diagnosis of melancholia. There has been some criticism of the expansion of coverage of the diagnosis, related to the development and promotion of antidepressants and the biological model since the late 1950s.\nSociety and culture.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"depression\" is used in a number of different ways. It is often used to mean this syndrome but may refer to other mood disorders or simply to a low mood. People's conceptualizations of depression vary widely, both within and among cultures. \"Because of the lack of scientific certainty,\" one commentator has observed, \"the debate over depression turns on questions of language. What we call it\u2014'disease,' 'disorder,' 'state of mind'\u2014affects how we view, diagnose, and treat it.\" There are cultural differences in the extent to which serious depression is considered an illness requiring personal professional treatment, or an indicator of something else, such as the need to address social or moral problems, the result of biological imbalances, or a reflection of individual differences in the understanding of distress that may reinforce feelings of powerlessness, and emotional struggle.\nCultural dimension.\nCultural differences contribute to different prevalence of symptoms. \"Do the Chinese somatize depression? A cross-cultural study\" by Parker \"et al.\" discusses the cultural differences in prevalent symptoms of depression between individualistic and collectivistic cultures. The authors reveal that individuals with depression in collectivistic cultures tend to present more somatic symptoms and less affective symptoms compared to those in individualistic cultures. The finding suggests that individualistic cultures 'warranting' or validating one's expression of emotions explains this cultural difference since collectivistic cultures see this as a taboo against the social cooperation it deems one of the most significant values.\nStigma.\nHistorical figures were often reluctant to discuss or seek treatment for depression due to social stigma about the condition, or due to ignorance of diagnosis or treatments. Nevertheless, analysis or interpretation of letters, journals, artwork, writings, or statements of family and friends of some historical personalities has led to the presumption that they may have had some form of depression. People who may have had depression include English author Mary Shelley, American-British writer Henry James, and American president Abraham Lincoln. Some well-known contemporary people with possible depression include Canadian songwriter Leonard Cohen and American playwright and novelist Tennessee Williams. Some pioneering psychologists, such as Americans William James and John B. Watson, dealt with their own depression.\nThere has been a continuing discussion of whether neurological disorders and mood disorders may be linked to creativity, a discussion that goes back to Aristotelian times. British literature gives many examples of reflections on depression. English philosopher John Stuart Mill experienced a several-months-long period of what he called \"a dull state of nerves\", when one is \"unsusceptible to enjoyment or pleasurable excitement; one of those moods when what is pleasure at other times, becomes insipid or indifferent\". He quoted English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge's \"Dejection\" as a perfect description of his case: \"A grief without a pang, void, dark and drear, / A drowsy, stifled, unimpassioned grief, / Which finds no natural outlet or relief / In word, or sigh, or tear.\" English writer Samuel Johnson used the term \"the black dog\" in the 1780s to describe his own depression, and it was subsequently popularized by British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill, who also had the disorder. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in his \"Faust, Part One\", published in 1808, has Mephistopheles assume the form of a black dog, specifically a poodle.\nSocial stigma of major depression is widespread, and contact with mental health services reduces this only slightly. Public opinions on treatment differ markedly to those of health professionals; alternative treatments are held to be more helpful than pharmacological ones, which are viewed poorly. In the UK, the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Royal College of General Practitioners conducted a joint Five-year Defeat Depression campaign to educate and reduce stigma from 1992 to 1996; a MORI study conducted afterwards showed a small positive change in public attitudes to depression and treatment.\nWhile serving his first term as Prime Minister of Norway, Kjell Magne Bondevik attracted international attention in August 1998 when he announced that he was suffering from a depressive episode, becoming the highest ranking world leader to admit to suffering from a mental illness while in office. Upon this revelation, Anne Enger became acting Prime Minister for three weeks, from 30 August to 23 September, while he recovered from the depressive episode. Bondevik then returned to office. Bondevik received thousands of supportive letters, and said that the experience had been positive overall, both for himself and because it made mental illness more publicly acceptable."}
{"id": "8390", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8390", "title": "Don Delillo", "text": ""}
{"id": "8391", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8391", "title": "Diana (mythology)", "text": "Diana is a goddess in Roman and Hellenistic religion, primarily considered a patroness of the countryside and nature, hunters, wildlife, childbirth, crossroads, the night, and the Moon. She is equated with the Greek goddess Artemis, and absorbed much of Artemis' mythology early in Roman history, including a birth on the island of Delos to parents Jupiter and Latona, and a twin brother, Apollo, though she had an independent origin in Italy.\nDiana is considered a virgin goddess and protector of childbirth. Historically, Diana made up a triad with two other Roman deities: Egeria the water nymph, her servant and assistant midwife; and Virbius, the woodland god.\nDiana is revered in modern neopagan religions including Roman neopaganism, Stregheria, and Wicca. In the ancient, medieval, and modern periods, Diana has been considered a triple deity, merged with a goddess of the moon (Luna/Selene) and the underworld (usually Hecate).\nEtymology.\nThe name \"D\u012b\u0101na\" probably derives from Latin ('godly'), ultimately from Proto-Italic \"*d\u012bw\u012b\", meaning 'divine, heavenly'. It stems from Proto-Indo-European \"*diwy\u00f3s\" ('divine, heavenly'), formed with the stem ('daylight sky') attached the thematic suffix -\"y\u00f3s\". Cognates appear in Myceanean Greek \"di-wi-ja\", in Ancient Greek \"\" (; 'belonging to heaven, godlike'), and in Sanskrit ('heavenly' or 'celestial').\nThe ancient Latin writers Varro and Cicero considered the etymology of D\u012b\u0101na as allied to that of \"dies\" and connected to the shine of the Moon, noting that one of her titles is Diana Lucifera (\"light-bearer\").\n... people regard Diana and the moon as one and the same. ... the moon \"(luna)\" is so called from the verb to shine \"(lucere)\". Lucina is identified with it, which is why in our country they invoke Juno Lucina in childbirth, just as the Greeks call on Diana the Light-bearer. Diana also has the name \"Omnivaga\" (\"wandering everywhere\"), not because of her hunting but because she is numbered as one of the seven planets; her name Diana derives from the fact that she turns darkness into daylight \"(dies)\". She is invoked at childbirth because children are born occasionally after seven, or usually after nine, lunar revolutions ...\nDescription.\nAs a goddess of the countryside.\nThe persona of Diana is complex, and contains a number of archaic features. Diana was originally considered to be a goddess of the wilderness and of the hunt, a central sport in both Roman and Greek culture. Early Roman inscriptions to Diana celebrated her primarily as a huntress and patron of hunters. Later, in the Hellenistic period, Diana came to be equally or more revered as a goddess not of the wild woodland but of the \"tame\" countryside, or \"villa rustica\", the idealization of which was common in Greek thought and poetry. This dual role as goddess of both civilization and the wild, and therefore the civilized countryside, first applied to the Greek goddess Artemis (for example, in the 3rd century BCE poetry of Anacreon).\nBy the 3rd century CE, after Greek influence had a profound impact on Roman religion, Diana had been almost fully combined with Artemis and took on many of her attributes, both in her spiritual domains and in the description of her appearance. The Roman poet Nemesianus wrote a typical description of Diana: She carried a bow and a quiver full of golden arrows, wore a golden cloak, purple half-boots, and a belt with a jeweled buckle to hold her tunic together, and wore her hair gathered in a ribbon. By the 5th century CE, almost a millennia after her cult's entry into Rome, the philosopher Proclus could still characterize Diana as \"the inspective guardian of every thing rural, [who] represses every thing rustic and uncultivated.\"\nAs a triple goddess.\nDiana was often considered an aspect of a triple goddess, known as \"Diana triformis\": Diana, Luna, and Hecate. According to historian C.M. Green, \"these were neither different goddesses nor an amalgamation of different goddesses. They were Diana...Diana as huntress, Diana as the moon, Diana of the underworld.\" At her sacred grove on the shores of Lake Nemi, Diana was venerated as a triple goddess beginning in the late 6th century BCE.\nAndreas Alf\u00f6ldi interpreted an image on a late Republican coin as the Latin Diana \"conceived as a threefold unity of the divine huntress, the Moon goddess and the goddess of the nether world, Hekate\". This coin, minted by P. Accoleius Lariscolus in 43\u00a0BCE, has been acknowledged as representing an archaic statue of Diana Nemorensis. It represents Artemis with the bow at one extremity, Luna-Selene with flowers at the other and a central deity not immediately identifiable, all united by a horizontal bar. The iconographical analysis allows the dating of this image to the 6th century at which time there are Etruscan models. The coin shows that the triple goddess cult image still stood in the \"lucus\" of Nemi in 43\u00a0BCE. Lake Nemi was called \"Triviae lacus\" by Virgil (\"Aeneid\" 7.516), while Horace called Diana \"montium custos nemoremque virgo\" (\"keeper of the mountains and virgin of Nemi\") and \"diva triformis\" (\"three-form goddess\").\nTwo heads found in the sanctuary and the Roman theatre at Nemi, which have a hollow on their back, lend support to this interpretation of an archaic triple Diana.\nAs goddess of crossroads and the underworld.\nThe earliest epithet of Diana was \"Trivia\", and she was addressed with that title by Virgil, Catullus, and many others. \"Trivia\" comes from the Latin \"trivium\", \"triple way\", and refers to Diana's guardianship over roadways, particularly Y-junctions or three-way crossroads. This role carried a somewhat dark and dangerous connotation, as it metaphorically pointed the way to the underworld. In the 1st-century CE play \"Medea\", Seneca's titular sorceress calls on Trivia to cast a magic spell. She evokes the triple goddess of Diana, Selene, and Hecate, and specifies that she requires the powers of the latter. The 1st century poet Horace similarly wrote of a magic incantation invoking the power of both Diana and Proserpina. The symbol of the crossroads is relevant to several aspects of Diana's domain. It can symbolize the paths hunters may encounter in the forest, lit only by the full moon; this symbolizes making choices \"in the dark\" without the light of guidance.\nDiana's role as a goddess of the underworld, or at least of ushering people between life and death, caused her early on to be conflated with Hecate (and occasionally also with Proserpina). However, her role as an underworld goddess appears to pre-date strong Greek influence (though the early Greek colony of Cumae had a cult of Hekate and certainly had contacts with the Latins). A theater in her sanctuary at Lake Nemi included a pit and tunnel that would have allowed actors to easily descend on one side of the stage and ascend on the other, indicating a connection between the phases of the moon and a descent by the moon goddess into the underworld. It is likely that her underworld aspect in her original Latin worship did not have a distinct name, like Luna was for her moon aspect. This is due to a seeming reluctance or taboo by the early Latins to name underworld deities, and the fact that they believed the underworld to be silent, precluding naming. Hekate, a Greek goddess also associated with the boundary between the earth and the underworld, became attached to Diana as a name for her underworld aspect following Greek influence.\nAs goddess of childbirth.\nDiana was often considered to be a goddess associated with fertility and childbirth, and the protection of women during labor. This probably arose as an extension of her association with the moon, whose cycles were believed to parallel the menstrual cycle, and which was used to track the months during pregnancy. At her shrine in Aricia, worshipers left votive terracotta offerings for the goddess in the shapes of babies and wombs, and the temple there also offered care of pups and pregnant dogs. This care of infants also extended to the training of both young people and dogs, especially for hunting. In her role as a protector of childbirth, Diana was called \"Diana Lucina\", \"Diana Lucifera\" or even \"Juno Lucina\", because her domain overlapped with that of the goddess Juno. The title of Juno may also have had an independent origin as it applied to Diana, with the literal meaning of \"helper\" \u2013 Diana as \"Juno Lucina\" would be the \"helper of childbirth\".\nAs a \"frame god\".\nAccording to a theory proposed by Georges Dum\u00e9zil, Diana falls into a particular subset of celestial gods, referred to in histories of religion as \"frame gods\". Such gods, while keeping the original features of celestial divinities (i.e. transcendent heavenly power and abstention from direct rule in worldly matters), did not share the fate of other celestial gods in Indoeuropean religions \u2013 that of becoming \"dei otiosi\", or gods without practical purpose, since they did retain a particular sort of influence over the world and mankind. The celestial character of Diana is reflected in her connection with inaccessibility, virginity, light, and her preference for dwelling on high mountains and in sacred woods. Diana, therefore, reflects the heavenly world in its sovereignty, supremacy, impassibility, and indifference towards such secular matters as the fates of mortals and states. At the same time, however, she is seen as active in ensuring the succession of kings and in the preservation of humankind through the protection of childbirth. These functions are apparent in the traditional institutions and cults related to the goddess:\nAccording to Dumezil, the forerunner of all \"frame gods\" is an Indian epic hero who was the image (avatar) of the Vedic god Dyaus. Having renounced the world, in his roles of father and king, he attained the status of an immortal being while retaining the duty of ensuring that his dynasty is preserved and that there is always a new king for each generation. The Scandinavian god Heimdallr performs an analogous function: he is born first and will die last. He too gives origin to kingship and the first king, bestowing on him regal prerogatives.\nDiana, although a female deity, has exactly the same functions, preserving mankind through childbirth and royal succession.\nF. H. Pairault, in her essay on Diana, qualified Dum\u00e9zil's theory as \"impossible to verify\".\nMythology.\nUnlike the Greek gods, Roman gods were originally considered to be numina: divine powers of presence and will that did not necessarily have physical form. At the time Rome was founded, Diana and the other major Roman gods probably did not have much mythology per se, or any depictions in human form. The idea of gods as having anthropomorphic qualities and human-like personalities and actions developed later, under the influence of Greek and Etruscan religion.\nBy the 3rd century BCE, Diana is found listed among the twelve major gods of the Roman pantheon by the poet Ennius. Though the Capitoline Triad were the primary state gods of Rome, early Roman myth did not assign a strict hierarchy to the gods the way Greek mythology did, though the Greek hierarchy would eventually be adopted by Roman religion as well.\nOnce Greek influence had caused Diana to be considered identical to the Greek goddess Artemis, Diana acquired Artemis's physical description, attributes, and variants of her myths as well. Like Artemis, Diana is usually depicted in art wearing a women's chiton, shortened in the kolpos style to facilitate mobility during hunting, with a hunting bow and quiver, and often accompanied by hunting dogs. A 1st-century BCE Roman coin (see above) depicted her with a unique, short hairstyle, and in triple form, with one form holding a bow and another holding a poppy.\nFamily.\nWhen worship of Apollo was first introduced to Rome, Diana became conflated with Apollo's sister Artemis as in the earlier Greek myths, and as such she became identified as the daughter of Apollo's parents Latona and Jupiter. Though Diana was usually considered to be a virgin goddess like Artemis, later authors sometimes attributed consorts and children to her. According to Cicero and Ennius, Trivia (an epithet of Diana) and Caelus were the parents of Janus, as well as of Saturn and Ops.\nAccording to Macrobius (who cited Nigidius Figulus and Cicero), Janus and Jana (Diana) are a pair of divinities, worshiped as the sun and moon. Janus was said to receive sacrifices before all the others because, through him, the way of access to the desired deity is made apparent.\nMyth of Actaeon.\nDiana's mythology incorporated stories which were variants of earlier stories about Artemis. Possibly the most well-known of these is the myth of Actaeon. In Ovid's version of this myth, part of his poem \"Metamorphoses\", he tells of a pool or grotto hidden in the wooded valley of Gargaphie. There, Diana, the goddess of the woods, would bathe and rest after a hunt. Actaeon, a young hunter, stumbled across the grotto and accidentally witnessed the goddess bathing without invitation. In retaliation, Diana splashed him with water from the pool, cursing him, and he transformed into a deer. His own hunting dogs caught his scent, and tore him apart.\nOvid's version of the myth of Actaeon differs from most earlier sources. Unlike earlier myths about Artemis, Actaeon is killed for an innocent mistake, glimpsing Diana bathing. An earlier variant of this myth, known as the Bath of Pallas, had the hunter intentionally spy on the bathing goddess Pallas (Athena), and earlier versions of the myth involving Artemis did not involve the bath at all.\nWorship in the classical period.\nDiana was an ancient goddess common to all Latin tribes. Therefore, many sanctuaries were dedicated to her in the lands inhabited by Latins. Her primary sanctuary was a woodland grove overlooking Lake Nemi, a body of water also known as \"Diana's Mirror\", where she was worshiped as Diana Nemorensis, or \"Diana of the Wood\". In Rome, the cult of Diana may have been almost as old as the city itself. Varro mentions her in the list of deities to whom king Titus Tatius promised to build a shrine. His list included Luna and Diana Lucina as separate entities. Another testimony to the antiquity of her cult is to be found in the \"lex regia\" of King Tullus Hostilius that condemns those guilty of incest to the \"sacratio\" to Diana. She had a temple in Rome on the Aventine Hill, according to tradition dedicated by king Servius Tullius. Its location is remarkable as the Aventine is situated outside the pomerium, i.e. original territory of the city, in order to comply with the tradition that Diana was a goddess common to all Latins and not exclusively of the Romans. Being placed on the Aventine, and thus outside the \"pomerium\", meant that Diana's cult essentially remained a \"foreign\" one, like that of Bacchus; she was never officially \"transferred\" to Rome as Juno was after the sack of Veii.\nOther known sanctuaries and temples to Diana include Colle di Corne near Tusculum, where she is referred to with the archaic Latin name of \"deva Cornisca\" and where existed a collegium of worshippers; at \u00c9vora, Portugal; Mount Algidus, also near Tusculum; at Lavinium; and at Tibur (Tivoli), where she is referred to as \"Diana Opifera Nemorensis\". Diana was also worshiped at a sacred wood mentioned by Livy \u2013 \"ad compitum Anagninum\" (near Anagni), and on Mount Tifata in Campania.\nAccording to Plutarch, men and women alike were worshipers of Diana and were welcomed into all of her temples. The one exception seems to have been a temple on the Vicus Patricius, which men either did not enter due to tradition, or were not allowed to enter. Plutarch related a legend that a man had attempted to assault a woman worshiping in this temple and was killed by a pack of dogs (echoing the myth of Diana and Actaeon), which resulted in a superstition against men entering the temple.\nA feature common to nearly all of Diana's temples and shrines by the second century CE was the hanging up of stag antlers. Plutarch noted that the only exception to this was the temple on the Aventine Hill, in which bull horns had been hung up instead. Plutarch explains this by way of reference to a legend surrounding the sacrifice of an impressive Sabine bull by King Servius at the founding of the Aventine temple.\nSanctuary at Lake Nemi.\nDiana's worship may have originated at an open-air sanctuary overlooking Lake Nemi in the Alban Hills near Aricia, where she was worshiped as Diana Nemorensis, or (\"Diana of the Sylvan Glade\"). According to legendary accounts, the sanctuary was founded by Orestes and Iphigenia after they fled from the Tauri. In this tradition, the Nemi sanctuary was supposedly built on the pattern of an earlier Temple of Artemis Tauropolos, and the first cult statue at Nemi was said to have been stolen from the Tauri and brought to Nemi by Orestes. Historical evidence suggests that worship of Diana at Nemi flourished from at least the 6th century BCE until the 2nd century CE. Her cult there was first attested in Latin literature by Cato the Elder, in a surviving quote by the late grammarian Priscian. By the 4th century BCE, the simple shrine at Nemi had been joined by a temple complex. The sanctuary served an important political role as it was held in common by the Latin League.\nA festival to Diana, the Nemoralia, was held yearly at Nemi on the Ides of August (August 13\u201315). Worshipers traveled to Nemi carrying torches and garlands, and once at the lake, they left pieces of thread tied to fences and tablets inscribed with prayers. Diana's festival eventually became widely celebrated throughout Italy, which was unusual given the provincial nature of Diana's cult. The poet Statius wrote of the festival:\nStatius describes the triple nature of the goddess by invoking heavenly (the stars), earthly (the grove itself) and underworld (Hecate) imagery. He also suggests by the garlanding of the dogs and polishing of the spears that no hunting was allowed during the festival.\nLegend has it that Diana's high priest at Nemi, known as the Rex Nemorensis, was always an escaped slave who could only obtain the position by defeating his predecessor in a fight to the death. Sir James George Frazer wrote of this sacred grove in \"The Golden Bough\", basing his interpretation on brief remarks in Strabo (5.3.12), Pausanias (2,27.24) and Servius' commentary on the \"Aeneid\" (6.136). The legend tells of a tree that stood in the center of the grove and was heavily guarded. No one was allowed to break off its limbs, with the exception of a runaway slave, who was allowed, if he could, to break off one of the boughs. He was then in turn granted the privilege to engage the Rex Nemorensis, the current king and priest of Diana, in a fight to the death. If the slave prevailed, he became the next king for as long as he could defeat his challengers. However, Joseph Fontenrose criticised Frazer's assumption that a rite of this sort actually occurred at the sanctuary, and no contemporary records exist that support the historical existence of the \"Rex Nemorensis\".\nSpread and conflation with Artemis.\nRome hoped to unify into and control the Latin tribes around Nemi, so Diana's worship was imported to Rome as a show of political solidarity. Diana soon afterwards became Hellenized, and combined with the Greek goddess Artemis, \"a process which culminated with the appearance of Diana beside Apollo [the brother of Artemis] in the first \"lectisternium\" at Rome\" in 399 BCE. The process of identification between the two goddesses probably began when artists who were commissioned to create new religious statues for Diana's temples outside Nemi were struck by the similar attributes between Diana and the more familiar Artemis, and sculpted Diana in a manner inspired by previous depictions of Artemis. Sibyllene influence and trade with Massilia, where similar cult statues of Artemis existed, would have completed the process.\nAccording to Fran\u00e7oise H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Pairault's study, historical and archaeological evidence point to the fact that the characteristics given to both Diana of the Aventine Hill and Diana Nemorensis were the product of the direct or indirect influence of the cult of Artemis, which was spread by the Phoceans among the Greek towns of Campania Cuma and Capua, who in turn had passed it over to the Etruscans and the Latins by the 6th and 5th centuries BCE.\nEvidence suggests that a confrontation occurred between two groups of Etruscans who fought for supremacy, those from Tarquinia, Vulci and Caere (allied with the Greeks of Capua) and those of Clusium. This is reflected in the legend of the coming of Orestes to Nemi and of the inhumation of his bones in the Roman Forum near the temple of Saturn. The cult introduced by Orestes at Nemi is apparently that of the Artemis Tauropolos. The literary amplification reveals a confused religious background: different versions of Artemis were conflated under the epithet. As far as Nemi's Diana is concerned there are two different versions, by Strabo and Servius Honoratus. Strabo's version looks to be the most authoritative as he had access to first-hand primary sources on the sanctuaries of Artemis, i.e. the priest of Artemis Artemidoros of Ephesus. The meaning of \"Tauropolos\" denotes an Asiatic goddess with lunar attributes, lady of the herds. The only possible \"interpretatio graeca\" of high antiquity concerning \"Diana Nemorensis\" could have been the one based on this ancient aspect of a deity of light, master of wildlife. \"Tauropolos\" is an ancient epithet attached to Artemis, Hecate, and even Athena. According to the legend Orestes founded Nemi together with Iphigenia. At Cuma the Sybil is the priestess of both Phoibos and Trivia. Hesiod and Stesichorus tell the story according to which after her death Iphigenia was divinised under the name of Hecate, a fact which would support the assumption that Artemis Tauropolos had a real ancient alliance with the heroine, who was her priestess in Taurid and her human paragon. This religious complex is in turn supported by the triple statue of Artemis-Hecate.\nIn Rome, Diana was regarded with great reverence and was a patroness of lower-class citizens, called plebeians, as well as slaves, who could receive asylum in her temples. Georg Wissowa proposed that this might be because the first slaves of the Romans were Latins of the neighboring tribes. However, the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus had the same custom of the asylum.\nIn Rome.\nWorship of Diana probably spread into the city of Rome beginning around 550\u00a0BCE, during her Hellenization and combination with the Greek goddess Artemis. Diana was first worshiped along with her brother and mother, Apollo and Latona, in their temple in the Campus Martius, and later in the Temple of Apollo Palatinus.\nThe first major temple dedicated primarily to Diana in the vicinity of Rome was the Temple of Diana Aventina (Diana of the Aventine Hill). According to the Roman historian Livy, the construction of this temple began in the 6th century BCE and was inspired by stories of the massive Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, which was said to have been built through the combined efforts of all the cities of Asia Minor. Legend has it that Servius Tullius was impressed with this act of massive political and economic cooperation, and convinced the cities of the Latin League to work with the Romans to build their own temple to the goddess. However, there is no compelling evidence for such an early construction of the temple, and it is more likely that it was built in the 3rd century BCE, following the influence of the temple at Nemi, and probably about the same time the first temples to Vertumnus (who was associated with Diana) were built in Rome (264\u00a0BCE). The misconception that the Aventine Temple was inspired by the Ephesian Temple might originate in the fact that the cult images and statues used at the former were based heavily on those found in the latter. Whatever its initial construction date, records show that the Avantine Temple was rebuilt by Lucius Cornificius in 32\u00a0BCE. If it was still in use by the 4th century CE, the Aventine temple would have been permanently closed during the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire. Today, a short street named the \"Via del Tempio di Diana\" and an associated plaza, \"Piazza del Tempio di Diana\", commemorates the site of the temple. Part of its wall is located within one of the halls of the Apuleius restaurant.\nLater temple dedications often were based on the model for ritual formulas and regulations of the Temple of Diana. Roman politicians built several minor temples to Diana elsewhere in Rome to secure public support. One of these was built in the Campus Martius in 187\u00a0BCE; no Imperial period records of this temple have been found, and it is possible it was one of the temples demolished around 55\u00a0BCE in order to build a theater. Diana also had a public temple on the Quirinal Hill, the sanctuary of Diana Planciana. It was dedicated by Plancius in 55\u00a0BCE, though it is unclear which Plancius.\nIn their worship of Artemis, Greeks filled their temples with sculptures of the goddess created by well-known sculptors, and many were adapted for use in the worship of Diana by the Romans, beginning around the 2nd century BCE (the beginning of a period of strong Hellenistic influence on Roman religion). The earliest depictions of the Artemis of Ephesus are found on Ephesian coins from this period. By the Imperial period, small marble statues of the Ephesian Artemis were being produced in the Western region of the Mediterranean and were often bought by Roman patrons. The Romans obtained a large copy of an Ephesian Artemis statue for their temple on the Aventine Hill. Diana was usually depicted for educated Romans in her Greek guise. If she was shown accompanied by a deer, as in the \"Diana of Versailles\", this is because Diana was the patroness of hunting. The deer may also offer a covert reference to the myth of Acteon (or Actaeon), who saw her bathing naked. Diana transformed Acteon into a stag and set his own hunting dogs to kill him.\nAt Mount Tifata.\nIn Campania, Diana had a major temple at Mount Tifata, near Capua. She was worshiped there as \"Diana Tifatina\". This was one of the oldest sanctuaries in Campania. As a rural sanctuary, it included lands and estates that would have been worked by slaves following the Roman conquest of Campania, and records show that expansion and renovation projects at her temple were funded in part by other conquests by Roman military campaigns. The modern Christian church of Sant'Angelo in Formis was built on the ruins of the Tifata temple.\nRoman provinces.\nIn the Roman provinces, Diana was widely worshiped alongside local deities. Over 100 inscriptions to Diana have been cataloged in the provinces, mainly from Gaul, Upper Germania, and Britannia. Diana was commonly invoked alongside another forest god, Silvanus, as well as other \"mountain gods\". In the provinces, she was occasionally conflated with local goddesses such as Abnoba, and was given high status, with \"Augusta\" and \"regina\" (\"queen\") being common epithets.\nHousehold worship.\nDiana was not only regarded as a goddess of the wilderness and the hunt, but was often worshiped as a patroness of families. She served a similar function to the hearth goddess Vesta, and was sometimes considered to be a member of the Penates, the deities most often invoked in household rituals. In this role, she was often given a name reflecting the tribe of family who worshiped her and asked for her protection. For example, in what is now Wiesbaden, Diana was worshiped as \"Diana Mattiaca\" by the Mattiaci tribe. Other family-derived named attested in the ancient literature include \"Diana Cariciana\", \"Diana Valeriana\", and \"Diana Plancia\". As a house goddess, Diana often became reduced in stature compared to her official worship by the Roman state religion. In personal or family worship, Diana was brought to the level of other household spirits, and was believed to have a vested interest in the prosperity of the household and the continuation of the family. The Roman poet Horace regarded Diana as a household goddess in his \"Odes\", and had an altar dedicated to her in his villa where household worship could be conducted. In his poetry, Horace deliberately contrasted the kinds of grand, elevated hymns to Diana on behalf of the entire Roman state, the kind of worship that would have been typical at her Aventine temple, with a more personal form of devotion.\nImages of Diana and her associated myths have been found on sarcophagi of wealthy Romans. They often included scenes depicting sacrifices to the goddess, and on at least one example, the deceased man is shown joining Diana's hunt.\nTheology.\nSince ancient times, philosophers and theologians have examined the nature of Diana in light of her worship traditions, attributes, mythology, and identification with other gods.\nConflation with other goddesses.\nDiana was initially a hunting goddess and goddess of the local woodland at Nemi, but as her worship spread, she acquired attributes of other similar goddesses. As she became conflated with Artemis, she became a moon goddess, identified with the other lunar goddesses goddess Luna and Hekate. She also became the goddess of childbirth and ruled over the countryside. Catullus wrote a poem to Diana in which she has more than one alias: Latonia, Lucina, Juno, Trivia, Luna.\nAlong with Mars, Diana was often venerated at games held in Roman amphitheaters, and some inscriptions from the Danubian provinces show that she was conflated with Nemesis in this role, as \"Diana Nemesis\".\nOutside of Italy, Diana had important centers of worship where she was syncretised with similar local deities in Gaul, Upper Germania, and Britannia. Diana was particularly important in the region in and around the Black Forest, where she was conflated with the local goddess Abnoba and worshiped as \"Diana Abnoba\".\nSome late antique sources went even further, syncretizing many local \"great goddesses\" into a single \"Queen of Heaven\". The Platonist philosopher Apuleius, writing in the late 2nd century, depicted the goddess declaring:\n\"I come, Lucius, moved by your entreaties: I, mother of the universe, mistress of all the elements, first-born of the ages, highest of the gods, queen of the shades, first of those who dwell in heaven, representing in one shape all gods and goddesses. My will controls the shining heights of heaven, the health-giving sea-winds, and the mournful silences of hell; the entire world worships my single godhead in a thousand shapes, with divers rites, and under many a different name. The Phrygians, first-born of mankind, call me the Pessinuntian Mother of the gods; the native Athenians the Cecropian Minerva; the island-dwelling Cypriots Paphian Venus; the archer Cretans Dictynnan Diana; the triple-tongued Sicilians Stygian Proserpine; the ancient Eleusinians Actaean Ceres; some call me Juno, some Bellona, others Hecate, others Rhamnusia; but both races of Ethiopians, those on whom the rising and those on whom the setting sun shines, and the Egyptians who excel in ancient learning, honour me with the worship which is truly mine and call me by my true name: Queen Isis.\"\nLater poets and historians looked to Diana's identity as a triple goddess to merge her with triads heavenly, earthly, and underworld (cthonic) goddesses. Maurus Servius Honoratus said that the same goddess was called Luna in heaven, Diana on earth, and Proserpina in hell. Michael Drayton praises the Triple Diana in poem \"The Man in the Moone\" (1606): \"So these great three most powerful of the rest, Phoebe, Diana, Hecate, do tell. Her sovereignty in Heaven, in Earth and Hell\".\nIn Platonism.\nBased on the earlier writings of Plato, the Neoplatonist philosophers of late antiquity united the various major gods of Hellenic tradition into a series of monads containing within them triads, with some creating the world, some animating it or bringing it to life, and others harmonizing it. Within this system, Proclus considered Diana to be one of the primary animating, or life-giving, deities. Proclus, citing Orphic tradition, concludes that Diana \"presides over all the generation in nature, and is the midwife of physical productive principles\" and that she \"extends these genitals, distributing as far as to subterranean natures the prolific power of [Bacchus].\" Specifically, Proclus considered the life-generating principle of the highest order, within the Intellectual realm, to be Rhea, whom he identified with Ceres. Within her divinity was produced the cause of the basic principle of life. Projecting this principle into the lower, Hypercosmic realm of reality generated a lower monad, Kore, who could therefore be understood as Ceres' \"daughter\". Kore embodied the \"maidenly\" principle of generation that, more importantly, included a principle of division \u2013 where Demeter generates life indiscriminately, Kore distributes it individually. This division results in another triad or trinity, known as the Maidenly trinity, within the monad of Kore: namely, Diana, Proserpine, and Minerva, through whom individual living beings are given life and perfected. Specifically, according to a commentary by scholar Spyridon Rangos, Diana (equated with Hecate) gives existence, Proserpine (equated with \"Soul\") gives form, and Minerva (equated with \"Virtue\") gives intellect.\nIn his commentary on Proclus, the 19th century Platonist scholar Thomas Taylor expanded upon the theology of the classical philosophers, further interpreting the nature and roles of the gods in light of the whole body of Neoplatonist philosophy. He cites Plato in giving a three-form aspect to her central characteristic of virginity: the undefiled, the mundane, and the anagogic. Through the first form, Diana is regarded as a \"lover of virginity\". Through the second, she is the guardian of virtue. Through the third, she is considered to \"hate the impulses arising from generation.\" Through the principle of the undefiled, Taylor suggests that she is given supremacy in Proclus' triad of life-giving or animating deities, and in this role the theurgists called her Hekate. In this role, Diana is granted undefiled power (\"Amilieti\") from the other gods. This generative power does not proceed forth from the goddess (according to a statement by the Oracle of Delphi) but rather resides with her, giving her unparalleled virtue, and in this way she can be said to embody virginity. Later commentators on Proclus have clarified that the virginity of Diana is not an absence of sexual drive, but a renunciation of sexuality. Diana embodies virginity because she generates but precedes active fertility (within Neoplatonism, an important maxim is that \"every productive cause is superior to the nature of the produced effect\").\nUsing the ancient Neoplatonists as a basis, Taylor also commented on the triadic nature of Diana and related goddesses, and the ways in which they subsist within one another, partaking unevenly in each other's powers and attributes. For example, Kore is said to embody both Diana/Hecate and Minerva, who create the virtuous or virgin power within her, but also Proserpine (her sole traditional identification), through whom the generative power of the Kore as a whole is able to proceed forth into the world, where it joins with the demiurge to produce further deities, including Bacchus and \"nine azure-eyed, flower-producing daughters\".\nProclus also included Artemis/Diana in a second triad of deities, along with Ceres and Juno. According to Proclus:\nProclus pointed to the conflict between Hera and Artemis in the \"Illiad\" as a representation of the two kinds of human souls. Where Hera creates the higher, more cultured, or \"worthy\" souls, Artemis brings light to and perfects the \"less worthy\" or less rational. As explained by Ragnos (2000), \"The aspect of reality which Artemis and Hera share, and because of which they engage in a symbolic conflict, is the engendering of life.\" Hera elevates rational living beings up to intellectual rational existence, whereas Artemis's power pertains to human life as far as its physical existence as a living thing. \"Artemis deals with the most elementary forms of life or the most elementary part of all life, whereas Hera operates in the most elevated forms of life or the most elevated part of all life.\nWorship in post-Roman Europe.\nSermons and other religious documents have provided evidence for the worship of Diana during the Middle Ages. Though few details have been recorded, enough references to Diana worship during the early Christian period exist to give some indication that it may have been relatively widespread among remote and rural communities throughout Europe, and that such beliefs persisted into the Merovingian period. References to contemporary Diana worship exist from the 6th century on the Iberian peninsula and what is now southern France, though more detailed accounts of Dianic cults were given for the Low Countries, and southern Belgium in particular. Many of these were probably local goddesses, and wood nymphs or dryads, which had been conflated with Diana by Christian writers Latinizing local names and traditions.\nIn the Low Countries.\nThe 6th century bishop Gregory of Tours reported meeting with a deacon named Vulfilaic (also known as Saint Wulflaicus or Walfroy the Stylite), who founded a hermitage on a hill in what is now Margut, France. On the same hill, he found \"an image of Diana which the unbelieving people worshiped as a god.\" According to Gregory's report, worshipers would also sing chants in Diana's honor as they drank and feasted. Vulfilaic destroyed a number of smaller pagan statues in the area, but the statue of Diana was too large. After converting some of the local population to Christianity, Vulfilaic and a group of local residents attempted to pull the large statue down the mountain in order to destroy it, but failed, as it was too large to be moved. In Vulfilaic's account, after praying for a miracle, he was then able to single-handedly pull down the statue, at which point he and his group smashed it to dust with their hammers. According to Vulfilaic, this incident was quickly followed by an outbreak of pimples or sores that covered his entire body, which he attributed to demonic activity and similarly cured via what he described as a miracle. Vulfilaic would later found a church on the site, which is today known as Mont Saint-Walfroy.\nAdditional evidence for surviving pagan practices in the Low Countries region comes from the \"Vita Eligii\", or \"Life of Saint Eligius\", written by Audoin in the 7th century. Audoin drew together the familiar admonitions of Eligius to the people of Flanders. In his sermons, he denounced \"pagan customs\" that the people continued to follow. In particular, he denounced several Roman gods and goddesses alongside Druidic mythological beliefs and objects:\n\"I denounce and contest, that you shall observe no sacrilegious pagan customs. For no cause or infirmity should you consult magicians, diviners, sorcerers or incantators. ..Do not observe auguries ... No influence attaches to the first work of the day or the [phase of the] moon. ... [Do not] make vetulas, little deer or iotticos or set tables at night or exchange New Year gifts or supply superfluous drinks... No Christian... performs solestitia or dancing or leaping or diabolical chants. No Christian should presume to invoke the name of a demon, not Neptune or Orcus or Diana or Minerva or Geniscus... No one should observe Jove's day in idleness. ... No Christian should make or render any devotion to the gods of the trivium, where three roads meet, to the fanes or the rocks, or springs or groves or corners. None should presume to hang any phylacteries from the neck of man nor beast. ..None should presume to make lustrations or incantations with herbs, or to pass cattle through a hollow tree or ditch ... No woman should presume to hang amber from her neck or call upon Minerva or other ill-starred beings in their weaving or dyeing. ... None should call the sun or moon lord or swear by them. ... No one should tell fate or fortune or horoscopes by them as those do who believe that a person must be what he was born to be.\"\nLegends from medieval Belgium concern a natural spring which came to be known as the \"Fons Remacli\", a location which may have been home to late-surviving worship of Diana. Remacle was a monk appointed by Eligius to head a monastery at Solignac, and he is reported to have encountered Diana worship in the area around the river Warche. The population in this region was said to have been involved in the worship of \"Diana of the Ardennes\" (a syncretism of Diana and the Celtic goddess Arduinna), with effigies and \"stones of Diana\" used as evidence of pagan practices. Remacle believed that demonic entities were present in the spring, and had caused it to run dry. He performed and exorcism of the water source, and installed a lead pipe, which allowed the water to flow again.\nThe \"Society of Diana\".\nDiana is the only pagan goddess mentioned by name in the New Testament (only in some Bible versions of Acts 19; many other Bibles refer to her as Artemis instead). As a result, she became associated with many folk beliefs involving goddess-like supernatural figures that Catholic clergy wished to demonize. In the Middle Ages, legends of night-time processions of spirits led by a female figure are recorded in the church records of Northern Italy, western Germany, and southern France. The spirits were said to enter houses and consume food which then miraculously re-appeared. They would sing and dance, and dispense advice regarding healing herbs and the whereabouts of lost objects. If the house was in good order, they would bring fertility and plenty. If not, they would bring curses to the family. Some women reported participating in these processions while their bodies still lay in bed. Historian Carlo Ginzburg has referred to these legendary spirit gatherings as \"The Society of Diana\".\nLocal clergy complained that women believed they were following Diana or Herodias, riding out on appointed nights to join the processions or carry out instructions from the goddess. The earliest reports of these legends appear in the writings of Regino of Pr\u00fcm in the year 899, followed by many additional reports and variants of the legend in documents by Ratherius and others. By 1310, the names of the goddess figures attached to the legend were sometimes combined as Herodiana. It is likely that the clergy of this time used the identification of the procession's leader as Diana or Herodias in order to fit an older folk belief into a Biblical framework, as both are featured and demonized in the New Testament. Herodias was often conflated with her daughter Salome in legend, which also holds that, upon being presented with the severed head of John the Baptist, she was blown into the air by wind from the saint's mouth, through which she continued to wander for eternity. Diana was often conflated with Hecate, a goddess associated with the spirits of the dead and with witchcraft. These associations, and the fact that both figures are attested to in the Bible, made them a natural fit for the leader of the ghostly procession. Clergy used this identification to assert that the spirits were evil, and that the women who followed them were inspired by demons. As was typical of this time period, though pagan beliefs and practices were near eliminated from Europe, the clergy and other authorities still treated paganism as a real threat, in part thanks to biblical influence; much of the Bible had been written when various forms of paganism were still active if not dominant, so medieval clergy applied the same kinds of warnings and admonitions for any non-standard folk beliefs and practices they encountered. Based on analysis of church documents and parishioner confessions, it is likely that the spirit identified by the Church as Diana or Herodias was called by names of pre-Christian figures like Holda (a Germanic goddess of the winter solstice), or with names referencing her bringing of prosperity, like the Latin Abundia (meaning \"plenty\"), Satia (meaning \"full\" or \"plentiful\") and the Italian Richella (meaning \"rich\"). Some of the local titles for her, such as \"bonae res\" (meaning \"good things\"), are similar to late classical titles for Hecate, like \"bona dea\". This might indicate a cultural mixture of medieval folk ideas with holdovers from earlier pagan belief systems. Whatever her true origin, by the 13th century, the leader of the legendary spirit procession had come to be firmly identified with Diana and Herodias through the influence of the Church.\nModern development and folklore.\n\"The Golden Bough\".\nIn his wide-ranging, comparative study of mythology and religion, \"The Golden Bough\", anthropologist James George Frazer drew on various lines of evidence to re-interpret the legendary rituals associated with Diana at Nemi, particularly that of the \"rex Nemorensis\". Frazer developed his ideas in relation to J. M. W. Turner's painting, also titled \"The Golden Bough\", depicting a dream-like vision of the woodland lake of Nemi. According to Frazer, the \"rex Nemorensis\" or king at Nemi was the incarnation of a dying and reviving god, a solar deity who participated in a mystical marriage to a goddess. He died at the harvest and was reincarnated in the spring. Frazer claimed that this motif of death and rebirth is central to nearly all of the world's religions and mythologies. In Frazer's theory, Diana functioned as a goddess of fertility and childbirth, who, assisted by the sacred king, ritually returned life to the land in spring. The king in this scheme served not only as a high priest but as a god of the grove. Frazer identifies this figure with Virbius, of which little is known, but also with Jupiter via an association with sacred oak trees. Frazer argued furthermore that Jupiter and Juno were simply duplicate names of Jana and Janus; that is, Diana and Dianus, all of whom had identical functions and origins.\nFrazer's speculatively reconstructed folklore of Diana's origins and the nature of her cult at Nemi were not well received even by his contemporaries. Godfrey Lienhardt noted that even during Frazer's lifetime, other anthropologists had \"for the most part distanced themselves from his theories and opinions\", and that the lasting influence of \"The Golden Bough\" and Frazer's wider body of work \"has been in the literary rather than the academic world.\" Robert Ackerman wrote that, for anthropologists, Frazer is \"an embarrassment\" for being \"the most famous of them all\" and that most distance themselves from his work. While \"The Golden Bough\" achieved wide \"popular appeal\" and exerted a \"disproportionate\" influence \"on so many [20th century] creative writers\", Frazer's ideas played \"a much smaller part\" in the history of academic social anthropology.\n\"The Gospel of the Witches\".\nFolk legends like the Society of Diana, which linked the goddess to forbidden gatherings of women with spirits, may have influenced later works of folklore. One of these is Charles Godfrey Leland's \"Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches\", which prominently featured Diana at the center of an Italian witch-cult. In Leland's interpretation of supposed Italian folk witchcraft, Diana is considered Queen of the Witches. In this belief system, Diana is said to have created the world of her own being having in herself the seeds of all creation yet to come. It was said that out of herself she divided the darkness and the light, keeping for herself the darkness of creation and creating her brother Lucifer. Diana was believed to have loved and ruled with her brother, and with him bore a daughter, Aradia (a name likely derived from Herodias), who leads and teaches the witches on earth.\nLeland's claim that \"Aradia\" represented an authentic tradition from an underground witch-cult, which had secretly worshiped Diana since ancient times has been dismissed by most scholars of folklore, religion, and medieval history. After the 1921 publication of Margaret Murray's \"The Witch-cult in Western Europe\", which hypothesized that the European witch trials were actually a persecution of a pagan religious survival, American sensationalist author Theda Kenyon's 1929 book \"Witches Still Live\" connected Murray's thesis with the witchcraft religion in \"Aradia\". Arguments against Murray's thesis would eventually include arguments against Leland. Witchcraft scholar Jeffrey Russell devoted some of his 1980 book \"A History of Witchcraft: Sorcerers, Heretics and Pagans\" to arguing against the claims Leland presented in \"Aradia\". Historian Elliot Rose's \"A Razor for a Goat\" dismissed \"Aradia\" as a collection of incantations unsuccessfully attempting to portray a religion. In his book \"Triumph of the Moon\", historian Ronald Hutton doubted not only of the existence of the religion that \"Aradia\" claimed to represent, and that the traditions Leland presented were unlike anything found in actual medieval literature, but also of the existence of Leland's sources, arguing that it is more likely that Leland created the entire story than that Leland could be so easily \"duped\". Religious scholar Chas S. Clifton took exception to Hutton's position, writing that it amounted to an accusation of \"serious literary fraud\" made by an \"argument from absence\".\nModern worship.\nBecause Leland's claims about an Italian witch-cult are questionable, the first verifiable worship of Diana in the modern age was probably begun by Wicca. The earliest known practitioners of Neopagan witchcraft were members of a tradition begun by Gerald Gardner. Published versions of the devotional materials used by Gardner's group, dated to 1949, are heavily focused on the worship of Aradia, the daughter of Diana in Leland's folklore. Diana herself was recognized as an aspect of a single \"great goddess\" in the tradition of Apuleius, as described in the Wiccan Charge of the Goddess (itself adapted from Leland's text). Some later Wiccans, such as Scott Cunningham, would replace Aradia with Diana as the central focus of worship.\nIn the early 1960s, Victor Henry Anderson founded the Feri Tradition, a form of Wicca that draws from both Charles Leland's folklore and the Gardnerian tradition. Anderson claimed that he had first been initiated into a witchcraft tradition as a child in 1926, and that he had been told the name of the goddess worshiped by witches was Tana. The name Tana originated in Leland's \"Aradia\", where he claimed it was an old Etruscan name for Diana. The Feri Tradition founded by Anderson continues to recognize Tana/Diana as an aspect of the Star Goddess related to the element of fire, and representing \"the fiery womb that gives birth to and transforms all matter.\" (In \"Aradia\", Diana is also credited as the creatrix of the material world and Queen of Faeries).\nA few Wiccan traditions would elevate Diana to a more prominent position of worship, and there are two distinct modern branches of Wicca focused primarily on Diana. The first, founded during the early 1970s in the United States by Morgan McFarland and Mark Roberts, has a feminist theology and only occasionally accepts male participants, and leadership is limited to female priestesses. McFarland Dianic Wiccans base their tradition primarily on the work of Robert Graves and his book \"The White Goddess\", and were inspired by references to the existence of medieval European \"Dianic cults\" in Margaret Murray's book \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\". The second Dianic tradition, founded by Zsuzsanna Budapest in the mid-1970s, is characterized by an exclusive focus on the feminine aspect of the divine, and as a result is exclusively female. This tradition combines elements from British Traditional Wicca, Italian folk-magic based on the work of Charles Leland, feminist values, and healing practices drawn from a variety of different cultures.\nA third Neopagan tradition heavily inspired by the worship of Diana through the lens of Italian folklore is Stregheria, founded in the 1980s. It centers around a pair of deities regarded as divine lovers, who are known by several variant names including Diana and Dianus, alternately given as Tana and Tanus or Jana and Janus (the later two deity names were mentioned by James Frazer in \"The Golden Bough\" as later corruptions of Diana and Dianus, which themselves were alternate and possibly older names for Juno and Jupiter). The tradition was founded by author Raven Grimassi, and influenced by Italian folktales he was told by his mother. One such folktale describes the moon being impregnated by her lover the morning star, a parallel to Leland's mythology of Diana and her lover Lucifer.\nDiana was also a subject of worship in certain Feraferian rites, particularly those surrounding the autumnal equinox, beginning in 1967.\nLegacy.\nIn language.\nBoth the Romanian words for \"fairy\" and S\u00e2nzian\u0103, the Leonese and Portuguese word for \"water nymph\" \"xana\", and the Spanish word for \"shooting target\" and \"morning call\" () seem to come from the name of Diana.\nIn the arts.\nSince the Renaissance, Diana's myths have often been represented in the visual and dramatic arts, including the opera \"L'arbore di Diana\". In the 16th century, Diana's image figured prominently at the ch\u00e2teaus of Fontainebleau, Chenonceau, and at Anet, in deference to Diane de Poitiers, mistress of Henri of France. At Versailles she was incorporated into the Olympian iconography with which Louis XIV, the Apollo-like \"Sun King\" liked to surround himself. Diana is also a character in the 1876 L\u00e9o Delibes ballet \"Sylvia\". The plot deals with Sylvia, one of Diana's nymphs and sworn to chastity, and Diana's assault on Sylvia's affections for the shepherd Amyntas.\nIn painting and sculpture.\nDiana has been one of the most popular themes in art. Painters like Titian, Peter Paul Rubens, Fran\u00e7ois Boucher, Nicolas Poussin and made use of her myth as a major theme. Most depictions of Diana in art featured the stories of Diana and Actaeon, or Callisto, or depicted her resting after hunting. Some famous work of arts with a Diana theme are:\nThere are many statues of Diana the Huntress in Yambol, Bulgaria."}
{"id": "8396", "revid": "48396901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8396", "title": "December 11", "text": ""}
{"id": "8397", "revid": "1310918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8397", "title": "Danny Elfman", "text": "Daniel Robert Elfman (born May 29, 1953) is an American film composer, singer, songwriter, and musician. He came to prominence as the lead vocalist and primary songwriter for the new wave band Oingo Boingo in the early 1980s. Since scoring his first studio film in 1985, Elfman has garnered international recognition for composing over 100 feature film scores, as well as compositions for television, stage productions, and the concert hall.\nElfman has frequently worked with directors Tim Burton, Sam Raimi, and Gus Van Sant, contributing music to nearly 20 Burton projects, including \"Pee-Wee's Big Adventure\", \"Beetlejuice\", \"Batman\", \"Edward Scissorhands\", \"Batman Returns\", \"Mars Attacks!\", \"Sleepy Hollow\", \"Big Fish\" and \"Alice in Wonderland\", as well as scoring Raimi's \"Darkman\", \"A Simple Plan\", \"Spider-Man\", \"Spider-Man 2\", \"Oz the Great and Powerful\", and \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\", and Van Sant's Academy Award-winning films \"Good Will Hunting\" and \"Milk\". He wrote music for all of the \"Men in Black\" and \"Fifty Shades of Grey\" franchise films, the songs and score for Henry Selick's animated musical \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\", and the themes for the popular television series \"Desperate Housewives\" and \"The Simpsons\".\nAmong his honors are four Oscar nominations, three Emmy Awards, a Grammy, seven Saturn Awards for Best Music, the 2002 Richard Kirk Award, the 2015 Disney Legend Award, the Max Steiner Film Music Achievement Award in 2017, and the Society of Composers &amp; Lyricists Lifetime Achievement Award in 2022.\nEarly life.\nElfman was born on May 29, 1953, in Los Angeles, California to a Jewish family of Russian descent. He is a son of Blossom Elfman (n\u00e9e Bernstein), a writer and teacher, and Milton Elfman, a teacher, and the brother of actor, musician, and journalist Richard Elfman. Elfman was raised in an affluent, racially-mixed community in Baldwin Hills, California, where he spent much of his time at the local movie theater discovering classic sci-fi, fantasy and horror films and first noticed the music of such film composers as Bernard Herrmann and Franz Waxman. Elfman has admitted to fabricating stories about his past out of boredom, including a false birthplace of Amarillo, Texas, and parents in the United States Air Force.\nIn his early school days, Elfman exhibited an aptitude for science with almost no interest in music, and was even rejected from elementary school orchestra \"for having no propensity for music.\" This would change when he switched high schools in the late 1960s and fell in with a musical crowd, who introduced him to early jazz and the work of Stravinsky and his 20th-century contemporaries. Elfman attended University High School in Los Angeles before dropping out.\nElfman left school to follow his brother Richard to France, where he performed violin with J\u00e9r\u00f4me Savary's Le Grand Magic Circus, an avant-garde musical theater group. He then embarked on a ten-month, self-guided tour through Africa, busking and collecting a range of West African percussion instruments until a series of illnesses forced him to return home. At this time, Richard was forming a new musical theater group in Los Angeles.\nCareer.\nOingo Boingo.\nAfter returning to Los Angeles from Africa in the early 1970s, Elfman was asked by his brother Richard to serve as musical director of his street theatre performance art troupe The Mystic Knights of the Oingo Boingo. Elfman was tasked with adapting and arranging 1920s and 1930s jazz and big band music by artists such as Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Django Reinhardt and Josephine Baker for the ensemble, which consisted of up to 15 performers playing upwards of 30 instruments. He also composed original pieces and helped build instruments unique for the group, including an aluminum gamelan, the 'Schlitz celeste' made from tuned beer cans, and a \"junkyard orchestra\" built from car parts and trash cans.\nThe Mystic Knights performed on the street and in theaters, and later in nightclubs throughout Los Angeles until Richard left in 1976 to pursue filmmaking. As a send-off to the group's original concept, Richard produced the film \"Forbidden Zone\" based on the Mystic Knights' stage performances. Elfman composed the songs and his first score for the film, and appeared as the character Satan, who performs a reworked version of Calloway's \"Minnie the Moocher.\"\nBefore the release of \"Forbidden Zone\", Elfman took over the Mystic Knights as lead singer-songwriter in 1976. In 1979, he pared the group down to eight players to record and tour as a ska-influenced new wave band. That summer, the group's name would change to Oingo Boingo. Their biggest success among eight studio albums penned by Elfman was 1985's \"Dead Man's Party\", featuring the hit song \"Weird Science\" from the movie of the same name. The band also appeared performing their single \"Dead Man's Party\" in the 1986 movie \"Back to School\", for which Elfman also composed the score. Elfman shifted the band to a more guitar-oriented rock sound in the late 1980s, which continued through their last album \"Boingo\" in 1994.\nCiting permanent hearing damage from performing live and conflicts with his film-scoring career, Elfman retired Oingo Boingo in 1995 with a series of five sold-out final concerts at the Universal Amphitheatre ending on Halloween night. On October 31, 2015, Elfman and Oingo Boingo guitarist Steve Bartek performed the song \"Dead Man's Party\" with an orchestra as an encore to a live-to-film concert of \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" score at the Hollywood Bowl. Elfman told the audience the performance was \"20 years to the day\" of Oingo Boingo's retirement.\nFilm scoring.\nAs fans of Oingo Boingo, Tim Burton and Paul Reubens invited Elfman to write the score for their first feature film \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\" in 1985. Elfman was initially apprehensive because of his lack of formal training and having never scored a studio feature, but after Burton accepted his initial demo of the title music, and with orchestration assistance from Oingo Boingo guitarist and arranger Steve Bartek, Elfman completed the score to great effect, paying homage to influential film composers Nino Rota and Bernard Herrmann. Elfman described the first time he heard his music played by a full orchestra as one of the most thrilling experiences of his life.\nFollowing \"Pee Wee's Big Adventure\", Elfman scored a string of comedies in the late 1980s, including \"Back to School\" starring Rodney Dangerfield, Burton's \"Beetlejuice\" and the Bill Murray film \"Scrooged\". Non-comedy work included the all-synth score to Emilio Estevez's crime drama \"Wisdom\" and the big band, blues-infused music for Martin Brest's buddy cop action film \"Midnight Run\".\nIn 1989, Elfman's influential, Grammy-winning score for Burton's \"Batman\" marked a major stylistic shift to dark, densely orchestrated music in the romantic idiom. This continued in his scores for Warren Beatty's \"Dick Tracy\", Sam Raimi's \"Darkman\" and Clive Barker's \"Nightbreed\", all released in 1990.\nWith \"Batman\", Elfman firmly established a career-spanning relationship with Burton, scoring all but three of the director's major studio releases. Highlights include \"Edward Scissorhands\" (1990), \"Batman Returns\" (1992), \"Sleepy Hollow\" (1999), \"Big Fish\" (2003) and \"Alice in Wonderland\" (2010). In 1993, Elfman wrote the score and ten songs for the Burton-produced stop motion animated film \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\", directed by Henry Selick, and also provided the singing voice for main character Jack Skellington, as well as the voices for secondary characters Barrel, the Clown with the Tear-Away Face and others. In 2005, he wrote the score and songs for Burton's \"Corpse Bride\" and provided the voice of the character of Bonejangles, and provided the score, songs and Oompa-Loompa vocals for Burton's \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" that same year.\nIn addition to frequent collaborations with Burton, Raimi and Gus Van Sant, Elfman has worked with directors such as Brian De Palma, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Errol Morris, Ang Lee, Richard Donner, Guillermo del Toro, David O. Russell, Taylor Hackford, Jon Amiel, Joe Johnston, and Barry Sonnenfeld. His scores for Sonnenfeld's \"Men in Black\", Van Sant's \"Good Will Hunting\" and \"Milk\", and Burton's \"Big Fish\" all received Academy Award nominations.\nSince the mid-1990s, Elfman expanded his craft to a range of genres, including thrillers (\"Dolores Claiborne\", \"A Simple Plan\", \"The Kingdom, The Girl on the Train, The Woman in the Window\"), dramas (\"Sommersby\", \"A Civil Action\", \"Hitchcock\"), indies (\"Freeway\", \"Silver Linings Playbook\", \"Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far on Foot, White Noise\"), family (\"Flubber\", \"Charlotte's Web\", \"Frankenweenie\", \"Goosebumps, Dolittle\"), documentary (\"Standard Operating Procedure\", \"The Unknown Known\"), and horror (\"Red Dragon\", \"The Wolfman\"), as well as entries in his well-established areas of horror comedy (\"The Frighteners\", \"Mars Attacks!\", \"Dark Shadows\") and comic book-inspired action films (\"Hulk\", \"Wanted\", \"\").\nAmong his franchise work, Elfman composed the scores for four \"Men in Black\" films (1997\u20132019) and three \"Fifty Shades\" films (2015\u20132018). In 1996, he scored the first film in the , adapting themes for the original television series by Lalo Schifrin as well as composing his own. Elfman scored Raimi's \"Spider-Man\" in 2002 and \"Spider-Man 2\" in 2004, themes and selections from which were used for Raimi's \"Spider-Man 3\", scored by Christopher Young. Elfman's \"Spider-Man\" theme was incorporated into the MCU film \" composed by Michael Giacchino.\nElfman entered the Marvel Cinematic Universe by providing additional music in 2015's \", receiving composer credit with Brian Tyler. Elfman also scored MCU's \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\" in 2022, utilizing Giacchino's theme to the original \"Doctor Strange\" film, as well as themes from WandaVision and , and music from Beethoven's Fifth Symphony and Bach's Toccata and Fugue.\nFor several high-profile sequel and reboot projects in the 2010s, Elfman incorporated established musical themes with his own original thematic material, including the DC Extended Universe's \"Justice League\", \"The Grinch,\" \"Dumbo\" and .\nElfman was featured in the 2016 documentary \"\", in which he appeared among over 50 film composers to discuss the craft of movie music and influential figures in the business.\nConcert music.\nElfman's first piece of original concert music, \"Serenada Schizophrana\", was commissioned by the American Composers Orchestra, who premiered the piece on February 23, 2005, at Carnegie Hall. Subsequent concert works include his first \"Violin Concerto \"Eleven Eleven\"\", co-commissioned by the Czech National Symphony Orchestra, Stanford Live at Stanford University, and the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, which premiered at Smetana Hall in Prague on June 21, 2017, with Sandy Cameron on violin and John Mauceri conducting the Czech National Symphony Orchestra; the \"Piano Quartet\", co-commissioned by the Lied Center for Performing Arts University of Nebraska and the Berlin Philharmonic Piano Quartet, which premiered February 6, 2018, in Lincoln, Nebraska; and the \"Percussion Quartet\", commissioned by Third Coast Percussion and premiered at the Philip Glass Days And Nights Festival in Big Sur on October 10, 2019.\n2022 saw the first performances of three concert works. Elfman's \"Cello Concerto\" for Gautier Capu\u00e7on was premiered by the Vienna Symphony on March 18, with subsequent performances by the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France in May and the San Francisco Symphony US premiere in November. Elfman's \"Percussion Concerto\" for Colin Currie premiered on March 25 at London's Royal Festival Hall with London Philharmonic Orchestra, and was later performed at Soka University of America in California, with Pacific Symphony. His \"Wunderkammer\", a commission from the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain, toured the UK in summer 2022, culminating in a performance in London's Royal Albert Hall as part of the BBC Proms, with national radio and TV broadcasts.\nElfman's \"Suite for Chamber Orchestra\" was premiered on May 4, 2023, by Orpheus Chamber Orchestra at St Mark's Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C. The \"Suite\" was co-commissioned by the Library of Congress, the Royalty Pool of Andre Kostelanetz, the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra, and the National Symphony Orchestra of Ireland. Subsequent performances of the \"Suite\" include the New York premiere by the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra in July 2023 at 92NY's inaugural MidSummer Music Fest, the West Coast premiere by the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra in December 2023 at the Alex Theatre in Glendale, California, and a performance by the Reno Chamber Orchestra in October 2024.\nStage music.\nIn 2008, Elfman accepted his first commission for the stage, composing the music for Twyla Tharp's \"Rabbit and Rogue\" ballet, co-commissioned by American Ballet Theatre and Orange County Performing Arts Center and premiering on June 3, 2008, at the Metropolitan Opera House, Lincoln Center. Other works for stage include the music for Cirque Du Soleil's \"Iris\" in 2011, and incidental music for the Broadway production of Taylor Mac's \"\" in 2019.\nIn October 2013, Elfman returned to the stage for the first time since his band Oingo Boingo disbanded to sing a handful of \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" songs as part of the concert \"Danny Elfman's Music from the Films of Tim Burton\", featuring suites of music from 15 Tim Burton films newly arranged by Elfman. The concert has since toured internationally and has played in Japan, Australia, Mexico and throughout Europe and the United States. Since 2015, Elfman has appeared regularly in a Hollywood Bowl Halloween concert featuring full orchestra performing the \"Nightmare Before Christmas\" score live to the film projection.\nElfman made his Coachella debut on April 16, 2022, with \"Danny Elfman: From Boingo to \"Batman\" to \"Big Mess\" to Beyond!\" The concert, postponed from Coachella 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, featured Elfman's film and television music arranged for band, orchestra and choir, as well as songs from his solo album \"Big Mess\" and new arrangements of songs from his Oingo Boingo catalogue. Conducted by Steve Bartek, and featuring Elfman (vocals, guitar, percussion), Wes Borland (guitar), Stu Brooks (bass), Nili Brosh (guitar), and Josh Freese (drums), the concert was expanded for two shows Halloween weekend 2022 at the Hollywood Bowl.\nTelevision and other projects.\nIn addition to his music for film, Elfman also penned themes for the television series \"The Simpsons\", \"Tales from the Crypt\", \"The Flash\" and \"Desperate Housewives\", which won Elfman his first Emmy. He also adapted his original themes for the animated versions of \"\" and \"Beetlejuice\". Occasional forays into serial television include episodes of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\", \"Amazing Stories\" and Pee-wee's Playhouse, the miniseries \"When We Rise\" co-composed with Chris Bacon, and themes for the Netflix series Wednesday.\nHe has composed music for animated shorts, including Sally Cruikshank's \"Face Like A Frog\" and Tim Burton's \"Stainboy\" internet series.\nElfman provided background music for Luigi Serafini's solo exhibition \"il Teatro della Pittura\" at the Fondazione Mudima di Milano in Milan, Italy in 1998 and for the \"Tim Burton\" exhibition at MoMA in 2009.\nIn the 1990s, Elfman composed music for advertising campaigns for Nike, Nissan and Lincoln-Mercury, and in 2002 wrote the music for Honda's \"Power of Dreams\" advertising campaign, which was the first cinema commercial to be shot in the IMAX format.\nIn 2013 he composed the music and provided the English-language vocals for the Hong Kong Disneyland attraction Mystic Manor.\nOn October 31, 2019, the MasterClass online educational series released \"Making Music out of Chaos,\" presenting 21 compositional and career lessons from Elfman's four decades of experience primarily in the film industry.\nElfman scored the 10-minute video \"Joe Biden,\" which introduced Joe Biden's acceptance of the presidential candidacy nomination at the 2020 Democratic National Convention.\nOn November 16, 2021, Disney Branded Television announced that Elfman would compose score and songs of the upcoming Disney Television Animation and 20th Television Animation stop-motion animated comedy series \"Rhona Who Lives by the River\" created by Emily Kapnek, Elfman also serves as executive producer for the series.\nSolo.\nIn October 2020, Elfman released the single, \"Happy,\" on Anti- Records and Epitaph Records. From January 2021 on the eleventh day of each month, he released five subsequent singles \"Sorry\", \"Love in the Time of COVID\", \"Kick Me\", \"True\", and a reworking of the Oingo Boingo song \"Insects\" from the album \"Nothing to Fear\". This culminated with the release of the double album \"Big Mess\" on June 11. Featuring 18 original songs, this was Elfman's first solo studio album since 1984's \"So-Lo\".\nOn August 11, 2021, Elfman released a remix of \"True\" with lead vocals shared between Elfman and Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor. A year later, Elfman released \"Bigger Messier\", a compilation of 23 remixes of songs on the album \"Big Mess\" by artists including Reznor, Iggy Pop, Blixa Bargeld, Squarepusher, Boy Harsher and more.\nInfluences and style.\nElfman has said his major influences are composers from Hollywood's Golden Age, such as Bernard Herrmann, Dimitri Tiomkin, Max Steiner, David Tamkin, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, and Carl Stalling; 20th century classical composers Sergei Prokofiev, Igor Stravinsky, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, Dmitri Shostakovich, and Carl Orff; and jazz, experimental and minimalist composers Kurt Weill, Duke Ellington, Harry Partch, Philip Glass, Lou Harrison, Terry Riley, and Steve Reich.\nInfluences on specific scores include Erik Satie (\"Forbidden Zone\"), Nino Rota (\"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\"), George Gershwin (\"Dick Tracy\"), Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (\"Edward Scissorhands\"), and Jimi Hendrix (\"Dead Presidents\"). Though not considered direct influences \"per se\", Elfman has discussed his respect and admiration for film composers Jerry Goldsmith, Ennio Morricone, Thomas Newman, Alexandre Desplat and John Williams, as well as classical composer John Adams.\nThough many believe Richard Wagner informed his influential score to \"Batman\", Elfman has said it was more likely from Wagner's influence on classic film composers such as Herrmann, Steiner, Waxman and Korngold, as he was unfamiliar with Wagner's work at the time.\nElfman counts Herrmann as his biggest influence, and has said hearing Herrmann's score to \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" when he was a child was the first time he recognized film music as a cinematic art form and realized the powerful contribution a composer makes to the movies. Pastiche of Herrmann's music can be heard in Elfman's \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\", especially the cues \"Stolen Bike\" and \"Clown Dream\", which directly reference Herrmann's music from \"Psycho\" and \"The 7th Voyage of Sinbad\" respectively. His score to \"Batman\" makes more subtle nods to Herrmann's \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" and \"Vertigo\", and more integral homage can be heard in later scores for \"Mars Attacks!\" and \"Hitchcock\", as well as the \"Blue Strings\" movement of his first concert work \"Serenada Schizophrana\".\nWhile Elfman is primarily known for writing large-scale orchestral works in the romantic, 20th century and Hollywood Golden Age film score traditions, his compositions have used a wide range of idioms, including rock and blues (\"Midnight Run, Hot to Trot\"), big band and jazz (\"Dick Tracy\", \"Chicago\"), operetta (\"The Nightmare Before Christmas\", \"Corpse Bride\"), funk and hip hop (\"Dead Presidents\", \"Notorious\"), folk and indie rock (\"Taking Woodstock\", \"Silver Linings Playbook\"), Americana (\"Article 99\", \"Sommersby\", \"Big Fish),\" minimalism (\"Good Will Hunting\", \"Standard Operating Procedure\", \"The Unknown Known\"), and atonal or experimental (\"Freeway\", \"A Simple Plan, The Girl on the Train\").\nGiven his appreciation and study of world music and his vast collection of instruments from non-Western cultures, Elfman will often use traditional instruments in his scores when there is an international setting, such as African percussion for \"Instinct\", the oud for \"The Kingdom\" set in Saudi Arabia, and pan flute for \"Proof of Life\" set in South America.\nWhen working on films with established musical identifiers, Elfman will often incorporate original themes in addition to his own thematic material. Examples include Lalo Schifrin's main theme and \"The Plot\" from the original for \"\"; John Williams' theme for \"Superman\", the Hans Zimmer/Junkie XL theme for \"Wonder Woman\" and his own original \"Batman\" theme for \"Justice League;\" the \"Welcome Christmas\" song from the 1966 \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" for \"The Grinch\"; and \"Casey Junior,\" \"Pink Elephants on Parade,\" and \"When I See an Elephant Fly\" from Disney's original 1941 animated film for \"Dumbo\".\nThe songs for \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" and \"Corpse Bride\" were influenced by Kurt Weill, Gilbert and Sullivan and early Rodgers and Hammerstein. At the request of Tim Burton, \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" songs drew inspiration from Bollywood, the Mamas and the Papas, ABBA, and Earth, Wind &amp; Fire individually.\nElfman's work in pop music and specifically as songwriter for Oingo Boingo was influenced by the Specials, Madness, the Selecter, Devo, Fun Boy Three, and XTC.\nMethods.\nFilm music.\nFor his film scores, Elfman draws musical inspiration almost exclusively from viewing a cut of the film, and occasionally from visits to the set while the film is in production (he wrote and orchestrated his theme for \"Batman\" on an airplane to Los Angeles after visiting the set in London). While he prefers not to work from script, story or concept, exceptions include \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\", for which ten songs needed to be written in advance of filmmaking, and \"Dumbo\", for which he composed the main theme before filming began.\nOnce a rough cut of the film is ready, Elfman and the director have a spotting session to decide where to place music in the film, the emotional undercurrents of each scene, and overall tone. Elfman then spends a few weeks of free composition and experimentation to begin working out thematic material and to develop sounds and the harmonic palette.\nWhen he has received approval on initial material from the filmmakers, Elfman begins to compose anywhere from 60 to 120 minutes of music cue-by-cue. He says two of the most important things to capture at this point are the tone of each scene and editorial rhythm. Next to thematic development, action set pieces tend to take Elfman the most time given the complexity of timing music to action.\nEarly in his career, he wrote out his scores using pencil, but has composed largely digitally since the mid-1990s.\nBefore recording the score, he demos each cue by mocking orchestral and choral parts on synthesizer to get approval from the director. Once approved, he provides a detailed, multi-line sketch of his composition to his lead orchestrator Steve Bartek, who ensures the sketches are appropriately broken down for sections of the orchestra (i.e. string, brass woodwind, some percussion), choir (SATB) and individual players.\nElfman also typically samples or records his own percussion and guitar playing to overlay with live orchestra. More than half of some scores feature Elfman's performance, including \"Dead Presidents\", \"\", \"Planet of the Apes\", \"The Kingdom\", \"The Girl on the Train\" and \"The Circle.\"\nTo produce the score, Elfman rents a recording studio and hires a conductor and orchestra/choir. He oversees the recording from the control booth so that he can troubleshoot with the film's director and recording engineers. The final recording is given to the film's sound department to mix with dialogue and sound effects for the film's complete soundtrack. Elfman will usually do a separate mix of select cues for an album presentation of the score, and has produced nearly 100 to date.\nOn the occasion that there are compressed deadlines or in the event he is not available to rescore or adapt his music if there are major edits to the film after the score's completion, Elfman will hire additional composers to work on small cues or sections of cues, adapting his existing material or themes. Examples include Jonathan Sheffer on \"Darkman\", David Buckley on the \"Fifty Shades\" films, and Pinar Toprak on \"Justice League\". Since the 1990s, Elfman has occasionally co-composed music or shared music writing credit (e.g.\"When We Rise\", \"Spy Kids\", ', '), or written themes that are then used or adapted by other composers, including Jonathan Sheffer (\"Pure Luck\"), Steve Bartek (\"Novacaine\"), John Debney (\"Heartbreakers\"), Deborah Lurie (\"9\"), and the Newton Brothers (\"Before I Wake\").\nElfman has only collaborated once with another artist: Siouxsie and the Banshees, on the song \"Face to Face\" for \"Batman Returns\" in 1992. It was a long-distance collaboration, as the studio needed the song very quickly; Siouxsie created the foundation of the song and sent it to Elfman, who added elements, and the two would send the track back and forth. Regarding collaboration, Elfman would later state, \"I'm not used to collaborating at all with anybody. I did one track with Siouxsie and the Banshees but that's it. I've always been in my own bubble, and that bubble has been very fertile\".\nConcert music.\nIn the liner notes for the 2006 CD recording of his first concert work \"Serenada Schizophrana\", Elfman wrote: \"I began composing several dozen short improvisational compositions, maybe a minute each. Slowly, some of them began to develop themselves until finally I had six separate movements that, in some abstract, absurd way, felt connected.\"\nTo create the cadenzas for his violin concerto \"Eleven Eleven\", Elfman collaborated with soloist Sandy Cameron, for whom the piece was written.\nVocals.\nElfman often incorporates choral or vocal arrangements into his film scores, notably the use of women's and children's choirs (\"Scrooged\", \"Nightbreed\", \"Edward Scissorhands\", \"Batman Returns\", \"Sleepy Hollow\", \"Alice in Wonderland\", \"The Grinch\"), and solo voice or vocal effects (\"Beetlejuice\", \"Mars Attacks!\", \"Men in Black II\", \"Flubber\", \"Nacho Libre\", \"Iris\", \"Dark Shadows\", \"The Girl on the Train\"). Evoking the \"O Fortuna\" from Carl Orff's \"Carmina Burana\", he set made-up, Latin-sounding text for SATB choir in standout cue \"Descent into Mystery\" from \"Batman\".\nElfman also adds his own vocals into compositions in much the same way he mixes his percussion and guitar performances into orchestral arrangements. Prominent use can be heard in the scores for \"To Die For\" (sung with director Gus Van Sant, credited to \"Little Gus and the Suzettes\"), \"Silver Linings Playbook\", and his music for the Hong Kong Disneyland ride Mystic Manor. He provided the singing voice for characters in \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" and \"Corpse Bride\" in addition to composing the scores and songs, and can be heard singing the \"Day-O\" call in the style of Harry Belafonte's \"Banana Boat Song\" in the first bars of the \"Beetlejuice\" main title.\nFor Tim Burton's \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\", Elfman set Roald Dahl's text for the Oompa-Loompa characters as four stylistically distinct songs: the Bollywood-influenced \"Augustus Gloop\", the funk-infused \"Violet Beauregarde\", the psychedelic pop stylings of \"Veruca Salt\" and the baroque rock of \"Mike Teavee\". For all songs in the film, Elfman sang, manipulated and mixed several layers of his vocals to create the singing voices and harmonies of the Oompa Loompas, and incorporated his vocals into non-song score tracks that featured the characters, including \"Loompa Land\", \"Chocolate River\", \"The Boat Arrives\" and \"The River Cruise\".\nLyrics.\nElfman typically writes the lyrics to songs he has composed for movies. He employs song structures from Tin Pan Alley and early musical theatre composers (32-bar form), and pop and rock of the 1950s and 1960s (verse-chorus). As his songs serve to advance the plot and develop characters, lyrics reflect storylines and imagery specific to the film and express the inner life of characters.\nHe wrote the lyrics and music for ten songs featured in the stop-motion musical \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\". Drawing from Tim Burton's parody poem of \"A Visit from St. Nicholas\" and concept drawings, Elfman wrote each song in consultation with Burton before the film even had a script. These include the full-cast songs \"This Is Halloween\", \"Town Meeting Song\" and \"Making Christmas\"; four songs for the main character Jack Skellington, \"Jack's Lament\", \"What's This?\", \"Jack's Obsession\" and \"Poor Jack\", all sung by Elfman; and the other character songs \"Kidnap the Sandy Claws\", \"Oogie Boogie's Song\" and \"Sally's Song\". An eleventh song, \"Finale/Reprise\", reworks lyrics from the songs \"This Is Halloween\", \"What's This?\" and \"Sally's Song\" for the film's ending. Though uncredited, Burton contributed some lyrics to \"Nightmare\", including the line \"Perhaps it's the head that I found in the lake\" in \"Town Meeting Song\".\nElfman composed five songs for Burton's \"Corpse Bride\": \"According to Plan\", with lyrics co-written by screenwriter John August; \"Remains of the Day\" (which he sung as the character Bonejangles) and \"Tears to Shed\", both with additional lyrics by August; and \"The Wedding Song\", credited solely to Elfman. The song \"Erased\" was not used in the final film.\nHe wrote the lyrics to \"Lullaby\" from \"Charlotte's Web\", the rock track \"The Little Things\" from \"Wanted\" which he also sang in English and Russian, and \"Alice's Theme\" from \"Alice in Wonderland\". Elfman co-wrote the lyrics to \"Twice the Love\" from \"Big Fish\" and the \"Wonka's Welcome Song\" for \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" with John August.\nElfman wrote the lyrics to all of Oingo Boingo's original songs 1979\u20131994 and has made residuals on the titular two-word opening phrase sung in his \"The Simpsons\" theme since the series first aired in 1989.\nPersonal life.\nAs a teenager, Elfman dated his classmate Kim Gordon, who would later become one of the members of the rock band Sonic Youth. He has two daughters, Lola and Mali, from his marriage to Geri Eisenmenger. Mali is a film producer and actress. Elfman and Mali collaborated on her 2011 film \"Do Not Disturb\".\nOn November 29, 2003, Elfman married actress Bridget Fonda. They have a son, Oliver. In 1998, Elfman scored \"A Simple Plan\", starring Fonda. He is the uncle of actor Bodhi Elfman, who is married to actress Jenna Elfman.\nElfman has been an atheist since the age of 11 or 12. In an interview with the New York Post, he referred to himself as a \"cynic-ologist\".\nDescribing his politics during the 1980s, Elfman said, \"I'm not a doomist. My attitude is always to be critical of what's around you, but not ever to forget how lucky we are. I've traveled around the world. I left thinking I was a revolutionary. I came back real right-wing patriotic. Since then, I've kind of mellowed in between.\" Several of his songs written for Oingo Boingo during this period satirized social politics, although Elfman stated his message was to \"question, resist, challenge\" and that his songs were not aligned to any one political agenda.\nIn 2008, Elfman expressed support for Barack Obama. For the 2020 Democratic National Convention, he scored the biographical video played ahead of Joe Biden's acceptance of the presidential nomination in the 2020 United States elections. In a series of posts on his Instagram page discussing the video, Elfman criticized Donald Trump, Richard Nixon, and the electoral college, and linked to several voter resources.\nDuring his 18 years with Oingo Boingo, Elfman developed significant hearing damage as a result of the continuous exposure to the high noise levels involved in performing in a rock band. Afraid of worsening his condition, he decided to leave the band, saying that he would never return to that kind of performance. His impairment was so bad that he could not \"even sit in a loud restaurant or bar anymore.\" However, he found performing in front of orchestras more tolerable, and returned several times to reprise his live performance of Jack Skellington.\nIn popular culture.\nSince \"The Simpsons\"' second annual \"Treehouse of Horror\" episode aired in 1991, launching \"scary names\" tradition in the opening and closing titles, Elfman has been alternately credited for the theme music as \"Red Wolf Elfman\", \"Danny Skellingelfman\", \"Li'l Leakin Brain Elfman\", \"Boris Elfmonivich\", \"Danny Elfblood\", \"Danny 'Hell'fman\", \"The Bloody Elf\", \"Danny Elfbones\", \"Elfmunster\" and \"Daniel Beilzebelsman\".\nElfman's composition \"Clown Dream\" from \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\" is used in the video game \"Grand Theft Auto V\" and has often been used as the opening music for Primus concerts.\nIn the 2007 sixth season \"Star Wars\" parody \"Blue Harvest\", \"Family Guy\" lampooned Elfman's orchestral style. A scene shows Elfman replacing an incinerated John Williams to conduct a full orchestra playing the score, only to be decapitated by a lightsaber after conducting a few bars of oom-pah music.\nEpisode five of the 14th season of \"South Park\" in 2010 criticized Tim Burton for using the \"same\" music in all his films, referring to Elfman's scores.\nIn October 2016, Elfman produced a video clip for Funny or Die with original \"horror\" music composed to footage of Donald Trump pacing around Hillary Clinton at the second United States presidential election debates, 2016.\nIn 2019, selections from Elfman's \"Midnight Run\" score were used in the third season of Netflix's \"Stranger Things\", including \"Stairway Chase\" in episodes 5 and 6, and \"Wild Ride\" and \"Package Deal\" in episode 6.\nChristina Aguilera revealed that Elfman's music inspired her Las Vegas concert residency The Xperience.\nAwards and nominations.\nAmerican Film Institute.\nElfman's scores for \"Batman\" and \"Edward Scissorhands\" were nominated for AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores.\nDiscography.\nIncluding commercial recordings of his film scores and the Oingo Boingo discography, Elfman has produced over 100 albums as of 2019."}
{"id": "8398", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8398", "title": "Dimension", "text": "In physics and mathematics, the dimension of a mathematical space (or object) is informally defined as the minimum number of coordinates needed to specify any point within it. Thus, a line has a dimension of one (1D) because only one coordinate is needed to specify a point on itfor example, the point at 5 on a number line. A surface, such as the boundary of a cylinder or sphere, has a dimension of two (2D) because two coordinates are needed to specify a point on itfor example, both a latitude and longitude are required to locate a point on the surface of a sphere. A two-dimensional Euclidean space is a two-dimensional space on the plane. The inside of a cube, a cylinder or a sphere is three-dimensional (3D) because three coordinates are needed to locate a point within these spaces.\nIn classical mechanics, space and time are different categories and refer to absolute space and time. That conception of the world is a four-dimensional space but not the one that was found necessary to describe electromagnetism. The four dimensions (4D) of spacetime consist of events that are not absolutely defined spatially and temporally, but rather are known relative to the motion of an observer. Minkowski space first approximates the universe without gravity; the pseudo-Riemannian manifolds of general relativity describe spacetime with matter and gravity. 10 dimensions are used to describe superstring theory (6D hyperspace + 4D), 11 dimensions can describe supergravity and M-theory (7D hyperspace + 4D), and the state-space of quantum mechanics is an infinite-dimensional function space.\nThe concept of dimension is not restricted to physical objects. s frequently occur in mathematics and the sciences. They may be Euclidean spaces or more general parameter spaces or configuration spaces such as in Lagrangian or Hamiltonian mechanics; these are abstract spaces, independent of the physical space.\nIn mathematics.\nIn mathematics, the dimension of an object is, roughly speaking, the number of degrees of freedom of a point that moves on this object. In other words, the dimension is the number of independent parameters or coordinates that are needed for defining the position of a point that is constrained to be on the object. For example, the dimension of a point is zero; the dimension of a line is one, as a point can move on a line in only one direction (or its opposite); the dimension of a plane is two, etc.\nThe dimension is an intrinsic property of an object, in the sense that it is independent of the dimension of the space in which the object is or can be embedded. For example, a curve, such as a circle, is of dimension one, because the position of a point on a curve is determined by its signed distance along the curve to a fixed point on the curve. This is independent from the fact that a curve cannot be embedded in a Euclidean space of dimension lower than two, unless it is a line. Similarly, a surface is of dimension two, even if embedded in three-dimensional space.\nThe dimension of Euclidean -space is . When trying to generalize to other types of spaces, one is faced with the question \"what makes -dimensional?\" One answer is that to cover a fixed ball in by small balls of radius , one needs on the order of such small balls. This observation leads to the definition of the Minkowski dimension and its more sophisticated variant, the Hausdorff dimension, but there are also other answers to that question. For example, the boundary of a ball in looks locally like and this leads to the notion of the inductive dimension. While these notions agree on , they turn out to be different when one looks at more general spaces.\nA tesseract is an example of a four-dimensional object. Whereas outside mathematics the use of the term \"dimension\" is as in: \"A tesseract \"has four dimensions\"\", mathematicians usually express this as: \"The tesseract \"has dimension 4\"\", or: \"The dimension of the tesseract \"is\" 4\" or: 4D.\nAlthough the notion of higher dimensions goes back to Ren\u00e9 Descartes, substantial development of a higher-dimensional geometry only began in the 19th century, via the work of Arthur Cayley, William Rowan Hamilton, Ludwig Schl\u00e4fli and Bernhard Riemann. Riemann's 1854 Habilitationsschrift, Schl\u00e4fli's 1852 \"Theorie der vielfachen Kontinuit\u00e4t\", and Hamilton's discovery of the quaternions and John T. Graves' discovery of the octonions in 1843 marked the beginning of higher-dimensional geometry.\nThe rest of this section examines some of the more important mathematical definitions of dimension.\nVector spaces.\nThe dimension of a vector space is the number of vectors in any basis for the space, i.e. the number of coordinates necessary to specify any vector. This notion of dimension (the cardinality of a basis) is often referred to as the \"Hamel dimension\" or \"algebraic dimension\" to distinguish it from other notions of dimension.\nFor the non-free case, this generalizes to the notion of the length of a module.\nManifolds.\nThe uniquely defined dimension of every connected topological manifold can be calculated. A connected topological manifold is locally homeomorphic to Euclidean -space, in which the number is the manifold's dimension.\nFor connected differentiable manifolds, the dimension is also the dimension of the tangent vector space at any point.\nIn geometric topology, the theory of manifolds is characterized by the way dimensions 1 and 2 are relatively elementary, the high-dimensional cases are simplified by having extra space in which to \"work\"; and the cases and are in some senses the most difficult. This state of affairs was highly marked in the various cases of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, in which four different proof methods are applied.\nComplex dimension.\nThe dimension of a manifold depends on the base field with respect to which Euclidean space is defined. While analysis usually assumes a manifold to be over the real numbers, it is sometimes useful in the study of complex manifolds and algebraic varieties to work over the complex numbers instead. A complex number (\"x\" + \"iy\") has a real part \"x\" and an imaginary part \"y\", in which x and y are both real numbers; hence, the complex dimension is half the real dimension.\nConversely, in algebraically unconstrained contexts, a single complex coordinate system may be applied to an object having two real dimensions. For example, an ordinary two-dimensional spherical surface, when given a complex metric, becomes a Riemann sphere of one complex dimension.\nVarieties.\nThe dimension of an algebraic variety may be defined in various equivalent ways. The most intuitive way is probably the dimension of the tangent space at any Regular point of an algebraic variety. Another intuitive way is to define the dimension as the number of hyperplanes that are needed in order to have an intersection with the variety that is reduced to a finite number of points (dimension zero). This definition is based on the fact that the intersection of a variety with a hyperplane reduces the dimension by one unless if the hyperplane contains the variety.\nAn algebraic set being a finite union of algebraic varieties, its dimension is the maximum of the dimensions of its components. It is equal to the maximal length of the chains formula_1 of sub-varieties of the given algebraic set (the length of such a chain is the number of \"formula_2\").\nEach variety can be considered as an algebraic stack, and its dimension as variety agrees with its dimension as stack. There are however many stacks which do not correspond to varieties, and some of these have negative dimension. Specifically, if \"V\" is a variety of dimension \"m\" and \"G\" is an algebraic group of dimension \"n\" acting on \"V\", then the quotient stack [\"V\"/\"G\"] has dimension \"m\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"n\".\nKrull dimension.\nThe Krull dimension of a commutative ring is the maximal length of chains of prime ideals in it, a chain of length \"n\" being a sequence formula_3 of prime ideals related by inclusion. It is strongly related to the dimension of an algebraic variety, because of the natural correspondence between sub-varieties and prime ideals of the ring of the polynomials on the variety.\nFor an algebra over a field, the dimension as vector space is finite if and only if its Krull dimension is 0.\nTopological spaces.\nFor any normal topological space , the Lebesgue covering dimension of is defined to be the smallest integer \"n\" for which the following holds: any open cover has an open refinement (a second open cover in which each element is a subset of an element in the first cover) such that no point is included in more than elements. In this case dim . For a manifold, this coincides with the dimension mentioned above. If no such integer exists, then the dimension of is said to be infinite, and one writes dim . Moreover, has dimension \u22121, i.e. dim if and only if is empty. This definition of covering dimension can be extended from the class of normal spaces to all Tychonoff spaces merely by replacing the term \"open\" in the definition by the term \"functionally open\".\nAn inductive dimension may be defined inductively as follows. Consider a discrete set of points (such as a finite collection of points) to be 0-dimensional. By dragging a 0-dimensional object in some direction, one obtains a 1-dimensional object. By dragging a 1-dimensional object in a \"new direction\", one obtains a 2-dimensional object. In general, one obtains an ()-dimensional object by dragging an -dimensional object in a \"new\" direction. The inductive dimension of a topological space may refer to the \"small inductive dimension\" or the \"large inductive dimension\", and is based on the analogy that, in the case of metric spaces, balls have -dimensional boundaries, permitting an inductive definition based on the dimension of the boundaries of open sets. Moreover, the boundary of a discrete set of points is the empty set, and therefore the empty set can be taken to have dimension -1.\nSimilarly, for the class of CW complexes, the dimension of an object is the largest for which the -skeleton is nontrivial. Intuitively, this can be described as follows: if the original space can be continuously deformed into a collection of higher-dimensional triangles joined at their faces with a complicated surface, then the dimension of the object is the dimension of those triangles.\nHausdorff dimension.\nThe Hausdorff dimension is useful for studying structurally complicated sets, especially fractals. The Hausdorff dimension is defined for all metric spaces and, unlike the dimensions considered above, can also have non-integer real values. The box dimension or Minkowski dimension is a variant of the same idea. In general, there exist more definitions of fractal dimensions that work for highly irregular sets and attain non-integer positive real values.\nHilbert spaces.\nEvery Hilbert space admits an orthonormal basis, and any two such bases for a particular space have the same cardinality. This cardinality is called the dimension of the Hilbert space. This dimension is finite if and only if the space's Hamel dimension is finite, and in this case the two dimensions coincide.\nIn physics.\nSpatial dimensions.\nClassical physics theories describe three physical dimensions: from a particular point in space, the basic directions in which we can move are up/down, left/right, and forward/backward. Movement in any other direction can be expressed in terms of just these three. Moving down is the same as moving up a negative distance. Moving diagonally upward and forward is just as the name of the direction implies \"i.e.\", moving in a linear combination of up and forward. In its simplest form: a line describes one dimension, a plane describes two dimensions, and a cube describes three dimensions. (See Space and Cartesian coordinate system.)\nTime.\nA temporal dimension, or time dimension, is a dimension of time. Time is often referred to as the \"fourth dimension\" for this reason, but that is not to imply that it is a spatial dimension. A temporal dimension is one way to measure physical change. It is perceived differently from the three spatial dimensions in that there is only one of it, and that we cannot move freely in time but subjectively move in one direction.\nThe equations used in physics to model reality do not treat time in the same way that humans commonly perceive it. The equations of classical mechanics are symmetric with respect to time, and equations of quantum mechanics are typically symmetric if both time and other quantities (such as charge and parity) are reversed. In these models, the perception of time flowing in one direction is an artifact of the laws of thermodynamics (we perceive time as flowing in the direction of increasing entropy).\nThe best-known treatment of time as a dimension is Poincar\u00e9 and Einstein's special relativity (and extended to general relativity), which treats perceived space and time as components of a four-dimensional manifold, known as spacetime, and in the special, flat case as Minkowski space. Time is different from other spatial dimensions as time operates in all spatial dimensions. Time operates in the first, second and third as well as theoretical spatial dimensions such as a fourth spatial dimension. Time is not however present in a single point of absolute infinite singularity as defined as a geometric point, as an infinitely small point can have no change and therefore no time. Just as when an object moves through positions in space, it also moves through positions in time. In this sense the force moving any object to change is \"time\".\nAdditional dimensions.\nIn physics, three dimensions of space and one of time is the accepted norm. However, there are theories that attempt to unify the four fundamental forces by introducing extra dimensions/hyperspace. Most notably, superstring theory requires 10 spacetime dimensions, and originates from a more fundamental 11-dimensional theory tentatively called M-theory which subsumes five previously distinct superstring theories. Supergravity theory also promotes 11D spacetime = 7D hyperspace + 4 common dimensions. To date, no direct experimental or observational evidence is available to support the existence of these extra dimensions. If hyperspace exists, it must be hidden from us by some physical mechanism. One well-studied possibility is that the extra dimensions may be \"curled up\" at such tiny scales as to be effectively invisible to current experiments.\nIn 1921, Kaluza\u2013Klein theory presented 5D including an extra dimension of space. At the level of quantum field theory, Kaluza\u2013Klein theory unifies gravity with gauge interactions, based on the realization that gravity propagating in small, compact extra dimensions is equivalent to gauge interactions at long distances. In particular when the geometry of the extra dimensions is trivial, it reproduces electromagnetism. However, at sufficiently high energies or short distances, this setup still suffers from the same pathologies that famously obstruct direct attempts to describe quantum gravity. Therefore, these models still require a UV completion, of the kind that string theory is intended to provide. In particular, superstring theory requires six compact dimensions (6D hyperspace) forming a Calabi\u2013Yau manifold. Thus Kaluza-Klein theory may be considered either as an incomplete description on its own, or as a subset of string theory model building.\nIn addition to small and curled up extra dimensions, there may be extra dimensions that instead are not apparent because the matter associated with our visible universe is localized on a subspace. Thus, the extra dimensions need not be small and compact but may be large extra dimensions. D-branes are dynamical extended objects of various dimensionalities predicted by string theory that could play this role. They have the property that open string excitations, which are associated with gauge interactions, are confined to the brane by their endpoints, whereas the closed strings that mediate the gravitational interaction are free to propagate into the whole spacetime, or \"the bulk\". This could be related to why gravity is exponentially weaker than the other forces, as it effectively dilutes itself as it propagates into a higher-dimensional volume.\nSome aspects of brane physics have been applied to cosmology. For example, brane gas cosmology attempts to explain why there are three dimensions of space using topological and thermodynamic considerations. According to this idea it would be since three is the largest number of spatial dimensions in which strings can generically intersect. If initially there are many windings of strings around compact dimensions, space could only expand to macroscopic sizes once these windings are eliminated, which requires oppositely wound strings to find each other and annihilate. But strings can only find each other to annihilate at a meaningful rate in three dimensions, so it follows that only three dimensions of space are allowed to grow large given this kind of initial configuration.\nExtra dimensions are said to be universal if all fields are equally free to propagate within them.\nIn computer graphics and spatial data.\nSeveral types of digital systems are based on the storage, analysis, and visualization of geometric shapes, including illustration software, Computer-aided design, and Geographic information systems. Different vector systems use a wide variety of data structures to represent shapes, but almost all are fundamentally based on a set of geometric primitives corresponding to the spatial dimensions:\nFrequently in these systems, especially GIS and Cartography, a representation of a real-world phenomenon may have a different (usually lower) dimension than the phenomenon being represented. For example, a city (a two-dimensional region) may be represented as a point, or a road (a three-dimensional volume of material) may be represented as a line. This \"dimensional generalization\" correlates with tendencies in spatial cognition. For example, asking the distance between two cities presumes a conceptual model of the cities as points, while giving directions involving travel \"up,\" \"down,\" or \"along\" a road imply a one-dimensional conceptual model. This is frequently done for purposes of data efficiency, visual simplicity, or cognitive efficiency, and is acceptable if the distinction between the representation and the represented is understood but can cause confusion if information users assume that the digital shape is a perfect representation of reality (i.e., believing that roads really are lines)."}
{"id": "8399", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8399", "title": "Dissolve", "text": "Dissolve may refer to:"}
{"id": "8400", "revid": "1272611996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8400", "title": "Duodecimal", "text": "The duodecimal system, also known as base twelve or dozenal, is a positional numeral system using twelve as its base. In duodecimal, the number twelve is denoted \"10\", meaning 1\u00a0twelve and 0 units; in the decimal system, this number is instead written as \"12\" meaning 1 ten and 2 units, and the string \"10\" means ten. In duodecimal, \"100\" means twelve\u00a0squared, \"1,000\" means twelve\u00a0cubed, and \"0.1\" means a twelfth.\nVarious symbols have been used to stand for ten and eleven in duodecimal notation; this page uses and , as in hexadecimal, which make a duodecimal count from zero to twelve read 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, , , and finally 10. The Dozenal Societies of America and Great Britain (organisations promoting the use of duodecimal) use turned digits in their published material: 2 (a turned 2) for ten and 3 (a turned 3) for eleven.\nThe number twelve, a superior highly composite number, is the smallest number with four non-trivial factors (2, 3, 4, 6), and the smallest to include as factors all four numbers (1 to 4) within the subitizing range, and the smallest abundant number. All multiples of reciprocals of 3-smooth numbers ( where are integers) have a terminating representation in duodecimal. In particular, \u00a0(0.3), \u00a0(0.4), \u00a0(0.6), \u00a0(0.8), and \u00a0(0.9) all have a short terminating representation in duodecimal. There is also higher regularity observable in the duodecimal multiplication table. As a result, duodecimal has been described as the optimal number system.\nIn these respects, duodecimal is considered superior to decimal, which has only 2 and 5 as factors, and other proposed bases like octal or hexadecimal. Sexagesimal (base sixty) does even better in this respect (the reciprocals of all 5-smooth numbers terminate), but at the cost of unwieldy multiplication tables and a much larger number of symbols to memorize.\nOrigin.\nGeorges Ifrah speculatively traced the origin of the duodecimal system to a system of finger counting based on the knuckle bones of the four larger fingers. Using the thumb as a pointer, it is possible to count to 12 by touching each finger bone, starting with the farthest bone on the fifth finger, and counting on. In this system, one hand counts repeatedly to 12, while the other displays the number of iterations, until five dozens, i.e. the 60, are full. This system is still in use in many regions of Asia.\nLanguages using duodecimal number systems are uncommon. Languages in the Nigerian Middle Belt such as Janji, Gbiri-Niragu (Gure-Kahugu), Piti, and the Nimbia dialect of Gwandara; and the Chepang language of Nepal are known to use duodecimal numerals.\nGermanic languages have special words for 11 and 12, such as \"eleven\" and \"twelve\" in English. They come from Proto-Germanic *\"ainlif\" and *\"twalif\" (meaning, respectively, \"one left\" and \"two left\"), suggesting a decimal rather than duodecimal origin. However, Old Norse used a hybrid decimal\u2013duodecimal counting system, with its words for \"one hundred and eighty\" meaning 200 and \"two hundred\" meaning 240. In the British Isles, this style of counting survived well into the Middle Ages as the long hundred.\nHistorically, units of time in many civilizations are duodecimal. There are twelve signs of the zodiac, twelve months in a year, and the Babylonians had twelve hours in a day (although at some point, this was changed to 24). Traditional Chinese calendars, clocks, and compasses are based on the twelve Earthly Branches or 24 (12\u00d72) Solar terms. There are 12\u00a0inches in an imperial foot, 12\u00a0troy ounces in a troy pound, 12\u00a0old British pence in a shilling, 24\u00a0(12\u00d72) hours in a day; many other items are counted by the dozen, gross (144, square of 12), or great gross (1728, cube of 12). The Romans used a fraction system based on 12, including the uncia, which became both the English words \"ounce\" and \"inch\". Pre-decimalisation, Ireland and the United Kingdom used a mixed duodecimal-vigesimal currency system (12\u00a0pence = 1\u00a0shilling, 20\u00a0shillings or 240\u00a0pence to the pound sterling or Irish pound), and Charlemagne established a monetary system that also had a mixed base of twelve and twenty, the remnants of which persist in many places.\nNotations and pronunciations.\nIn a positional numeral system of base \"n\" (twelve for duodecimal), each of the first \"n\" natural numbers is given a distinct numeral symbol, and then \"n\" is denoted \"10\", meaning 1 times \"n\" plus 0 units. For duodecimal, the standard numeral symbols for 0\u20139 are typically preserved for zero through nine, but there are numerous proposals for how to write the numerals representing \"ten\" and \"eleven\". More radical proposals do not use any Arabic numerals under the principle of \"separate identity.\"\nPronunciation of duodecimal numbers also has no standard, but various systems have been proposed.\nTransdecimal symbols.\nSeveral authors have proposed using letters of the alphabet for the transdecimal symbols. Latin letters such as (as in hexadecimal) or (initials of \"Ten\" and \"Eleven\") are convenient because they are widely accessible, and for instance can be typed on typewriters. However, when mixed with ordinary prose, they might be confused for letters. As an alternative, Greek letters such as could be used instead. Frank Emerson Andrews, an early American advocate for duodecimal, suggested and used in his 1935 book \"New Numbers\" (italic capital X from the Roman numeral for ten and a rounded italic capital E similar to open E), along with italic numerals \u2013.\nEdna Kramer in her 1951 book \"The Main Stream of Mathematics\" used a (sextile or six-pointed asterisk, hash or octothorpe). The symbols were chosen because they were available on some typewriters; they are also on push-button telephones. This notation was used in publications of the Dozenal Society of America (DSA) from 1974 to 2008.\nFrom 2008 to 2015, the DSA used , the symbols devised by William Addison Dwiggins.\nThe Dozenal Society of Great Britain (DSGB) proposed symbols . This notation, derived from Arabic digits by 180\u00b0 rotation, was introduced by Isaac Pitman in 1857. In March 2013, a proposal was submitted to include the digit forms for ten and eleven propagated by the Dozenal Societies in the Unicode Standard. Of these, the British/Pitman forms were accepted for encoding as characters at code points and . They were included in Unicode 8.0 (2015).\nAfter the Pitman digits were added to Unicode, the DSA took a vote and then began publishing PDF content using the Pitman digits instead, but continues to use the letters X and E on its webpage.\nBase notation.\nThere are also varying proposals of how to distinguish a duodecimal number from a decimal one. The most common method used in mainstream mathematics sources comparing various number bases uses a subscript \"10\" or \"12\", e.g. \"5412 = 6410\". To avoid ambiguity about the meaning of the subscript 10, the subscripts might be spelled out, \"54twelve = 64ten\". In 2015 the Dozenal Society of America adopted the more compact single-letter abbreviation \"z\" for \"dozenal\" and \"d\" for \"decimal\", \"54z = 64d\".\nOther proposed methods include italicizing duodecimal numbers \"\"54\" = 64\", adding a \"Humphrey point\" (a semicolon instead of a decimal point) to duodecimal numbers \"54;6 = 64.5\", prefixing duodecimal numbers by an asterisk \"*54\u00a0= 64\", or some combination of these. The Dozenal Society of Great Britain uses an asterisk prefix for duodecimal whole numbers, and a Humphrey point for other duodecimal numbers.\nPronunciation.\nThe Dozenal Society of America suggested the pronunciation of ten and eleven as \"dek\" and \"el\". For the names of powers of twelve, there are two prominent systems. In spite of the efficiency of these newer systems, terms for powers of twelve either already exist or remain easily reconstructed in English using words and affixes.\nBase-12 nomenclature in English.\nAnother nominal for twelve (1210) is a \"dozen\" (1012 \"or\" 1\u202210112).\nOne hundred and forty-four (14410) is also known as a \"gross\" (10012 \"or\" 1\u202210212).\nOne thousand, seven hundred and twenty-eight is (172810) also known as a \"great-gross\" (1,00012 or 1\u202210312).\nFor the next powers of twelve that follow those aforementioned, the affixes (dozen-, gross-, great-) are used to produce names for these powers of twelve that have a greater positional-notation value. 20,73610 or 10,00012 may be rendered a \"dozen-great-gross\"; so 248,83210 or 100,00012 is a \"gross-great-gross\", with 2,985,98410 or 1,000,00012 being known as a \"great-great-gross\".\nIt should be made plain that the indices being a multiple of three, e.g. 10312 [1,00012], 10612 [1,000,00012], 10912 [1,000,000,00012] results, in these examples, in a \"great gross\", a \"great-great-gross\", and a \"great-great-great-gross\", respectively.\nDuodecimal numbers.\nIn this system, the prefix \"e\"- is added for fractions.\nAs numbers get larger (or fractions smaller), the last two morphemes are successively replaced with tri-mo, quad-mo, penta-mo, and so on.\nMultiple digits in this series are pronounced differently: 12 is \"do two\"; 30 is \"three do\"; 100 is \"gro\"; 9 is \"el gro dek do nine\"; 86 is \"el gro eight do six\"; 8,15 is \"eight gro el do el, one gro five do dek\"; ABA is \"dek gro el do dek\"; BBB is \"el gro el do el\"; 0.06 is \"six egro\"; and so on.\nSystematic Dozenal Nomenclature (SDN).\nThis system uses \"-qua\" ending for the positive powers of 12 and \"-cia\" ending for the negative powers of 12, and an extension of the IUPAC systematic element names (with syllables dec and lev for the two extra digits needed for duodecimal) to express which power is meant.\nAfter hex-, further prefixes continue sept-, oct-, enn-, dec-, lev-, unnil-, unun-.\nAdvocacy and \"dozenalism\".\nWilliam James Sidis used 12 as the base for his constructed language Vendergood in 1906, noting it being the smallest number with four factors and its prevalence in commerce.\nThe case for the duodecimal system was put forth at length in Frank Emerson Andrews' 1935 book \"New Numbers: How Acceptance of a Duodecimal Base Would Simplify Mathematics\". Emerson noted that, due to the prevalence of factors of twelve in many traditional units of weight and measure, many of the computational advantages claimed for the metric system could be realized \"either\" by the adoption of ten-based weights and measure \"or\" by the adoption of the duodecimal number system.\nBoth the Dozenal Society of America and the Dozenal Society of Great Britain promote widespread adoption of the duodecimal system. They use the word \"dozenal\" instead of \"duodecimal\" to avoid the more overtly decimal terminology. However, the etymology of \"dozenal\" itself is also an expression based on decimal terminology since \"dozen\" is a direct derivation of the French word \"douzaine\", which is a derivative of the French word for twelve, \"douze\", descended from Latin \"duodecim\".\nMathematician and mental calculator Alexander Craig Aitken was an outspoken advocate of duodecimal:\nIn media.\nIn \"Little Twelvetoes,\" an episode of the American educational television series \"Schoolhouse Rock!\", a farmer encounters an alien being with twelve fingers on each hand and twelve toes on each foot who uses duodecimal arithmetic. The alien uses \"dek\" and \"el\" as names for ten and eleven, and Andrews' script-X and script-E for the digit symbols.\nDuodecimal systems of measurements.\nSystems of measurement proposed by dozenalists include:\nComparison to other number systems.\nThe Dozenal Society of America argues that if a base is too small, significantly longer expansions are needed for numbers; if a base is too large, one must memorise a large multiplication table to perform arithmetic. Thus, it presumes that \"a number base will need to be between about 7 or 8 through about 16, possibly including 18 and 20\".\nThe number 12 has six factors, which are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12, of which 2 and 3 are prime. It is the smallest number to have six factors, the largest number to have at least half of the numbers below it as divisors, and is only slightly larger than 10. (The numbers 18 and 20 also have six factors but are much larger.) Ten, in contrast, only has four factors, which are 1, 2, 5, and 10, of which 2 and 5 are prime. Six shares the prime factors 2 and 3 with twelve; however, like ten, six only has four factors (1, 2, 3, and 6) instead of six. Its corresponding base, senary, is below the DSA's stated threshold.\nEight and sixteen only have 2 as a prime factor. Therefore, in octal and hexadecimal, the only terminating fractions are those whose denominator is a power of two.\nThirty is the smallest number that has three different prime factors (2, 3, and 5, the first three primes), and it has eight factors in total (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, and 30). Sexagesimal was actually used by the ancient Sumerians and Babylonians, among others; its base, sixty, adds the four convenient factors 4, 12, 20, and 60 to 30 but no new prime factors. The smallest number that has four different prime factors is 210; the pattern follows the primorials. However, these numbers are quite large to use as bases, and are far beyond the DSA's stated threshold.\nIn all base systems, there are similarities to the representation of multiples of numbers that are one less than or one more than the base.\"In the following multiplication table, numerals are written in duodecimal. For example, \"10\" means twelve, and \"12\" means fourteen.\"\nConversion tables to and from decimal.\nTo convert numbers between bases, one can use the general conversion algorithm (see the relevant section under positional notation). Alternatively, one can use digit-conversion tables. The ones provided below can be used to convert any duodecimal number between 0;1 and ,; to decimal, or any decimal number between 0.1 and 99,999.9 to duodecimal. To use them, the given number must first be decomposed into a sum of numbers with only one significant digit each. For example:\nThis decomposition works the same no matter what base the number is expressed in. Just isolate each non-zero digit, padding them with as many zeros as necessary to preserve their respective place values. If the digits in the given number include zeroes (for example, 7,080.9), these are left out in the digit decomposition (7,080.9 = 7,000 + 80 + 0.9). Then, the digit conversion tables can be used to obtain the equivalent value in the target base for each digit. If the given number is in duodecimal and the target base is decimal, we get:\nBecause the summands are already converted to decimal, the usual decimal arithmetic is used to perform the addition and recompose the number, arriving at the conversion result:\n Duodecimal ---&gt; Decimal\n 10,000 = 20,736\n 2,000 = 3,456 \n 300 = 432\n 40 = 48\n 5 = 5\n + 0;6 = + 0.5\n 12,345;6 = 24,677.5\nThat is, 12,345;6 equals 24,677.5\nIf the given number is in decimal and the target base is duodecimal, the method is same. Using the digit conversion tables:\n 10,000 + 2,000 + 300 + 40 + 5 + 0.6 &lt;br&gt; = 5,954 + 1,18 + 210 + 34 + 5 + 0;\nTo sum these partial products and recompose the number, the addition must be done with duodecimal rather than decimal arithmetic:\n Decimal --&gt; Duodecimal\n 10,000 = 5,954\n 2,000 = 1,18\n 300 = 210\n 40 = 34\n 5 = 5\n + 0.6 = + 0;\n 12,345.6 = 7,189;\nThat is, 12,345.6 equals 7,189;\nFractions and irrational numbers.\nFractions.\nDuodecimal fractions for rational numbers with 3-smooth denominators terminate:\nwhile other rational numbers have recurring duodecimal fractions:\nAs explained in recurring decimals, whenever an irreducible fraction is written in radix point notation in any base, the fraction can be expressed exactly (terminates) if and only if all the prime factors of its denominator are also prime factors of the base.\nBecause formula_1 in the decimal system, fractions whose denominators are made up solely of multiples of 2 and 5 terminate: \u00a0=\u00a0, \u00a0=\u00a0, and \u00a0=\u00a0 can be expressed exactly as 0.125, 0.05, and 0.002 respectively. and , however, recur (0.333... and 0.142857142857...).\nBecause formula_2 in the duodecimal system, is exact; and recur because they include 5 as a factor; is exact, and recurs, just as it does in decimal.\nThe number of denominators that give terminating fractions within a given number of digits, , in a base is the number of factors (divisors) of formula_3, the th power of the base (although this includes the divisor 1, which does not produce fractions when used as the denominator). The number of factors of \"formula_3\" is given using its prime factorization.\nFor decimal, formula_5. The number of divisors is found by adding one to each exponent of each prime and multiplying the resulting quantities together, so the number of factors of \"formula_6\" is formula_7.\nFor example, the number 8 is a factor of 103 (1000), so formula_8 and other fractions with a denominator of 8 cannot require more than three fractional decimal digits to terminate. formula_9\nFor duodecimal, formula_10. This has formula_11 divisors. The sample denominator of 8 is a factor of a gross formula_12 (in decimal), so eighths cannot need more than two duodecimal fractional places to terminate. formula_13\nBecause both ten and twelve have two unique prime factors, the number of divisors of \"formula_3\" for grows quadratically with the exponent (in other words, of the order of formula_15).\nRecurring digits.\nThe Dozenal Society of America argues that factors of 3 are more commonly encountered in real-life division problems than factors of 5. Thus, in practical applications, the nuisance of repeating decimals is encountered less often when duodecimal notation is used. Advocates of duodecimal systems argue that this is particularly true of financial calculations, in which the twelve months of the year often enter into calculations.\nHowever, when recurring fractions \"do\" occur in duodecimal notation, they are less likely to have a very short period than in decimal notation, because 12 (twelve) is between two prime numbers, 11 (eleven) and 13 (thirteen), whereas ten is adjacent to the composite number 9. Nonetheless, having a shorter or longer period does not help the main inconvenience that one does not get a finite representation for such fractions in the given base (so rounding, which introduces inexactitude, is necessary to handle them in calculations), and overall one is more likely to have to deal with infinite recurring digits when fractions are expressed in decimal than in duodecimal, because one out of every three consecutive numbers contains the prime factor 3 in its factorization, whereas only one out of every five contains the prime factor 5. All other prime factors, except 2, are not shared by either ten or twelve, so they do not\ninfluence the relative likeliness of encountering recurring digits (any irreducible fraction that contains any of these other factors in its denominator will recur in either base).\nAlso, the prime factor 2 appears twice in the factorization of twelve, whereas only once in the factorization of ten; which means that most fractions whose denominators are powers of two will have a shorter, more convenient terminating representation in duodecimal than in decimal:\nThe duodecimal period length of 1/\"n\" are (in decimal)\nThe duodecimal period length of 1/(\"n\"th prime) are (in decimal)\nSmallest prime with duodecimal period \"n\" are (in decimal)\nIrrational numbers.\nThe representations of irrational numbers in any positional number system (including decimal and duodecimal) neither terminate nor repeat. The following table gives the first digits for some important algebraic and transcendental numbers in both decimal and duodecimal."}
{"id": "8401", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8401", "title": "David Hayes Agnew", "text": "David Hayes Agnew (November 24, 1818March 22, 1892) was an American surgeon.\nBiography.\nAgnew was born on November 24, 1818, Nobleville, Pennsylvania (present-day Christiana). His parents were Robert Agnew and Agnes Noble. Agnew grew up as a Christian. He was surrounded by a family of doctors and had always known he was going to become a physician. As a young boy, he had a sharp sense of humor and was very intelligent.\nHe was educated at Jefferson College, and at Delaware College in Newark, Delaware. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine on April 6, 1838. He returned to Nobleville to help his father in his clinic. He worked there for two years. His father was an asthmatic and moved to Maryland in 1840 because the climate was more suited to his condition. Agnew moved with him. On November 21, 1841, he married Margaret Irwin. In 1852, he bought and revived the Philadelphia School of Anatomy. He held responsibility for ten years until 1862. During the American Civil War he was consulting surgeon in the Mower Army Hospital, near Philadelphia, and acquired a considerable reputation for his operations in cases of gunshot wounds. On December 21, 1863, he became the Demonstrator of Anatomy and Assistant Lecturer on Clinical Surgery at The University of Pennsylvania. Later, he was requested to assist the Professor of Surgery in the Conduct of the surgical clinics. In the year 1865, he gave summer instruction courses. For the next seven years, he worked for the university as Demonstrator of Anatomy. A large portion of his success was due to his wife's energy, intelligence, and determination. She gave him an impetus to try harder and not be satisfied with his first try.\nHe was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1872.\nGarfield case.\nOn July 2, 1881, President James A. Garfield was shot by Charles J. Guiteau. He held the position of chief consulting surgeon. When a committee came to give him his money for helping, Agnew said, \"Gentlemen, I present no bill for my attendance to President Garfield. I gave my services freely and gratuitously\". He was never optimistic about the President's case and was not fooled by fallacious beliefs. This procedure helped create Agnew's reputation.\n\"The Agnew Clinic\".\n\"The Agnew Clinic\" is an 1889 painting by Thomas Eakins which depicts Agnew conducting a mastectomy operation before a gallery of students and doctors.\nAccomplishments.\nDavid Agnew wrote \"The Principles and Practice of Surgery\", covers an experience of fifty active years, and its value, preserving and presenting as it does the life-work of such a recognized authority, can hardly be overrated. It was a three-volume set that he published from 1878 to 1883. He also helped found the Irwin &amp; Agnew Iron Foundry in 1846.\nDeath.\nAgnew caught a severe attack of epidemic influenza in 1890. He never fully recovered. Following this, he had an attack of broncho-vesicular catarrh. On March 9, 1892, he was put to bed for a series of medical problems. After a few days his condition began to improve, but suddenly, on March 12 it became much worse. On March 20, he fell into a comatose condition. Agnew stayed like this until he died at 3:20\u00a0p.m. on March 22, 1892. He is now buried in West Laurel Hill Cemetery.\nReferences.\nSources.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "8402", "revid": "10379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8402", "title": "Diving (sport)", "text": "Diving is the sport of jumping or falling into water from a platform or springboard, usually while performing acrobatics. Diving is an internationally recognised sport that is part of the Olympic Games. In addition, unstructured and non-competitive diving is a recreational pastime.\nCompetitors possess many of the same characteristics as gymnasts and dancers, including strength, flexibility, kinaesthetic judgement and air awareness. Some professional divers were originally gymnasts or dancers as both the sports have similar characteristics to diving. Dmitri Sautin holds the record for most Olympic diving medals won, by winning eight medals in total between 1992 and 2008.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nIn the Tomb of Hunting and Fishing there is a wall painting from around 530 - 500 BCE \n that shows a person climbing rocks towards a cliff face and a second person diving down the cliff face towards water.\nThe Tomb of the Diver in Paestum, contains a fresco dating to around 500 to 475 BCE that also shows a scene of a person diving into a pool or stream of water from a structure.\nPlunging.\nAlthough diving has been a popular pastime across the world since ancient times, the first modern diving competitions were held in England in the 1880s. The exact origins of the sport are unclear, though it likely derives from the act of diving at the start of swimming races.\nIn the seventeenth century gymnasts moved their equipment to the beaches and \"performed acrobatics over the water.\"\nThe 1904 book \"Swimming\" by Ralph Thomas notes English reports of plunging records dating back to at least 1865. The 1877 edition to \"British Rural Sports\" by John Henry Walsh makes note of a \"Mr. Young\" plunging in 1870, and also states that 25 years prior, a swimmer named Drake could cover .\nThe English Amateur Swimming Association (at the time called the Swimming Association of Great Britain) first started a \"plunging championship\" in 1883. The Plunging Championship was discontinued in 1937.\nFancy diving.\nDiving into a body of water had also been a method used by gymnasts in Germany and Sweden since the early 19th century. The soft landing allowed for more elaborate gymnastic feats in midair as the jump could be made from a greater height. This tradition evolved into 'fancy diving', while diving as a preliminary to swimming became known as 'Plain diving'.\nIn England, the practice of high diving \u2013 diving from a great height \u2013 gained popularity; the first diving stages were erected at the Highgate Ponds at a height of in 1893 and the first world championship event, the National Graceful Diving Competition, was held there by the Royal Life Saving Society in 1895. The event consisted of standing and running dives from either .\nIt was at this event that the Swedish tradition of fancy diving was introduced to the sport by the athletes Otto Hagborg and C F Mauritzi. They demonstrated their acrobatic techniques from the 10\u00a0m diving board at Highgate Pond and stimulated the establishment of the Amateur Diving Association in 1901, the first organisation devoted to diving in the world (later amalgamated with the Amateur Swimming Association). Fancy diving was formally introduced into the championship in 1903.\nOlympic era.\nPlain diving was first introduced into the Olympics at the 1904 event. The 1908 Olympics in London added 'fancy diving' and introduced elastic boards rather than fixed platforms. Women were first allowed to participate in the diving events for the 1912 Olympics in Stockholm.\nIn the 1928 Olympics, 'plain' and 'fancy' diving were amalgamated into one event \u2013 'Highboard Diving'. The diving event was first held indoors in the Empire Pool for the 1934 British Empire Games and 1948 Summer Olympics in London.\nCompetitive diving.\nMost diving competitions consist of three disciplines: 1\u00a0m and 3\u00a0m springboards, and the platform. Competitive athletes are divided by gender, and often by age group. In platform events, competitors are allowed to perform their dives on either the five, seven and a half (generally just called seven), nine, or ten meter towers. In major diving meets, including the Olympic Games and the World Championships, platform diving is from the 10 meter height.\nDivers have to perform a set number of dives according to established requirements, including somersaults and twists. Divers are judged on whether and how well they completed all aspects of the dive, the conformance of their body to the requirements of the dive, and the amount of splash created by their entry to the water. A possible score out of ten is broken down into three points for the takeoff (meaning the hurdle), three for the flight (the actual dive), and three for the entry (how the diver hits the water), with one more available to give the judges flexibility.\nThe raw score is multiplied by a degree of difficulty factor, derived from the number and combination of movements attempted. The diver with the highest total score after a sequence of dives is declared the winner.\nSynchronized diving.\nSynchronized diving was adopted as an Olympic sport in 2000. Two divers form a team and perform dives simultaneously. The dives are identical. It used to be possible to dive opposites, also known as a pinwheel, but this is no longer part of competitive synchronised diving. For example, one diver would perform a forward dive and the other an inward dive in the same position, or one would do a reverse and the other a back movement. In these events, the diving would be judged both on the quality of execution and the synchronicity \u2013 in timing of take-off and entry, height and forward travel.\nScoring the dive.\nThere are rules governing the scoring of a dive. Usually a score considers three elements of the dive: the approach, the flight, and the entry. The primary factors affecting the scoring are:\nEach dive is assigned a \"degree of difficulty\" (DD), which is determined from a combination of the moves undertaken, position used, and height. The DD value is multiplied by the scores given by the judges.\nTo reduce the subjectivity of scoring in major meets, panels of five or seven judges are assembled; major international events such as the Olympics use seven-judge panels. For a five-judge panel, the highest and lowest scores are discarded and the middle three are summed and multiplied by the DD. For seven-judge panels, as of the 2012 London Olympics, the two highest scores and two lowest are discarded, leaving three to be summed and multiplied by the DD. (Prior to the London Olympics, the highest and lowest scores were eliminated, and the remaining five scores were multiplied by , to allow for comparison to five-judge panels.) The cancelling of scores is used to make it difficult for a single judge to manipulate scores.\nThere is a general misconception about scoring and judging. In serious meets, the absolute score is somewhat meaningless. It is the relative score, not the absolute score that wins meets. Accordingly, good judging implies consistent scoring across the dives. Specifically, if a judge consistently gives low scores for all divers, or consistently gives high scores for the same divers, the judging will yield fair relative results and will cause divers to place in the correct order. However, absolute scores have significance to the individual divers. Besides the obvious instances of setting records, absolute scores are also used for rankings and qualifications for higher level meets.\nIn synchronised diving events, there is a panel of seven, nine, or eleven judges; two or three to mark the execution of one diver, two or three to mark the execution of the other, and the remaining three or five to judge the synchronisation. The execution judges are positioned two on each side of the pool, and they score the diver which is nearer to them. The 2012 London Olympics saw the first use of eleven judges.\nThe score is computed similarly to the scores from other diving events, but has been modified starting with the 2012 London Olympics for the use of the larger judging panels. Each group of judges will have the highest and lowest scores dropped, leaving the middle score for each diver's execution and the three middle scores for synchronisation. The total is then weighted by and multiplied by the DD. The result is that the emphasis is on the synchronisation of the divers.\nThe synchronisation scores are based on:\nThe judges may also disqualify the diver for certain violations during the dive, including:\nCompetitive strategy.\nTo win dive meets, divers create a dive list in advance of the meet. To win the meet the diver must accumulate more points than other divers. Often, simple dives with low DDs will look good to spectators but will not win meets. The competitive diver will attempt the highest DD dives possible with which they can achieve consistent, high scores. If divers are scoring 8 or 9 on most dives, it may be a sign of their extreme skill, or it may be a sign that their dive list is not competitive, and they may lose the meet to a diver with higher DDs and lower scores.\nIn competition, divers must submit their lists beforehand, and once past a deadline (usually when the event is announced or shortly before it begins) they cannot change their dives. If they fail to perform the dive announced, even if they physically cannot execute the dive announced or if they perform a more difficult dive, they will receive a score of zero. Under exceptional circumstances, a redive may be granted, but these are exceedingly rare (usually for very young divers just learning how to compete, or if some event outside the diver's control has caused them to be unable to perform-such as a loud noise).\nIn the Olympics or other highly competitive meets, many divers will have nearly the same list of dives as their competitors. The importance for divers competing at this level is not so much the DD, but how they arrange their list. Once the more difficult rounds of dives begin it is important to lead off with a confident dive to build momentum. They also tend to put a very confident dive in front of a very difficult dive to ensure that they will have a good mentality for the difficult dive. Most divers have pre-dive and post-dive rituals that help them either maintain or regain focus. Coaches also play a role in this aspect of the sport. Many divers rely on their coaches to help keep their composure during the meet. In a large meet coaches are rarely allowed on the deck to talk to their athlete so it is common to see coaches using hand gestures or body movements to communicate.\nThere are some American meets which will allow changes of the position of the dive even after the dive has been announced immediately before execution, but these are an exception to the rules generally observed internationally.\nGenerally, NCAA rules allow for dives to be changed while the diver is on the board, but the diver must request the change directly after the dive is announced. This applies especially in cases where the wrong dive is announced. If the diver pauses during his or her hurdle to ask for a change of dive, it will be declared a ulk (when the diver stops mid-hurdle) and the change of dive will not be permitted.\nUnder FINA law, no dive may be changed after the deadline for the dive-sheet to be submitted (generally a period ranging from one hour to 24 hours, depending on the rulings made by the event organiser).\nIt is the diver's responsibility to ensure that the dive-sheet is filled in correctly, and also to correct the referee or announcer before the dive if they describe it incorrectly. If a dive is performed which is as submitted but not as (incorrectly) announced, it is declared failed and scores zero according to a strict reading of the FINA law. But in practice, a re-dive would usually be granted in these circumstances.\nGovernance.\nThe global governing body of diving is FINA, which also governs swimming, synchronised swimming, water polo and open water swimming. Almost invariably, at national level, diving shares a governing body with the other aquatic sports.\nThis is frequently a source of political friction as the committees are naturally dominated by swimming officials who do not necessarily share or understand the concerns of the diving community. Divers often feel, for example, that they do not get adequate support over issues like the provision of facilities. Other areas of concern are the selection of personnel for the specialised Diving committees and for coaching and officiating at events, and the team selection for international competitions.\nThere are sometimes attempts to separate the governing body as a means to resolve these frustrations, but they are rarely successful. For example, in the UK the Great Britain Diving Federation was formed in 1992 with the intention of taking over the governance of Diving from the ASA (Amateur Swimming Association). Although it initially received widespread support from the diving community, the FINA requirement that international competitors had to be registered with their National Governing Body was a major factor in the abandonment of this ambition a few years later.\nSince FINA refused to rescind recognition of the ASA as the British governing body for all aquatic sports including diving, this meant that the elite divers had to belong to ASA-affiliated clubs to be eligible for selection to international competition.\nIn the United States scholastic diving is almost always part of the school's swim team. Diving is a separate sport in Olympic and Club Diving. The NCAA will separate diving from swimming in special diving competitions after the swim season is completed.\nSafety.\nRecreational diving.\nAfter an incident in Washington in 1993, most US and other pool builders are reluctant to equip a residential swimming pool with a diving springboard so home diving pools are much less common these days. In the incident, 14-year-old Shawn Meneely made a \"suicide dive\" (holding his hands at his sides, so that his head hit the bottom first) in a private swimming pool and became a tetraplegic. The lawyers for the family, Jan Eric Peterson and Fred Zeder, successfully sued the diving board manufacturer, the pool builder, and the National Spa and Pool Institute over the inappropriate depth of the pool.\nThe NSPI had specified a minimum depth of 7\u00a0ft 6 in (2.29 m) which proved to be insufficient in the above case. The pool into which Meneely dived was not constructed to the published standards. The standards had changed after the diving board was installed on the non-compliant pool by the homeowner. But the courts held that the pool \"was close enough\" to the standards to hold NSPI liable. The multimillion-dollar lawsuit was eventually resolved in 2001 for US$6.6\u00a0million ($8\u00a0million after interest was added) in favour of the plaintiff. The NSPI was held to be liable, and was financially strained by the case. It filed twice for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and was successfully reorganised into a new swimming pool industry association.\nSpinal cord injuries.\nIt has been commented that for spinal cord injuries related to diving board use in the United States that \"For the purposes of obtaining rough estimates of diving board-related injury risks,\" the estimated \"...rate of SCI [Spinal Cord Injury] due to diving into swimming pools from diving boards to be on the order of 0.028 per 100,000 swimmers...\"\nSubmerged objects.\nMany diving accidents occur when divers do not account for submerged objects in the water such as rocks and logs. Because of this many beaches and pools prohibit diving in shallow waters or when a lifeguard is not on duty. It was commetend that \"...shallow dives can end up in death or permanent injury.\" and that in 1988 on lake powell a person \"...was left a quadriplegic after diving just 5 feet off a houseboat into the murky lake.\"\nImpact with water.\nWater resistance increases with the speed of entry, so entering the water at high-velocity induces rapid deceleration. Jumping into water from a height of 20 feet (6.1 m) results in a person impacting with the water surface at 25\u00a0mph (40\u00a0km/h). Impacting with the water surface at this velocity is capable of giving a person temporary paralysis of the diaphragm, a compressed spine, broken bones, or concussion.\nThe speed that a diver is travelling at the water surface when they dive from a ten-metre platform is around 35\u00a0mph and when a diver hits the water flat from 10 metres they are brought to rest in about 1\u00a0ft. The extreme deceleration when hitting the water flat at around 35\u00a0mph can cause severe bruising both internal and external, strains to connective tissue securing the organs, possible minor haemorrhaging to lungs and other tissues possibly resulting in a person coughing up blood, a compressed spine, broken bones, or concussion. This is very painful and distressing, but not life-threatening.\nTom Daley has described one concussion that occurred to him \"I missed my hands before the Beijing World Series and smashed my head at 35mph on to the water...\". The concussion resulted in him receiving \"headaches, nausea, dizziness...\". It also resulted in Daley being \"...out of action for six days and left him unable to dive off his competition height of 10m for three weeks.\"\nIt was commented that in 1989 a 22-year-old, who was a \"...diver and a member of the Salt Lake Country Club diving team... ...climbed up on a set of towering rocks... ...about 60 feet...\" (18.2 metres). He dove into the water doing a \"back flip.\" He never surfaced from the water and was found several days later 120 feet below the surface. The 22-year-old was found to have suffered a broken neck.\nCompetitive diving.\nIn competitive diving, FINA takes regulatory steps to ensure that athletes are protected from the inherent dangers of the sport. For example, they impose restrictions according to age on the heights of platforms which divers may compete on.\nGroup D divers have only recently been allowed to compete on the tower. In the past, the age group could compete only springboard, to discourage children from taking on the greater risks of tower diving. Group D tower was introduced to counteract the phenomenon of coaches pushing young divers to compete in higher age categories, thus putting them at even greater risk.\nHowever, some divers may safely dive in higher age categories to dive on higher platforms. Usually this occurs when advanced Group C divers wish to compete on the 10\u00a0m.\nPoints on pool depths in connection with diving safety:\nCompetitive diving injuries.\nIt has been commented that \"Competitive diving poses unique risks for both traumatic and overuse injuries in practice and competition.\"\nIt was commented further that \"Head, cervical spine, shoulder, and lumbar spine injuries among others are not uncommon, though rates vary significantly in the literature. Existing data suggest that as the level of competition elevates, traumatic injuries (including head injury) become relatively less common, while overuse injuries predominate.\"\nIt has also been commented that \"The most frequently injured areas are the wrist, shoulder, and lumbar spine.\"\nWhen looking at \"...(NCAA) swimming and diving injuries from 2009 to 2014... ...[it was found that there was] an injury rate of 1.94 injuries per 1000 athlete exposures (AE) for males and 2.49 injuries per 1000 AE for females, with more injuries happening during practice over competition.\" It has also been found that \"...2.1% of divers were injured in the 2008 Olympics... [and] ...8.1% of divers were injured in the 2012 Olympics.\" It was further found that \"...during the (FINA) World Championships of 2015, 2013, and 2009... ...older athletes in the diving, high diving, and water polo groups were in the highest risk group for injury.\"\nIn relation to springboard diving it has been commented that \"The injury-producing forces during the takeoff are related to jumping and deceleration... ...The most common injuries related to this part of the dive are patellar tendinitis, patellar tracking problems, quadriceps tendinitis, Jumper\u2019s knee and patellofemoral compression syndrome commonly caused by repetitive stress placed on the patellar or quadriceps tendon during jumping. Vertical jump ability, as well as jumping and landing technique, are believed to influence tendon loading.\"\nIt has also been commented that 10-metre platform diving can also \"...cause repetitive strain injuries from repeatedly pushing off the concrete platform.\"\nIt has further been commented that \"Concussions are relatively common, as are pulmonary contusions in which the force of impact bruises the lungs.\" Other injuries that may occur include torn triceps muscles, torn ACL ligaments and lower back issues.\nWhen entering the water divers spread their arms and somersault \"...either forward or backward underwater...[giving] the illusion of a vertical entry and pull extra water down that hole with them in a maneuver that stresses lower back muscles and hip flexors.\" When divers performs this underwater somersault, it is extremely inadvisable to attempt to scoop the trajectory underwater against the rotation as it can cause serious back injuries.\nInjuries that diver Tom Daley has received include \"...concussions, torn triceps, broken ribs, [as well as having] coughed up blood.\" Tom also has a scar on the top of his head from hitting his head on the diving board.\nTom has also described the deterioration of a knee injury that he received; \"During the first lockdown in 2020 I\u2019d torn some cartilage in my knee, but there was no pain and I continued to train. Just when the Olympics was only eight weeks away my knee got tighter and tighter, like a screw being turned. It became locked in a position and I couldn\u2019t straighten it or bend it... ...We booked a scan. We thought maybe it just needed an injection to get it moving again. The doctor also mooted the idea that it might need keyhole surgery. From there I was sent for an MRI scan. From the scan, we could see that the cartilage had not only torn, it had also flipped up and the joint had come back down on top of it... ...It can be flattened and sewn back down, but the surgeon described it as being a bit like a bent credit card that may snap up again or cause more problems. The only other way to fix the problem was to take it out. \u201cThere is a recovery time of four to six weeks,\u201d the doctor said... ...A couple of weeks after surgery, I was back in the pool, building my diving back up again.\"\nCompetitive diving deaths.\nIn 1983, at the World University Games in Edmonton, Canada, diver Sergei Chalibashvili, aged 21, died when he was attempting a reverse 3 1/2-somersault and his head collided with the hardwood 10 metre diving platform. After the accident he was taken to hospital and died a week later.\nIn 1987 during training diver Nathan Meade, aged 21, died when he struck his head on a 10 metre concrete platform. The dive he was attempting was a reverse 2 1/2 somersault.\nDive groups.\nThere are six \"groups\" into which dives are classified: \"Forward, Back, Inward, Reverse, Twist,\" and \"Armstand\". The armstand group applies only to Platform competitions, whereas the other five groups apply to both Springboard and Platform.\nDive positions.\nDuring the flight of the dive, one of four positions is assumed:\nThese positions are referred to by the letters A, B, C and D respectively.\nAdditionally, some dives can be started in a flying position. The body is kept straight with the arms extended to the side, and the regular dive position is assumed at about half the dive.\nDifficulty is rated according to the Degree of Difficulty of the dives. Some divers may find pike easier in a flip than tuck, and most find straight the easiest in a front/back dive, although it is still rated the most difficult because of the risk of overrotation.\nAn armstand dive may have a higher degree of difficulty outdoors compared to indoors as wind can destabilise the equilibrium of the diver.\nDive numbers.\nIn competition, the dives are referred to by a schematic system of three- or four-digit numbers. The letter to indicate the position is appended to the end of the number.\nThe first digit of the number indicates the dive group as defined above.\nFor groups 1 to 4, the number consists of three digits and a letter of the alphabet. The third digit represents the number of half-somersaults. The second digit is either 0 or 1, with 0 representing a normal somersault, and 1 signifying a \"flying\" variation of the basic movement (i.e. the first half somersault is performed in the straight position, and then the pike or tuck shape is assumed). No flying dive has been competed at a high level competition for many years.\nFor example:\nFor Group 5, the dive number has 4 digits. The first digit indicates that it is a twisting dive. The second digit indicates the group (1\u20134) of the underlying movement; the third digit indicates the number of half-somersaults, and the fourth indicates the number of half-twists.\nFor example:\nFor Group 6 \u2013 Armstand \u2013 the dive number has either three or four digits: Three digits for dives without twist and four for dives with twists.\nIn non-twisting armstand dives, the second digit indicates the direction of rotation (0 = no rotation, 1 = forward, 2 = backward, 3 = reverse, 4 = inward) and the third digit indicates the number of half-somersaults. Inward-rotating armstand dives have never been performed, and are generally regarded as physically impossible.\nFor example:\nFor twisting Armstand dives, the dive number again has 4 digits, but rather than beginning with the number 5, the number 6 remains as the first digit, indicating that the \"twister\" will be performed from an Armstand. The second digit indicates the direction of rotation \u2013 as above, the third is the number of half-somersaults, and the fourth is the number of half-twists:\ne.g. 6243D \u2013 armstand back double-somersault with one and a half twists in the free position\nAll of these dives come with DD (degree of difficulty) this is an indication of how difficult/complex a dive is. The score that the dive receives is multiplied by the DD (also known as tariff) to give the dive a final score. Before a diver competes they must decide on a \"list\" this is a number of optional dives and compulsory dives. The optionals come with a DD limit. this means that a diver must select X number of dives and the combined DD limit must be no more than the limit set by the competition/organisation etc.\nUntil the mid-1990s the tariff was decided by the FINA diving committee, and divers could only select from the range of dives in the published tariff table. Since then, the tariff is calculated by a formula based on various factors such as the number of twist and somersaults, the height, the group etc., and divers are free to submit new combinations. This change was implemented because new dives were being invented too frequently for an annual meeting to accommodate the progress of the sport.\nMechanics of diving.\nAt the moment of take-off, two critical aspects of the dive are determined, and cannot subsequently be altered during the execution. One is the trajectory of the dive, and the other is the magnitude of the angular momentum.\nThe speed of rotation \u2013 and therefore the total amount of rotation \u2013 may be varied from moment to moment by changing the shape of the body, in accordance with the law of conservation of angular momentum.\nThe center of mass of the diver follows a parabolic path in free-fall under the influence of gravity (ignoring the effects of air resistance, which are negligible at the speeds involved).\nTrajectory.\nSince the parabola is symmetrical, the travel away from the board as the diver passes it is twice the amount of the forward travel at the peak of the flight. Excessive forward distance to the entry point is penalised when scoring a dive, but obviously an adequate clearance from the diving board is essential on safety grounds.\nThe greatest possible height that can be achieved is desirable for several reasons:\nControl of rotation.\nThe magnitude of angular momentum remains constant throughout the dive, but since\nand the moment of inertia is larger when the body has an increased radius, the speed of rotation may be increased by moving the body into a compact shape, and reduced by opening out into a straight position.\nSince the tucked shape is the most compact, it gives the most control over rotational speed, and dives in this position are easier to perform. Dives in the straight position are hardest, since there is almost no scope for altering the speed, so the angular momentum must be created at take-off with a very high degree of accuracy. (A small amount of control is available by moving the position of the arms and by a slight hollowing of the back).\nThe opening of the body for the entry does not stop the rotation, but merely slows it down. The vertical entry achieved by expert divers is largely an illusion created by starting the entry slightly short of vertical, so that the legs are vertical as they disappear beneath the surface. A small amount of additional tuning is available by 'entry save' techniques, whereby underwater movements of the upper body and arms against the viscosity of the water affect the position of the legs.\nTwisting.\nDives with multiple twists and somersaults are some of the most spectacular movements, as well as the most challenging to perform.\nThe rules state that twisting \"must not be generated manifestly on take-off\". Consequently, divers must use some of the somersaulting angular momentum to generate twisting movements. The physics of twisting can be explained by looking at the components of the angular momentum vector.\nAs the diver leaves the board, the total angular momentum vector is horizontal, pointing directly to the left for a forward dive for example. For twisting rotation to exist, it is necessary to tilt the body sideways after takeoff, so that there is now a small component of this horizontal angular momentum vector along the body's long axis. The tilt can be seen in the photo.\nThe tilting is done by the arms, which are outstretched to the sides just before the twist. When one arm is moved up and the other is moved down (like turning a big steering wheel), the body reacts by tilting to the side, which then begins the twisting rotation. At the completion of the required number of twist rotations, the arm motion is reversed (the steering wheel is turned back), which removes the body's tilt and stops the twisting rotation.\nAn alternative explanation is that the moving arms have precession torque on them which set the body into twisting rotation. Moving the arms back produces opposite torque which stops the twisting rotation.\nEntry.\nThe rules state that the body should be vertical, or nearly so, for entry. Strictly speaking, it is physically impossible to achieve a literally vertical position throughout the entry as there will inevitably still be some rotational momentum while the body is entering the water. Divers therefore attempt to create the illusion of being vertical, especially when performing rapidly rotating multiple somersault movements. For back entries, one technique is to allow the upper body to enter slightly short of vertical so that the continuing rotation leaves the final impression of the legs entering vertically. This is called \"Knee save\". Another is to use \"Pike save\" movements of scooping the upper body underwater in the direction of rotation so as to counteract the rotation of the legs. Knee saves are performed for back entries and Pike saves are performed for front entries.\nThe arms must be beside the body for feet-first dives, which are typically competed only on the 1m springboard and only at fairly low levels of 3m springboard, and extended forwards in line for \"head-first\" dives, which are much more common competitively. It used to be common for the hands to be interlocked with the fingers extended towards the water, but a different technique has become favoured during the last few decades. Now the usual practice is for one hand to grasp the other with palms down to strike the water with a flat surface. This creates a vacuum between the hands, arms and head which, with a vertical entry, will pull down and under any splash until deep enough to have minimal effect on the surface of the water (the so-called \"rip entry\").\nOnce a diver is completely under the water they may choose to roll or scoop in the same direction their dive was rotating to pull their legs into a more vertical position. Apart from aesthetic considerations, it is important from a safety point of view that divers reinforce the habit of rolling in the direction of rotation, especially for forward and inward entries. Back injuries such as hyperextension are caused by attempting to re-surface in the opposite direction. Diving from the higher levels increases the danger and likelihood of such injuries.\nBy country.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, elite competitive diving is regulated by DPC (Diving Plongeon Canada), although the individual provinces also have organizational bodies. The main competitive season runs from February to July, although some competitions may be held in January or December, and many divers (particularly international level athletes) will train and compete year round.\nMost provincial level competitions consist of events for six age groups (Groups A, B, C, D, E, and Open) for both genders on each of the three board levels. These age groups roughly correspond to those standardised by FINA, with the addition of a youngest age group for divers 9 and younger, Group E, which does not compete nationally and does not have a tower event (although divers of this age may choose to compete in Group D). The age group Open is so called because divers of any age, including those over 18, may compete in these events, so long as their dives meet a minimum standard of difficulty.\nAlthough Canada is internationally a fairly strong country in diving, the vast majority of Canadian high schools and universities do not have diving teams, and many Canadian divers accept athletic scholarships from American colleges.\nAdult divers who are not competitive at an elite level may compete in masters diving. Typically, masters are either adults who never practised the sport as children or teenagers, or former elite athletes who have retired but still seek a way to be involved in the sport. Many diving clubs have masters teams in addition to their primary competitive ones, and while some masters dive only for fun and fitness, there are also masters competitions, which range from the local to world championship level.\nNational championships.\nDivers can qualify to compete at the age group national championships, or junior national championships, in their age groups as assigned by FINA up to the age of 18. This competition is held annually in July. Qualification is based on achieving minimum scores at earlier competitions in the season, although athletes who place very highly at a national championship will be automatically qualified to compete at the next. Divers must qualify at two different competitions, at least one of which must be a level 1 competition, i.e. a competition with fairly strict judging patterns. Such competitions include the Polar Bear Invitational in Winnipeg, the Sting in Victoria, and the Alberta Provincial Championships in Edmonton or Calgary. The qualifying scores are determined by DPC according to the results of the preceding year's national competition, and typically do not have much variation from year to year.\nDivers older than 18, or advanced divers of younger ages, can qualify for the senior national championships, which are held twice each year, once roughly in March and once in June or July. Once again, qualification is based on achieving minimum scores at earlier competitions (in this case, within the 12 months preceding the national championships, and in an Open age group event), or high placements in previous national championships or international competitions. It is no longer the case that divers may use results from age group events to qualify for senior nationals, or results from Open events to qualify for age group nationals.\nRepublic of Ireland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland facilities are limited to one operational pool at the National Aquatic Centre in Dublin. Other facilities with diving boards at the University of Limerick are undergoing staff training in an effort to start diving programmes.\nNational championships.\nNational championships take place late in the year, usually during November. The competition is held at the National Aquatic Centre in Dublin and consists of four events:\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, diving competitions on all boards run throughout the year. National Masters' Championships are held two or three times per year.\nUnited States.\nSummer diving.\nIn the United States, summer diving is usually limited to one meter diving at community or country club pools. Some pools organise to form intra-pool competitions. These competitions are usually designed to accommodate all school-age children.\nHigh school diving.\nIn the United States scholastic diving at the high school level is usually limited to one meter diving (but some schools use three meter springboards.). Scores from those one meter dives contribute to the swim team's overall score. High school diving and swimming concludes their season with a state competition. Depending on the state and the number of athletes competing in the state, certain qualifications must be achieved to compete in the state's championship meet. There are often regional championships and district championships which are necessary to compete in before reaching the state meet to narrow the field to only the most competitive athletes. Most state championship meets consist of eleven dives. The eleven dives are usually split up between two categories: five required (voluntary) dives and six optional dives.\nClub diving.\nIn the United States, pre-college divers interested in learning one and three meter or platform diving should consider a club sanctioned by either USA Diving or AAU Diving. In USA Diving, Future Champions is the entry level or novice diver category with eight levels of competition. From Future Champions, divers graduate to \"Junior Olympic\", or JO. JO divers compete in age groups at inter-club competitions, at invitationals, and if qualified, at regional, zone and national competitions. Divers over the age of 19 years of age cannot compete in these events as a JO diver.\nUSA Diving sanctions the Winter Nationals championship with one, three meter, and platform events. In the summer USA Diving sanctions the Summer Nationals including all three events with both Junior and Senior divers. USA Diving is sanctioned by the United States Olympic Committee to select team representatives for international diving competitions including the World Championships and Olympic Games.\nAAU Diving sanctions one national event per year in the summer. AAU competes on the one, three, and tower to determine the All-American team.\nCollege diving.\nIn the United States scholastic diving at the college level requires one and three meter diving. Scores from the one and three meter competition contribute to the swim team's overall meet score. College divers interested in tower diving may compete in the NCAA separate from swim team events. NCAA Divisions II and III do not usually compete platform; if a diver wishes to compete platform in college, he or she must attend a Division I school.\nEach division also has rules on the number of dives in each competition. Division II schools compete with 10 dives in competition whereas Division III schools compete with 11. Division I schools only compete with 6 dives in competition. These 6 dives consist of either 5 optionals and 1 voluntary, or 6 optionals. If the meet is a 5 optional meet, then the divers will perform 1 optional from each category (Front, Back, Inward, Reverse, and Twister) and then 1 voluntary from the category of their choice. The voluntary in this type of meet is always worth a DD (Degree of Difficulty) of 2.0 even if the real DD is worth more or less on a DD sheet. In a 6 optional meet, the divers will yet again perform one dive from each category, but this time they will perform a 6th optional from the category of their choosing, which is worth its actual DD from the DD sheet.\nThe highest level of collegiate competition is the NCAA Division 1 Swimming and Diving Championship. Events at the championship include 1 metre springboard, 3 metre springboard, and platform, as well as various swimming individual and relay events. The points scored by swimmers and divers are combined to determine a team swimming &amp; diving champion. To qualify for a diving event at the NCAA championships, a competitor must first finish in the top three at one of five zone championships, which are held after the various conference championship meets. A diver who scores at least 310 points on the 3 metre springboard and 300 points on the 1 metre springboard in a 6 optional meet can participate in the particular zone championship corresponding to the geographic region in which his or her school lies.\nA number of colleges and universities offer scholarships to men and women who have competitive diving skills. These scholarships are usually offered to divers with age-group or club diving experience.\nThe NCAA limits the number of years a college student can represent any school in competitions. The limit is four years, but could be less under certain circumstances.\nMasters' Diving.\nDivers who continue diving past their college years can compete in Masters' Diving programs. Masters' diving programs are frequently offered by college or club programs.\nMasters' Diving events are normally conducted in age-groups separated by five or ten years, and attract competitors of a wide range of ages and experience (many, indeed, are newcomers to the sport); the oldest competitor in a Masters' Diving Championship was Viola Krahn, who at the age of 101 was the first person in any sport, male or female, anywhere in the world, to compete in an age-group of 100+ years in a nationally organised competition.\nNon-competitive diving.\nDiving is also popular as a non-competitive activity. Such diving usually emphasises the airborne experience, and the height of the dive, but does not emphasise what goes on once the diver enters the water. The ability to dive underwater can be a useful emergency skill, and is an important part of watersport and navy safety training. Entering water from a height is an enjoyable leisure activity, as is underwater swimming.\nSuch non-competitive diving can occur indoors and outdoors. Outdoor diving typically takes place from cliffs or other rock formations either into fresh or salt water. However, man-made diving platforms are sometimes constructed in popular swimming destinations. Outdoor diving requires knowledge of the water depth and currents as conditions can be dangerous.\nOn occasion, the diver will inadvertently belly flop, entering the water horizontally or nearly so. The diver typically displaces a larger than usual amount of water.\nHigh diving.\nA recently developing section of the sport is \"High Diving\" (e.g. see 2013 World Aquatics Championships), conducted in open air locations, usually from improvised platforms up to high (as compared with as used in Olympic and World Championship events). Entry to the water is invariably feet-first to avoid the risk of injury that would be involved in head-first entry from that height. The final half-somersault is almost always performed backwards, enabling the diver to spot the entry point and control their rotation.\nCompetitive high diving is run as the Red Bull Cliff Diving World Series."}
{"id": "8405", "revid": "1893265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8405", "title": "Dative", "text": ""}
{"id": "8406", "revid": "1269399218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8406", "title": "Dative case", "text": "In grammar, the dative case (abbreviated , or sometimes when it is a core argument) is a grammatical case used in some languages to indicate the recipient or beneficiary of an action, as in \"\", Latin for \"Maria gave Jacob a drink\". In this example, the dative marks what would be considered the indirect object of a verb in English.\nSometimes the dative has functions unrelated to giving. In Scottish Gaelic and Irish, the term \"dative case\" is used in traditional grammars to refer to the prepositional case-marking of nouns following simple prepositions and the definite article. In Georgian and Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu), the dative case can also mark the subject of a sentence. This is called the dative construction. In Hindi, the dative construction is not limited to only certain verbs or tenses and it can be used with any verb in any tense or mood.\nThe dative was common among early Indo-European languages and has survived to the present in the Balto-Slavic branch, the Germanic branch, Albanian and others. It also exists in similar forms in several non-Indo-European languages, such as the Uralic family of languages. In some languages, the dative case has assimilated the functions of other, now extinct cases. In Ancient Greek, the dative has the functions of the Proto-Indo-European locative and instrumental as well as those of the original dative.\nUnder the influence of English, which uses the preposition \"to\" for (among other uses) both indirect objects (\"give to\") and directions of movement (\"go to\"), the term \"dative\" has sometimes been used to describe cases that in other languages would more appropriately be called lative.\nEtymology.\n\"Dative\" comes from Latin \"c\u0101sus dat\u012bvus\" (\"case for giving\"), a translation of Greek \u03b4\u03bf\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u1f74 \u03c0\u03c4\u1ff6\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, \"dotik\u0113 pt\u00f4sis\" (\"inflection for giving\"). Dionysius Thrax in his Art of Grammar also refers to it as \"epistaltik\u0113\u0301\" \"for sending (a letter)\", from the verb \"epist\u00e9ll\u014d\" \"send to\", a word from the same root as epistle.\nEnglish.\nThe Old English language had a dative case; however, the English case system gradually fell into disuse during the Middle English period, when the accusative and dative of pronouns merged into a single oblique case that was also used with all prepositions. This conflation of case in Middle and Modern English has led most modern grammarians to discard the \"accusative\" and \"dative\" labels as obsolete in reference to English, often using the term \"objective\" for oblique.\nSet expressions.\nThe dative case is rare in modern English usage, but it can be argued that it survives in a few set expressions. One example is the word \"methinks\", with the meaning \"it seems to me\". It survives in this fixed form from Old English (having undergone, however, phonetic changes with the rest of the language), in which it was constructed as \"[it]\" + \"me\" (the dative case of the personal pronoun) + \"thinks\" (i.e., \"seems\", &lt; Old English \u00feyncan, \"to seem\", a verb closely related to the verb \u00feencan, \"to think\", but distinct from it in Old English; later it merged with \"think\" and lost this meaning).\nRelic pronouns.\nThe modern objective case pronoun whom is derived from the dative case in Old English, specifically the Old English dative pronoun \"hw\u0101m\" (as opposed to the modern subjective \"who\", which descends from Old English \"hw\u0101\") \u2013 though \"whom\" \"also\" absorbed the functions of the Old English accusative pronoun \"hwone\". It is also cognate to the word \"\"wem\" (the dative form of \"wer\"\") in German. The OED defines all classical uses of the word \"whom\" in situations where the indirect object \"is not known\" \u2013 in effect, indicating the anonymity of the indirect object.\nLikewise, some of the object forms of personal pronouns are remnants of Old English datives. For example, \"him\" goes back to the Old English dative \"him\" (accusative was \"hine\"), and \"her\" goes back to the dative \"hire\" (accusative was \"h\u012be\"). These pronouns are not pure datives in modern English; they are also used for functions previously indicated by the accusative.\nModern English.\nThe indirect object of the verb may be placed between the verb and the direct object of the verb: \"he gave me a book\" or \"he wrote me a poem.\"\nThe indirect object may also be expressed using a prepositional phrase using \"to\": \"he gave a book to me\".\nGerman.\nIn general, the dative (German: \"Dativ\") is used to mark the indirect object of a German sentence. For example:\nIn English, the first sentence can be rendered as \"I sent the book \"to the man\"\" and as \"I sent \"the man\" the book\", where the indirect object is identified in English by standing in front of the direct object. The normal word order in German is to put the dative in front of the accusative (as in the example above). However, since the German dative is marked in form, it can also be put \"after\" the accusative: . The after and signifies a now largely archaic ending for certain nouns in the dative. It survives today almost exclusively in set phrases such as (at home, \"lit.\" to house), (in the course of), and (during the day, \"lit.\" at the day), as well as in occasional usage in formal prose, poetry, and song lyrics.\nSome masculine nouns (and one neuter noun, [heart]), referred to as \"weak nouns\" or \"n-nouns\", take an -n or -en in the dative singular and plural. Many are masculine nouns ending in -e in the nominative (such as [name], [officer], and [boy]), although not all such nouns follow this rule. Many also, whether or not they fall into the former category, refer to people, animals, professions, or titles; exceptions to this include the aforementioned and , as well as (letter), (peace), (obelisk), (planet), and others.\nCertain German prepositions require the dative: (from), (out of), (at, near), (against), (opposite), (with), (after, to), (since), (from), and (at, in, to). Some other prepositions ( [at], [on], [along], [behind], [in, into], (beside, next to), [over, across], [under, below], [in front of], and [among, between]) may be used with dative (indicating current location), or accusative (indicating direction toward something). (dative: The book is lying on the table), but (accusative: I put the book onto the table).\nIn addition the four prepositions (in place of), (in spite of), (during), and (because of) which require the genitive in modern formal language, are most commonly used with the dative in colloquial German. For example, \"because of the weather\" is expressed as instead of the formally correct . Other prepositions requiring the genitive in formal language, are combined with (\"of\") in colloquial style, e.g. instead of (\"outside the garden\").\nThe concept of an indirect object may be rendered by a prepositional phrase. In this case, the noun's or pronoun's case is determined by the preposition, not by its function in the sentence. Consider this sentence:\nHere, the subject, , is in the nominative case, the direct object, , is in the accusative case, and is in the dative case, since always requires the dative ( is a contraction of + ). However:\nIn this sentence, is the indirect object, but, because it follows (direction), the accusative is required, not the dative.\nAll of the articles change in the dative case.\nSome German verbs require the dative for their direct objects. Common examples are \"antworten\" (to answer), \"danken\" (to thank), \"gefallen\" (to please), \"folgen\" (to follow), \"glauben\" (to believe), \"helfen\" (to help), and \"raten\" (to advise). In each case, the direct object of the verb is rendered in the dative. For example:\nThese verbs cannot be used in normal passive constructions, because German allows these only for verbs with accusative objects. It is therefore ungrammatical to say: *\"Ich werde geholfen.\" \"I am helped.\" Instead a special construction called \"impersonal passive\" must be used: \"Mir wird geholfen\", literally: \"To me is helped.\" A colloquial (non-standard) way to form the passive voice for dative verbs is the following: \"Ich kriege geholfen\", or: \"Ich bekomme geholfen\", literally: \"I get helped\". The use of the verb \"to get\" here reminds us that the dative case has something to do with giving and receiving. In German, help is not something you \"perform on\" somebody, but rather something you \"offer\" them.\nThe dative case is also used with reflexive (\"sich\") verbs when specifying what part of the self the verb is being done to:\nCf. the respective \"accord\" in French: \"\" (\"The children have washed themselves\") vs. \" [uninflected] \" (\"... their hands\").\nGerman can use two datives to make sentences like: \"Sei mir meinem Sohn(e) gn\u00e4dig!\" \"For my sake, have mercy on my son!\" Literally: \"Be for me to my son merciful.\" The first dative \"mir\" (\"for me\") expresses the speaker's commiseration (much like the \"dativus ethicus\" in Latin, see below). The second dative \"meinem Sohn(e)\" (\"to my son\") names the actual object of the plea. Mercy is to be given \"to\" the son \"for\" or \"on behalf of\" his mother/father.\nAdjective endings also change in the dative case. There are three inflection possibilities depending on what precedes the adjective. They most commonly use \"weak inflection\" when preceded by a definite article (the), \"mixed inflection\" after an indefinite article (a/an), and \"strong inflection\" when a quantity is indicated (many green apples).\nLatin.\nThere are several uses for the dative case ():\nGreek.\nAncient.\nIn addition to its main function as the \"dativus\", the dative case has other functions in Classical Greek: (The chart below uses the Latin names for the types of dative; the Greek name for the dative is \u03b4\u03bf\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae \u03c0\u03c4\u1ff6\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, like its Latin equivalent, derived from the verb \"to give\"; in Ancient Greek, \u03b4\u03af\u03b4\u03c9\u03bc\u03b9.)\nThe articles in the Greek dative are\nModern.\nThe dative case, strictly speaking, no longer exists in Modern Greek, except in fossilized expressions like \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b1 \u03c4\u03c9 \u0398\u03b5\u03ce (from the ecclesiastical \u03c4\u1ff7 \u0398\u03b5\u1ff7 \u03b4\u03cc\u03be\u03b1, \"Glory to God\") or \u03b5\u03bd \u03c4\u03ac\u03be\u03b5\u03b9 (\u1f10\u03bd \u03c4\u03ac\u03be\u03b5\u03b9, lit. \"in order\", i.e. \"all right\" or \"OK\"). Otherwise, most of the functions of the dative are expressed by the genitive or by prepositional phrases.\nSlavic languages.\nIn Russian, the dative case is used for indicating the indirect object of an action (that to which something is given, thrown, read, etc.). In the instance where a person is the goal of motion, dative is used instead of accusative to indicate motion toward. This is usually achieved with the preposition + destination in dative case; , meaning \"to the doctor.\"\nDative is also the necessary case taken by certain prepositions when expressing certain ideas. For instance, when the preposition \"\u043f\u043e\" is used to mean \"along\", its object is always in dative case, as in , meaning \"along the sides.\"\nOther Slavic languages apply the dative case (and the other cases) more or less the same way as does Russian; some languages may use the dative in other ways. The following examples are from Polish:\nSome other kinds of dative use as found in the Serbo-Croatian language are: \"Dativus finalis\" (Titaniku u pomo\u0107 \"to Titanic's rescue\"), \"Dativus commodi/incommodi\" (Operi svojoj majci su\u0111e \"Wash the dishes for your mother\"), \"Dativus possessivus\" (Ovcama je dlaka gusta \"Sheep's hair is thick\"), \"Dativus ethicus\" (\u0160ta/\u0161to mi radi Boni? \"What is Boni doing? (I am especially interested in what it is)\") and Dativus auctoris (Izgleda mi okej \"It seems okay to me\").\nUnusual in other Indo-European branches but common among Slavic languages, endings of nouns and adjectives are different based on grammatical function. Other factors are gender and number. In some cases, the ending may not be obvious, even when those three factors (function, gender, number) are considered. For example, in Polish, 'syn' (\"son\") and 'ojciec' (\"father\") are both masculine singular nouns, yet appear as \"syn \u2192 synowi and \"ojciec \u2192 ojcu in the dative.\nBaltic languages.\nBoth Lithuanian and Latvian have a distinct dative case in the system of nominal declensions.\nLithuanian nouns preserve Indo-European inflections in the dative case fairly well: (o-stems) vaikas -&gt; sg. vaikui, pl. vaikams; (\u0101-stems) ranka -&gt; sg. rankai, pl. rankoms; (i-stems) viltis -&gt; sg. vil\u010diai, pl. viltims; (u-stems) s\u016bnus -&gt; sg. s\u016bnui, pl. s\u016bnums; (consonant stems) vanduo -&gt; sg. vandeniui, pl. vandenims.\nAdjectives in the dative case receive pronominal endings (this might be the result of a more recent development): tas geras vaikas -&gt; sg. tam geram vaikui, pl. tiems geriems vaikams.\nThe dative case in Latvian underwent further simplifications \u2013 the original masculine endings of \"both\" nouns and adjectives have been replaced with pronominal inflections: tas v\u012brs -&gt; sg. tam v\u012bram, pl. v\u012briem. Also, the final \"s\" in all Dative forms has been dropped. The only exception is personal pronouns in the plural: mums (to us), jums (to you). In colloquial Lithuanian the final \"s\" in the dative is often omitted, as well: time geriem vaikam.\nIn both Latvian and Lithuanian, the main function of the dative case is to render the indirect object in a sentence: (lt) a\u0161 duodu vyrui knyg\u0105; (lv) es dodu [duodu] v\u012bram gr\u0101matu \u2013 \"I am giving a book to the man\".\nThe dative case can also be used with gerundives to indicate an action preceding or simultaneous with the main action in a sentence: (lt) jam \u012f\u0117jus, visi atsistojo \u2013 \"when he walked in, everybody stood up\", lit. \"to him having walked in, all stood up\"; (lt) jai miegant, visi dirbo \u2013 \"while she slept, everybody was working\", lit. \"to her sleeping, all were working\".\nIn modern standard Lithuanian, Dative case is not required by prepositions, although in many dialects it is done frequently: (dial.) iki (+D) \u0161iai dienai, (stand.) iki (+G) \u0161ios dienos \u2013 \"up until this day\".\nIn Latvian, the dative case is taken by several prepositions in the singular and all prepositions in the plural (due to peculiar historical changes): sg. bez (+G) tevis \"(without thee)\" ~ pl. bez (+D) jums \"(without you)\"; sg. pa (+A) ce\u013cu \"(along the road)\" ~ pl. pa (+D) ce\u013ciem \"(along the roads)\".\nArmenian.\nIn modern Eastern Armenian, the dative is attained by adding any article to the genitive:\nThere is a general tendency to view -\u056b\u0576 as the standard dative suffix, but only because that is its most productive (and therefore common) form. The suffix -\u056b\u0576 as a dative marker is nothing but the standard, most common, genitive suffix -\u056b accompanied by the definite article -\u0576. But the dative case encompasses indefinite objects as well, which will not be marked by -\u056b\u0576:\nThe main function of the dative marking in Armenian is to indicate the receiving end of an action, more commonly the indirect object which in English is preceded by the preposition \"to\". In the use of \"giving\" verbs like \"give, donate, offer, deliver, sell, bring...\" the dative marks the recipient. With communicative verbs like \"tell, say, advise, explain, ask, answer...\" the dative marks the listener. Other verbs whose indirect objects are marked by the dative case in Armenian are \"show, reach, look, approach...\"\nEastern Armenian also uses the dative case to mark the time of an event, in the same way English uses the preposition \"at\", as in \"Meet me at nine o' clock.\"\nIndo-Aryan languages.\nHindustani (Hindi-Urdu).\nHindustani (Hindi-Urdu) has true dative case for pronouns, but for nouns the dative case has to be constructed using the dative case-marker (postposition) \u0915\u094b \u06a9\u0648 (ko) to the nouns in their oblique case. Pronouns in Hindustani also have an oblique case, so dative pronouns can also be alternatively constructed using the dative case-marker \u0915\u094b \u06a9\u0648 (ko) with the pronouns in their oblique case, hence forming two sets of synonymous dative pronouns. The following table shows the pronouns in their nominative and their dative forms. Hindustani lacks pronouns in the third person and the demonstrative pronouns double as the third person pronouns. \nThe table below shows the oblique cases of Hindustani for the nouns \"boy\" and \"girl\" which take in the dative case-marker after them to assign the combination of the oblique case and the case-marker the dative case. The oblique case of Hindustani by itself has no meaning and adding the case-marker \u0915\u094b \u06a9\u0648 (ko) assigns the oblique case the function of the dative case.\nDative case in Hindustani can also mark the subject of a sentence. This is called the dative construction or quirky subjects. In the examples below the dative pronoun passes the subjecthood test of subject-oriented anaphora binding. The dative subject \u092e\u0941\u091d\u0947 \u0645\u062c\u06be\u06d2 (\"mujhe\") binds the anaphora \u0905\u092a\u0928\u0947 \u0627\u067e\u0646\u06d2 (\"apne\").\nSanskrit.\nThe dative case is known as the \"fourth case\" (chaturthi-vibhakti) in the usual procedure in the declension of nouns. Its use is mainly for the indirect object.\nNon-Indo-European languages.\nHungarian.\nAs with many other languages, the dative case is used in Hungarian to show the indirect object of a verb. For example, \"D\u00e1nielnek adtam ezt a k\u00f6nyvet\" (I gave this book to D\u00e1niel). It has two suffixes, \"-nak\" and \"-nek\"; the correct one is selected by vowel harmony. The personal dative pronouns follow the \"-nek\" version: \"nekem\", \"neked\", etc. This case is also used to express \"for\" in certain circumstances, such as \"I bought a gift for Mother\". In possessive constructions the nak/nek endings are also used but this is not the dative form (rather, the attributive or possessive case)\nFinnish.\nFinnish does not have a separate dative case. However, the allative case can fulfill essentially the same role as dative, beyond its primary meaning of directional movement (that is, going somewhere or approaching someone). For example: \"He lahjoittivat kaikki rahansa k\u00f6yhille (They donated all their money to the poor.)\" It is similar in Estonian\".\"\nTsez.\nIn the Northeast Caucasian languages, such as Tsez, the dative also takes the functions of the lative case in marking the direction of an action. By some linguists, they are still regarded as two separate cases in those languages, although the suffixes are exactly the same for both cases. Other linguists list them separately only for the purpose of separating syntactic cases from locative cases. An example with the ditransitive verb \"show\" (literally: \"make see\") is given below:\nThe dative/lative is also used to indicate possession, as in the example below, because there is no such verb as \"to have\".\nAs in the examples above, the dative/lative case usually occurs in combination with another suffix as poss-lative case; this should not be regarded as a separate case, however, as many of the locative cases in Tsez are constructed analytically; hence, they are, in fact, a combination of two case suffixes. See Tsez language#Locative case suffixes for further details.\nVerbs of perception or emotion (like \"see\", \"know\", \"love\", \"want\") also require the logical subject to stand in the dative/lative case. In this example the \"pure\" dative/lative without its POSS-suffix is used.\nTurkish.\nThe dative case (\"y\u00f6nelme durumu\") in the Turkish language is formed by adding the \"-e\" or \"-a\" suffixes to the end of the noun, in accordance with the effected noun's vowel harmony. The word that should be in the dative case can be found as an answer to the questions 'neye?' (to what?), 'kime?' (to whom?) and 'nereye?' (to where?) will lead to find a dative case in a sentence. There are many different uses for the dative case.\nThe dative also is for objects, usually indirect objects, but sometimes objects that in English would be considered direct:\nThe dative case tells \"whither\", that is, the place \"to which\". Thus it has roughly the meaning of the English prepositions \"to\" and \"into\", and also \"in\" when it can be replaced with \"into\":"}
{"id": "8407", "revid": "1266123786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8407", "title": "Dodecahedron", "text": "In geometry, a dodecahedron (; ) or duodecahedron is any polyhedron with twelve flat faces. The most familiar dodecahedron is the regular dodecahedron with regular pentagons as faces, which is a Platonic solid. There are also three regular star dodecahedra, which are constructed as stellations of the convex form. All of these have icosahedral symmetry, order 120.\nSome dodecahedra have the same combinatorial structure as the regular dodecahedron (in terms of the graph formed by its vertices and edges), but their pentagonal faces are not regular:\nThe pyritohedron, a common crystal form in pyrite, has pyritohedral symmetry, while the tetartoid has tetrahedral symmetry.\nThe rhombic dodecahedron can be seen as a limiting case of the pyritohedron, and it has octahedral symmetry. The elongated dodecahedron and trapezo-rhombic dodecahedron variations, along with the rhombic dodecahedra, are space-filling. There are numerous other dodecahedra.\nWhile the regular dodecahedron shares many features with other Platonic solids, one unique property of it is that one can start at a corner of the surface and draw an infinite number of straight lines across the figure that return to the original point without crossing over any other corner.\nRegular dodecahedron.\nThe convex regular dodecahedron is one of the five regular Platonic solids and can be represented by its Schl\u00e4fli symbol {5, 3}.\nThe dual polyhedron is the regular icosahedron {3, 5}, having five equilateral triangles around each vertex.\nThe convex regular dodecahedron also has three stellations, all of which are regular star dodecahedra. They form three of the four Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra. They are the small stellated dodecahedron {5/2, 5}, the great dodecahedron {5, 5/2}, and the great stellated dodecahedron {5/2, 3}. The small stellated dodecahedron and great dodecahedron are dual to each other; the great stellated dodecahedron is dual to the great icosahedron {3, 5/2}. All of these regular star dodecahedra have regular pentagonal or pentagrammic faces. The convex regular dodecahedron and great stellated dodecahedron are different realisations of the same abstract regular polyhedron; the small stellated dodecahedron and great dodecahedron are different realisations of another abstract regular polyhedron.\nOther pentagonal dodecahedra.\nIn crystallography, two important dodecahedra can occur as crystal forms in some symmetry classes of the cubic crystal system that are topologically equivalent to the regular dodecahedron but less symmetrical: the pyritohedron with pyritohedral symmetry, and the tetartoid with tetrahedral symmetry:\nPyritohedron.\nA pyritohedron is a dodecahedron with pyritohedral (Th) symmetry. Like the regular dodecahedron, it has twelve identical pentagonal faces, with three meeting in each of the 20 vertices (see figure). However, the pentagons are not constrained to be regular, and the underlying atomic arrangement has no true fivefold symmetry axis. Its 30 edges are divided into two sets \u2013 containing 24 and 6 edges of the same length. The only axes of rotational symmetry are three mutually perpendicular twofold axes and four threefold axes.\nAlthough regular dodecahedra do not exist in crystals, the pyritohedron form occurs in the crystals of the mineral pyrite, and it may be an inspiration for the discovery of the regular Platonic solid form. The true regular dodecahedron can occur as a shape for quasicrystals (such as holmium\u2013magnesium\u2013zinc quasicrystal) with icosahedral symmetry, which includes true fivefold rotation axes.\nCrystal pyrite.\nThe name \"crystal pyrite\" comes from one of the two common crystal habits shown by pyrite (the other one being the cube). In pyritohedral pyrite, the faces have a Miller index of (210), which means that the dihedral angle is 2\u00b7arctan(2) \u2248 126.87\u00b0 and each pentagonal face has one angle of approximately 121.6\u00b0 in between two angles of approximately 106.6\u00b0 and opposite two angles of approximately 102.6\u00b0. The following formulas show the measurements for the face of a perfect crystal (which is rarely found in nature).\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_3\nCartesian coordinates.\nThe eight vertices of a cube have the coordinates (\u00b11, \u00b11, \u00b11).\nThe coordinates of the 12 additional vertices are\n(0, \u00b1(1 + \"h\"), \u00b1(1 \u2212 \"h\"2)), \n(\u00b1(1 + \"h\"), \u00b1(1 \u2212 \"h\"2), 0) and\n(\u00b1(1 \u2212 \"h\"2), 0, \u00b1(1 + \"h\")).\n\"h\" is the height of the wedge-shaped \"roof\" above the faces of that cube with edge length 2.\nAn important case is \"h\" = (a quarter of the cube edge length) for perfect natural pyrite (also the pyritohedron in the Weaire\u2013Phelan structure).\nAnother one is \"h\" = = 0.618... for the regular dodecahedron. See section \"Geometric freedom\" for other cases.\nTwo pyritohedra with swapped nonzero coordinates are in dual positions to each other like the dodecahedra in the compound of two dodecahedra.\nGeometric freedom.\nThe pyritohedron has a geometric degree of freedom with limiting cases of a cubic convex hull at one limit of collinear edges, and a rhombic dodecahedron as the other limit as 6 edges are degenerated to length zero. The regular dodecahedron represents a special intermediate case where all edges and angles are equal.\nIt is possible to go past these limiting cases, creating concave or nonconvex pyritohedra. The \"endo-dodecahedron\" is concave and equilateral; it can tessellate space with the convex regular dodecahedron. Continuing from there in that direction, we pass through a degenerate case where twelve vertices coincide in the centre, and on to the regular great stellated dodecahedron where all edges and angles are equal again, and the faces have been distorted into regular pentagrams. On the other side, past the rhombic dodecahedron, we get a nonconvex equilateral dodecahedron with fish-shaped self-intersecting equilateral pentagonal faces.\nTetartoid.\nA tetartoid (also tetragonal pentagonal dodecahedron, pentagon-tritetrahedron, and tetrahedric pentagon dodecahedron) is a dodecahedron with chiral tetrahedral symmetry (T). Like the regular dodecahedron, it has twelve identical pentagonal faces, with three meeting in each of the 20 vertices. However, the pentagons are not regular and the figure has no fivefold symmetry axes.\nAlthough regular dodecahedra do not exist in crystals, the tetartoid form does. The name tetartoid comes from the Greek root for one-fourth because it has one fourth of full octahedral symmetry, and half of pyritohedral symmetry. The mineral cobaltite can have this symmetry form.\nAbstractions sharing the solid's topology and symmetry can be created from the cube and the tetrahedron. In the cube each face is bisected by a slanted edge. In the tetrahedron each edge is trisected, and each of the new vertices connected to a face center. (In Conway polyhedron notation this is a gyro tetrahedron.)\nCartesian coordinates.\nThe following points are vertices of a tetartoid pentagon under tetrahedral symmetry:\nunder the following conditions:\nGeometric freedom.\nThe regular dodecahedron is a tetartoid with more than the required symmetry. The triakis tetrahedron is a degenerate case with 12 zero-length edges. (In terms of the colors used above this means, that the white vertices and green edges are absorbed by the green vertices.)\nDual of triangular gyrobianticupola.\nA lower symmetry form of the regular dodecahedron can be constructed as the dual of a polyhedron constructed from two triangular anticupola connected base-to-base, called a \"triangular gyrobianticupola.\" It has D3d symmetry, order 12. It has 2 sets of 3 identical pentagons on the top and bottom, connected 6 pentagons around the sides which alternate upwards and downwards. This form has a hexagonal cross-section and identical copies can be connected as a partial hexagonal honeycomb, but all vertices will not match.\nRhombic dodecahedron.\nThe \"rhombic dodecahedron\" is a zonohedron with twelve rhombic faces and octahedral symmetry. It is dual to the quasiregular cuboctahedron (an Archimedean solid) and occurs in nature as a crystal form. The rhombic dodecahedron packs together to fill space.\nThe \"rhombic dodecahedron\" can be seen as a degenerate pyritohedron where the 6 special edges have been reduced to zero length, reducing the pentagons into rhombic faces.\nThe rhombic dodecahedron has several stellations, the first of which is also a parallelohedral spacefiller.\nAnother important rhombic dodecahedron, the Bilinski dodecahedron, has twelve faces congruent to those of the rhombic triacontahedron, i.e. the diagonals are in the ratio of the golden ratio. It is also a zonohedron and was described by Bilinski in 1960. This figure is another spacefiller, and can also occur in non-periodic spacefillings along with the rhombic triacontahedron, the rhombic icosahedron and rhombic hexahedra.\nOther dodecahedra.\nThere are 6,384,634 topologically distinct \"convex\" dodecahedra, excluding mirror images\u2014the number of vertices ranges from 8 to 20. (Two polyhedra are \"topologically distinct\" if they have intrinsically different arrangements of faces and vertices, such that it is impossible to distort one into the other simply by changing the lengths of edges or the angles between edges or faces.)\nTopologically distinct dodecahedra (excluding pentagonal and rhombic forms)\nPractical usage.\nArmand Spitz used a dodecahedron as the \"globe\" equivalent for his Digital Dome planetarium projector, based upon a suggestion from Albert Einstein.\nRegular dodecahedrons are sometimes used as dice, when they are known as d12s, especially in games such as Dungeons and Dragons."}
{"id": "8408", "revid": "1271365848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8408", "title": "Darwin, Northern Territory", "text": "Darwin (Larrakia: \"\") is the capital city of the Northern Territory, Australia. The city has nearly 53% of the Northern Territory's population, with 139,902 at the 2021 census. It is the smallest, wettest, and most northerly of the Australian capital cities and serves as the Top End's regional centre.\nDarwin's proximity to Southeast Asia makes it a key link between Australia and countries such as Indonesia and Timor-Leste. The Stuart Highway begins in Darwin and extends southerly across central Australia through Tennant Creek and Alice Springs, concluding in Port Augusta, South Australia. The city is built upon a low bluff overlooking Darwin Harbour. Darwin's suburbs begin at Lee Point in the north and stretch to Berrimah in the east. The Stuart Highway extends to Darwin's eastern satellite city of Palmerston and its suburbs.\nThe Darwin region, like much of the Top End, has a tropical climate, with a wet and dry season. A period known locally as \"the build up\" leading up to Darwin's wet season sees temperature and humidity increase. Darwin's wet season typically arrives in late November to early December and brings with it heavy monsoonal downpours, spectacular lightning displays, and increased cyclone activity. During the dry season, the city has clear skies and mild sea breezes from the harbour.\nThe Larrakia people are the traditional owners of the Darwin area, and Aboriginal people are a significant proportion of the population. On 9 September 1839, sailed into Darwin Harbour during its survey of the area. John Clements Wickham named the region \"Port Darwin\" in honour of their former shipmate Charles Darwin, who had sailed with them on the ship's previous voyage. The settlement there became the town of Palmerston in 1869, but was renamed Darwin in 1911. The city has been almost entirely rebuilt four times, following devastation caused by a cyclone in 1897, another one in 1937, Japanese air raids during World War II, and Cyclone Tracy in 1974.\nHistory.\nIndigenous history.\nThe Aboriginal people of the Larrakia language group are the traditional custodians and earliest known inhabitants of the greater Darwin area. Their name for the area is Garramilla, pronounced and meaning \"white stone\", referring to the colour of rock and sea cliffs found in the area. They had trading routes with Southeast Asia (see Macassan contact with Australia) and imported goods from as far afield as South and Western Australia. Established songlines penetrated throughout the country, allowing stories and histories to be told and retold along the routes. The extent of shared songlines and history of multiple clan groups within this area is contestable.\nPre-20th century.\nThe Dutch visited Australia's northern coastline in the 1600s and landed on the Tiwi Islands only to be attacked by the Tiwi peoples. The Dutch created the first European maps of the area. This accounts for the Dutch names in the area, such as Arnhem Land and Groote Eylandt. During this period, Dutch explorers named the region around Darwin\u2014sometimes including nearby Kimberley\u2014variations of \"Van Diemen's Land\", after the VOC governor-general Anthony van Diemen. This should not be confused with the more general and prolonged use of the same name for Tasmania.\nThe first Briton to see Darwin harbour appears to have been Lieutenant John Lort Stokes of on 9 September 1839. The ship's captain, Commander John Clements Wickham, named the port after Charles Darwin, the British naturalist who had sailed with him when he served as first lieutenant on the earlier second expedition of the \"Beagle\".\nIn 1863, the Northern Territory was transferred from New South Wales to South Australia. In 1864 South Australia sent B. T. Finniss north as Government Resident to survey and found a capital for its new territory. Finniss chose a site at Escape Cliffs, near the entrance to Adelaide River, about northeast of the modern city. This attempt was short-lived, and the settlement abandoned by 1865. On 5 February 1869, George Goyder, the Surveyor-General of South Australia, established a small settlement of 135 people at Port Darwin between Fort Hill and the escarpment. Goyder named the settlement Palmerston after British Prime Minister Lord Palmerston. In 1870, the first poles for the Overland Telegraph were erected in Darwin, connecting Australia to the rest of the world. The discovery of gold by employees of the Australian Overland Telegraph Line digging holes for telegraph poles at Pine Creek in the 1880s spawned a gold rush, which further boosted the colony's development.\nIn February 1872 the brigantine \"Alexandra\" was the first private vessel to sail from an English port directly to Darwin, carrying people many of whom were coming to recent gold finds.\nIn early 1875 Darwin's white population had grown to approximately 300 because of the gold rush. On 17 February 1875 the left Darwin \"en route\" for Adelaide. The approximately 88 passengers and 34 crew (surviving records vary) included government officials, circuit-court judges, Darwin residents taking their first furlough, and miners. While travelling south along the north Queensland coast, the \"Gothenburg\" encountered a cyclone-strength storm and was wrecked on a section of the Great Barrier Reef. Only 22 men survived, while between 98 and 112 people perished. Many passengers who perished were Darwin residents, and news of the tragedy severely affected the small community, which reportedly took several years to recover.\nIn the 1870s, relatively large numbers of Chinese settled at least temporarily in the Northern Territory; many were contracted to work the goldfields and later to build the Palmerston to Pine Creek railway. By 1888 there were 6,122 Chinese in the Northern Territory, mostly in or around Darwin. The early Chinese settlers were mainly from Guangdong Province. The Chinese community established Darwin Chinatown. At the end of the 19th century, anti-Chinese feelings grew in response to the 1890s economic depression, and the White Australia policy meant many Chinese left the territory. But some stayed, became British subjects, and established a commercial base in Darwin.\nEarly 20th century.\nThe Northern Territory was initially settled and administered by South Australia, until its transfer to the Commonwealth in 1911. In the same year, the city's official name changed from Palmerston to Darwin.\nThe period between 1911 and 1919 was filled with political turmoil, particularly with trade union unrest, which culminated on 17 December 1918. Led by Harold Nelson, some 1,000 demonstrators marched to Government House at Liberty Square in Darwin, where they burnt an effigy of the Administrator of the Northern Territory, John Gilruth, and demanded his resignation. The incident became known as the Darwin Rebellion. Their grievances were against the two main Northern Territory employers: Vestey's Meatworks and the federal government. Both Gilruth and the Vestey company left Darwin soon afterward.\nOn 18 October 1918, during the Spanish flu pandemic, the SS \"Mataram\" sailing from Singapore with infectious diseases arrived in Darwin.\nIn 1931, the 17 remaining patients from the leprosarium at Cossack, Western Australia were moved to Darwin, after it closed down. It was at a time when many Aboriginal people who were thought to have leprosy or other infectious diseases were sent to lock hospitals and leprosariums under the \"Aborigines Act 1905\", which gave the Chief Protector of Aborigines powers to arrest and send any Indigenous person suspected of having a range of diseases to one of these institutions.\nAround 10,000 Australian and other Allied troops arrived in Darwin at the outset of World War II to defend Australia's northern coast. On 19 February 1942 at 9:57am, 188 Japanese warplanes attacked Darwin in two waves. It was the same fleet that had bombed Pearl Harbor, though considerably more bombs were dropped on Darwin than on Pearl Harbor. The attack killed at least 243 people and caused immense damage to the town, airfields, and aircraft. These were by far the most serious attacks on Australia in time of war, in terms of fatalities and damage. They were the first of many raids on Darwin.\nDarwin Chinatown which lay within the heart of Darwin was razed to the ground by the Japanese bombing and was never rebuilt. Northern Territory administrator Aubrey Abbott wanted to eliminate the Chinese community and forcibly seized their land as it was considered prime real estate.\nDarwin was further developed after the war, with sealed roads constructed connecting the region to Alice Springs to the south and Mount Isa to the southeast, and Manton Dam built in the south to provide the city with water. On Australia Day (26 January) 1959, Darwin was granted city status.\n1970\u2013present.\nOn 25 December 1974, Darwin was struck by Cyclone Tracy, which killed 71 people and destroyed over 70% of the city's buildings, including many old stone buildings such as the Palmerston Town Hall, which could not withstand the lateral forces the winds generated. After the disaster, 30,000 of the population of 46,000 were evacuated in the biggest airlift in Australia's history. The town was rebuilt with newer materials and techniques during the late 1970s by the Darwin Reconstruction Commission, led by former Brisbane Lord mayor Clem Jones. A satellite city of Palmerston was built east of Darwin in the early 1980s.\nOn 17 September 2003, the Adelaide\u2013Darwin railway was completed, with the opening of the Alice Springs\u2013Darwin standard gauge line.\nAviation history.\nDarwin hosted many of aviation's early pioneers. On 10 December 1919, Captain Ross Smith and his crew landed in Darwin and won a \u00a310,000 prize from the Australian government for completing the first flight from London to Australia in under 30 days. Smith and his crew flew a Vickers Vimy, G-EAOU, and landed on an airstrip that has become Ross Smith Avenue.\nOther aviation pioneers include Amy Johnson, Amelia Earhart, Sir Charles Kingsford Smith and Bert Hinkler. The original QANTAS Empire Airways Ltd Hangar, a registered heritage site, was part of the original Darwin Civil Aerodrome in Parap and is now a museum that still bears scars from the bombing of Darwin during World War II.\nDarwin was home to Australian and U.S. pilots during the war, with airstrips built in and around Darwin. Today Darwin provides a staging ground for military exercises.\nDarwin was a compulsory stopover and checkpoint in the London-to-Melbourne Centenary Air Race in 1934. The official name of the race was the MacRobertson Air Race. Winners of the race were Tom Campbell Black and C. W. A. Scott.\nThe following is an excerpt from \"Time\" magazine, 29 October 1934:\nThe Darwin Aviation Museum is about from the city centre on the Stuart Highway and is one of only three places outside the United States where a B-52 bomber (on permanent loan from the United States Air Force) is on public display.\nGeography.\nDarwin is a coastal city, situated along the western shoreline of the Northern Territory. The water meets the land from the Beagle Gulf, which extends out into the Timor Sea. The central business district occupies a low bluff overlooking Darwin Harbour to the south, beyond which lie East Arm, Middle Arm, Northern Territory, and, across the gulf, West Arm. Middle Arm has an industrial precinct on the peninsula, which is being promoted as a sustainable development area that will include plants for industries such as low-emission petrochemicals, renewable hydrogen, and carbon capture storage. The city is flanked by Frances Bay to the east and Cullen Bay to the west.\nThe rest of the city is relatively flat and low-lying, and areas bordering the coast are home to recreational reserves, extensive beaches, and excellent fishing.\nCity and suburbs.\nDarwin and its suburbs spread in an approximately triangular shape, with the older southwestern suburbs\u2014and the city itself\u2014forming one corner, the newer northern suburbs another, and the eastern suburbs, progressing towards Palmerston, forming the third.\nThe older part of Darwin is separated from the newer northern suburbs by Darwin International Airport and RAAF Base Darwin. Palmerston is a satellite city east of Darwin that was established in the 1980s and is one of Australia's fastest-growing municipalities. Darwin's rural areas, including Howard Springs, Humpty Doo and Berry Springs, are experiencing strong growth.\nDarwin's central business district (CBD) is bounded by Daly Street in the northwest, McMinn Street in the northeast, Mitchell Street on the southwest, and Bennett Street on the southeast. The CBD has been the focus of a number of major projects, such as the billion-dollar redevelopment of the Stokes Hill wharf waterfront area, including a convention centre with seating for 1,500 people and approximately of exhibition space. The developers announced that this includes hotels, residential apartments, and public space. The city's main industrial areas are along the Stuart Highway toward Palmerston, centred on Winnellie. The area'a largest shopping precinct is Casuarina Square.\nThe most expensive residential areas stand along the coast in suburbs such as the marina of Cullen Bay, Larrakeyah, Bayview and Brinkin. These low-lying regions are at risk during cyclones and higher tides, but adequate drainage and stringent building regulations have reduced the potential damage to buildings or injury to residents. The inner northern suburbs are home to lower-income households, although low-income Territory Housing units are scattered throughout the metropolitan area. The suburb of Lyons was part of a multi-stage land release and development in the Northern Suburbs; planning, development and construction took place from 2004 to 2009. More recent developments near Lyons subdivision includes the suburb of Muirhead.\nClimate.\nDarwin has a tropical savanna climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Aw\") with distinct wet and dry seasons, and the average maximum temperature is similar year round. The Australian Building Codes Board classifies it as Climate Zone 1. The NCC Climate zones are a broad classification of climate zones by the NCC ranging from one to eight, categorising the different climates of Australia. The dry season runs from about May to September, during which nearly every day is sunny, and afternoon relative humidity averages around 30%.\nThe driest period of the year, seeing about of monthly rainfall on average, is between May and September. In the coolest months, June and July, the daily minimum temperature may dip as low as , but very rarely lower, and a temperature lower than has never been recorded in the city centre. Outer suburbs away from the coast occasionally record temperatures as low as in the dry season. For a 147\u2011day period during the 2012 dry season, from 5 May to 29 September, Darwin recorded no precipitation. Prolonged periods of no precipitation are common in the dry season in Northern Australia (particularly in the Northern Territory and northern regions of Western Australia), although a no-rainfall event of this extent is rare. The 3pm dewpoint average in the wet season is around .\nExtreme temperatures at the Darwin Post Office Station have ranged from on 17 October 1892 to on 25 June 1891; extreme temperatures at the Darwin Airport station (which is farther from the coast and routinely records cooler temperatures than the post office station, which is in Darwin's CBD) have ranged from on 18 October 1982 to on 29 July 1942. The highest minimum temperature on record is on 18 January 1928 for the post office station and on both 25 November 1987 and 17 December 2014 for the airport station. The lowest maximum temperature on record is on 3 June 1904 for the post office station and on 14 July 1968 for the airport station.\nThe wet season is associated with tropical cyclones and monsoon rains. Most rainfall occurs between December and March (the summer), when thunderstorms are common and afternoon relative humidity averages over 70 percent during the wettest months. It does not rain every day during the wet season, but most days have plentiful cloud cover; January averages under six hours of bright sunshine daily. Darwin's highest daily rainfall verified by the Bureau of Meteorology is , which fell when Cyclone Carlos bore down on the Darwin area on 16 February 2011. February 2011 was also Darwin's wettest month ever recorded, with at the airport.\nThe hottest months are October and November, just before the onset of the main rain season. The temperature is usually below , but the heat index sometimes rises above , because of humidity levels that most find uncomfortable. Because of its long dry season, Darwin has the second-highest average daily hours of sunshine (8.4) of any Australian capital, with the most sunshine from April to November; only Perth, Western Australia, averages more (8.8). The sun passes directly overhead in mid-October and mid-February.\nThe average temperature of the sea ranges from in July to in December.\nDarwin occupies one of the most lightning-prone areas in Australia. On 31 January 2002 an early-morning squall line produced over 5,000 cloud-to-ground lightning strikes within a radius of Darwin alone\u2014about three times the amount of lightning that Perth experiences on average in an entire year.\nDemographics.\nAncestry and immigration.\nDarwin's population changed after the Second World War. Like many other Australian cities, Darwin experienced influxes from Europe, with significant numbers of Italians and Greeks during the 1960s and 1970s. It also began to experience an influx from other European countries, which included the Dutch, Germans, and many others. A significant proportion of Darwin's residents are recent immigrants from Asia, including the peoples of East Timor.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \n38.3% of the population at the 2016 census was born overseas. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from the Philippines (3.6%), England (3.1%), New Zealand (2.1%), India (2%) and Greece (0.9%).\n8.7% of the population, or 11,960 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and/or Torres Strait Islanders) in 2016. This is the largest proportion of any Australian capital city.\nLanguage.\nAt the 2016 census, 58% of the population spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home include Tagalog (3.7%), Greek (3.5%), Mandarin (2.0%), Nepali (1.2%), Indonesian (1.0%), Australian Aboriginal languages (1.0%), Malayalam (0.9%), Vietnamese (0.8%), Cantonese (0.7%), Italian (0.6%), Portuguese (0.5%, mostly spoken by Timorese), and Tamil (0.5%).\nAge.\nIn 2011, the Darwin population averaged 33 years old (compared to the national average of around 37), to a large extent because of the military presence and because many people opt to retire elsewhere.\nReligion.\nAs of 2021, 41.7% of Darwin had no religion, so described. The largest religious denomination was Roman Catholicism (18.2%) and Anglican (5.2%).\nLaw and government.\nThe Darwin City Council (incorporated under the Northern Territory Local Government Act 1993) governs the City of Darwin, which takes in the CBD and the suburbs. The city has been governed by a city council form of government since 1957. The council consists of 13 elected members, the lord mayor, and 12 aldermen.\nThe City of Darwin electorate is organised into four electoral units or wards. The wards are Chan, Lyons, Richardson, and Waters. The constituents of each ward are directly responsible for electing three aldermen. Constituents of all wards are directly responsible for electing the Lord Mayor of Darwin. Since the August 2017 council elections, the mayor has been Kon Vatskalis.\nThe rest of the Darwin area is divided into two local government areas\u2014the Palmerston City Council and the Shire of Coomalie. These areas have elected councils that are responsible for functions delegated to them by the Northern Territory Government, such as planning and garbage collection.\nThe Legislative Assembly of the Northern Territory convenes in Darwin in the Northern Territory Parliament House. Government House, the official residence of the Administrator of the Northern Territory, is on the Esplanade.\nDarwin is split between nine electoral divisions in the Legislative Assembly\u2014Port Darwin, Fannie Bay, Fong Lim, Nightcliff, Sanderson, Johnston, Casuarina, Wanguri, and Karama. Historically, Darwin voters elected Country Liberal Party members, but since the turn of the 21st century, voters have often selected Labor members, particularly in the more diverse northern section; as of the 2020 Northern Territory general election, all of Darwin's nine Legislative Assembly electoral divisions are held by Labor, with Labor also holding both the Northern Territory's federal electorates, Solomon and Lingiari.\nAlso on the Esplanade is the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory. Darwin has a Magistrate's Court on the corner of Cavenagh and Bennett streets, close to the Darwin City Council Chambers.\nCrime.\nDarwin's police force are members of the Northern Territory Police, under the NT Police Darwin Metropolitan Command. The Darwin urban centre includes Darwin City and the associated suburbs from Buffalo Creek, Berrimah, and East Arm westwards, representing around 35% of the Northern Territory's population. Palmerston urban centre closely approximates the Palmerston Local Government Area, and represents approximately 13% of the Northern Territory's population.\nDarwin has had a history of alcohol abuse and violent crime, with 6,000 assaults in 2009, of which 350 resulted in broken jaws and noses\u2014more than anywhere else in the world, according to the Royal Darwin Hospital.\nMitchell Street, with its numerous pubs, clubs and other entertainment venues, was one of the areas policed by the CitySafe Unit, officially launched by the NT Chief Minister Paul Henderson on 25 February 2009. It was credited with success in tackling alcohol abuse linked to crime, and the NT police were looking at establishing a specialist licensing enforcement unit in 2010.\nThe First Response Patrol, run by Larrakia Nation, which helps move homeless Indigenous women out of dangerous situations, was credited with the decline in sexual assaults in 2009. The service operates every day from 5am to 2am.\nRecent trends.\nIn the 10 months between 1 October 2018, the date that the alcohol floor price and various other measures were imposed by the NT government following the Riley Review, and 31 July 2019, alcohol-related assaults dropped by 16% and domestic violence by 9% in the Darwin area.\nThe rate of offending in most categories of crime dropped in the Darwin urban area between 2018 and 2019, with the notable exceptions of motor vehicle theft and break-ins (both up about 12%). Apart from sexual assault, which rose from 21 to 46, all other categories of crime declined in Palmerston.\nEconomy.\nThe two largest economic sectors are mining and tourism. Given its location, Darwin serves as a gateway for Australian travellers to Asia.\nMining and energy industry production exceeds $2.5\u00a0billion per annum. The most important mineral resources are gold, zinc, and bauxite, along with manganese and many others. The energy production is mostly off-shore with oil and natural gas from the Timor Sea, although there are significant uranium deposits near Darwin. Tourism employs 8% of Darwin residents and is expected to grow as domestic and international tourists now spend time in Darwin during the wet and dry seasons. Federal spending is also a major contributor to the local economy.\nDarwin's importance as a port is expected to grow, due to the increased exploitation of petroleum in the nearby Timor Sea and to the completion of the railway link and continued expansion in trade with Asia. During 2005, a number of major construction projects started in Darwin. One is the redevelopment of the Wharf Precinct, which includes a large convention and exhibition centre, apartment housing including Outrigger Pandanas and Evolution on Gardiner, retail and entertainment outlets including a large wave pool and safe swimming lagoon. The Chinatown project has also started with plans to construct Chinese-themed retail and dining outlets.\nTourism.\nTourism is one of Darwin's largest industries and a major employment sector for the Northern Territory. In 2005\u20132006, 1.38\u00a0million people visited the Northern Territory. They stayed for 9.2\u00a0million nights and spent over $1.5\u00a0billion. The tourism industry directly employed 8,391 Territorians in June 2006, and, when indirect employment is included, tourism typically accounts for more than 14,000 jobs across the Territory.\nDarwin is a hub for tours to Kakadu National Park, Litchfield National Park and Katherine Gorge. The year is traditionally divided into the wet and dry seasons, but there are up to six traditional seasons in Darwin. It is warm and sunny from May to September. Humidity rises during the green season, from October to April, bringing thunderstorms and monsoonal rains that rejuvenate the landscape. Tourism is largely seasonal, with most tourists visiting during the cooler dry season, from April to September.\nMilitary.\nThe military presence in both Darwin and the wider Northern Territory is a substantial source of employment. On 16 November 2011, Prime Minister Julia Gillard and President Barack Obama announced that the United States would station troops in Australia for the first time since World War II. The agreement between the U.S. and Australia would involve a contingent of 250 Marines arriving in Darwin in 2012, with the total number rising to a maximum of 2,500 troops by 2017 on six-month rotations as well as a supporting air element including F-22 Raptors, F-35 Joint Strike Fighters and KC-135 refuellers. China and Indonesia have expressed concern about the decision. Some analysts have argued that an expanded U.S. presence could pose a threat to security. Gillard announced that the first 200 U.S. Marines had arrived in Darwin from Hawaii on 3 April 2012. In 2013, further news of other expansion vectors aired in U.S. media, with no comment or confirmation from Australian authorities. The agreement between the two governments remains hidden from public scrutiny. Marine numbers based in Darwin increased to more than 1,150 by 2014. In a 2019 telephone survey of local residents, 51% of respondents had positive feelings about the U.S. troop presence, with 6% responding negatively. In late 2021, the U.S. Department of Defense signed a contract to create a fuel storage facility at East Arm.\nDarwin hosts biennial multi-nation exercises named \"Pitch Black\"; in 2014 this involved military personnel from Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, and the United States.\nEducation.\nEducation is overseen territory-wide by the Department of Education and Training (DET), whose role is to continually improve education outcomes for all students, with a focus on Indigenous students.\nPreschool, primary and secondary.\nDarwin is served by a number of public and private schools that cater to local and overseas students. Over 16,500 primary and secondary students are enrolled in schools in Darwin, with 10,524 students attending primary education, and 5,932 students attending secondary education. Over 12,089 students are enrolled in government schools, and 2,124 in independent schools.\nThere were 9,764 students attending schools in the City of Darwin area. 6,045 students attended primary schools and 3,719 attended secondary schools. Over 7,161 students are enrolled in government schools and 1,108 in independent schools. There are over 35 primary and pre-schools and 12 secondary schools, including both government and non-government. Most schools in the city are secular, but there are a small number of Catholic and Lutheran institutions. Students intending to complete their secondary education work toward either the Northern Territory Certificate of Education, the Victorian Certificate of Education, or the Victorian Certificate of Applied Learning (the latter two are offered only at Haileybury Rendall School). Until the sale and restructuring of Kormilda College in 2018, it was the only school to offer the International Baccalaureate in the Northern Territory.\nSchools have been restructured into Primary, Middle, and High schools since the beginning of 2007.\nTertiary and vocational.\nDarwin's largest university is Charles Darwin University, the Northern Territory's central provider of tertiary education. It has both vocational and academic courses, acting as both a university and an Institute of TAFE. More than 5,500 students are enrolled in tertiary and further education courses.\nDarwin is also home to several private vocational colleges, including Alana Kaye College and Latitude College.\nArchitecture.\nAs Darwin was destroyed by cyclones several times and suffered severe bomb damage during World War II, few historic buildings remain in town. The Administrator's Office dating from 1883 was used as a law court and as a police station and was only slightly damaged by bombs, but in 1974, the cyclone completely destroyed it. In 1979, it was decided to rebuild, and the reconstruction was finished in 1981. The building houses government offices today. Opposite the building, Survivors Lookout offers a view of the marina.In a park in the south of the CBD, the ruin of the Town Hall built in 1883 and destroyed by the cyclone in 1974 can be seen. Browns Mart is a stone building dating from 1880 opposite the park. Browns Mart was originally used in many different activities including commerce, storage, shipping and insurance agency, mining exchange and meetings of local organisations but it was transformed into a theatre.\nOne of Darwin's most prominent buildings is the Chinese Temple, which was founded in 1887 and damaged by cyclones in 1897 and in 1937. It was severely damaged by bombs in 1942 and rebuilt after the war. On 24 December 1974 the cyclone completely destroyed it. Reconstruction was completed in 1978.\nThere are various modern churches in Darwin. St Mary's Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Cathedral was inaugurated in 1962. Christ Church Anglican Cathedral was rebuilt in 1977 after being severely damaged by bombs in 1942 and destroyed by Cyclone Tracy in 1974. The Uniting Memorial Church was built in 1960.\nArts and culture.\nThe Darwin Symphony Orchestra was assembled in 1989 and has performed throughout the Territory. The Darwin Theatre Company is a locally produced professional theatre production company, performing locally and nationally.\nThe Darwin Entertainment Centre is the city's main concert venue and hosts theatre and orchestral performances. Other theatres include the Darwin Convention Centre, which opened in July 2008. The Darwin Convention Centre is part of the $1.1\u00a0billion Darwin Waterfront project.\nThe Northern Territory Museum and Art Gallery (MAGNT) in Darwin gives an overview of the history of the area, including exhibits on Cyclone Tracy and the boats of the Pacific Islands. The MAGNT also organises the annual Telstra National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Art Award, the longest-running Indigenous art award in Australia. The MAGNT also manages the \"Defence of Darwin Experience\", a multi-media installation that tells the story of the Japanese air raids on Darwin during World War II.\nThe NT Dance Company is led by choreographer Gary Lang, who has been artistic director since 2012. Lang previously taught at many leading dance companies, including Bangarra Dance Theatre, after studying dance at NAISDA in Sydney and working as a dancer for years. The company has a strong focus on culture, and also works with disadvantaged young Indigenous people.\nLocal and visiting bands can be heard at venues including the Darwin Entertainment Centre, The Vic Hotel, Happy Yess, and Brown's Mart. Artists such as Jessica Mauboy and The Groovesmiths call Darwin home.\nThe multiculturalism of Darwin has helped make Southeast Asian noodle broth laksa the city's favourite meal.\nOther entertainment.\nWeekly markets include the popular Mindil Beach Sunset Market (Thursdays and Sundays during the dry season); Parap Market; Nightcliff Market; and Rapid Creek market.\nDarwin's only casino opened in 1979 as the Don Casino, operating out of the Don Hotel on Cavenagh Street. The present site of the hotel and casino on Darwin's Mindil Beach opened in 1983, at which point gambling operations ceased at the Don Hotel and resumed at the newly built facilities. The new hotel and casino was named Mindil Beach Casino until 1985, when the name changed to the Diamond Beach Hotel Casino. Upon its acquisition by MGM Grand the hotel was rebranded as the MGM Grand Darwin, before it changed to Skycity Darwin after Skycity Entertainment Group purchased the hotel in 2004.\nMitchell Street in the central business district is lined with nightclubs, takeaways, and restaurants. This is the city's entertainment hub. There are several smaller theatres, two cinema complexes (Casuarina, and Palmerston), and the Deckchair Cinema. An open-air cinema operates through the dry season, from April to October, screening independent and arthouse films.\nRecreation.\nBeaches.\nDuring the months of October\u2013May the sea contains deadly box jellyfish, known locally as stingers or sea wasps. Saltwater crocodiles are common in all waterways surrounding Darwin and are occasionally found in Darwin Harbour and on local beaches. An active trapping program is carried out by the NT Government to limit numbers of crocodiles within the Darwin urban waterway area.\nThe city has many kilometres of beaches, including the Casuarina Beach and renowned Mindil Beach, home of the Mindil Beach markets. Darwin City Council has designated an area of Casuarina Beach as a free beach, which has been designated as a nudist beach area since 1976.\nBundilla Beach was formerly named Vesteys Beach, as it was one of the beaches overlooked by Vestey's Meatworks, which existed from 1914 to 1920 and was involved in the Darwin rebellion. In March 2021, the beach was formally renamed Bundilla Beach, the name by which it had long been known to the traditional owners, the Larrakia people.\nThe Darwin Surf Life Saving Club operates longboats and surf skis and provides events and lifesaving accreditations.\nLake Alexander is a man-made swimming lake at East Point Reserve.\nFishing.\nFishing is a popular recreation among Darwin locals. Visitors fish for the barramundi, an iconic fish in the region. This fish thrives in the Daly River, Moyle River, Roper River, Anson Bay, Mary River, and South and East Alligator River.\nBlue-water fishing is also available off the coast of Darwin; Spanish mackerel, black jewfish, queenfish, and snapper are found in the area.\nParks and gardens.\nDarwin has extensive parks and gardens. These include the George Brown Darwin Botanic Gardens, East Point Reserve, Casuarina Coastal Reserve, Charles Darwin National Park, Knuckey Lagoons Conservation Reserve, Leanyer Recreation Park, the Nightcliff Foreshore, Bicentennial Park and the Jingili Water Gardens.\nWildlife.\nDarwin is a popular bird-watching site, with locations such as the George Brown Darwin Botanic Gardens, East Point Reserve, Buffalo Creek, Leanyer Ponds, and Knuckey Lagoon. Slightly further from the city is one of the best birding sites in the country, Fogg Dam Conservation Reserve.\nSome species of native mammals are more abundant in Darwin than in the surrounding native forest and woodland ecosystems of the region, including the common brushtail possum and black-footed tree-rat. This is likely due to the presence of well-watered gardens and parks, the absence of frequent fires, and the availability of denning sites (e.g. the roofs of houses).\nDarwin is also home to many species of frogs and reptiles. There are more species of snake in Darwin than any other Australian capital city, with 34 non-marine snake species found in the region, of which 23 have been recorded by professional snake catchers in Darwin itself. Fortunately for the citizens of Darwin, a far smaller proportion of these snakes are highly venomous than is typically found in other cities, due to the low numbers of front-fanged elapid species and dominance of relatively harmless pythons and colubrid species. Of the 23 more regularly encountered snake species in Darwin, it seems that species with broader habitat and dietary preferences, as well as a penchant for arboreality, are associated with more frequent human\u2013snake interactions. Shifts in snake behaviour or movement also occur throughout the year, with species specific differences in abundance and occurrence in certain months.\nSports.\nThe Marrara Sports Complex near the airport has stadiums for Australian rules (TIO Stadium), cricket, rugby league, football, basketball (and indoor court sports), athletics and field hockey. Every two years since 1991 (excluding 2003 due to the SARS outbreak), Darwin has hosted the Arafura Games, a major regional sporting event. In July 2003, the city hosted its first international test cricket match between Australia and Bangladesh, followed by Australia and Sri Lanka in 2004.\nAustralian rules is played all year round and the Territory's premier league competition, the Northern Territory Football League is based in Darwin. Australian Football League clubs generally sell a handful of games to the Northern Territory each year, some of which are played at Marrara Oval. Darwin is part of a bid for a Northern Territory AFL license for proposed entry into the competition by 2028 at the earliest. The Darwin-based Indigenous All-Stars have participated in the AFL pre-season competition. In 2003, a record crowd of 17,500 attended a pre-season game between the All-Stars and Carlton Football Club at Marrara.\nRugby League and Rugby Union club competitions are played in Darwin each year, organised by the NTRL and NTRU respectively. The Darwin Hottest Sevens in the World tournament is hosted in Darwin each January, with Rugby Sevens club teams from countries including Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Malaysia, and Singapore competing. Darwin's Hottest 7s is the richest Rugby 7s tournament in the Southern Hemisphere.\nDarwin hosts a round of the Supercars Championship every year, bringing thousands of motorsports fans to the Hidden Valley Raceway. Also in Hidden Valley, adjacent to the road-racing circuit, is Darwin's dirt track racing venue, Northline Speedway. The speedway has hosted a number of Australian Championships over the years for different categories including Sprintcars, Speedcars, and Super Sedans.\nThe Darwin Cup culminating on the first Monday of August is a popular horse race event for Darwin and draws large crowds every year to Fannie Bay Racecourse. While it is not as popular as the Melbourne Cup, it does draw a crowd and, in 2003, Sky Racing began televising most of the races. The Darwin Cup day is a public holiday for the Northern Territory (Picnic Day public holiday).\nThere is one greyhound racing track in Darwin at Winnellie Park on Hook Road. It is the only track in the Northern Territory.\nIn 2022, the Darwin Salties basketball club will debut in the Queensland-based NBL1 North competition, making the NBL1 the first Australian sport league to have clubs based in and playing out of every state and territory in Australia.\nMedia.\nDarwin's major newspapers are the \"Northern Territory News\" (Monday\u2013Saturday), \"The Sunday Territorian\" (Sunday), and the national daily, \"The Australian\" (Monday\u2013Friday) and \"The Weekend Australian\" (Saturday), all published by News Corp. Free weekly community newspapers include \"Sun Newspapers\" (delivered in Darwin, Palmerston and Litchfield), and published by the \"NT News\". Another newspaper, the \"Centralian Advocate\" (1947\u2013present), is printed in Darwin and trucked to Alice Springs.\nFormer publications in (or connected to) Darwin include:\nFive free-to-air channels service Darwin. Commercial television channels are provided by Seven Darwin (Seven Network affiliate), Nine Darwin (formerly branded as Channel 8) and Ten Darwin (Network Ten relay), which launched on 28 April 2008. The two government-owned national broadcast services in Darwin are the ABC and SBS. Subscription television services Foxtel via Cable and Fetch TV via IPTV are available in the Darwin/Palmerston/Litchfield areas.\nDarwin has radio stations on AM and FM frequencies, as well as on DAB+ (digital radio). ABC stations include ABC Local Radio (105.7 FM), ABC Radio National (657 AM), ABC News Radio (102.5 FM), ABC Classic (107.3 FM) and Triple J (103.3 FM). SBS Radio (100.9 FM) also broadcasts its national radio network to Darwin. There are three commercial radio stations, Hot 100, Mix 104.9 and Top Country 92.3. Other stations in Darwin include university-based station Territory FM 104.1, dance music station KIK FM 91.5, Palmerston FM 88.0 and Niche Radio 87.6 Non-English stations include Arabic-language channel 2ME 1638 AM, Chinese-language channel 2CR 1701 AM, Greek-language channel 2MM 1656AM, Italian-language channel Rete Italia 1476 AM and Spanish-language channel Radio Austral 90.7 FM. Indigenous community-based stations Radio Larrakia 94.5 FM and Radio Yolngu 1530 AM. The two sports stations TAB Radio 1242 AM and SEN 1611 AM. As well as Christian stations Faith 88.4 FM, Rhema 97.7 FM and Vision Radio 1323 AM.\nTransport.\nThe Territory's public transport services are managed by the Department of Lands and Planning, Public Transport Division. Darwin has a bus network serviced by a range of contracted bus operators, which provides transport to the main suburbs of Darwin.\nDarwin has no commuter rail system, but long-distance passenger rail services do operate out of the city. The Alice Springs-Darwin railway line was completed in 2003, linking Darwin to Adelaide. The first service ran in 2004. \"The Ghan\" passenger train service between Adelaide and Darwin railway station via Alice Springs and Katherine runs once per week in each direction, with some exceptions. \nHistorically, the North Australia Railway carried passengers and freight from Darwin into the interior, reaching Pine Creek in 1889, Katherine in 1917, and Birdum in 1929. It was closed due to declining traffic in 1976.\nDarwin International Airport, in the suburb of Eaton, is Darwin's only airport, which shares its runways with the Royal Australian Air Force's RAAF Base Darwin.\nDarwin can be reached via the Stuart Highway, which runs the length of the Northern Territory from Darwin through Katherine, Tennant Creek, Alice Springs, and on to Adelaide. Other major roads in Darwin include Tiger Brennan Drive, Amy Johnson Avenue, Dick Ward Drive, Bagot Road, Trower Road, and McMillans Road. Bus service in the greater Darwin area is provided by Darwinbus.\nPort.\nFerries leave from Port Darwin to island locations, mainly for tourists. A ferry service to the Tiwi Islands, the \"Arafura Pearl\", operates from Cullen Bay.\nDarwin has a deepwater port, East Arm Wharf, which opened in 2000. It has of wharfline and is capable of handling Panamax-sized ships of a maximum length of and a DWT of up to .\nInfrastructure.\nHealth.\nThe Government of the Northern Territory Department of Health and Families oversees one public hospital in the Darwin metropolitan region. The Royal Darwin Hospital, in Tiwi, is the city's major teaching and referral hospital, and the largest in the Northern Territory.\nThere is one major private hospital, Darwin Private Hospital, in Tiwi, adjacent to the Royal Darwin Hospital. Darwin Private Hospital is operated and owned by Healthscope Ltd, a private hospital corporation.\nA new hospital called Palmerston Regional Hospital was opened in August 2018 to help ease the pressure of patient numbers at the Royal Darwin Hospital.\nUtilities.\nWater storage, supply and power for Darwin is managed by PowerWater. The corporation is also responsible for management of sewage and the major water catchments in the region. Water is mainly stored in the largest dam, The Darwin River Dam, which holds up to 90% of Darwin's water supply. For many years, Darwin's principal water supply came from Manton Dam.\nDarwin and its suburbs, Palmerston and Katherine, are powered by the Channel Island Power Station, the Northern Territory's largest power plant, and the Weddell Power Station.\nTelecommunications.\nDarwin once had Australia's only international connection to the outside world in the form of an overseas telegraph cable, connecting Darwin to Java. The southern section of the cable connected Darwin with Adelaide and was known as the overland telegraph line. In 2022, the Northern Territory Government announced that an international undersea cable system would land into Darwin, directly connecting it to Indonesia, Singapore, the United States and Timor Leste. The new cable system, representing an investment of $700 million, is expected to create a new digital economy as it is coupled with recent announcements on Data Centre Investment into Darwin. The plans for Darwin for Data Centres and International cables are outlined in the Northern Territory's Digital Strategy the Terabit Territory."}
{"id": "8409", "revid": "36510957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8409", "title": "Dictator", "text": "A dictator is a political leader who possesses absolute power. A dictatorship is a state ruled by one dictator or by a polity. The word originated as the title of a Roman dictator elected by the Roman Senate to rule the republic in times of emergency. Like the terms \"tyrant\" and \"autocrat\", \"dictator\" came to be used almost exclusively as a non-titular term for oppressive rule. In modern usage the term \"dictator\" is generally used to describe a leader who holds or abuses an extraordinary amount of personal power. \nDictatorships are often characterised by some of the following: suspension of elections and civil liberties; proclamation of a state of emergency; rule by decree; repression of political opponents; not abiding by the procedures of the rule of law; and the existence of a cult of personality centered on the leader. Dictatorships are often one-party or dominant-party states. A wide variety of leaders coming to power in different kinds of regimes, such as one-party or dominant-party states and civilian governments under a personal rule, have been described as dictators.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dictator\" comes from the Latin word \"dict\u0101tor\", agent noun from \"dictare\" (say repeatedly, assert, order). A dictator was a Roman magistrate given sole power for a limited duration. Originally an emergency legal appointment in the Roman Republic and the Etruscan culture, the term \"dictator\" did not have the negative meaning it has now. It started to get its modern negative meaning with Cornelius Sulla's ascension to the dictatorship following Sulla's civil war, making himself the first Dictator in Rome in more than a century (during which the office was ostensibly abolished) as well as \"de facto\" eliminating the time limit and need of senatorial acclamation.\nHe avoided a major constitutional crisis by resigning the office after about one year, dying a few years later. Julius Caesar followed Sulla's example in 49 BC and in February 44 BC was proclaimed , \"Dictator in perpetuity\", officially doing away with any limitations on his power, which he kept until his assassination the following month. Following Caesar's assassination, his heir Augustus was offered the title of dictator, but he declined it. Later successors also declined the title of dictator, and usage of the title soon diminished among Roman rulers.\nModern era.\nAs late as the second half of the 19th century, the term \"dictator\" had occasional positive implications. For example, during the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, the national leader Lajos Kossuth was often referred to as dictator, without any negative connotations, by his supporters and detractors alike, although his official title was that of regent-president. When creating a provisional executive in Sicily during the Expedition of the Thousand in 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi officially assumed the title of \"dictator\" (see Dictatorship of Garibaldi). Shortly afterwards, during the 1863 January uprising in Poland, \"Dictator\" was also the official title of four leaders, the first being Ludwik Mieros\u0142awski.\nPast that time, however, the term \"dictator\" assumed an invariably negative connotation. In popular usage, a \"dictatorship\" is often associated with brutality and oppression. As a result, it is often also used as a term of abuse against political opponents. The term has also come to be associated with megalomania. Many dictators create a cult of personality around themselves and they have also come to grant themselves increasingly grandiloquent titles and honours. For instance, Idi Amin Dada, who had been a British army lieutenant prior to Uganda's independence from Britain in October 1962, subsequently styled himself \"His Excellency, President for Life, Field Marshal Al Hadji Doctor Idi Amin Dada, VC, DSO, MC, Conqueror of the British Empire in Africa in General and Uganda in Particular\". In the movie \"The Great Dictator\" (1940), Charlie Chaplin satirized not only Adolf Hitler but the institution of dictatorship itself.\nCharacteristics.\nBenevolent dictatorship.\nA benevolent dictatorship refers to a government in which an authoritarian leader exercises absolute political power over the state but is perceived to do so with regard for the benefit of the population as a whole, standing in contrast to the decidedly malevolent stereotype of a dictator. A benevolent dictator may allow for some civil liberties or democratic decision-making to exist, such as through public referendums or elected representatives with limited power, and often makes preparations for a transition to genuine democracy during or after their term. The label has been applied to leaders such as Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk of Turkey (1923\u201338), Josip Broz Tito of SFR Yugoslavia (1953\u201380), and Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore (1959\u201390).\nMilitary roles.\nThe association between a dictator and the military is a common one. Many dictators take great pains to emphasize their connections with the military and they often wear military uniforms. In some cases, this is perfectly legitimate; for instance, Francisco Franco was a general in the Spanish Army before he became Chief of State of Spain, and Manuel Noriega was officially commander of the Panamanian Defense Forces. In other cases, the association is mere pretense.\nCrowd manipulation.\nSome dictators have been masters of crowd manipulation, such as Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler. Others were more prosaic speakers, such as Joseph Stalin and Francisco Franco. Typically, the dictator's people seize control of all media, censor or destroy the opposition, and give strong doses of propaganda daily, often built around a cult of personality.\nMussolini and Hitler used similar, modest titles referring to them as \"the Leader\". Mussolini used \"Il Duce\" and Hitler was generally referred to as \"der F\u00fchrer\", both meaning 'Leader' in Italian and German respectively. Franco used a similar title, \"El Caudillo\" (\"the Head\", 'the chieftain') and for Stalin his adopted name, meaning \"Man of Steel\", became synonymous with his role as the absolute leader. For Mussolini, Hitler, and Franco, the use of modest, non-traditional titles displayed their absolute power even stronger as they did not need any, not even a historic legitimacy either. However, in the case of Franco, the title \"Caudillo\" did have a longer history for political-military figures in both Latin America and Spain. Franco also used the phrase \"By the Grace of God\" on coinage or other material displaying him as \"Caudillo\", whereas Hitler and Mussolini rarely used such language or imagery. \nHuman rights abuses, war crimes and genocides.\nOver time, dictators have been known to use tactics that violate human rights. For example, under the Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, government policy was enforced by secret police and the Gulag system of prison labour camps. Most Gulag inmates were not political prisoners, although significant numbers of political prisoners could be found in the camps at any one time. Data collected from Soviet archives gives the death toll from Gulags as 1,053,829. The International Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for Sudan's military dictator Omar al-Bashir over alleged war crimes in Darfur.\nSimilar crimes were committed during Chairman Mao Zedong's rule over the People's Republic of China during China's Cultural Revolution, where Mao set out to purge dissidents, primarily through the use of youth groups strongly committed to his cult of personality, and during Augusto Pinochet's junta in Chile. Some dictators have been associated with genocide on certain races or groups; the most notable and wide-reaching example is the Holocaust, Adolf Hitler's genocide of eleven million people, of whom six million were Jews. Later on in Democratic Kampuchea, General Secretary Pol Pot and his policies killed an estimated 1.7\u00a0million people (out of a population of 7 million) during his four-year dictatorship. As a result, Pol Pot is sometimes described as \"the Hitler of Cambodia\" and \"a genocidal tyrant\".\nModern usage in formal titles.\nBecause of its negative and pejorative connotations, modern authoritarian leaders very rarely (if ever) use the term \"dictator\" in their formal titles, instead they most often simply have title of president. In the 19th century, however, its official usage was more common:\nCriticism.\nThe usage of the term \"dictator\" in western media has been criticized by the left-leaning organization Fairness &amp; Accuracy in Reporting as \"Code for Government We Don't Like\". According to them, leaders that would generally be considered authoritarian but are allied with the United States such as Paul Biya or Nursultan Nazarbayev are rarely referred to as \"dictators\", while leaders of countries opposed to U.S. policy such as Nicol\u00e1s Maduro or Bashar al-Assad have the term applied to them much more liberally."}
{"id": "8410", "revid": "17678816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8410", "title": "Decibel", "text": "The decibel (symbol: dB) is a relative unit of measurement equal to one tenth of a bel (B). It expresses the ratio of two values of a power or root-power quantity on a logarithmic scale. Two signals whose levels differ by one decibel have a power ratio of 101/10 (approximately ) or root-power ratio of 101/20 (approximately ).\nThe unit fundamentally expresses a relative change but may also be used to express an absolute value as the ratio of a value to a fixed reference value; when used in this way, the unit symbol is often suffixed with letter codes that indicate the reference value. For example, for the reference value of 1\u00a0volt, a common suffix is \"V\" (e.g., \"20\u00a0dBV\").\nTwo principal types of scaling of the decibel are in common use. When expressing a power ratio, it is defined as ten times the logarithm with base 10. That is, a change in \"power\" by a factor of 10 corresponds to a 10\u00a0dB change in level. When expressing root-power quantities, a change in amplitude by a factor of 10 corresponds to a 20\u00a0dB change in level. The decibel scales differ by a factor of two, so that the related power and root-power levels change by the same value in linear systems, where power is proportional to the square of amplitude.\nThe definition of the decibel originated in the measurement of transmission loss and power in telephony of the early 20th century in the Bell System in the United States. The bel was named in honor of Alexander Graham Bell, but the bel is seldom used. Instead, the decibel is used for a wide variety of measurements in science and engineering, most prominently for sound power in acoustics, in electronics and control theory. In electronics, the gains of amplifiers, attenuation of signals, and signal-to-noise ratios are often expressed in decibels.\nHistory.\nThe decibel originates from methods used to quantify signal loss in telegraph and telephone circuits. Until the mid-1920s, the unit for loss was \"miles of standard cable\" (MSC). 1\u00a0MSC corresponded to the loss of power over one mile (approximately 1.6\u00a0km) of standard telephone cable at a frequency of \u00a0radians per second (795.8\u00a0Hz), and matched closely the smallest attenuation detectable to a listener. A standard telephone cable was \"a cable having uniformly distributed resistance of 88\u00a0ohms per loop-mile and uniformly distributed shunt capacitance of 0.054\u00a0microfarads per mile\" (approximately corresponding to 19\u00a0gauge wire).\nIn 1924, Bell Telephone Laboratories received a favorable response to a new unit definition among members of the International Advisory Committee on Long Distance Telephony in Europe and replaced the MSC with the \"Transmission Unit\" (TU). 1\u00a0TU was defined such that the number of TUs was ten times the base-10 logarithm of the ratio of measured power to a reference power.\nThe definition was conveniently chosen such that 1\u00a0TU approximated 1\u00a0MSC; specifically, 1\u00a0MSC was 1.056\u00a0TU. In 1928, the Bell system renamed the TU into the decibel, being one tenth of a newly defined unit for the base-10 logarithm of the power ratio. It was named the \"bel\", in honor of the telecommunications pioneer Alexander Graham Bell.\nThe bel is seldom used, as the decibel was the proposed working unit.\nThe naming and early definition of the decibel is described in the NBS Standard's Yearbook of 1931:\nIn 1954, J. W. Horton argued that the use of the decibel as a unit for quantities other than transmission loss led to confusion, and suggested the name \"logit\" for \"standard magnitudes which combine by multiplication\", to contrast with the name \"unit\" for \"standard magnitudes which combine by addition\".\nIn April\u00a02003, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) considered a recommendation for the inclusion of the decibel in the International System of Units (SI), but decided against the proposal. However, the decibel is recognized by other international bodies such as the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and International Organization for Standardization (ISO). The IEC permits the use of the decibel with root-power quantities as well as power and this recommendation is followed by many national standards bodies, such as NIST, which justifies the use of the decibel for voltage ratios. In spite of their widespread use, suffixes (such as in dBA or dBV) are not recognized by the IEC or ISO.\nDefinition.\nThe IEC Standard 60027-3:2002 defines the following quantities. The decibel (dB) is one-tenth of a bel: . The bel (B) is \u00a0ln(10) nepers: . The neper is the change in the level of a root-power quantity when the root-power quantity changes by a factor of \"e\", that is , thereby relating all of the units as nondimensional natural \"log\" of root-power-quantity ratios, =\u00a0 =\u00a0. Finally, the level of a quantity is the logarithm of the ratio of the value of that quantity to a reference value of the same kind of quantity.\nTherefore, the bel represents the logarithm of a ratio between two power quantities of 10:1, or the logarithm of a ratio between two root-power quantities of :1.\nTwo signals whose levels differ by one decibel have a power ratio of 101/10, which is approximately , and an amplitude (root-power quantity) ratio of 101/20 ().\nThe bel is rarely used either without a prefix or with SI unit prefixes other than \"deci\"; it is customary, for example, to use \"hundredths of a decibel\" rather than \"millibels\". Thus, five one-thousandths of a bel would normally be written 0.05\u00a0dB, and not 5\u00a0mB.\nThe method of expressing a ratio as a level in decibels depends on whether the measured property is a \"power quantity\" or a \"root-power quantity\"; see \"Power, root-power, and field quantities\" for details.\nPower quantities.\nWhen referring to measurements of \"power\" quantities, a ratio can be expressed as a level in decibels by evaluating ten times the base-10 logarithm of the ratio of the measured quantity to reference value. Thus, the ratio of \"P\" (measured power) to \"P\"0 (reference power) is represented by \"L\"\"P\", that ratio expressed in decibels, which is calculated using the formula:\nThe base-10 logarithm of the ratio of the two power quantities is the number of bels. The number of decibels is ten times the number of bels (equivalently, a decibel is one-tenth of a bel). \"P\" and \"P\"0 must measure the same type of quantity, and have the same units before calculating the ratio. If in the above equation, then \"L\"\"P\" = 0. If \"P\" is greater than \"P\"0 then \"L\"\"P\" is positive; if \"P\" is less than \"P\"0 then \"L\"\"P\" is negative.\nRearranging the above equation gives the following formula for \"P\" in terms of \"P\"0 and \"L\"\"P\" :\nRoot-power (field) quantities.\nWhen referring to measurements of root-power quantities, it is usual to consider the ratio of the squares of \"F\" (measured) and \"F\"0 (reference). This is because the definitions were originally formulated to give the same value for relative ratios for both power and root-power quantities. Thus, the following definition is used:\nThe formula may be rearranged to give\nSimilarly, in electrical circuits, dissipated power is typically proportional to the square of voltage or current when the impedance is constant. Taking voltage as an example, this leads to the equation for power gain level \"L\"\"G\":\nwhere \"V\"out is the root-mean-square (rms) output voltage, \"V\"in is the rms input voltage. A similar formula holds for current.\nThe term \"root-power quantity\" is introduced by ISO Standard 80000-1:2009 as a substitute of \"field quantity\". The term \"field quantity\" is deprecated by that standard and \"root-power\" is used throughout this article.\nRelationship between power and root-power levels.\nAlthough power and root-power quantities are different quantities, their respective levels are historically measured in the same units, typically decibels. A factor of 2 is introduced to make \"changes\" in the respective levels match under restricted conditions such as when the medium is linear and the \"same\" waveform is under consideration with changes in amplitude, or the medium impedance is linear and independent of both frequency and time. This relies on the relationship\nholding. In a nonlinear system, this relationship does not hold by the definition of linearity. However, even in a linear system in which the power quantity is the product of two linearly related quantities (e.g. voltage and current), if the impedance is frequency- or time-dependent, this relationship does not hold in general, for example if the energy spectrum of the waveform changes.\nFor differences in level, the required relationship is relaxed from that above to one of proportionality (i.e., the reference quantities \"P\" and \"F\" need not be related), or equivalently,\nmust hold to allow the power level difference to be equal to the root-power level difference from power \"P\" and \"F\" to \"P\" and \"F\". An example might be an amplifier with unity voltage gain independent of load and frequency driving a load with a frequency-dependent impedance: the relative voltage gain of the amplifier is always 0\u00a0dB, but the power gain depends on the changing spectral composition of the waveform being amplified. Frequency-dependent impedances may be analyzed by considering the quantities power spectral density and the associated root-power quantities via the Fourier transform, which allows elimination of the frequency dependence in the analysis by analyzing the system at each frequency independently.\nConversions.\nSince logarithm differences measured in these units often represent power ratios and root-power ratios, values for both are shown below. The bel is traditionally used as a unit of logarithmic power ratio, while the neper is used for logarithmic root-power (amplitude) ratio.\nExamples.\nThe unit dBW is often used to denote a ratio for which the reference is 1\u00a0W, and similarly dBm for a reference point.\n, illustrating the consequence from the definitions above that \"L\"\"G\" has the same value, 30\u00a0dB, regardless of whether it is obtained from powers or from amplitudes, provided that in the specific system being considered power ratios are equal to amplitude ratios squared.\nA change in power ratio by a factor of 10 corresponds to a change in level of . A change in power ratio by a factor of 2 or is approximately a change of 3\u00a0dB. More precisely, the change is \u00b1\u00a0dB, but this is almost universally rounded to 3\u00a0dB in technical writing. This implies an increase in voltage by a factor of . Likewise, a doubling or halving of the voltage, corresponding to a quadrupling or quartering of the power, is commonly described as 6\u00a0dB rather than \u00b1\u00a0dB.\nShould it be necessary to make the distinction, the number of decibels is written with additional significant figures. 3.000\u00a0dB corresponds to a power ratio of 103/10, or , about 0.24% different from exactly 2, and a voltage ratio of , about 0.12% different from exactly . Similarly, an increase of 6.000\u00a0dB corresponds to a power ratio of , about 0.5% different from 4.\nProperties.\nThe decibel is useful for representing large ratios and for simplifying representation of multiplicative effects, such as attenuation from multiple sources along a signal chain. Its application in systems with additive effects is less intuitive, such as in the combined sound pressure level of two machines operating together. Care is also necessary with decibels directly in fractions and with the units of multiplicative operations.\nReporting large ratios.\nThe logarithmic scale nature of the decibel means that a very large range of ratios can be represented by a convenient number, in a manner similar to scientific notation. This allows one to clearly visualize huge changes of some quantity. See \"Bode plot\" and \"Semi-log plot\". For example, 120\u00a0dB SPL may be clearer than \"a trillion times more intense than the threshold of hearing\".\nRepresentation of multiplication operations.\nLevel values in decibels can be added instead of multiplying the underlying power values, which means that the overall gain of a multi-component system, such as a series of amplifier stages, can be calculated by summing the gains in decibels of the individual components, rather than multiply the amplification factors; that is, = log(\"A\") + log(\"B\") + log(\"C\"). Practically, this means that, armed only with the knowledge that 1\u00a0dB is a power gain of approximately 26%, 3\u00a0dB is approximately 2\u00d7 power gain, and 10\u00a0dB is 10\u00d7 power gain, it is possible to determine the power ratio of a system from the gain in dB with only simple addition and multiplication. For example:\nHowever, according to its critics, the decibel creates confusion, obscures reasoning, is more related to the era of slide rules than to modern digital processing, and is cumbersome and difficult to interpret.\nQuantities in decibels are not necessarily additive, thus being \"of unacceptable form for use in dimensional analysis\".\nThus, units require special care in decibel operations. Take, for example, carrier-to-noise-density ratio \"C\"/\"N\"0 (in hertz), involving carrier power \"C\" (in watts) and noise power spectral density \"N\"0 (in W/Hz). Expressed in decibels, this ratio would be a subtraction (\"C\"/\"N\"0)dB = \"C\"dB \u2212 \"N\"0\u00a0dB. However, the linear-scale units still simplify in the implied fraction, so that the results would be expressed in dB-Hz.\nRepresentation of addition operations.\nAccording to Mitschke, \"The advantage of using a logarithmic measure is that in a transmission chain, there are many elements concatenated, and each has its own gain or attenuation. To obtain the total, addition of decibel values is much more convenient than multiplication of the individual factors.\" However, for the same reason that humans excel at additive operation over multiplication, decibels are awkward in inherently additive operations:if two machines each individually produce a sound pressure level of, say, 90\u00a0dB at a certain point, then when both are operating together we should expect the combined sound pressure level to increase to 93\u00a0dB, but certainly not to 180\u00a0dB!; suppose that the noise from a machine is measured (including the contribution of background noise) and found to be 87\u00a0dBA but when the machine is switched off the background noise alone is measured as 83\u00a0dBA. [...] the machine noise [level (alone)] may be obtained by 'subtracting' the 83\u00a0dBA background noise from the combined level of 87\u00a0dBA; i.e., 84.8\u00a0dBA.; in order to find a representative value of the sound level in a room a number of measurements are taken at different positions within the room, and an average value is calculated. [...] Compare the logarithmic and arithmetic averages of [...] 70\u00a0dB and 90\u00a0dB: logarithmic average = 87\u00a0dB; arithmetic average = 80\u00a0dB.\nAddition on a logarithmic scale is called logarithmic addition, and can be defined by taking exponentials to convert to a linear scale, adding there, and then taking logarithms to return. For example, where operations on decibels are logarithmic addition/subtraction and logarithmic multiplication/division, while operations on the linear scale are the usual operations:\nThe logarithmic mean is obtained from the logarithmic sum by subtracting formula_14, since logarithmic division is linear subtraction.\nFractions.\nAttenuation constants, in topics such as optical fiber communication and radio propagation path loss, are often expressed as a fraction or ratio to distance of transmission. In this case, dB/m represents decibel per meter, dB/mi represents decibel per mile, for example. These quantities are to be manipulated obeying the rules of dimensional analysis, e.g., a 100-meter run with a 3.5\u00a0dB/km fiber yields a loss of 0.35\u00a0dB = 3.5\u00a0dB/km \u00d7 0.1\u00a0km.\nUses.\nPerception.\nThe human perception of the intensity of sound and light more nearly approximates the logarithm of intensity rather than a linear relationship (see Weber\u2013Fechner law), making the dB scale a useful measure.\nAcoustics.\nThe decibel is commonly used in acoustics as a unit of sound power level or sound pressure level. The reference pressure for sound in air is set at the typical threshold of perception of an average human and there are common comparisons used to illustrate different levels of sound pressure. As sound pressure is a root-power quantity, the appropriate version of the unit definition is used:\nwhere \"p\"rms is the root mean square of the measured sound pressure and \"p\"ref is the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals in air or 1 micropascal in water.\nUse of the decibel in underwater acoustics leads to confusion, in part because of this difference in reference value.\nSound intensity is proportional to the square of sound pressure. Therefore, the sound intensity level can also be defined as:\nThe human ear has a large dynamic range in sound reception. The ratio of the sound intensity that causes permanent damage during short exposure to that of the quietest sound that the ear can hear is equal to or greater than 1 trillion (1012). Such large measurement ranges are conveniently expressed in logarithmic scale: the base-10 logarithm of 1012 is 12, which is expressed as a sound intensity level of 120\u00a0dB re 1 pW/m2. The reference values of I and p in air have been chosen such that this corresponds approximately to a sound pressure level of 120\u00a0dB re 20\u00a0\u03bcPa.\nSince the human ear is not equally sensitive to all sound frequencies, the acoustic power spectrum is modified by frequency weighting (A-weighting being the most common standard) to get the weighted acoustic power before converting to a sound level or noise level in decibels.\nTelephony.\nThe decibel is used in telephony and audio. Similarly to the use in acoustics, a frequency weighted power is often used. For audio noise measurements in electrical circuits, the weightings are called psophometric weightings.\nElectronics.\nIn electronics, the decibel is often used to express power or amplitude ratios (as for gains) in preference to arithmetic ratios or percentages. One advantage is that the total decibel gain of a series of components (such as amplifiers and attenuators) can be calculated simply by summing the decibel gains of the individual components. Similarly, in telecommunications, decibels denote signal gain or loss from a transmitter to a receiver through some medium (free space, waveguide, coaxial cable, fiber optics, etc.) using a link budget.\nThe decibel unit can also be combined with a reference level, often indicated via a suffix, to create an absolute unit of electric power. For example, it can be combined with \"m\" for \"milliwatt\" to produce the \"dBm\". A power level of 0 dBm corresponds to one milliwatt, and 1 dBm is one decibel greater (about 1.259\u00a0mW).\nIn professional audio specifications, a popular unit is the dBu. This is relative to the root mean square voltage which delivers 1\u00a0mW (0\u00a0dBm) into a 600-ohm resistor, or \u2248 0.775\u00a0VRMS. When used in a 600-ohm circuit (historically, the standard reference impedance in telephone circuits), dBu and dBm are identical.\nOptics.\nIn an optical link, if a known amount of optical power, in dBm (referenced to 1\u00a0mW), is launched into a fiber, and the losses, in dB (decibels), of each component (e.g., connectors, splices, and lengths of fiber) are known, the overall link loss may be quickly calculated by addition and subtraction of decibel quantities.\nIn spectrometry and optics, the blocking unit used to measure optical density is equivalent to \u22121\u00a0B.\nVideo and digital imaging.\nIn connection with video and digital image sensors, decibels generally represent ratios of video voltages or digitized light intensities, using 20\u00a0log of the ratio, even when the represented intensity (optical power) is directly proportional to the voltage generated by the sensor, not to its square, as in a CCD imager where response voltage is linear in intensity.\nThus, a camera signal-to-noise ratio or dynamic range quoted as 40\u00a0dB represents a ratio of 100:1 between optical signal intensity and optical-equivalent dark-noise intensity, not a 10,000:1 intensity (power) ratio as 40\u00a0dB might suggest.\nSometimes the 20\u00a0log ratio definition is applied to electron counts or photon counts directly, which are proportional to sensor signal amplitude without the need to consider whether the voltage response to intensity is linear.\nHowever, as mentioned above, the 10\u00a0log intensity convention prevails more generally in physical optics, including fiber optics, so the terminology can become murky between the conventions of digital photographic technology and physics. Most commonly, quantities called \"dynamic range\" or \"signal-to-noise\" (of the camera) would be specified in 20\u00a0log dB, but in related contexts (e.g. attenuation, gain, intensifier SNR, or rejection ratio) the term should be interpreted cautiously, as confusion of the two units can result in very large misunderstandings of the value.\nPhotographers typically use an alternative base-2 log unit, the stop, to describe light intensity ratios or dynamic range.\nSuffixes and reference values.\nSuffixes are commonly attached to the basic dB unit in order to indicate the reference value by which the ratio is calculated. For example, dBm indicates power measurement relative to 1\u00a0milliwatt.\nIn cases where the unit value of the reference is stated, the decibel value is known as \"absolute\". If the unit value of the reference is not explicitly stated, as in the dB gain of an amplifier, then the decibel value is considered relative.\nThis form of attaching suffixes to dB is widespread in practice, albeit being against the rules promulgated by standards bodies (ISO and IEC), given the \"unacceptability of attaching information to units\" and the \"unacceptability of mixing information with units\". The IEC 60027-3 standard recommends the following format: or as , where \"x\" is the quantity symbol and \"x\"ref is the value of the reference quantity, e.g., \u00a0=\u00a020\u00a0dB or =\u00a020\u00a0dB for the electric field strength \"E\" relative to 1\u00a0\u03bcV/m reference value.\nIf the measurement result 20\u00a0dB is presented separately, it can be specified using the information in parentheses, which is then part of the surrounding text and not a part of the unit: 20\u00a0dB (re: 1\u00a0\u03bcV/m) or 20\u00a0dB (1\u00a0\u03bcV/m).\nOutside of documents adhering to SI units, the practice is very common as illustrated by the following examples. There is no general rule, with various discipline-specific practices. Sometimes the suffix is a unit symbol (\"W\",\"K\",\"m\"), sometimes it is a transliteration of a unit symbol (\"uV\" instead of \u03bcV for microvolt), sometimes it is an acronym for the unit's name (\"sm\" for square meter, \"m\" for milliwatt), other times it is a mnemonic for the type of quantity being calculated (\"i\" for antenna gain with respect to an isotropic antenna, \"\u03bb\" for anything normalized by the EM wavelength), or otherwise a general attribute or identifier about the nature of the quantity (\"A\" for A-weighted sound pressure level). The suffix is often connected with a hyphen, as in \"dBHz\", or with a space, as in \"dB\u00a0HL\", or enclosed in parentheses, as in \"dB(HL)\", or with no intervening character, as in \"dBm\" (which is non-compliant with international standards).\nList of suffixes.\nVoltage.\nSince the decibel is defined with respect to \"power\", not \"amplitude\", conversions of voltage ratios to decibels must square the amplitude, or use the factor of 20 instead of 10, as discussed above.\nAcoustics.\nProbably the most common usage of \"decibels\" in reference to sound level is dB, sound pressure level referenced to the nominal threshold of human hearing: The measures of pressure (a root-power quantity) use the factor of 20, and the measures of power (e.g. dB and dB) use the factor of 10.\nAudio electronics.\nSee also dB and dB above."}
{"id": "8411", "revid": "8158242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8411", "title": "Darwinism", "text": "Darwinism is a term used to describe a theory of biological evolution developed by the English naturalist Charles Darwin (1809\u20131882) and others. The theory states that all species of organisms arise and develop through the natural selection of small, inherited variations that increase the individual's ability to compete, survive, and reproduce. Also called Darwinian theory, it originally included the broad concepts of transmutation of species or of evolution which gained general scientific acceptance after Darwin published \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859, including concepts which predated Darwin's theories. English biologist Thomas Henry Huxley coined the term \"Darwinism\" in April 1860. \nTerminology.\nDarwinism subsequently referred to the specific concepts of natural selection, the Weismann barrier, or the central dogma of molecular biology. Though the term usually refers strictly to biological evolution, creationists have appropriated it to refer to the origin of life or to cosmic evolution, that are distinct to biological evolution, and therefore consider it to be the belief and acceptance of Darwin's and of his predecessors' work, in place of other concepts, including divine design and extraterrestrial origins.\nEnglish biologist Thomas Henry Huxley coined the term \"Darwinism\" in April 1860. It was used to describe evolutionary concepts in general, including earlier concepts published by English philosopher Herbert Spencer. Many of the proponents of Darwinism at that time, including Huxley, had reservations about the significance of natural selection, and Darwin himself gave credence to what was later called Lamarckism. The strict neo-Darwinism of German evolutionary biologist August Weismann gained few supporters in the late 19th century. During the approximate period of the 1880s to about 1920, sometimes called \"the eclipse of Darwinism\", scientists proposed various alternative evolutionary mechanisms which eventually proved untenable. The development of the modern synthesis in the early 20th century, incorporating natural selection with population genetics and Mendelian genetics, revived Darwinism in an updated form.\nWhile the term \"Darwinism\" has remained in use amongst the public when referring to modern evolutionary theory, it has increasingly been argued by science writers such as Olivia Judson, Eugenie Scott, and Carl Safina that it is an inappropriate term for modern evolutionary theory. For example, Darwin was unfamiliar with the work of the Moravian scientist and Augustinian friar Gregor Mendel, and as a result had only a vague and inaccurate understanding of heredity. He naturally had no inkling of later theoretical developments and, like Mendel himself, knew nothing of genetic drift, for example.\nIn the United States and to some extent in the United Kingdom, creationists often use the term \"Darwinism\" as a pejorative term in reference to beliefs such as scientific materialism.\nHuxley.\nHuxley, upon first reading Darwin's theory in 1858, responded, \"How extremely stupid not to have thought of that!\"\nWhile the term \"Darwinism\" had been used previously to refer to the work of Erasmus Darwin in the late 18th century, the term as understood today was introduced when Charles Darwin's 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\" was reviewed by Thomas Henry Huxley in the April 1860 issue of \"The Westminster Review\". Having hailed the book as \"a veritable Whitworth gun in the armoury of liberalism\" promoting scientific naturalism over theology, and praising the usefulness of Darwin's ideas while expressing professional reservations about Darwin's gradualism and doubting if it could be proved that natural selection could form new species, Huxley compared Darwin's achievement to that of Nicolaus Copernicus in explaining planetary motion:\nThese are the basic tenets of evolution by natural selection as defined by Darwin:\nOther 19th-century usage.\n\"Darwinism\" soon came to stand for an entire range of evolutionary (and often revolutionary) philosophies about both biology and society. One of the more prominent approaches, summed in the 1864 phrase \"survival of the fittest\" by Herbert Spencer, later became emblematic of Darwinism even though Spencer's own understanding of evolution (as expressed in 1857) was more similar to that of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck than to that of Darwin, and predated the publication of Darwin's theory in 1859. What is now called \"Social Darwinism\" was, in its day, synonymous with \"Darwinism\"\u2014the application of Darwinian principles of \"struggle\" to society, usually in support of anti-philanthropic political agenda. Another interpretation, one notably favoured by Darwin's half-cousin Francis Galton, was that \"Darwinism\" implied that because natural selection was apparently no longer working on \"civilized\" people, it was possible for \"inferior\" strains of people (who would normally be filtered out of the gene pool) to overwhelm the \"superior\" strains, and voluntary corrective measures would be desirable\u2014the foundation of eugenics.\nIn Darwin's day there was no rigid definition of the term \"Darwinism\", and it was used by opponents and proponents of Darwin's biological theory alike to mean whatever they wanted it to in a larger context. The ideas had international influence, and Ernst Haeckel developed what was known as \"Darwinismus\" in Germany, although, like Spencer's \"evolution\", Haeckel's \"Darwinism\" had only a rough resemblance to the theory of Charles Darwin, and was not centred on natural selection. In 1886, Alfred Russel Wallace went on a lecture tour across the United States, starting in New York and going via Boston, Washington, Kansas, Iowa and Nebraska to California, lecturing on what he called \"Darwinism\" without any problems.\nIn his book \"Darwinism\" (1889), Wallace had used the term \"pure-Darwinism\" which proposed a \"greater efficacy\" for natural selection. George Romanes dubbed this view as \"Wallaceism\", noting that in contrast to Darwin, this position was advocating a \"pure theory of natural selection to the exclusion of any supplementary theory.\" Taking influence from Darwin, Romanes was a proponent of both natural selection and the inheritance of acquired characteristics. The latter was denied by Wallace who was a strict selectionist. Romanes' definition of Darwinism conformed directly with Darwin's views and was contrasted with Wallace's definition of the term.\nContemporary usage.\nThe term \"Darwinism\" is often used in the United States by promoters of creationism, notably by leading members of the intelligent design movement, as an epithet to attack evolution as though it were an ideology (an \"ism\") based on philosophical naturalism, atheism, or both. For example, in 1993, UC Berkeley law professor and author Phillip E. Johnson made this accusation of atheism with reference to Charles Hodge's 1874 book \"What Is Darwinism?\" However, unlike Johnson, Hodge confined the term to exclude those like American botanist Asa Gray who combined Christian faith with support for Darwin's natural selection theory, before answering the question posed in the book's title by concluding: \"It is Atheism.\"\nCreationists use pejoratively the term \"Darwinism\" to imply that the theory has been held as true only by Darwin and a core group of his followers, whom they cast as dogmatic and inflexible in their belief. In the 2008 documentary film \"\", which promotes intelligent design (ID), American writer and actor Ben Stein refers to scientists as Darwinists. Reviewing the film for \"Scientific American\", John Rennie says \"The term is a curious throwback, because in modern biology almost no one relies solely on Darwin's original ideas ... Yet the choice of terminology isn't random: Ben Stein wants you to stop thinking of evolution as an actual science supported by verifiable facts and logical arguments and to start thinking of it as a dogmatic, atheistic ideology akin to Marxism.\"\nHowever, \"Darwinism\" is also used neutrally within the scientific community to distinguish the modern evolutionary synthesis, which is sometimes called \"neo-Darwinism\", from those first proposed by Darwin. \"Darwinism\" also is used neutrally by historians to differentiate his theory from other evolutionary theories current around the same period. For example, \"Darwinism\" may refer to Darwin's proposed mechanism of natural selection, in comparison to more recent mechanisms such as genetic drift and gene flow. It may also refer specifically to the role of Charles Darwin as opposed to others in the history of evolutionary thought\u2014particularly contrasting Darwin's results with those of earlier theories such as Lamarckism or later ones such as the modern evolutionary synthesis.\nIn political discussions in the United States, the term is mostly used by its enemies. Biologist E. O. Wilson at Harvard University described the term as being \"a rhetorical device to make evolution seem like a kind of faith, like 'Maoism [...] Scientists don't call it 'Darwinism'.\" In the United Kingdom, the term often retains its positive sense as a reference to natural selection, and for example British ethologist and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins wrote in his collection of essays \"A Devil's Chaplain\", published in 2003, that as a scientist he is a Darwinist.\nIn his 1995 book \"Darwinian Fairytales\", Australian philosopher David Stove used the term \"Darwinism\" in a different sense from the above examples. Describing himself as non-religious and as accepting the concept of natural selection as a well-established fact, Stove nonetheless attacked what he described as flawed concepts proposed by some \"Ultra-Darwinists\". Stove alleged that by using weak or false \"ad hoc\" reasoning, these Ultra-Darwinists used evolutionary concepts to offer explanations that were not valid: for example, Stove suggested that the sociobiological explanation of altruism as an evolutionary feature was presented in such a way that the argument was effectively immune to any criticism. English philosopher Simon Blackburn wrote a rejoinder to Stove, though a subsequent essay by Stove's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 James Franklin suggested that Blackburn's response actually \"confirms Stove's central thesis that Darwinism can 'explain' anything.\"\nIn more recent times, the Australian moral philosopher and professor Peter Singer, who serves as the Ira\u00a0W. DeCamp Professor of Bioethics at Princeton University, has proposed the development of a \"Darwinian left\" based on the contemporary scientific understanding of biological anthropology, human evolution, and applied ethics in order to achieve the establishment of a more equal and cooperative human society in accordance with the sociobiological explanation of altruism.\nEsoteric usage.\nIn evolutionary aesthetics theory, there is evidence that perceptions of beauty are determined by natural selection and therefore Darwinian; that things, aspects of people and landscapes considered beautiful are typically found in situations likely to give enhanced survival of the perceiving human's genes."}
{"id": "8412", "revid": "31567860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8412", "title": "Doraemon", "text": " is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Fujiko F. Fujio. First serialized in 1969, the manga's chapters were collected in 45 volumes published by Shogakukan from 1974 to 1996. The story revolves around an earless robotic cat named Doraemon, who travels back from the 22nd century to help a boy named Nobita Nobi.\nThe manga spawned a media franchise. Three anime TV series have been adapted in 1973, 1979, and 2005. Additionally, Shin-Ei Animation has produced over forty animated films, including two 3D computer-animated films, all of which are distributed by Toho. Various types of merchandise and media have been developed, including soundtrack albums, video games, and musicals. The manga series was licensed for an English language release in North America, via Amazon Kindle, by a collaboration of Fujiko F. Fujio Pro with Voyager Japan and AltJapan Co., Ltd. The anime series was licensed by Disney for an English-language release in North America in 2014, and LUK International in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.\n\"Doraemon\" was well received by critics and became a hit in many Asian countries. It won numerous awards, including the Japan Cartoonists Association Award in 1973 and 1994, the Shogakukan Manga Award for children's manga in 1982, and the Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize in 1997. As of 2024, it has sold over 300 million copies worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling manga series of all time. The character of Doraemon has been viewed as a Japanese cultural icon, and was appointed as the first \"anime ambassador\" in 2008 by the country's Foreign Ministry.\nSynopsis.\nNobita Nobi is a ten-year-old Japanese school boy, who is kind-hearted and honest, but also lazy, unlucky, weak, gets bad grades and is bad at sports. One day, a blue robot cat from the 22nd century named Doraemon is sent back to the past by Nobita's future great-great-grandson, Sewashi Nobi, to take care of Nobita so that his descendants can have a better life. Doraemon has a four-dimensional pocket in which he stores tools, inventions, and gadgets from the future to aid Nobita whenever he is faced with a problem. Although Doraemon is a cat robot, he has a fear of mice because of an incident where robotic mice chewed off his ears. This is why Doraemon lost his original yellow color and turned blue, from sadness.\nNobita has three main friends: Takeshi Goda (nicknamed Gian), Suneo Honekawa (Gian's sidekick), and Shizuka Minamoto, Nobita's best friend and love-interest. Gian is a strong, leading and domineering boy, but also loyal to his friends. Suneo is a wealthy and spoiled boy who uses his friendship with Gian to win the respect of other schoolmates. Shizuka is a gentle and kind girl who frequently plays with Nobita. Nobita has a crush on Shizuka; she is his prospective future wife (Nobita's future wife is initially Gian's younger sister). Although Gian and Suneo are Nobita's friends, they also typically bully and abuse him. Nobita normally responds by using Doraemon's gadgets to fight back against them, but Nobita has a tendency to get carried away with using the gadgets (or Gian and Suneo, if they steal it away), which typically results in unintended consequences for him and others.\nIn addition to Gian, Suneo, and Shizuka, Dorami and Hidetoshi Dekisugi are also recurring characters. Dorami is Doraemon's younger sister, and Dekisugi is a gifted student boy who as Shizuka's close friend, frequently attracts the jealousy of Nobita.\nCreation and conception.\nDevelopment and themes.\n\"Doraemon\" is written and illustrated by Fujiko F. Fujio, the pen name of Japanese manga artist Hiroshi Fujimoto. According to Fujio, it was originally conceived following a series of three events: when searching for ideas for a new manga, he wished a machine existed that would come up with ideas for him, he tripped over his daughter's toy, and heard cats fighting in his neighborhood. To set up the plot and characters, he used some elements from his earlier manga series, \"Obake no Q-Tar\u014d\", which involve an living with humans, with a similar formula. Fujio said that the idea for \"Doraemon\" came after \"an accumulation of trial and error\", during which he finally found the most suitable style of manga to him. Initially, the series achieved little success as was well known at the time, and only became a hit after its adaptation into an anime TV series and multiple feature films.\n\"Doraemon\" is mainly aimed at children, so Fujio chose to create the character with a simple graphic style, based on shapes such as circles and ellipses. He used the same sequences of cartoons with regularity and continuity to enhance the reader's ease of understanding. In addition, blue, a characteristic color of Doraemon, was chosen as the main color in magazine publications, which used to have a yellow cover and red title. Set in Tokyo, the manga reflected parts of Japan's society, such as the class system and the \"ideal\" of Japanese childhood. Problems, if occur, were resolved in a way so as not to rely on violence and eroticism, and the stories were integrated with the concept of environmentalism. The manga also insisted on the ethical values of integrity, perseverance, courage, family and respect.\nIn order to underline the crucial role of the young generation in society, the manga's creator chose to have the act carried out in a \"children's domain\" where young people can live with happiness, freedom and power without adult's interference. As Saya S. Shiraishi noted, the existence of the \"domain\" helped \"Doraemon\" to have a strong appeal in various Asian countries. During \"Doraemon\"'s development, Fujio did not express a change in characters; he said, \"When a manga hero become a success, the manga suddenly stops being interesting. So the hero has to be like the stripes on a barber pole; he seems to keep moving upward, but actually he stays in the same place.\"\nAccording to Zensho Ito, Fujio's former student, the \"length\" of time in the universe is one of the ideas that inspired Fujio to make \"Doraemon\". Frequently displayed in its stories is Nobita's desire to control time, and there exist time-control gadgets that he uses to satisfy that desire, particularly the \"Time Machine\", which lies in his desk drawer. Unlike Western works on science fiction, the manga did not explain the theory nor the applied technology behind these tools, but instead focusing on how the characters exploit their advantages, making it more children-friendly.\nOrigin of the name.\nThe name \"Doraemon\" can be roughly translated to \"stray\". Unusually, the name is written in a mixture of two Japanese scripts: Katakana () and Hiragana (). \"Dora\" derives from , and is a corruption of nora (stray), while \"-emon\" (in kanji ) is an old-fashioned suffix for male names (for example, as in Ishikawa Goemon). Nobita's home address in Tsukimidai (\"moon-view-heights\"), Nerima refers to Fujimidai (\"Fuji-view-heights\"), where Osamu Tezuka's residence and animation studio is based. The name \"Nobita Nobi\" refers to \"nobi nobi\", meaning \"the way a young child grows up free, healthy, and happy, unrestrained in any sense\".\nGadgets.\nGadgets, or , are Doraemon's tools from the future, usually used to help the characters. Fujio said that Doraemon has a total of 1,293 gadgets; according to a 2004 analysis by Yasuyuki Yokoyama of Toyama University, there are 1,963 gadgets found in 1,344 sketches. The most important gadgets include \"Take-Copter\", a small piece of headgear made out of bamboo that can allow its users to fly; \"Time Machine\", a machine used for time travel; \"Anywhere Door\", a pink-colored door that allows people to travel according to the thoughts of the person who turns the knob; \"Time Kerchief\", a handkerchief which can turn an object new or old or a person young or old; \"Translator Tool\", a cuboid jelly that allow one to converse in any language; and \"Designer\", a camera used to instantly dress-up the user.\nSaya S. Shiraishi wrote that most of the gadgets were \"an impressive testimony to the standards of quality control and innovation that exist in the twenty-second century\". The gadgets were an essential part of the series so as to reflect a positive point of view about the association of technology in children, and to express the wishes of modern society.\nConclusion.\nThe series ceased its original run in 1994 and was not given an ending before Fujimoto's death in 1996; this has since aroused numerous urban legends throughout the years. One of the most well-known \"endings\" of the manga was by an amateur manga cartoonist under the pen name \"Yasue T. Tajima\", first appeared on the Internet in 1998 and made up into a manga in 2005. The story takes place when Doraemon's battery dies, and Nobita later grows up becoming a robot engineer, potentially revive Doraemon and live a happy life. Tajima issued an apology in 2007, and the profits were shared with Shogakukan and the copyright owner, Fujiko F. Fujio Pro.\nRy\u016bichi Yagi and Takashi Yamazaki, the directors of \"Stand by Me Doraemon\", confirmed that it had only one opening, while the ending has been rewritten several times. Because of this, Shogakukan had to clarify that only if the marriage of Nobita and Shizuka is finalized will the mission be accomplished, and then Doraemon will return to the future.\nMedia.\nManga.\nIn December 1969, the \"Doraemon\" manga appeared in six different children's monthly magazines published by Shogakukan: \"Yoiko\", \"Y\u014dchien\", \"Shogaku Ichi-nensei\", \"Shogaku Ni-nensei\", \"Shogaku San-nensei\", and \"Shogaku Yo-nensei\". The magazines were aimed at children from nursery school to fourth grade. In 1973, two other magazines, \"Shogaku Go-nensei\" and \"Shogaku Roku-nensei\" (aimed at fifth-grade and sixth-grade students respectively), started publishing the manga. In 1977, \"CoroCoro Comic\" was launched as the flagship magazine of \"Doraemon.\"\nSince the debut of \"Doraemon\" in 1969, the stories have been selectively collected into forty-five volumes that were published under Shogakukan's imprint from July 31, 1974, to April 26, 1996. These volumes are collected in the Takaoka Central Library in Toyama, Japan, where Fujio was born. Between April 25, 2005, and February 28, 2006, Sh\u014dgakukan published a series of five manga volumes under the title \"Doraemon Plus\" (\"Doraemon+\"), featuring short stories which did not appear in the forty-five original volumes; a sixth volume, the first volume in eight years, was published on December 1, 2014. Additionally, 119 unpublished stories were compiled into six colored-manga volumes under the title \"Doraemon Kara Sakuhin-shu\" , published from July 17, 1999, to September 2, 2006. Between July 24, 2009, and September 25, 2012, Shogakukan published a \"master works\" collection consisting of twenty volumes with all 1,345 stories written by Fujio. In December 2019, on the 50th anniversary of \"Doraemon\", a \"Volume 0\" was published by Shogakukan featuring six different versions of Doraemon's first appearance.\nThere have been two series of bilingual, Japanese and English, volumes of the manga by Shogakukan English Comics under the title \"Doraemon: Gadget Cat from the Future\", and two audio versions. The first series has ten volumes and the second one has six. 21st Century Publishing House released bilingual English-Chinese versions in mainland China, and Chingwin Publishing Group released bilingual English-Chinese versions in Taiwan.\nIn July 2013, Fujiko F. Fujio Pro announced that they would be collaborating with ebook publisher Voyager Japan and localization company AltJapan Co., Ltd. to release an English-language version of the manga in full color digitally via the Amazon Kindle platform in North America. Shogakukan released the first volume in November 2013; by 2016, a total of 200 volumes have been published. This English version incorporates a variety of changes to character names; Nobita is \"Noby\", Shizuka is \"Sue\", Suneo is \"Sneech\", and Gian is \"Big G\", while dorayaki is \"Yummy Bun/Fudgy Pudgy Pie\". Also, by 2016, four volumes of the manga have been published in English in print by Shogakukan Asia.\nShogakukan started digital distribution of all forty-five original volumes throughout Japan from July 16, 2015.\nLong Stories.\n\"Doraemon's Long Tales\", also known as \"Doraemon's Long Stories\", is a manga and movie series ongoing since 1979, featuring longer and continuous narratives about the characters' adventures into various lands of science fiction and fantasy. The series consists of twenty-four tank\u014dbon volumes published from 1983 to 2004.\nSpin-offs.\nSeveral spin-off manga series of \"Doraemon\" have been made. \"The Doraemons\", a manga illustrated by Michiaki Tanaka based on \"Doraemon\", was published by Shogakukan in six \"tank\u014dbon\" volumes from 1996 to 2001. Between 1997 and 2003, Shogakukan also published fifteen volumes of \"The Doraemons Special\", created by Yukihiro Mitani and Masaru Miyazaki as a complement part of \"The Doraemons\", including twelve from the main series and three from the \"Robot Training School Edition\". \"Dorabase\", a baseball-themed manga written and illustrated by Mugiwara Shintar\u014d, is another spin-off of \"Doraemon\"; twenty-three volumes of the manga were published by Shogakukan from April 26, 2001, to October 28, 2011.\nAnime.\nThe first attempt of a \"Doraemon\" animated series was in 1973, by Nippon Television. After a January 1973 pilot named \"Doraemon Mirai Kara Yattekuru\" , twenty-six episodes, each with two segments, were broadcast on Nippon TV from April 1 to September 30 of the same year. The series was directed by Mitsuo Kaminashi with voice cast from Aoni Production; the character Doraemon was voiced by K\u014dsei Tomita, then later by Masako Nozawa. Later in the series, the animation studio, Nippon TeleMovie Productions, went bankrupt, and the masters were sold off or destroyed. The series was re-aired on Nippon TV and several local stations until 1979, when Shogakukan requested Toyama Television to cease broadcasting. Some of the segments were found in the archives of Imagica in 1995, and some others were recovered by Jun Masami in 2003. As of 2013, 21 of 52 segments are known to survive, two of which have no audio.\n\"Doraemon\" remained fairly exclusive in manga form until 1979 when an animation studio, Shin-Ei Animation (now owned by TV Asahi) produced an animated second attempt of \"Doraemon\". The series aired on TV Asahi from April 2, 1979. Ryo Motohira served as chief director from 1981, and Tsutomu Shibayama from 1984. Eiichi Nakamura served as director of character designer, while Shunsuke Kikuchi was the composer. Nobuyo \u014cyama voiced Doraemon in the series; because of this, in Asia, this version is sometimes referred to as the \u014cyama Edition. In total, 1,787 episodes were produced and released in VHS and DVD by Toho. On April 15, 2005, a major renewal was carried out, including the replacement of voice actors and staff, and updated character designs. The third series is sometimes referred to in Asia as the Mizuta Edition, as a tribute for the voice actress for Doraemon, Wasabi Mizuta. It was released in DVD on February 10, 2006, under the title \"New TV-ban Doraemon\" with Shogakukan Video banner.\nIn May 2014, TV Asahi Corporation announced an agreement with The Walt Disney Company to bring the 2005 series to the Disney XD television channel and Disney Channel in the United States beginning in the summer of that year. Besides using the name changes that were used in AltJapan's English adaptation of the original manga, other changes and edits have also been made to make the show more relatable to an American audience, such as Japanese text being replaced with English text on certain objects like signs and graded papers, items such as yen notes being replaced by US dollar bills, and the setting being changed from Japan to the United States. Initial response to the edited dub was positive. The Disney adaptation began broadcast in Japan on Disney Channel from February 1, 2016. The broadcast offered the choice of the English voice track or a newly recorded Japanese track by the Japanese cast of the 2005 series.\nThe anime has also been aired in over sixty countries worldwide. It premiered in Thailand in 1982, the Philippines in 1999, India in 2005, and Vietnam in 2010. Other Asian countries that broadcast the series include China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Malaysia, Indonesia, and South Korea. The series is licensed in EMEA regions by LUK International; it premiered in Spain in 1993 and France in 2003. It has also been distributed in South American countries, including Brazil, Colombia, and Chile. In 2017, POPS Worldwide, a Vietnamese multimedia company, collaborated with TV Asahi to release the anime series on YouTube and other digital platforms.\nFilms.\nBy 2024, there have been 43 annual feature-length animated films produced by Shin-Ei Animation and released by Toho. The first twenty-five films are based on the 1979 anime, while the rest are based on the 2005 anime. Unlike the anime and manga series, the films are more action-adventure oriented, taking the familiar characters of \"Doraemon\" and placing them in a variety of exotic and perilous settings.\nA 3D computer animated film, \"Stand by Me Doraemon,\" debuted in Japan on August 8, 2014. Directed by Takashi Yamazaki and Ry\u016bichi Yagi, it combines elements from the short stories of the manga series: \"All the Way from the Country of the Future\", \"Imprinting Egg\", \"Goodbye, Shizuka-chan\", \"Romance in Snowy Mountain\", \"Nobita's the Night Before a Wedding\", and \"Goodbye, Doraemon\u00a0...\" into a new complete story, from the first time Doraemon came to Nobita's house to Doraemon bidding farewell to Nobita. The film was a box office success, grossing $183.4 million worldwide. A sequel, \"Stand by Me Doraemon 2\", also directed by Yamazaki and Yagi, was released on November 20, 2020.\nShort films, OVA and crossover.\nSeveral \"Doraemon\" short films were produced and released between 1989 and 2004. These include ', a film about the life of Doraemon from birth before coming to Nobita; ', a film about the events related to the marriage of Nobita and Shizuka; \"The Day When I Was Born\" and \"\", the films about the relationship between Nobita and his parents along with his grandmother. Other short films focus on Dorami and The Doraemons. In 1981, Toho released \"What Am I for Momotaro\", a film about Momotar\u014d, the hero of Japanese folklore.\nIn 1994, an educational OVA was made, titled \"Doraemon: Nobita to Mirai Note\" , where the main characters express the hope for a better Earth. The OVA was released in DVD along with the 13th issue of \"Fujiko F. Fujio Wonderland\" magazine in September 2004. A crossover episode of \"Doraemon\" with \"\" aired on TV Asahi on November 9, 2018.\nMusic.\nThe soundtrack of the 1973 anime series was composed by Nobuyoshi Koshibe, who also arranged the opening theme song and the ending theme song , both performed by Harumi Nait\u014d. For the 1979 anime, Shunsuke Kikuchi was the composer, who arranged ; it had been performed by numerous singers, including Kumiko \u014csugi and Satoko Yamano. When the anime got a reboot in 2005, Kan Sawada was the composer of the series. There are four other opening themes, including an instrumental version of \"Doraemon no Uta\" performed by Twelve Girls Band; \"Hagushichao\" performed by Rimi Natsukawa; \"Yume wo Kanaete Doraemon\" , the opening theme broadcast from 2007 to 2018; and \"Doraemon\" performed by Gen Hoshino, broadcast since October 2019.\nNumerous collections of theme songs of the anime series and feature films were initially available in cassettes. Since the 1990s, \"Doraemon\" songs have been released in CD, under the type of singles and compilation albums. Soundtracks of \"Doraemon\" feature films have been released by Nippon Columbia since 2001 in the album series .\nMusical shows.\n\"Doraemon\" has been adapted into a musical, titled . Based on the 1990 anime film , it debuted at Tokyo Metropolitan Art Space on September 4, 2008, running through September 14. Shoji Kokami was the director and writer, Makoto Sakamoto played Nobita and Reiko Suho as Shizuka; Jaian and Suneo were portrayed by Tomohiro Waki and Kensaku Kobayashi, respectively; Wasabi Mizuta voiced Doraemon. The musical was later revived and ran at Sunshine Theater, Tokyo from March 26 to April 2, 2017, then later in other prefectures including Fukuoka, Osaka, Miyagi and Aichi. The 2017 revival is also directed and written by Kokami, with Mizuta reprising her role; Nobita, Shizuka, Jaian and Suneo were played by Yuuchi Ogoe, Hina Higuchi, Koki Azuma and Sh\u014d Jinnai, respectively.\nVideo games.\nMany Japanese-only video games based on \"Doraemon\" have been developed. For instance, in 1983, Bandai developed , an arcade game inspired by Pac-Man. \"Doraemon\", a NES video game made by Hudson Soft, was released on December 12, 1986, and became one of the best-selling games of that year in Japan with over 1.15 million copies sold. On December 6, 2007, Sega published \"Doraemon Wii\", the first \"Doraemon\" video game released on Wii. Doraemon can also be seen in Namco's \"Taiko no Tatsujin\" rhythm game series, such as in \"Taiko no Tatsujin: Sesson de Dodon ga Don!\" (2017). The first Doraemon game to receive a Western release was \"Doraemon Story of Seasons\" (2019). Card games with \"Doraemon\" themes have also been made in several special occasions, sometimes to exploit the popularity of feature films. In 2016, a special edition of \"Uno\" about the series' characters was released exclusively in Japan, as a result of a cooperation between Asatsu-DK and Mattel.\nMerchandise.\nIn Japan, the \"Doraemon\" merchandising rights belong to Shogakukan-Shueisha Productions, which has produced and distributed a wide range of products under its brand, such as toys, food, stationery, action figures, , shoes, clothing, and others. Several companies have collaborated on the creation and distribution of products on the series and its characters, including Sanrio, Converse, Moleskine, and ESP Guitars, which has made guitars decorated with \"Doraemon\" characters; a further partnership of \"Doraemon\" with Uniqlo led to a line of clothing designed by Takashi Murakami. The \"Doraemon\" franchise has also collaborated with various Japanese brands, including Tsi Groove &amp; Sports's \"Jack Bunny!!\" golf apparel brand, Unicharm's \"MamiPoko\" diaper brand, and the video games \"LINE Pop 2\", \"Monster Strike\", and \"Granblue Fantasy\". Viz Media owns the \"Doraemon\" merchandising rights in North and Latin America, which has developed \"Doraemon\"-themed clothing and collectibles in collaboration with retail chain Hot Topic, and themed Happy Meals in a 2015 collaboration with McDonald's. Viz Media Europe (now Crunchyroll EMEA) manages the merchandising in Europe except Spain and Portugal; LUK International has obtained licenses in these two countries.\nCharacters from \"Doraemon\" have been used in advertising through specific agreements with Shogakukan. For instance, following the Cool Japan initiative promoted by the Japanese government, Sharp Corporation produced a series of commercials featuring the characters of Doraemon and Nobita, which were broadcast in several ASEAN countries. In late 2011, Shogakukan and Toyota Motor Corporation joined forces to create a series of live-action commercials as part of Toyota's ReBorn ad campaign, which depicted the manga's characters two decades after being grown up, where Hollywood actor Jean Reno played Doraemon.\nReception.\nGeneral.\n\"Doraemon\" is considered one of the best-known manga of all time, a true Japanese cultural icon, and an essential part of family life of the Japanese post-war generation. Akihiro Motoyama observed that \"mothers who watched the movies when they were children are now taking their own children to see them\". It was also commercially successful: over books were sold in Japan by 1996. The 1979 and 2005 anime series also achieved high ratings on television. With the film \"\", the \"Doraemon\" anime film series reached 100 million tickets sold at the Japanese box office, surpassing \"Godzilla\" as the highest-grossing film franchise in Japan. By 2015, it had sold over 103 million tickets, and was the largest franchise by numbers of admissions in the country.\n\"Doraemon\" was also a hit in Asia in general, and was considered one of the typical cases of Japanese soft power, although it was published without a license in some countries. The anime television series is available in over 60 countries, and reportedly getting high ratings in at least 30 countries. However, \"Doraemon\" was less successful in Western countries, because it was viewed as a children-only series, and there were some tight restrictions about publishing manga and broadcasting anime series there. The manga has sold over copies worldwide by 2012; over 250 million by 2019; and over 300 million by 2024. Estimates show that \"Doraemon\" has generated at least more than in merchandise sales by 2019, and over $1.7 billion from anime feature films by 2020, making it one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time.\nOutside Japan, \"Doraemon\" achieved particular success in Vietnam, with a record-breaking 40 million copies sold by 2006. The manga was first launched there in 1992 by Kim \u0110\u1ed3ng Publishing House, but the copyright from Shogakukan was not fully acquired until 1996. In 1993, the Vietnamese Ministry of Culture considered the manga's publication to be \"an impactful event for the improvement of children, youth and adult's likings\u00a0... [\"Doraemon\"] is a comprehensively educational book series which has the effect of developing children's personality\". Doraemon is now a cultural icon in Vietnam, having featured in many cultural events.\nCritical response and analysis.\n\"Doraemon\" received favorable reviews. Mark Schilling wrote, \"For kids whose lives are often so regulated, Doraemon represents a welcome breath of freedom and a glimpse of a funnier, friendlier world where all dreams, even foolish ones, can come true.\" Italian writer Massimo Nicora wrote that the manga \"can be interpreted as a type of book that criticizes, with irony, the omnipotence of science that pretends to solve every problem with its tools\", alluding to the fact that Doraemon's gadgets often end up making the problems even worse than they initially were, more than anything else. He added that it represents \"the metaphor of the childish imagination, which always manages to find the most bizarre and original solutions, in a continuous game of transformation of reality\".\nSome critics considered that Nobita's flawed personality and modest background is different from the special or extraordinary characteristics usually seen in other typical anime and manga protagonists; this portrayal has been seen as reasons of its appeal as well as the contrary, especially in the United States. According to the Italian Parents Movement (Moige), in the manga, \"the lazy Nobita does not know any kind of appreciable evolution\", though there are still good points including \"the criticism of bullying, the goodness that transpires from the little Nobita and the positive figure of Shizuka\".\nIn his 2000 article, Leo Ching explained that the success of \"Doraemon\" in Asia was because it had reflected the Asian values such as imagination and responsibility, the same reason that \"Oshin\", another Japanese cultural export, became well known there. On the other hand, according to an analysis by Anne Allison, professor of cultural anthropology at Duke University, the strong point of it was not the variety of the gadgets, but the relationship between Doraemon and Nobita, which was particularly appreciated. Jason Thompson praised the \"silly situations\" and \"old fashioned, simple artwork\", with Doraemon's expression and comments adding to the \"surrounding elementary-school mischief\". On the manga's 50th anniversary, an op-ed published on \"Asahi Shimbun\" stated that the manga \"has already become a contemporary classic\".\nAwards, accolades and public recognition.\n\"Doraemon\" has received numerous accolades. It won the Japan Cartoonists Association Award twice in 1973 and 1994, the former for Excellence Award while the latter for Minister of Education, Science and Technology Award. In 1982, it received the first Shogakukan Manga Award for children's manga. In 1997, the manga won the Grand Prize at the first Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize. The 1979 series won the award from the Japanese Agency for Cultural Affairs four times for best television series in 1984, 1985, 1988 and 1989.\nA 2006 poll among 80,000 Japanese fans for the 10th anniversary of the Japan Media Arts Festival placed \"Doraemon\" at fifth among the top ten best manga of all time. The 2005 and 2006 surveys conducted by TV Asahi found the \"Doraemon\" anime ranked fifth and third, respectively, among the 100 most favorite anime series of all time. In 2010, a survey conducted by researchers of Tokyo Polytechnic University found that most responders considered \"Doraemon\", along with \"Dragon Ball\" franchise, to be the anime series that represents Cool Japan. In a 2013 survey, \"Doraemon\" was found to be the best anime recommended for foreign people.\nCriticisms.\n\"Doraemon\" has been blamed for having a negative impact on children, due to the controversial traits of the characters in the anime. The character has received criticism in China, where some media outlets considered Doraemon to be a politically subversive character and that it was a tool of Japan's \"cultural invasion\". Some education groups in Taiwan demanded the anime to be banned, as the plot involve bullying which would encourage campus bullying. In 2016, a resolution to ban Hindi dubbed \"Doraemon\" anime series was submitted in Pakistan. Around the same time, legal notices were served against several companies in India, targeting \"Doraemon\" and \"Crayon Shin-chan\" for bans (which did not materialize), as having an adverse effect on children. Disney Channel India, the regional broadcaster of the anime, was banned in Bangladesh and Pakistan citing non-availability of localized dubs for content including \"Doraemon\".\nCultural impact and legacy.\nThe \"Doraemon\" manga has inspired many other mangakas; these include Eiichiro Oda, the creator of \"One Piece\" with the idea of \"Devil Fruits\", and Masashi Kishimoto, the creator of \"Naruto\", who showed interest in drawing characters from anime shows during his childhood, including Doraemon. The manga has also been mentioned in \"Gin Tama\" and \"Great Teacher Onizuka\". The character Doraemon is considered one of the cultural icons in Japan, and one of the most well-known characters in manga history; some critics compared his notability with Mickey Mouse and Snoopy. Mark Schilling noted that Doraemon's \"Take-Copter\" is familiar among Japanese people \"just as Snoopy's biplane is familiar to most Americans\".\nOn April 22, 2002, on the special issue of \"Asian Hero\" in \"Time\" magazine, Doraemon was the only anime character to be named one of the twenty-two Asian Heroes, and was described as \"The Cuddliest Hero in Asia\". A 2007 poll by Oricon shown that Doraemon was the second-strongest manga character ever, behind only Son Goku of \"Dragon Ball\". Doraemon is also referred as something with the ability to satisfy all wishes.\nIn 2005, the Taiwan Society of New York selected \"Doraemon\" as a culturally significant work of Japanese otaku pop-culture in its exhibit \"Little Boy: The Arts of Japan's Exploding Subculture\", curated by renowned artist Takashi Murakami. In 2008, the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs appointed Doraemon as the first anime cultural ambassador; a Ministry spokesperson explained the decision as an attempt to help people in other countries understand Japanese anime better and to deepen their interest in Japanese culture. On September 3, 2012, Doraemon was granted official residence in the city of Kawasaki, Kanagawa, one hundred years before he was born. In the same year, Hong Kong celebrated the birthday of Doraemon 100 years early with a series of displays of the character. In April 2013, Doraemon was chosen as Japan's ambassador in Tokyo's bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympics and 2020 Summer Paralympics. He appeared in the 2016 Summer Olympics closing ceremony to promote the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo.\nA Fujiko F. Fujio museum opened in Kawasaki on September 3, 2011, featuring Doraemon as the star of the museum. The National Museum of Singapore held a time-travelling exhibition in October 2020 as a tribute to the manga. After the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami, Shogakukan released an earthquake survival guidebook, which included the main cast of the \"Doraemon\" manga series. TV Asahi launched the \"Doraemon Fund\" charity fund to raise money for natural disasters in 2004, and in 2011. In 2020, Mumbai's Sion Friends Circle group distributed food and books to kids using mascots, one being Doraemon, to help during the COVID-19 pandemic. In Vietnam, a Doraemon scholarship fund was established in 1996, and the Doraemon character has been used for education of traffic safety. \"Doraemon\"'s creator, Fujiko F. Fujio, received the Culture Fighter Medal from the Vietnamese Ministry of Culture in 1996 for his contributions to young education through the manga.\nMany prominent figures have been nicknamed after the cast of \"Doraemon\": politician Osamu Fujimura is known as the \"Doraemon of Nagatacho\" due to his figure and warm personality, and sumo wrestler Takamisugi was nicknamed \"Doraemon\" because of his resemblance to the character. In 2015, a group of people in a drought-affected village in northern Thailand used a Doraemon toy to complete a rain-ritual, in order to avoid controversies that would occur by using real animals.\nA parody of \"Doraemon\" created by Hikari Fujisaki, titled \"Nozoemon\" , was first serialized in Nihon Bungeisha's \"Comic Heaven\" magazine in September 2014, with the compiled book volume released on June 9, 2015; however, it was discontinued in August 2015 due to content issues."}
{"id": "8414", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8414", "title": "Dartmoor Preservation Association", "text": "Dartmoor Preservation Association (DPA) is one of the oldest environmental or amenity bodies in the UK. It was founded in 1883. It concerns itself with Dartmoor, a National Park in Devon, south-west England. It began with two main areas of concern. Firstly, commoners' rights were being eroded through army use, including the firing of live artillery shells, and piecemeal enclosure of land around the margins. Secondly, there was increasing public interest in Dartmoor's scenery, archaeology, history and wildlife\nThe DPA has opposed what it considered to be unsuitable developments on Dartmoor throughout its history. In its founding year, the secretary, Robert Burnard persuaded the War Department not to fire on the Okehampton Firing Range on Saturdays to allow access to the public. Many battles have been fought since, particularly against the military presence and the proposed building of reservoirs on the moor, notably under the Chairmanship of Lady Sayer, granddaughter of Robert Burnard.\nThe DPA continues to follow the same objectives as when it was founded. For example, in June 2015, it supported the inhabitants of Widecombe-in-the-Moor against the erecting of a telecommunications mast in an area of pristine countryside against the wishes of the local population.\nDartmoor Preservation Association is a registered charity, Number 215665.\nBackground.\nDartmoor is said to be one of the last remaining areas of wilderness in Britain, but it has been a managed landscape since the late Neolithic (3,000-2,500 BCE). The Bronze Age inhabitants (from 2,500 to 750 BCE) cleared ancient forest and developed farming. They made extensive use of surface moorstone in the construction of roundhouses (their remains now seen as \"hut circles\"), enclosures, land-dividing reaves, stone rows, stone circles, menhirs and kistvaens.\nFarming has continued through the Medieval period to the present day, but a more disruptive activity to the landscape was the appearance of tin-mining, firstly by stream-working, then by lode-working and finally by underground mining. Many valleys have been dug over and scarred, leaving a rich industrial archaeology. Other activities such as newtake wall building, peat cutting, rabbit warrening, quarrying, clay extraction and the building of a prominent prison have all left marks on the moor. Recent undertakings have left more obvious changes: the building of reservoirs and the planting of conifer forests.\nHistory of the association.\nThe use of moorstone continued up to recent times with the extensive building of dry stone walls around farm newtakes. Later, stone was cut and dressed. The use of moorstone continued to such an extent that in 1847 boundary markers were cut around Pew Tor to protect it. Marker stones were erected around Roos Tor. The taking of stone started to change the Dartmoor landscape: for example Eric Hemery (writing in 1983) stated that Swell Tor had been \"decapitated and disembowelled by the quarrymen\".\nIn August 1881, a public meeting was convened by the Portreeve of Tavistock in the Guildhall to discuss the continued taking of stone, particularly from landmark tors. The DPA was founded in 1883. The protected area around Pew Tor was extended in December 1896. In 1901, the DPA commissioned a report into damage to ancient monuments, caused by the taking of stone for building and road-mending, and into unlawful enclosures of common land.\nCommoners' rights.\nThe first publication of the DPA, in 1890, was a short history of commoners' rights on Dartmoor and the commons of Devon. This notes a decrease in the numbers of animals even in medieval times: in 1296 \u2013 5,000 cattle, 487 horses, 131 folds of sheep; in 1316 \u2013 3,292 cattle, 368 horses, 100 folds of sheep. \"An important battle occurred in 1894 when the Corporation of London attempted to buy the whole of Dartmoor in order to pipe its water to Paddington alongside Brunel\u2019s recently converted railway, when it went from broad gauge to standard gauge. The DPA led the revolt against this\". In 1897, the DPA went to court to fight successfully the enclosure of a section of Peter Tavy Great Common, in support of a farmer. Commoners rights seem to have been a settled issue in recent years: except for where they are impinged upon by the military presence.\nMilitary use.\nDartmoor Training Area has been used regularly for military training since 1873, although it was used earlier during the Napoleonic and Crimean Wars. In 1906\u201307, seven miles of roads were built on the north moor to facilitate the movement of guns. There are three established firing ranges at Okehampton, Willsworthy and Merrivale. The area taken up with live firing ranges is and they are used on average 120 days each year. They are used for small arms, mortars and artillery smoke and illuminating shells.\nThe use of the moor by the military has been a major concern of the DPA since its founding. In its first year, Robert Burnard (DPA Secretary) persuaded the War Department not to fire on the Okehampton Firing Range on Saturdays so that there may be some public access to the area. Lady Sylvia Sayer was very outspoken about it being totally at odds with the area being designated as a National Park. In 1963 the DPA published a widely circulated 24-page booklet entitled \"Misuse of a National Park\" which includes photographs of unexploded shells lying on the open moor, corrugated iron buildings, large craters, a derelict tank used as a target, bullet marks on standing stones, etc. It also contains details of a 1958 incident in which a young boy was killed by a mortar shell near Cranmere Pool.\nSince the 1960s there has been much less military damage and litter as a result of the DPA persuading the Services to be more cautious. The military have changed since the Victorian era, they now have 120 conservation groups across the Ministry of Defence (MOD), including Dartmoor Military Conservation Group. The current leases run for many years, with Cramber Tor most recently being granted a further 40-year licence.\nAfforestation.\nEarly afforestation occurred when Brimpts was planted with trees in 1862. The Forestry Commission was founded in 1919, following World War I and in that year the Duchy of Cornwall planted 800 acres of conifers at Fernworthy. In 1921, Plymouth Corporation planted conifers around Burrator Reservoir. The Forestry Commission planted Bellever and Laughter Tor farms in 1930-32 and in 1944-1945 Soussons Down was also planted. The DPA opposed these post-war plantings and R. Hansford Worth (1868\u20131950, a Plymouth engineer, scientist and antiquarian) delivered a lecture fiercely critical of the Duchy of Cornwall as the landowners at The Plymouth Athenaeum, using the argument of encroachment on the rights of common and loss of ancient monuments. DPA opposition to forestry on Dartmoor arose again in 1953 when it wrote a policy on woodlands in the then-new national park. Opposition was exercised when Hawn, Dendles and High House Wastes, all near Cornwood, were designated for tree planting in 1959. Argument continued while Hawns and Dendles Wastes were ploughed in 1960. High House Waste was purchased by the DPA in 1964 and the Nature Conservancy (UK) bought neighbouring Dendles in 1965. The situation in 2015 is that some of the Dartmoor plantations have been affected by the fungal disease Phytophthora ramorum which results in widespread clear felling to prevent further spread of the disease. The policy now is to replant with more native hardwood trees although more resistant conifers are also being used.\nReservoirs.\nThere are eight Dartmoor reservoirs, with the earliest being Tottiford Reservoir, 1861. Three were built in the mid-20th century: Fernworthy, 1942; Avon, 1957 and Meldon, 1972, and the DPA fought many battles over these. It opposed plans for reservoirs on Brent Moor (1899) and Holne Moor (1901) where, later, the Avon Reservoir and Venford Reservoirs were respectively built. The DPA's opposition was supported in the House of Commons with argument made regarding the effects on the local water table. The DPA was one of many local and national amenity bodies that fought the building of the Meldon dam. The preservation battle for the Meldon valley was recorded in a DPA publication. The DPA offered a viable alternative site, Gorhuish Valley, for various reasons, including the fact that minerals such as arsenic would leach into the water supply if Meldon were selected. The Meldon story was discussed many times in Parliament. Another battle was fought against the flooding of the Swincombe valley to form another reservoir. This was rejected in parliament in 1970, revived in 1974 and finally resolved by the building of the Roadford Reservoir to the west of the moor. In 1985 the DPA used funds from a bequest to purchase 50 acres of land where the dam of a reservoir at Swincombe would have to be.\nNational Park designation.\nThe National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 led to Dartmoor being one of the first four parks to be designated, by an order made on 15 August 1951 and confirmed on 30 October 1951. Shortly after this, the DPA tried to ensure that the new National Park was run by an independent committee and not by the Dartmoor Standing Committee that was a subcommittee of Devon County Council Planning Committee. The committee was reformed as Dartmoor National Park Committee under the Local Government Act 1972 but it was still a subcommittee of Devon County Council and as such it was not seen to be an independent guardian of the moor by the DPA. It was not until 1997 that an independent Dartmoor National Park Authority was enabled under the Environment Act 1995 as a free-standing local authority, forty-four years after the park was created, although it is still dominated by local authorities and government appointees.\nNorth Hessary Tor TV mast.\nThe DPA learned in October 1951 that the BBC planned to build a 750-foot television mast on North Hessary Tor, near Princetown, that was erected in 1955. This was to be a relay from a transmitting station at Wenvoe, South Wales. The DPA objected to this threat and sought expert opinion, offered alternative solutions, pressed for a public enquiry, engaged a lawyer, held public meetings, distributed pamphlets, wrote to the press and petitioned parliament. Eventually, a public enquiry was announced. When the decision was made to permit the mast, there were a number of conditions, included among them was that the development was built near the tor, leaving it still intact, and that its new approach road should not be fenced. During the process of obtaining land for the transmitter, one MP asked in the House of Commons: \"Will the Assistant Postmaster-General bear in mind that we have no desire to hinder the provision of this station but that it is felt that ancient common rights such as these, that have existed for a thousand years, should be adequately protected or properly extinguished by due process of law?\"\nSharpitor.\nDuring World War II, the Royal Air Force (RAF) built a mast and buildings on Peek Hill, as RAF Sharpitor. In 1956, permission was granted to rebuild the station as part of the \"Gee\" radio navigation system, to be occupied for ten years. There followed delay in leaving and a proposal was made in 1970 by Devon &amp; Cornwall Police to use the mast, which was rejected. Then later that year Plymouth Corporation wanted to use the exposed site for housing juvenile offenders. This was also rejected, but Plymouth appealed. At a public enquiry in June 1973 Lady Sylvia Sayer represented the DPA and permission for development on the site was refused. A few years later, DPA fought successfully in support of South West Water (SWW) against renewed calls for a new reservoir at Swincombe. To mark the victory, Sylvia Sayer asked SWW if DPA could purchase the rocky outcrop of Sharpitor. The DPA purchased 32 acres in February 1984.\nOkehampton bypass.\nOkehampton lies on the A30 main road, the shortest route from London to west Devon and Cornwall. The need for a bypass was mooted in 1963. In 1975, three routes were considered: a northern route through mainly farmland, a central route using a railway, and a southern route through Dartmoor National Park. In August 1976, the Department of the Environment announced the preferred route was through the National Park. A major event on the timeline of this project was a 96-day public enquiry from 1 May 1979 to 4 February 1980 held in Okehampton. In March 1984, the DPA with other organisations petitioned Parliament opposing compulsory purchase orders on public open spaces. The Secretary of State announced in July 1985 that he was introducing a bill to reverse the decision of a Joint Parliamentary Committee and confirm a route through the National Park. This was followed by a confirmation bill in November 1985 that was passed in the House of Lords on 5 December 1985. Construction started in November 1986 and the road was opened on 19 July 1988.\nSince 2000.\nThe DPA continues to follow the same objectives as when it was founded. The activities have widened, involving local partners, it has a calendar of events, walks and work days with its Conservation Team undertaking a variety of moorland projects, it funds the supply of walking boots to some children who need them for the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme through the Moor Boots Scheme, it collaborates with the Campaign for National Parks, it monitors the activities of Dartmoor National Park Authority who run the National Park. It objected to eight planning proposals (with success in seven cases), with many other achievements in the DPA Director's Annual Report. The DPA remains true to its original objectives and has also added other activities in support of Dartmoor and its inhabitants.\nChina clay expansion.\nThe china clay industry on Dartmoor was established long before the DPA was founded. The earliest record of a china clay pit refers to Hook Lake in 1502. The area was surveyed around 1827 by Cornishmen with thirty years experience in the clay industry. They obtained a 21-year lease in 1830, from the Earl of Morley who owned the land, to work the area between Lee Moor and Shaugh Moor. A rival pit was opened at Leftlake in about 1850 and at Hemerdon and Broomage in about 1855. Further pits were opened at Cholwichtown, Whitehill Yeo and Wigford Down/Brisworthy (circa 1860). Others followed at Smallhanger and Headon in the 1870s. Redlake started working in 1910. China clay pits are open cast mines that result in large holes in the ground accompanied by large waste tips. Over time, the pits become larger and more ground is needed for the waste, changing the landscape: the effect of this can be seen from space.\nThe DPA argues that this is an activity that does not agree with the ethos of a National Park, whose purpose is to protect landscape from unsuitable development. In 1994, the National Park boundaries were changed to include common land at Shaugh Moor and exclude china clay worked land at Lee Moor. The DPA revived its campaign with the publication of a booklet in 1999 when the Blackabrook Valley, Crownhill Down and Shaugh Moor, near the popular tourist area of Cadover Bridge, all came under threat from exploitation or dumping of waste. The china clay companies relinquished planning permissions in 2001. However, in November 2009, the clay companies, Sibelco and Imerys, produced a report reviewing old mineral permissions under the Environment Act 1995 with a view to joining up two pits. A presumed Bronze Age barrow, known as Emmets Post, was to be removed and three other monuments may be affected. The DPA were recorded twice, with other bodies, in a Devon County Council Development Management Committee Report for their representations in securing the future of the three areas where planning permissions were relinquished in 2001. Oxford Archaeology held an open day during their excavation of Emmets Post in 2014 prior to its removal.\nHouse of Lords reception.\nThe DPA and Exmoor Society held a joint reception at the House of Lords on 6 November 2008, hosted by Baroness Mallalieu, to lobby members of both Houses of Parliament and relevant Ministers about ensuring that environmental schemes for the uplands are \"fit for purpose\". Both organisations funded an invited number of upland hill farmers to attend.\nWhitehorse Hill excavation.\nThe excavation in August 2011 on the north moor of a Bronze Age burial kistvaen, or cist, that was originally uncovered in 2001 was part-funded by the DPA, along with other bodies.\nSouth West Uplands Federation Conference.\nA conference for the upland farmers of Bodmin Moor, Exmoor and Dartmoor was held as a joint venture between the South West Uplands Federation and the DPA. It was run by the DPA at Exeter Racecourse in October 2012, with 150 delegates. Speakers came from the Foundation for Common Land, the Forest of Dartmoor Commoners, the University of Gloucestershire, the National Farmers Union of England and Wales and the Open Spaces Society. The CEO raised sponsorship from Dartmoor National Park, Exmoor National Park, Natural England, Duchy of Cornwall and the Exmoor Society - this reflecting the standing of the DPA with those bodies.\nUndergrounding power cables.\nTwo major projects to underground overhead power cables in Dartmoor National Park have been completed in a joint project between Western Power Distribution, the South West Protected Landscapes Forum (SWPLF) and Dartmoor National Park Authority. The two schemes on Holne Moor and Walkhampton Common between them remove nearly 6\u00a0km of overhead line from open moorland. At nearly 5\u00a0km, the Walkhampton scheme is the largest to be undertaken in the South West region by Western Power Distribution. The old overhead line was readily visible from the B3212 Princetown to Yelverton Road, strung across Walkhampton Common from Devil's Elbow to just above Horseyeatt at Peek Hill. The works to provide the new underground supply were mainly undertaken on the highway to minimise the impact on the sensitive moorland landscape, its archaeology, wildlife and livestock. The DPA has supported the undergrounding of these visually intrusive power lines for many years.\nThe Dartmoor Conservation Garden.\nThe Dartmoor Conservation Garden is a joint project between DPA and Dartmoor National Park Authority (DNPA) and is located in the Jack Wigmore Garden behind the High Moorland Centre in Princetown: this is a memorial garden to a former Chair of the Authority. It is planted with a cross-section of typical native Dartmoor plants. It also houses some typical Dartmoor archaeological features, such as a 4,000-year-old Bronze Age burial kistvaen (or cist) and a Medieval granite cross from Ter Hill. This marked the Monk's Path but was constantly being pushed over by cattle. The purpose of the Garden is to illustrate the biodiversity on Dartmoor. The project came online in June 2015.\nWidecombe telecommunications mast.\nThe DPA were involved in a campaign in June 2015 against four telecommunications masts planned for Dartmoor, with the first to be erected in the village of Widecombe. At short notice, the DPA banners were taken out, letters written, press interviews given and support given to the villagers when an inflatable mast was demonstrated \u2013 with the effect that the planning application was withdrawn.\nFriends of Dartmoor.\nIn common with other amenity bodies, such as those for the Lake District, Peak District, Pembrokeshire Coast, Yorkshire Dales Three Peaks and the New Forest Trust, the image of Dartmoor Preservation Association is evolving from its Victorian origins, although the original name is being retained. Friends of Dartmoor projects a more modern image of preservation where several years of diplomacy have achieved good relations with the partner agencies that operate in the Dartmoor arena. This is due mainly to the efforts of the previous CEO, James Paxman and his successor, Phil Hutt.\nConstitution, objectives and policies.\nThe DPA Constitution, objectives and policies are published on the DPA web site.\nThe objectives enshrined in the constitution are the protection, preservation and enhancement in the public interest of the landscape, antiquities, flora and fauna, natural beauty, cultural heritage and scientific interest of Dartmoor. Also the protection and preservation of public access to and on Dartmoor subject to the ancient rights of commoners. Co-operation with the commoners and any organisation in achieving DPA objectives, also the study of and the recording and publication of information upon the antiquities, history and natural history of Dartmoor.\nThe DPA has twenty-two policies listed on its web site: regarding access and rights of way, fencing, protecting monuments, diverse habitats, bracken, china clay quarrying, military training and live firing, hill farming and small scale traditional local industries, quarrying, television and telephone masts, wind farms, planning applications, housing developments, woodlands and forestry, ponies, swaling, and recreational activities.\nConservation.\nThe DPA conservation team meet throughout the year to work on a number of ongoing projects; from gorse clearance, to habitat protection and archaeological surveying. A quarterly timetable is released both on the organisation's website and through its member publications, along with details of how to get involved. The team also host an annual open day at the DPA land holding of Pudsham Meadows."}
{"id": "8418", "revid": "12680084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8418", "title": "Dartmouth College", "text": "Dartmouth College ( ) is a private Ivy League research university in Hanover, New Hampshire, United States. Established in 1769 by Eleazar Wheelock, Dartmouth is one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. Emerging into national prominence at the turn of the 20th century, Dartmouth has since been considered among the most prestigious undergraduate colleges in the United States.\nAlthough originally established to educate Native Americans in Christian theology and the English way of life, the university primarily trained Congregationalist ministers during its early history before it gradually secularized. While Dartmouth is now a research university rather than simply an undergraduate college, it continues to go by \"Dartmouth College\" to emphasize its focus on undergraduate education.\nFollowing a liberal arts curriculum, Dartmouth provides undergraduate instruction in 40 academic departments and interdisciplinary programs, including 60 majors in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering, and enables students to design specialized concentrations or engage in dual degree programs. In addition to the undergraduate faculty of arts and sciences, Dartmouth has four professional and graduate schools: the Geisel School of Medicine, the Thayer School of Engineering, the Tuck School of Business, and the Guarini School of Graduate and Advanced Studies. The university also has affiliations with the Dartmouth\u2013Hitchcock Medical Center. Dartmouth is home to the Rockefeller Center for Public Policy and the Social Sciences, the Hood Museum of Art, the John Sloan Dickey Center for International Understanding, and the Hopkins Center for the Arts. With a student enrollment of about 6,700, Dartmouth is the smallest university in the Ivy League. Undergraduate admissions are highly selective with an acceptance rate of 5.3% for the class of 2028, including a 3.8% rate for regular decision applicants.\nSituated on a terrace above the Connecticut River, Dartmouth's main campus is in the rural Upper Valley region of New England. The university functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms. Dartmouth is known for its undergraduate focus, Greek culture, and campus traditions. Its 34 varsity sports teams compete intercollegiately in the Ivy League conference of the NCAA Division I. The university has many prominent alumni, including 170 members of the United States Congress, 25 U.S. governors, 8 U.S. Cabinet secretaries, 3 Nobel Prize laureates, 2 U.S. Supreme Court justices, and a U.S. vice president. Other notable alumni include 81 Rhodes Scholars, 26 Marshall Scholarship recipients, 13 Pulitzer Prize recipients, 10 CEOs of \"Fortune\" 500 companies, and 51 Olympic medalists.\nHistory.\nDartmouth was founded by Eleazar Wheelock, a Yale graduate and Congregational minister from Windham, Connecticut, who had sought to establish a school to train Native Americans as Christian missionaries. It was one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. Wheelock's ostensible inspiration for such an establishment resulted from his relationship with Mohegan Indian Samson Occom. Occom became an ordained minister after studying under Wheelock from 1743 to 1747, and later moved to Long Island to preach to the Montauks.\nWheelock founded Moor's Indian Charity School in 1755. The Charity School proved somewhat successful, but additional funding was necessary to continue school's operations, and Wheelock sought the help of friends to raise money. The first major donation to the school was given by John Phillips in 1762, who went on to found Phillips Exeter Academy. Occom, accompanied by the Reverend Nathaniel Whitaker, traveled to England in 1766 to raise money from churches. With these funds, they established a trust to help Wheelock. The head of the trust was a Methodist named William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth.\nAlthough the fund provided Wheelock ample financial support for the Charity School, Wheelock initially had trouble recruiting Indians to the institution, primarily because its location was far from tribal territories. In seeking to expand the school into a college, Wheelock relocated it to Hanover, in the Province of New Hampshire. The move from Connecticut followed a lengthy and sometimes frustrating effort to find resources and secure a charter. The Royal Governor of New Hampshire, John Wentworth, provided the land upon which Dartmouth would be built and on December 13, 1769, issued a royal charter in the name of King George III establishing the college. That charter created a college \"for the education and instruction of youth of the Indian tribes in this land in reading, writing, and all parts of learning which shall appear necessary and expedient for civilizing and christianizing children of pagans as well as in all liberal arts and sciences and also of English youth and any others\". The reference to educating Native American youth was included to connect Dartmouth to the Charity School and enable the use of the Charity School's unspent trust funds. Named for William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth \u2013 an important supporter of Eleazar Wheelock's earlier efforts but who, in fact, opposed creation of the college and never donated to it \u2013 Dartmouth is the nation's ninth oldest college and the last institution of higher learning established under colonial rule. The college granted its first degrees in 1771.\nGiven the limited success of the Charity School, however, Wheelock intended his new college as one primarily for whites. Occom, disappointed with Wheelock's departure from the school's original goal of Indian Christianization, went on to form his own community of New England Indians called Brothertown Indians in New York.\nIn 1819, Dartmouth College was the subject of the historic Dartmouth College case, which challenged New Hampshire's 1816 attempt to amend the college' charter to make the school a public university. An institution called Dartmouth University occupied the college buildings and began operating in Hanover in 1817, though the college continued teaching classes in rented rooms nearby. Daniel Webster, an alumnus of the class of 1801, presented the college's case to the Supreme Court, which found the amendment of Dartmouth's charter to be an illegal impairment of a contract by the state and reversed New Hampshire's takeover of the college. Webster concluded his peroration with the famous words: \"It is, Sir, as I have said, a small college. And yet there are those who love it.\"\nDartmouth taught its first African-American students in 1775 and 1808. By the end of the Civil War, 20 black men had attended the college or its medical school. and Dartmouth \"was recognized in the African-American community as a place where a man of color could go to get educated\". One of them, Jonathan C. Gibbs, served as Secretary of State and Superintendent of Public Instruction for the state of Florida.\nIn 1866, the New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts was incorporated in Hanover, in connection with Dartmouth College. The institution was officially associated with Dartmouth and was directed by Dartmouth's president. The new college was moved to Durham, New Hampshire, in 1891, and later became known as the University of New Hampshire.\nDartmouth emerged onto the national academic stage at the turn of the 20th century. Prior to this period, the college had clung to traditional methods of instruction and was relatively poorly funded. Under President William Jewett Tucker (1893\u20131909), Dartmouth underwent a major revitalization of facilities, faculty, and the student body, following large endowments such as the $10,000 given by Dartmouth alumnus and law professor John Ordronaux. 20 new structures replaced antiquated buildings, while the student body and faculty both expanded threefold. Tucker is often credited for having \"refounded Dartmouth\" and bringing it into national prestige. Presidents Ernest Fox Nichols (1909\u201316) and Ernest Martin Hopkins (1916\u201345) continued Tucker's trend of modernization, further improving campus facilities and introducing selective admissions in the 1920s. In 1945, Hopkins was subject to no small amount of controversy, as he openly admitted to Dartmouth's practice of using racial quotas to deny Jews entry into the university. John Sloan Dickey, serving as president from 1945 until 1970, strongly emphasized the liberal arts, particularly public policy and international relations. During World War II, Dartmouth was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a navy commission.\nThe Dartmouth workshop, which was held in 1956, is widely considered to be the founding event of artificial intelligence as a field.\nIn 1970, longtime professor of mathematics and computer science John George Kemeny became president of Dartmouth. Kemeny oversaw several major changes at the college. Dartmouth, which had been a men's institution, began admitting women as full-time students and undergraduate degree candidates in 1972 amid much controversy. At about the same time, the college adopted its \"Dartmouth Plan\" of academic scheduling, permitting the student body to increase in size within the existing facilities.\nIn 1988, Dartmouth's alma mater song's lyrics changed from \"Men of Dartmouth\" to \"Dear old Dartmouth\".\nDuring the 1990s, the college saw a major academic overhaul under President James O. Freedman and a controversial (and ultimately unsuccessful) 1999 initiative to encourage the school's single-sex Greek houses to go coed. The first decade of the 21st century saw the commencement of the $1.5 billion Campaign for the Dartmouth Experience, the largest capital fundraising campaign in the college's history, which surpassed $1 billion in 2008. The mid- and late first decade of the 21st century have also seen extensive campus construction, with the erection of two new housing complexes, full renovation of two dormitories, and a forthcoming dining hall, life sciences center, and visual arts center. In 2004, Booz Allen Hamilton selected Dartmouth College as a model of institutional endurance \"whose record of endurance has had implications and benefits for all American organizations, both academic and commercial\", citing \"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\" and Dartmouth's successful self-reinvention in the late 19th century.\nSince the election of a number of petition-nominated trustees to the Board of Trustees starting in 2004, the role of alumni in Dartmouth governance has been the subject of ongoing conflict. President James Wright announced his retirement in February 2008 and was replaced by Harvard University professor and physician Jim Yong Kim on July 1, 2009. Kim was succeeded by Philip J. Hanlon in June 2013 and Sian Leah Beilock in June 2023.\nIn May 2010 Dartmouth joined the Matariki Network of Universities (MNU) together with Durham University (UK), Queen's University (Canada), University of Otago (New Zealand), University of T\u00fcbingen (Germany), University of Western Australia (Australia) and Uppsala University (Sweden).\nIn early August 2019, Dartmouth College agreed to pay nine current and former students a total of $14 million to settle a class-action lawsuit alleging they were sexually harassed by three former neuroscience professors.\nIn 2019, Dartmouth College was elected to the Association of American Universities (AAU).\nIn April 2022, Dartmouth College returned the papers of Samson Occom, who helped Eleazar Wheelock secure the funds for Dartmouth College for what Occom believed would be a school for Native students in Connecticut, to the Mohegan Tribe.\nIn November 2022, Dartmouth Hall was rededicated after a $42 million renovation. Fundraising for the project was led by over 1700 alumnae as part of the celebration of 50 years of coeducation at Dartmouth College.\nAcademics.\nDartmouth, a liberal arts institution, offers a four-year Bachelor of Arts and ABET-accredited Bachelor of Engineering degree to undergraduate students. The college has 39 academic departments offering 56 major programs, while students are free to design special majors or engage in dual majors. For the graduating class of 2017, the most popular majors were economics, government, computer science, engineering sciences, and history. The Economics Department, whose prominent professors include David Blanchflower, Andrew Samwick, and Diego Comin, among others, also holds the distinction as the top-ranked bachelor's-only economics program in the world. The Government Department similarly includes numerous eminent faculty members, such as Stephen Brooks and William Wohlforth, and is among Dartmouth's most popular majors. These two departments are known for enforcing a median grade of B+ in most of their courses in order to curb the burgeoning trend of grade inflation at American universities. \nIn order to graduate, a student must complete 35 total courses, eight to ten of which are typically part of a chosen major program. Other requirements for graduation include the completion of ten \"distributive requirements\" in a variety of academic fields, proficiency in a foreign language, and completion of a writing class and first-year seminar in writing. Many departments offer honors programs requiring students seeking that distinction to engage in \"independent, sustained work\", culminating in the production of a thesis. In addition to the courses offered in Hanover, Dartmouth offers 57 different off-campus programs, including Foreign Study Programs, Language Study Abroad programs, and Exchange Programs.\nThrough the Graduate Studies program, Dartmouth grants doctorate and master's degrees in 19 Arts &amp; Sciences graduate programs. Although the first graduate degree, a PhD in classics, was awarded in 1885, many of the current PhD programs have only existed since the 1960s. Furthermore, Dartmouth is home to three professional schools: the Geisel School of Medicine (established 1797), Thayer School of Engineering (1867)\u2014which also serves as the undergraduate department of engineering sciences\u2014and Tuck School of Business (1900). With these professional schools and graduate programs, conventional American usage would accord Dartmouth the label of \"Dartmouth University\"; however, because of historical and nostalgic reasons (such as \"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\"), the school uses the name \"Dartmouth College\" to refer to the entire institution.\nDartmouth employs a total of 607 tenured or tenure-track faculty members, including the highest proportion of female tenured professors among the Ivy League universities, and the first black woman tenure-track faculty member in computer science at an Ivy League university. Faculty members have been at the forefront of such major academic developments as the Dartmouth Workshop, the Dartmouth Time-Sharing System, Dartmouth BASIC, and Dartmouth ALGOL 30. In 2005, sponsored project awards to Dartmouth faculty research amounted to $169 million.\nDartmouth served as the host member of the University Press of New England, a university press founded in 1970 that included Brandeis University, Tufts University, the University of New Hampshire, and Northeastern University. The University Press of New England shut down in 2018. With the exception of Dartmouth College Press titles, in 2021, Brandeis become the sole owner of all copyrights and titles of UPNE.\nRankings.\nDartmouth was ranked 12th among undergraduate programs at national universities by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" in its 2022 rankings. \"U.S. News\" also ranked the school 3rd best for veterans, tied for 5th best in undergraduate teaching, and 7th for \"best value\" national universities. Dartmouth's undergraduate teaching was previously ranked 1st by \"U.S. News\" for five years in a row (2009\u20132013). Dartmouth College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education.\nIn \"Forbes\" 2019 rankings of 650 universities, liberal arts colleges and service academies, Dartmouth ranked 10th overall and 10th in research universities. In the \"Forbes\" 2018 \"grateful graduate\" rankings, Dartmouth came in first for the second year in a row.\nThe 2021\" Academic Ranking of World Universities\" ranked Dartmouth among the 90\u2013110th best universities in the nation. However, this specific ranking has drawn criticism from scholars for not adequately adjusting for the size of an institution, which leads to larger institutions ranking above smaller ones like Dartmouth.\nThe 2006 Carnegie Foundation classification listed Dartmouth as the only \"majority-undergraduate\", \"arts-and-sciences focus[ed]\", \"research university\" in the country that also had \"some graduate coexistence\" and \"very high research activity\".\nAdmissions.\nUndergraduate admission to Dartmouth College is characterized by the Carnegie Foundation and \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" as \"most selective\". The \"Princeton Review\", in its 2024 edition, gave the university an admissions selectivity rating of 99 out of 99.\nFor the freshman class entering Fall 2023, Dartmouth received a record 28,841 applications of which 6.2% were accepted, consistent with the prior two years; approximately 67% of those accepted are expected to matriculate. Of those admitted students who reported class rank, 444 were ranked first or second in their class, while 96% ranked in the top decile. The admitted students' academic profile showed an all-time high SAT average score of 1501, while the average composite ACT score remained at 33.\nAdditionally, for the 2016\u20132017 academic year, Dartmouth received 685 transfer applications of which 5.1% were accepted, with an average SAT composite score of 1490, average composite ACT score of 34, and average college GPA of about 3.85. Dartmouth meets 100% of students' demonstrated financial need in order to attend the college, and currently admits all students, including internationals, on a need-blind basis.\nFinancial aid.\nDartmouth guarantees to meet 100% of the demonstrated need of every admitted student who applies for financial aid at the time of admission. Dartmouth is one of seven American universities to practice international need-blind admissions. This means that all applicants, including U.S. permanent residents, undocumented students in the U.S., and international students, are admitted to the college without regard to their financial circumstances. At Dartmouth, free tuition is provided for students from families with total incomes of $125,000 or less and possessing typical assets. Dartmouth is also one of a few U.S. universities to eliminate undergraduate student loans and replace them with expanded scholarship grants. In 2015, $88.8 million (~$ in ) in need-based scholarships were awarded to Dartmouth students.\nThe median family income of Dartmouth students is $200,400, with 58% of students coming from the top 10% highest-earning families and 14% from the bottom 60%.\nHowever, a 2022 article from \"The Dartmouth\" disputes the college's claims by saying the following: \"To put it all together with the $9 million of student debt from the Class of 2021, this change in Dartmouth policy, hailed as \"eliminat[ing] loans for undergraduate students\" actually eliminated only about a quarter\u201427.4% to be exact\u2014of student loans for undergraduate students. So, while Dartmouth gets glowing coverage in news publications across the country, 72.6% of the debt it saddles its students with remains.\"\nThe Dartmouth Plan.\nDartmouth functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms. The Dartmouth Plan (or simply \"D-Plan\") is an academic scheduling system that permits the customization of each student's academic year. All undergraduates are required to be in residence for the fall, winter, and spring terms of their freshman year and two terms of their senior year, as well as the summer term of their sophomore year. However, students may petition to alter this plan so that they may be off during terms of their senior year or sophomore summer terms. During all terms, students are permitted to choose between studying on-campus, studying at an off-campus program, or taking a term off for vacation, outside internships, or research projects. The typical course load is three classes per term, and students will generally enroll in classes for 12 total terms over the course of their academic career.\nThe D-Plan was instituted in the early 1970s at the same time that Dartmouth began accepting female undergraduates. It was initially devised as a plan to increase the enrollment without enlarging campus accommodations, and has been described as \"a way to put 4,000 students into 3,000 beds\". Although new dormitories have been built since, the number of students has also increased and the D-Plan remains in effect. It was modified in the 1980s in an attempt to reduce the problems of lack of social and academic continuity.\nBoard of trustees.\nDartmouth is governed by a board of trustees comprising the college president (\"ex officio\"), the state governor (\"ex officio\"), 13 trustees nominated and elected by the board (called \"charter trustees\"), and eight trustees nominated by alumni and elected by the board (\"alumni trustees\"). The nominees for alumni trustee are determined by a poll of the members of the Association of Alumni of Dartmouth College, selecting from among names put forward by the Alumni Council or by alumni petition.\nAlthough the board elected its members from the two sources of nominees in equal proportions between 1891 and 2007, the board decided in 2007 to add several new members, all charter trustees. In the controversy that followed the decision, the Association of Alumni filed a lawsuit, although it later withdrew the action. In 2008, the board added five new charter trustees.\nCampus.\nDartmouth College is situated in the rural town of Hanover, New Hampshire, located in the Upper Valley along the Connecticut River in New England. Its campus is centered on a \"Green\", a former field of pine trees cleared in 1771. Dartmouth is the largest private landowner of the town of Hanover, and its total landholdings and facilities are worth an estimated $434 million. In addition to its campus in Hanover, Dartmouth owns of Mount Moosilauke in the White Mountains and a tract of land in northern New Hampshire known as the Second College Grant.\nDartmouth's campus buildings vary in age from Wentworth and Thornton Halls of the 1820s (the oldest surviving buildings constructed by the college) to new dormitories and mathematics facilities completed in 2006. Most of Dartmouth's buildings are designed in the Georgian colonial architecture style, a theme which has been preserved in recent architectural additions. The college has actively sought to reduce carbon emissions and energy usage on campus, earning it the grade of A\u2212 from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card 2008.\nA notable feature of the Dartmouth campus is its many trees which (despite Dutch elm disease) include some 200 American elms. The campus also has the largest Kentucky coffeetree in New Hampshire, at 91\u00a0ft tall.\nWhile Dartmouth's campus is located in a rural setting, it is connected to several major cities by intercity bus services that directly serve Dartmouth and Hanover. Dartmouth Coach provides service from Hanover to South Station and Logan International Airport in Boston as well as New York City, while Greyhound Lines operates a daily route connecting Hanover and Montreal. All three cities are popular weekend/vacation destinations for Dartmouth students.\nAcademic facilities.\nThe college's creative and performing arts facility is the Hopkins Center for the Arts (\"the Hop\"). Opened in 1962, the Hop houses the college's drama, music, film, and studio arts departments, as well as a woodshop, pottery studio, and jewelry studio which are open for use by students and faculty. The building was designed by the famed architect Wallace Harrison, who would later design the similar-looking fa\u00e7ade of Manhattan's Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln Center. Its facilities include two theaters and one 900-seat auditorium and the Courtyard Caf\u00e9 dining facility. The Hop is connected to the Hood Museum of Art, arguably North America's oldest museum in continuous operation, and the Loew Auditorium, where films are screened.\nIn addition to its 19 graduate programs in the arts and sciences, Dartmouth is home to three separate graduate schools. The Geisel School of Medicine is located in a complex on the north side of campus and includes laboratories, classrooms, offices, and a biomedical library. The Dartmouth\u2013Hitchcock Medical Center, located several miles to the south in Lebanon, New Hampshire, contains a 396-bed teaching hospital for the Medical School. The Thayer School of Engineering and the Tuck School of Business are both located at the end of Tuck Mall, west of the center of campus and near the Connecticut River. The Thayer School comprises two buildings; Tuck has seven academic and administrative buildings, as well as several common areas. The two graduate schools share a library, the Feldberg Business &amp; Engineering Library. In December 2018, Dartmouth began a major expansion of the west end of campus by breaking ground on the $200 million (~$ in ) Center for Engineering and Computer Science. The center will house the Computer Science department and Magnuson Center for Entrepreneurship. In October 2019, construction began on the Irving Institute of Energy and Society. Both were completed by Spring 2022, and the Center for Engineering and Computer Science was renamed the Class of 1982 Engineering and Computer Science Center.\nDartmouth's libraries are all part of the collective Dartmouth College Library, which comprises 2.48 million volumes and 6 million total resources, including videos, maps, sound recordings, and photographs. Its specialized libraries include the Biomedical Libraries, Evans Map Room, Feldberg Business &amp; Engineering Library, Jones Media Center, Rauner Special Collections Library, and Sherman Art Library. Baker-Berry Library is the main library at Dartmouth, consisting of a merger of the Baker Memorial Library (opened 1928) and the Berry Library (completed 2002). Located on the northern side of the Green, Baker's tower is an iconic symbol of the college.\nAthletic facilities.\nDartmouth's original sports field was the Green, where students played cricket and old division football during the 19th century. Today, two of Dartmouth's athletic facilities are located in the southeast corner of campus. The center of athletic life is the Alumni Gymnasium, which includes the Karl Michael Competition Pool and the Spaulding Pool, a fitness center, a weight room, and a 1/13th-mile (123\u00a0m) indoor track. Attached to Alumni Gymnasium is the Berry Sports Center, which contains basketball and volleyball courts (Leede Arena), as well as the Kresge Fitness Center. Behind the Alumni Gymnasium is Memorial Field, a 15,600-seat stadium overlooking Dartmouth's football field and track. The nearby Thompson Arena, designed by Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi and constructed in 1975, houses Dartmouth's ice rink. Also visible from Memorial Field is the Nathaniel Leverone Fieldhouse, home to the indoor track. The new softball field, Dartmouth Softball Park, was constructed in 2012, sharing parking facilities with Thompson arena and replacing Sachem Field, located over a mile from campus, as the primary softball facility.\nDartmouth's other athletic facilities in Hanover include the Friends of Dartmouth Rowing Boathouse and the old rowing house storage facility (both located along the Connecticut River), the Hanover Country Club, Dartmouth's oldest remaining athletic facility (established in 1899), and the Corey Ford Rugby Clubhouse. The college also maintains the Dartmouth Skiway, a skiing facility located over two mountains near the Hanover campus in Lyme Center, New Hampshire, that serves as the winter practice grounds for the Dartmouth Ski Team, which is a perennial contender for the NCAA Division I championship.\nDartmouth's close association and involvement in the development of the downhill skiing industry is featured in the 2010 book \"Passion for Skiing\" as well as the 2013 documentary based on the book \"Passion for Snow\".\nResidential housing and student life facilities.\nBeginning in the fall term of 2016, Dartmouth placed all undergraduate students in one of six House communities, similar to residential colleges, including Allen House, East Wheelock House, North Park House, School House, South House, and West House, alongside independent Living Learning Communities. Dartmouth used to have nine residential communities located throughout campus, instead of ungrouped dormitories or residential colleges. The dormitories varied in design from modern to traditional Georgian styles, and room arrangements range from singles to quads and apartment suites. Since 2006, the college has guaranteed housing for students during their freshman and sophomore years. More than 3,000 students elect to live in housing provided by college.\nCampus meals are served by Dartmouth Dining Services, which operates 11 dining establishments around campus. The Class of 1953 Commons, commonly referred to as \"Foco\", is the all-you-can-eat dining hall, located at the center of campus. Dartmouth also operates \u00e0 la carte cafes around campus (Collis Caf\u00e9, Courtyard Caf\u00e9, Novack Caf\u00e9, The Fern Coffee &amp; Tea Bar, Ramekin, and Caf\u00e9@Baker), a convenience store (Collis Market), and three snack bars located in the Allen House Commons (also called the \"Cube\"), McLaughlin Cluster, and East Wheelock Cluster.\nThe Collis Center is the center of student life and programming, serving as what would be generically termed the \"student union\" or \"campus center\". It contains a caf\u00e9, study space, common areas, and a number of administrative departments, including the Academic Skills Center. Robinson Hall, next door to both the Collis Center and the Class of 1953 Commons, contains the offices of a number of student organizations, including the Dartmouth Outing Club and \"The Dartmouth\" daily newspaper.\nStudent life.\nDartmouth Student Government represents students on issues related to student life. Annually, students elect a student body president, vice president, and undergraduate senate to represent them in the following academic year. In 2006, \"The Princeton Review\" ranked Dartmouth third in its \"Quality of Life\" category, and sixth for having the \"Happiest Students\". Athletics and participation in the Greek system are the most popular campus activities. In all, Dartmouth offers more than 350 organizations, teams, and sports. The school is also home to a variety of longstanding traditions and celebrations and has a loyal alumni network; Dartmouth ranked #2 in \"The Princeton Review\" in 2006 for Best Alumni Network.\nIn 2014, Dartmouth College was the third highest in the nation in \"total of reports of rape\" on their main campus, with 42 reports of rape. \"The Washington Post\" attributed the high number of rape reports to the fact that a growing number of sexual assault victims feel comfortable enough to report sexual assaults that would have gone unreported in previous years. In 2015, the Huffington Post reported that Dartmouth had the highest rate of bystander intervention of any college surveyed, with 57.7% of Dartmouth students reporting that they would take some sort of action if they saw someone acting in a \"sexually violent or harassing manner,\" compared to 45.5% of students nationally.\nDartmouth fraternities have an extensive history of hazing and alcohol abuse, leading to police raids and accusations of sexual harassment.\nStudent groups.\nDartmouth's more than 200 student organizations and clubs cover a wide range of interests. In 2007, the college hosted eight academic groups, 17 cultural groups, two honor societies, 30 \"issue-oriented\" groups, 25 performing groups, 12 pre-professional groups, 20 publications, and 11 recreational groups. Notable student groups include the nation's largest and oldest collegiate outdoors club, the Dartmouth Outing Club, which includes the nationally recognized Big Green Bus; the campus's oldest a cappella group, The Dartmouth Aires; the controversial independent newspaper \"The Dartmouth Review\"; Dartmouth Student Government, the college's official undergraduate student government; and \"The Dartmouth\", arguably the nation's oldest university newspaper. \"The Dartmouth\" describes itself as \"America's Oldest College Newspaper, Founded 1799\".\nPartially because of Dartmouth's rural, isolated location, the Greek system dating from the 1840s is one of the most popular social outlets for students. Dartmouth is home to 32 recognized Greek houses: 17 fraternities, 12 sororities, and three coeducational organizations. In 2007, roughly 70% of eligible students belonged to a Greek organization; since 1987, students have not been permitted to join Greek organizations until their sophomore year. Dartmouth College was among the first institutions of higher education to desegregate fraternity houses, doing so in the 1950s, and was involved in the movement to create coeducational Greek houses in the 1970s. In the early first decade of the 21st century, campus-wide debate focused on a board of trustees recommendation that Greek organizations become \"substantially coeducational\"; this attempt to change the Greek system eventually failed.\nDartmouth also has a number of secret societies, which are student- and alumni-led organizations often focused on preserving the history of the college and initiating service projects. Most prominent among them is the Sphinx society, housed in a prominent Egyptian tomb-like building near the center of campus. The Sphinx has been the subject of numerous rumors as to its facilities, practices, and membership.\nThe college has an additional classification of social/residential organizations known as undergraduate societies.\nAthletics.\nApproximately 20% of students participate in a varsity sport, and nearly 80% participate in some form of club, varsity, intramural, or other athletics. In 2021, Dartmouth College fielded 33 intercollegiate varsity teams: 15 for men, 17 for women, and coeducational sailing and equestrian programs. Dartmouth's athletic teams compete in the NCAA Division I eight-member Ivy League conference; some teams also participate in the Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC). As is mandatory for the members of the Ivy League, Dartmouth College does not offer athletic scholarships. In addition to the traditional American team sports (football, basketball, baseball, and ice hockey), Dartmouth competes at the varsity level in many other sports including track and field, softball, squash, sailing, tennis, rowing, soccer, skiing, and lacrosse.\nThe college also offers 26 club and intramural sports such as fencing, rugby, water polo, figure skating, boxing, volleyball, ultimate frisbee, and cricket, leading to a 75% participation rate in athletics among the undergraduate student body. The Dartmouth Fencing Team, despite being entirely self-coached, won the USACFC club national championship in 2014. The Dartmouth Men's Rugby Team, founded in 1951, has been ranked among the best collegiate teams in that sport, winning for example the Ivy Rugby Conference every year between 2008 and 2020. The figure skating team won the national championship five straight times from 2004 through 2008. In addition to the academic requirements for graduation, Dartmouth requires every undergraduate to complete a swim and three terms of physical education.\nNative Americans at Dartmouth.\nThe charter of Dartmouth College, granted to Wheelock in 1769, proclaims that the institution was created \"for the education and instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing and all parts of Learning ... as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences; and also of English Youth and any others\". However, Wheelock primarily intended the college to educate white youth, and the few Native students that attended Dartmouth experienced much difficulty in an institution ostensibly dedicated to their education. The funds for the Charity School for Native Americans that preceded Dartmouth College were raised primarily by the efforts of a Mohegan named Samson Occom, and at least some of those funds were used to help found the college.\nThe college graduated only 19 Native Americans during its first 200 years. In 1970, the college established Native American academic and social programs as part of a \"new dedication to increasing Native American enrollment\". Since then, Dartmouth has graduated over 700 Native American students from over 200 different tribes, more than the other seven Ivy League universities combined.\nTraditions.\nDartmouth is well known for its fierce school spirit and many traditions. The college functions on a quarter system, and one weekend each term is set aside as a traditional celebratory event, known on campus as \"big weekends\" or \"party weekends\". In the fall term, Homecoming (officially called Dartmouth Night) is marked by a bonfire on the Green constructed by the freshman class. Winter term is celebrated by Winter Carnival, a tradition started in 1911 by the Dartmouth Outing Club to promote winter sports. This tradition is the oldest in the United States, and subsequently went on to catch on at other New England colleges. In the spring, Green Key is a weekend mostly devoted to campus parties and celebration.\nThe summer term was formerly marked by Tubestock, an unofficial tradition in which the students used wooden rafts and inner tubes to float on the Connecticut River. Begun in 1986, Tubestock was ended in 2006 by town ordinance. The Class of 2008, during their summer term on campus in 2006, replaced the defunct Tubestock with Fieldstock. This new celebration includes a barbecue, live music, and the revival of the 1970s and 1980s tradition of racing homemade chariots around the Green. Unlike Tubestock, Fieldstock is funded and supported by the college.\nAnother longstanding tradition is four-day, student-run First-Year Trips for incoming freshmen, begun in 1935. Each trip concludes at the Moosilauke Ravine Lodge. In 2011, over 96% of freshmen elected to participate.\nInsignia and other representations.\nMotto and song.\nDartmouth's motto, chosen by Eleazar Wheelock, is \"Vox clamantis in deserto\". The Latin motto is literally translated as \"The voice of one crying in the wilderness\", but is more often rendered as \"A voice crying out in the wilderness\". The phrase appears five times in the Bible and is a reference to the college's location on what was once the frontier of European settlement. Richard Hovey's \"Men of Dartmouth\" was elected as the best of Dartmouth's songs in 1896, and became the school's official song in 1926. The song was retitled to \"Alma Mater\" in the 1980s when its lyrics were changed to refer to women as well as men.\nSeal.\nDartmouth's 1769 royal charter required the creation of a seal for use on official documents and diplomas. The college's founder, Eleazar Wheelock, designed a seal for his college bearing a striking resemblance to the seal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, a missionary society founded in London in 1701, in order to maintain the illusion that his college was more for mission work than for higher education. Engraved by a Boston silversmith, the seal was ready by commencement of 1773. The trustees officially accepted the seal on August 25, 1773, describing it as:\nOn October 28, 1926, the trustees affirmed the charter's reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone. The College Publications Committee commissioned noted typographer William Addison Dwiggins to create a line drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use. Dwiggins' design was modified during 1957 to change the date from \"1770\" to \"1769\", to accord with the date of the college charter. The trustees commissioned a new set of dies with a date of \"1769\" to replace the old dies, now badly worn after almost two hundred years of use. The 1957 design continues to be used under trademark number 2305032.\nShield.\nOn October 28, 1926, the trustees approved a \"Dartmouth College Shield\" for general use. Artist and engraver W. Parke Johnson designed this emblem on the basis of the shield that is depicted at the center of the original seal. This design does not survive. On June 9, 1944, the trustees approved another coat of arms based on the shield part of the seal, this one by Canadian artist and designer Thoreau MacDonald. That design was used widely and, like Dwiggins' seal, had its date changed from \"1770\" to \"1769\" around 1958. That version continues to be used under trademark registration number 3112676 and others.\nCollege designer John Scotford made a stylized version of the shield during the 1960s, but it did not see the success of MacDonald's design. The shield appears to have been used as the basis of the shield of the Geisel School of Medicine, and it has been reproduced in sizes as small as 20 micrometers across. The design has appeared on Rudolph Ruzicka's Bicentennial Medal (Philadelphia Mint, 1969) and elsewhere.\nNickname, symbol, and mascot.\nDartmouth has never had an official mascot. The nickname \"The Big Green\", originating in the 1860s, is based on students' adoption of a shade of forest green (\"Dartmouth Green\") as the school's official color in 1866. Beginning in the 1920s, the Dartmouth College athletic teams were known by their unofficial nickname \"the Indians\", a moniker that probably originated among sports journalists. This unofficial mascot and team name was used until the early 1970s, when its use came under criticism. In 1974, the Trustees declared the \"use of the [Indian] symbol in any form to be inconsistent with present institutional and academic objectives of the College in advancing Native American education\". Some alumni and students, as well as the conservative student newspaper, \"The Dartmouth Review\", have sought to return the Indian symbol to prominence, but never succeeded in doing so.\nVarious student initiatives have been undertaken to adopt a mascot, but none has become \"official\". One proposal devised by the college humor magazine the \"Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern\" was Keggy the Keg, an anthropomorphic beer keg who makes occasional appearances at college sporting events. Despite student enthusiasm for Keggy, the mascot has received approval from only the student government. In November 2006, student government attempted to revive the \"Dartmoose\" as a potential replacement amid renewed controversy surrounding the former unofficial Indian mascot.\nAlumni.\nDartmouth's alumni are known for frequently donating to their alma mater. According to a 2008 article in \"The Wall Street Journal\" based on data from payscale.com, Dartmouth graduates also earn higher median salaries at least 10 years after graduation than alumni of any other American university surveyed.\nBy 2008, Dartmouth had graduated 238 classes of students, and had over 60,000 living alumni in a variety of fields. Finance, consulting, and technology have consistently been the most popular industries to enter for students. Top employers of new graduates include Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, McKinsey &amp; Company, Bain &amp; Company, Amazon, Microsoft, and Google.\nNelson A. Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United States and 49th Governor of New York, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth with a degree in economics in 1930. Over 164 Dartmouth graduates have served in the United States Senate and United States House of Representatives, such as Massachusetts statesman Daniel Webster. Cabinet members of American presidents include Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, Secretary of Defense James V. Forrestal, Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson, and Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner. C. Everett Koop was the Surgeon General of the United States under President Ronald Reagan. Two Dartmouth alumni have served as justices on the Supreme Court of the United States: Salmon P. Chase and Levi Woodbury. Eugene Norman Veasey (class of 1954) served as the Chief Justice of Delaware. The 46th Governor of Pennsylvania, Tom Wolf; the 42nd Governor of Illinois, businessman Bruce Rauner; and the 31st governor and current senator from North Dakota, John Hoeven (R), are also Dartmouth alumni. Ernesto de la Guardia, class of 1925, was president of the Republic of Panama.\nIn literature and journalism, Dartmouth has produced 13 Pulitzer Prize winners: Thomas M. Burton, Richard Eberhart, Dan Fagin, Paul Gigot, Frank Gilroy, Jake Hooker, Nigel Jaquiss, Joseph Rago, Martin J. Sherwin, David K. Shipler, David Shribman, Justin Harvey Smith and Robert Frost. Frost, who received four Pulitzer Prizes for Poetry in his lifetime, attended but did not graduate from Dartmouth; he is, however, the only person to have received two honorary degrees from Dartmouth.\nOther authors and media personalities include CNN Chief White House correspondent and anchor Jake Tapper, novelist and founding editor of \"The Believer\" Heidi Julavits, \"Dean of rock critics\" Robert Christgau, National Book Award winners Louise Erdrich and Phil Klay, novelist/screenwriter Budd Schulberg, political commentator Dinesh D'Souza, radio talk show host Laura Ingraham, commentator Mort Kondracke, and journalist James Panero. Norman Maclean, professor at the University of Chicago and author of \"A River Runs Through It and Other Stories\", graduated from Dartmouth in 1924. Theodor Geisel, better known as children's author Dr. Seuss, was a member of the class of 1925. Tom Ryan, CEO and president of Paramount Streaming and Founder of Pluto TV graduated in 1991.\nIn the area of religion and theology, Dartmouth alumni include priests and ministers Ebenezer Porter, Jonathan Clarkson Gibbs, Caleb Sprague Henry, Arthur Whipple Jenks, Solomon Spalding, and Joseph Tracy; Transcendental Meditation Movement leader John Hagelin; and rabbis Marshall Meyer, Arnold Resnicoff, and David E. Stern. Hyrum Smith, brother of Mormon Prophet Joseph Smith, attended the college in his teens. He was Patriarch of the LDS Church.\nDartmouth alumni in academia include Stuart Kauffman and Jeffrey Weeks, both recipients of MacArthur Fellowships (commonly called \"genius grants\"). Dartmouth has also graduated three Nobel Prize winners with four separate prizes: Owen Chamberlain (Physics, 1959), K. Barry Sharpless (Chemistry, 2001 and 2022), and George Davis Snell (Physiology or Medicine, 1980). Educators include founder and first president of Bates College Oren Burbank Cheney (1839); the former chancellor of the University of California, San Diego, Marye Anne Fox (PhD. in Chemistry, 1974); founding president of Vassar College Milo Parker Jewett; founder and first president of Kenyon College Philander Chase; first professor of Wabash College Caleb Mills; president of Union College Charles Augustus Aiken. Nine of Dartmouth's 17 presidents were alumni of the college.\nDartmouth alumni serving as CEOs or company presidents and executives include John Henry Patterson (NCR owner) and founder, Charles Alfred Pillsbury, founder of the Pillsbury Company and patriarch of the Pillsbury family, Sandy Alderson (San Diego Padres), John Donahoe (Nike, Inc.), Louis V. Gerstner, Jr. (IBM), Charles E. Haldeman (Putnam Investments), Donald J. Hall Sr. (Hallmark Cards), Douglas Hodge (CEO of PIMCO accused of fraud), Jeffrey R. Immelt (General Electric), Gail Koziara Boudreaux (United Health Care), Grant Tinker (NBC), Greg Maffei (Liberty Media), and Brian Goldner (Hasbro).\nIn film, entertainment, and television, Dartmouth is represented by David Benioff, co-creator, showrunner, and writer of \"Game of Thrones\"; Shonda Rhimes, creator of \"Grey's Anatomy\", \"Private Practice\", and \"Scandal\"; Budd Schulberg, Academy Award-winning screenwriter of \"On the Waterfront\"; Michael Phillips, who won the Academy Award for Best Picture as co-producer of \"The Sting\"; Rachel Dratch, a former cast member of \"Saturday Night Live\"; Chris Meledandri, executive producer of \"Ice Age\", \"Horton Hears a Who!\", and \"Despicable Me\"; writer and director duo Phil Lord and Chris Miller; and the title character of \"Mister Rogers' Neighborhood\", Fred Rogers. Other notable film and television figures include Sarah Wayne Callies (\"Prison Break\"), Emmy Award winner Michael Moriarty, Andrew Shue of \"Melrose Place\", Aisha Tyler of \"Friends\" and \"24\", ESPN and Tennis Channel broadcaster Brett Haber, Connie Britton of \"Spin City\" and \"Friday Night Lights\", Mindy Kaling of \"The Office\" and \"The Mindy Project\", David Harbour of \"Stranger Things\", and Michelle Khare of HBO Max's \"Karma\".\nA number of Dartmouth alumni have found success in professional sports. In baseball, Dartmouth alumni include All-Star and three-time Gold Glove winner and manager Brad Ausmus, All-Star reliever Mike Remlinger, and pitcher Kyle Hendricks. Professional football players include Miami Dolphins quarterback Jay Fiedler, linebacker Reggie Williams, three-time Pro Bowler Nick Lowery, quarterback Jeff Kemp, and Tennessee Titans tight end Casey Cramer, and Miami Dolphins defensive coordinator Matt Burke. \nDartmouth has also produced a number of Olympic competitors. Lawrence Whitney won bronze at the 1912 Summer Olympics in men's shot put. Adam Nelson won the silver medal in the shot put in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and the gold medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics to go along with his gold medal in the 2005 World Championships in Athletics in Helsinki. Kristin King and Sarah Parsons were members of the United States' 2006 bronze medal-winning ice hockey team. Cherie Piper, Gillian Apps, and Katie Weatherston were among Canada's ice hockey gold medalists in 2006. At the 2024 Olympics, Ariana Ramsey won a bronze medal with the United States women's national rugby sevens team, setting up the game-winning try against Australia.\nDick Durrance and Tim Caldwell competed for the United States in skiing in the 1936 and 1976 Winter Olympics, respectively. Arthur Shaw, Earl Thomson, Edwin Myers, Marc Wright, Adam Nelson, Gerry Ashworth, and Vilhj\u00e1lmur Einarsson have all won medals in track and field events. Former heavyweight rower Dominic Seiterle is a member of the Canadian national rowing team and won a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in the men's 8+ event.\nIn popular culture.\nDartmouth College has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular media. Some of the most prominent include:"}
{"id": "8419", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8419", "title": "Dartmouth, Devon", "text": "Dartmouth () is a town and civil parish in the English county of Devon. It is a tourist destination set on the western bank of the estuary of the River Dart, which is a long narrow tidal ria that runs inland as far as Totnes. It lies within the South Devon Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and South Hams district, and had a population of 5,512 in 2001, reducing to 5,064 at the 2011 census. There are two electoral wards in the \"Dartmouth\" area (Townstal &amp; Kingswear). Their combined population at the above census was 6,822.\nHistory.\nIn 1086, the Domesday Book listed \"Dunestal\" as the only settlement in the area which now makes up the parish of Dartmouth. It was held by Walter of Douai. It paid tax on half a hide, and had two plough teams, two slaves, five villagers and four smallholders. There were six cattle, 40 sheep and 15 goats. At this time Townstal (as the name became) was apparently a purely agricultural settlement, centred around the church. Walter of Douai rebelled against William II, and his lands were confiscated and added to the Honour of Marshwood (Dorset), which sublet Townstal and Dartmouth to the FitzStephens. It was probably during the early part of their proprietorship that Dartmouth began to grow as a port, as it was of strategic importance as a deep-water port for sailing vessels. The port was used as the sailing point for the Crusades of 1147 and 1190, and Warfleet Creek, close to Dartmouth Castle is supposed by some to be named for the vast fleets which assembled there. Dartmouth was a home of the Royal Navy from the reign of Edward III and was twice surprised and sacked during the Hundred Years' War, after which the mouth of the estuary was closed every night with a great chain. The narrow mouth of the Dart is protected by two fortified castles, Dartmouth Castle and Kingswear Castle. Originally Dartmouth's only wharf was Bayard's Cove, a relatively small area protected by a fort at the southern end of the town.\nIn 1373 Geoffrey Chaucer visited and among the pilgrims in his \"Canterbury Tales\",\nNotwithstanding Dartmouth's connections with the crown and respectable society, it was a major base for privateering in medieval times. John Hawley or Hauley, a licensed privateer and sometime mayor of Dartmouth is reputed to be a model for Chaucer's \"schipman\".\nThe earliest street in Dartmouth to be recorded by name (in the 13th century) is Smith Street. Several of the houses on the street are originally late 16th century or early 17th century and probably rebuilt on the site of earlier medieval dwellings. The street name undoubtedly derives from the smiths and shipwrights who built and repaired ships here when the tidal waters reached as far as this point. Smith Street was also the site of the town pillory in medieval times.\nThe first church in the parish was St Clement's, Townstal, which may have existed in some form before the 1190s. It was granted by the FitzStephens to Torre Abbey in about 1198, the Abbey having been founded in 1196, and the present stone-built church was probably started shortly after this.\nManorial transactions are first recorded in 1220, when the manor house was at Norton, about half a mile west of Townstal. Names of occupations also started to appear, including taverner, tailor, coggar, korker, goldsmith, glover, skinner and baker. The \"Fosse\", now Foss Street, a dam across the creek known later as The Mill Pool, was first mentioned in 1243. The flow of water out of the pool through the Mill Gullet powered a tidal mill. The dam was used as an unofficial footpath linking Clifton, to the south, with Hardness, to the north. Before this it was necessary to go westwards to the head of the creek at Ford to travel between the two settlements. The lord of the manor was given the rights to hold a weekly market and an annual fair in 1231. In 1281, a legal case proved that the Lord of Totnes had the right to charge tolls on ships using the river, and this right was bought by Nicholas of Tewkesbury in 1306, who conveyed the town, river and port to the king in 1327, so making Dartmouth a Royal Borough. The king gave the river to the Duchy of Cornwall in 1333, who still own the \"fundus\" or bed of the river. In 1335 Edward III granted Dartmouth to Joan of Carew, whose husband was Lord of Stoke Fleming, and almost immediately she obediently passed the lordship to Guy de Bryan, one of the king's leading ministers. In 1341, the town was granted a Royal Charter, which allowed for the election of a mayor. The borough was required to provide two ships for forty days per year. After 1390, no more is heard of lordship rights, and the borough became effectively independent of any lord.\nSt Saviour's Church was constructed in 1335 and consecrated in 1372. It contains a pre-Reformation oak rood screen built in 1480 and several monuments including the tomb of John Hawley (died 1408) and his two wives, covered with a large brass plate effigy of all three. A large medieval ironwork door is decorated with two leopards of the Plantagenets and is possibly the original portal. Although it is dated \"1631\", this is thought to be the date of a subsequent refurbishment coincidental with major renovations of the church in the 17th century. The gallery of the church is decorated with the heraldic crests of prominent local families and is reputed to be constructed of timbers from ships captured during the defeat of the Spanish Armada, although this has not been categorically substantiated. An engraving of a painting by Thomas Allom of the interior of the church, showing the rood screen, provided the inspiration for Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration \"Dartmouth Church\" in Fisher's Drawing Room scrap Book, 1833.\nIn medieval times, land access from the Totnes direction passed the manor at Norton and the parish church at Townstal before falling steeply along what are now Church Road, Mount Boone and Ridge Hill to the river at Hardness. There were steeper routes via Townstal Hill and Clarence Street and also via Brown's Hill. These were all too steep for vehicles, so the only land access was by packhorse. In 1671 there is the first mention of the building of the \"New Ground\". A previously existing sandbank was built up using ships' ballast, and a quay wall was built around it to provide more mooring space. The area proved too unstable to be built on, and is now the Royal Avenue Gardens. It was originally linked to the corner of the Quay by a bridge, opposite Duke Street. At the other end of The Quay, Spithead extended into the river for a few yards. \nDartmouth sent numerous ships to join the English fleet that attacked the Spanish Armada, including the Roebuck, Crescent and Hart. The \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora del Rosario\", the Spanish Armada's \"payship\" commanded by Admiral Pedro de Vald\u00e9s, was captured along with all its crew by Sir Francis Drake. It was reportedly anchored in the River Dart for more than a year and the crew were used as labourers on the nearby Greenway Estate which was the home of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and his half-brother Sir Walter Raleigh. Greenway was later the home of Dame Agatha Christie.\nIn 1592 the \"Madre de Deus\", a Portuguese treasure ship captured by the English in the Azores, docked at Dartmouth Harbour. It attracted all manner of traders, dealers, cutpurses and thieves and by the time Sir Walter Raleigh arrived to reclaim the Crown's share of the loot, a cargo estimated at half a million pounds had been reduced to \u00a3140,000. Still, ten freighters were needed to carry the treasure to London.\nHenry Hudson put into Dartmouth on his return from North America, and was arrested for sailing under a foreign flag. The Pilgrim Fathers put into Dartmouth's Bayard's Cove, en route from Southampton to America. They rested a while before setting off on their journey in the \"Mayflower\" and the \"Speedwell\" on 20 August 1620. About 300 miles west of Land's End, upon realising that the \"Speedwell\" was unseaworthy, it returned to Plymouth. The \"Mayflower\" departed alone to complete the crossing to Cape Cod. Dartmouth's sister city is Dartmouth, Massachusetts.\nThe town contains many medieval and Elizabethan streetscapes and is a patchwork of narrow lanes and stone stairways. A significant number of the historic buildings are listed. One of the most obvious is the Butterwalk, built 1635 to 1640. Its intricately carved wooden fascia is supported on granite columns. Charles II held court in the Butterwalk whilst sheltering from storms in 1671 in a room which now forms part of Dartmouth Museum. Much of the interior survives from that time.\nThe Royal Castle Hotel was built in 1639 on the then new quay. The building was re-fronted in the 19th century, and as the new frontage is itself listed, it is not possible to see the original which lies beneath. A claimant for the oldest building is a former merchant's house in Higher Street, now a Good Beer Guide listed public house called \"the Cherub\", built circa 1380. Agincourt House (next to the Lower Ferry) is also 14th century.\nThe remains of a fort at Gallants Bower just outside the town are some of the best preserved remains of a Civil War defensive structure. The fort was built by Royalist occupation forces in c. 1643 to the south east of the town, with a similar fort at Mount Ridley on the opposite slopes of what is now Kingswear. The Parliamentarian General Fairfax attacked from the north in 1646, taking the town and forcing the Royalists to surrender, after which Gallants Bower was demolished.\n19th century.\nBefore 1671, what is now the town centre was almost entirely tidal mud flats. The New Road (now Victoria Road) was constructed across the bed of the (silted up) Mill Pool and up the Ford valley after 1823. Spithead was extended in 1864 when the Dartmouth and Torbay Railway arrived in Kingswear and a pontoon was constructed, linked to Spithead by a bridge. The railway directors and others formed the Dartmouth Harbour Commissioners. \nAt this time, all the roads in those parts of Dartmouth which were not land reclamations were very narrow. In 1864-7 Higher Street was widened into Southtown and linked to Lower Street, which was also widened, with the northern part renamed Fairfax Place. Some of the buildings were rebuilt further back with decorative frontages.\nIn 1881 the Harbour Commissioners produced a scheme for an embankment or esplanade from near the Lower Ferry to Hardness, across the remains of The Pool, to provide an attraction for tourists and further mooring space. It was completed in 1885 after much disagreement between the Borough, the Commissioners and the Railway (now the Great Western Railway). A new station was also built at this time. The building of the Embankment left a section of river isolated between Spithead and the New Ground, which is known as The Boatfloat, and is linked to the river by a bridge for small vessels under the road.\nThe coming of steam ships led to Dartmouth being used as a bunkering port, with coal being brought in by ship or train. Coal lumpers were members of gangs, who competed to bunker the ships by racing to be first to a ship. This led to the men living as close as possible to the river, and their tenements became grossly overcrowded, with the families living in slum conditions, with up to 15 families in one house, one family to a room.\nThe Royal National Lifeboat Institution opened the Dart Lifeboat Station at the Sand Quay in 1878, but it was closed in 1896. In all this time only one effective rescue was made by the lifeboat.\n20th century.\nThe area to the north of Ridge Hill was a shallow and muddy bay (\"Coombe Mud\") with a narrow road running along the shore linking with the Higher Ferry. The mud was a dumping ground for vessels, including a submarine. The reclamation was completed in 1937 by the extension of the Embankment and the reclamation of the mud behind it, which became Coronation Park. \nIn the 1920s, aided by government grants, the council made a start on clearing the slums. This was aided by the decline in the use of coal as a fuel for ships. The slums were demolished, and the inhabitants were rehoused in new houses in the Britannia Avenue area, to the west of the old village or hamlet of Townstal. The process was interrupted by the second world war, but was resumed with the construction of many prefabs, and later more houses. Community facilities were minimal at first, but a central area was reserved for a church, which was used by the Baptists and opened in 1954, together with a speedway track. The latter was later used for housing, but a new community centre was opened nearby, together with a leisure centre, an outdoor swimming pool, and later an indoor pool, and supermarkets. There are also light industrial units.\nIn the latter part of the Second World War the town was a base for American forces and one of the departure points for Utah Beach in the D Day landings. Slipways and harbour improvements were also constructed. Much of the surrounding countryside and notably Slapton Sands was closed to the public while it was used by US troops for practise landings and manoeuvres. \nBetween 1985 and 1990 the Embankment was widened by 6 metres and raised to prevent flooding at spring tides. A tidal lock gate was provided at the Boatfloat bridge, which could be closed at such times.\n21st century.\nDart Lifeboat Station was reopened in 2007, the first time that a lifeboat had been stationed in the town since 1896. It has initially been kept in a temporary building in Coronation Park.\nIn 2010, a fire seriously damaged numerous historical properties in Fairfax Place and Higher Street. Several were Tudor and Grade I or Grade II listed buildings.\nGovernance.\nThe town was an ancient borough, incorporated by Edward III, known formally as Clifton-Dartmouth-Hardness, and consisting of the three parishes of \"St Petrox\", \"St Saviour\" and \"Townstal\", and incorporating the hamlets of Ford, Old Mill and Norton. It was reformed under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. The town returned two members of parliament from the 13th century until 1835, after which one Member of Parliament (MP) was elected until the town was disenfranchised in 1868. It remained a municipal borough until 1974, when it was merged into the South Hams district, and became a successor parish of Dartmouth with a town council.\nDartmouth Town Council is the lowest of three tiers of local government. It consists of 16 councillors representing the two wards of Clifton and Townstal. At the second tier, Dartmouth forms part of the Dartmouth and Kingswear ward of South Hams District Council, which returns three councillors. At the upper tier of local government Dartmouth and Kingswear Electoral Division elects one member to Devon County Council.\nCulture and tourism.\nThe Port of Dartmouth Royal Regatta takes place annually over three days at the end of August. The event sees the traditional regatta boat races along with markets, fun fairs, community games, musical performances, air displays including the Red Arrows and fireworks. A Royal Navy guard ship is often present at the event.\nOther cultural events include beer festivals in February and July (the latter in Kingswear), a music festival and an art and craft weekend in June, a food festival in October and a Christmas candlelit event.\nThe Flavel Centre incorporates the public library and performance spaces, featuring films, live music and comedy and exhibitions.\nBayard's Cove has been used in several television productions, including \"The Onedin Line\" a popular BBC television drama series that ran from 1971 to 1980. Many of the scenes from the BBC's popular series \"Down to Earth\", starring Ricky Tomlinson, were filmed at various locations around the town.\nNotable tourist attractions include the Dartmouth Royal Naval College, Bayard's Cove Fort, Dartmouth Castle and the Dartmouth Steam Railway which terminates at Kingswear on the opposite bank of the river.\nBoat cruises to nearby places along the coast (such as Torbay and Start Bay) and up the river (to Totnes, Dittisham and the Greenway Estate) are provided by several companies. The paddlesteamer PS Kingswear Castle returned to the town in 2013. The South West Coast Path National Trail passes through the town, and also through extensive National Trust coastal properties at Little Dartmouth and Brownstone (Kingswear). The Dart Valley Trail starts in Dartmouth, with routes either side of the River Dart as far as Dittisham, and continuing to Totnes via Cornworthy, Tuckenhay and Ashprington. The area has long been well regarded for yachting, and there are extensive marinas at Sandquay, Kingswear and Noss (approximately one mile north of Kingswear).\nClimate.\nThe nearest Met Office weather station is Slapton, about 5 miles south-south west of Dartmouth and a similar distance from the coast. As with the rest of the British Isles and South West England, the area experiences a maritime climate with warm summers and mild winters\u2014this is particularly pronounced due to its position near the coast\u2014extremes range from a record low of just in January 1987 up to a record high of during June 1976.\nTransport.\nDartmouth is linked to Kingswear, on the other side of the River Dart, by three ferries. The Higher Ferry and the Lower Ferry are both vehicular ferries. The Passenger Ferry, as its name suggests, carries only passengers, principally to connect with the Dartmouth Steam Railway at Kingswear railway station. The nearest bridge across the Dart is in Totnes, some away by road.\nThe A379 road runs through Dartmouth, linking the town to Slapton and Kingsbridge to the southwest and to Torbay to the east across the Higher Ferry. The A3122 connects Dartmouth to a junction with the A381, and hence to both Totnes and a more direct route to Kingsbridge.\nStagecoach South West provides local town bus services and links to Plymouth, Totnes and Exeter, and Kingsbridge. In addition it provides links to the Torbay resorts of Brixham, Paignton and Torquay from Kingswear via the ferry.\nNo railway has ever run to Dartmouth, but the town does have a railway station, opened on 31 March 1890 to replace the original facility on the pontoon, although it is now a restaurant. In fact Dartmouth Railway Station was built while the line from Paignton to the River Dart was still being built, anticipating a bridge across the river being built near the present Greenway Halt. The railway line to Kingswear was opened in 1864. As a result of shortage of capital, a deviation from the original scheme to run the line from Churston to Greenway with a steamer service to Dartmouth was proposed, but defeated in Parliament. It had been suggested that this could, at a later date, be used as a jumping off point for a bridge to the west bank of the Dart and a line direct to Dartmouth. In 1900, a Light Railway scheme was proposed for a crossing of the Dart near Maypool to join another line from Totnes and then proceed to Kingsbridge and Yealmpton, with a branch to Salcombe. This was also defeated by lack of funds. The railway terminated at a station called \"Kingswear for Dartmouth\" (now on the Dartmouth Steam Railway) and a ferry took passengers across the river to the station at Dartmouth railway station, which had a dedicated pontoon. British Railways formally closed the line to mainline passenger trains in 1973, but it immediately re-opened as a heritage line and has run as one ever since.\nMedia.\nLocal TV coverage is provided by BBC West and ITV West Country. Television signals are received from the Beacon Hill TV transmitter and the local relay transmitter situated south east of the town.\nLocal radio stations include BBC Radio Devon on 104.3 FM, Heart West on 96.4 FM, Greatest Hits Radio South Devon on 105.5 FM, and Radio Exe on 107.3 FM.\n\"The Dartmouth Chronicle\" is the town's local weekly newspaper.\nEducation.\nBritannia Royal Naval College.\nThe town is home to the Royal Navy's officer training college (Britannia Royal Naval College), where all officers of the Royal Navy and many foreign naval officers are trained.\nSchools.\nDartmouth has one primary school\u2014St John the Baptist R.C. Primary School, and one all-through school\u2014Dartmouth Academy\u2014for those aged 3\u201316. Dartmouth also has a pre-school in the centre of town, established for over 40 years and based in the old Victorian school rooms at South Ford Road. It provides care for 2- to 5-year-olds and is run as a charitable organisation.\nSport and leisure.\nDartmouth has a Non-League football club Dartmouth A.F.C. who play at Long Cross.\nDartmouth also hosts the annual \"World Indoor Rally Championship\", based on slot car racing in the late summer.\nAt the end of August and early September there is the annual Port of Dartmouth Royal Regatta.\nSince 1905 Dartmouth has had a greenhouse as part of the Royal Avenue Gardens. In May 2013 this building, used for the previous 10 years by Dartmouth in Bloom, a not-for-profit organisation affiliated with Britain in Bloom, was closed as structurally unsound. There are proposals to restore the greenhouse to its prior Edwardian style."}
{"id": "8420", "revid": "40366080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8420", "title": "Dodo", "text": "The dodo (Raphus cucullatus) is an extinct flightless bird that was endemic to the island of Mauritius, which is east of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean. The dodo's closest relative was the also-extinct and flightless Rodrigues solitaire. The two formed the subtribe Raphina, a clade of extinct flightless birds that were a part of the family which includes pigeons and doves. The closest living relative of the dodo is the Nicobar pigeon. A white dodo was once thought to have existed on the nearby island of R\u00e9union, but it is now believed that this assumption was merely confusion based on the also-extinct R\u00e9union ibis and paintings of white dodos.\nSubfossil remains show the dodo measured about in height and may have weighed in the wild. The dodo's appearance in life is evidenced only by drawings, paintings, and written accounts from the 17th century. Since these portraits vary considerably, and since only some of the illustrations are known to have been drawn from live specimens, the dodos' exact appearance in life remains unresolved, and little is known about its behaviour. It has been depicted with brownish-grey plumage, yellow feet, a tuft of tail feathers, a grey, naked head, and a black, yellow, and green beak. It used gizzard stones to help digest its food, which is thought to have included fruits, and its main habitat is believed to have been the woods in the drier coastal areas of Mauritius. One account states its clutch consisted of a single egg. It is presumed that the dodo became flightless because of the ready availability of abundant food sources and a relative absence of predators on Mauritius. Though the dodo has historically been portrayed as being fat and clumsy, it is now thought to have been well-adapted for its ecosystem. \nThe first recorded mention of the dodo was by Dutch sailors in 1598. In the following years, the bird was hunted by sailors and invasive species, while its habitat was being destroyed. The last widely accepted sighting of a dodo was in 1662. Its extinction was not immediately noticed, and some considered the bird to be a myth. In the 19th century, research was conducted on a small quantity of remains of four specimens that had been brought to Europe in the early 17th century. Among these is a dried head, the only soft tissue of the dodo that remains today. Since then, a large amount of subfossil material has been collected on Mauritius, mostly from the Mare aux Songes swamp. The extinction of the dodo less than a century after its discovery called attention to the previously unrecognised problem of human involvement in the disappearance of entire species. The dodo achieved widespread recognition from its role in the story of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\", and it has since become a fixture in popular culture, often as a symbol of extinction and obsolescence.\nTaxonomy.\nThe dodo was variously declared a small ostrich, a rail, an albatross, or a vulture, by early scientists. In 1842, Danish zoologist Johannes Theodor Reinhardt proposed that dodos were ground pigeons, based on studies of a dodo skull he had discovered in the collection of the Natural History Museum of Denmark. This view was met with ridicule, but was later supported by English naturalists Hugh Edwin Strickland and Alexander Gordon Melville in their 1848 monograph \"The Dodo and Its Kindred\", which attempted to separate myth from reality. After dissecting the preserved head and foot of the specimen at the Oxford University Museum and comparing it with the few remains then available of the extinct Rodrigues solitaire (\"Pezophaps solitaria\"), they concluded that the two were closely related. Strickland stated that although not identical, these birds shared many distinguishing features of the leg bones, otherwise known only in pigeons.\nStrickland and Melville established that the dodo was anatomically similar to pigeons in many features. They pointed to the very short keratinous portion of the beak, with its long, slender, naked basal part. Other pigeons also have bare skin around their eyes, almost reaching their beak, as in dodos. The forehead was high in relation to the beak, and the nostril was located low on the middle of the beak and surrounded by skin, a combination of features shared only with pigeons. The legs of the dodo were generally more similar to those of terrestrial pigeons than of other birds, both in their scales and in their skeletal features. Depictions of the large crop hinted at a relationship with pigeons, in which this feature is more developed than in other birds. Pigeons generally have very small clutches, and the dodo is said to have laid a single egg. Like pigeons, the dodo lacked the vomer and septum of the nostrils, and it shared details in the mandible, the zygomatic bone, the palate, and the hallux. The dodo differed from other pigeons mainly in the small size of the wings and the large size of the beak in proportion to the rest of the cranium.\nThroughout the 19th century, several species were classified as congeneric with the dodo, including the Rodrigues solitaire and the R\u00e9union solitaire, as \"Didus solitarius\" and \"Raphus solitarius\", respectively (\"Didus\" and \"Raphus\" being names for the dodo genus used by different authors of the time). An atypical 17th-century description of a dodo and bones found on Rodrigues, now known to have belonged to the Rodrigues solitaire, led Abraham Dee Bartlett to name a new species, \"Didus nazarenus\", in 1852. Based on solitaire remains, it is now a synonym of that species. Crude drawings of the red rail of Mauritius were also misinterpreted as dodo species; \"Didus broeckii\" and \"Didus herberti\".\nFor many years the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire were placed in a family of their own, the Raphidae (formerly Dididae), because their exact relationships with other pigeons were unresolved. Each was also placed in its own monotypic family (Raphidae and Pezophapidae, respectively), as it was thought that they had evolved their similarities independently. Osteological and DNA analysis has since led to the dissolution of the family Raphidae, and the dodo and solitaire are now placed in the columbid subfamily Raphinae and tribe Raphini, along with their closest relatives. In 2024, the new subtribe Raphina was created to include only the dodo and the solitaire.\nEvolution.\nIn 2002, American geneticist Beth Shapiro and colleagues analysed the DNA of the dodo for the first time. Comparison of mitochondrial cytochrome \"b\" and 12S rRNA sequences isolated from a tarsal of the Oxford specimen and a femur of a Rodrigues solitaire confirmed their close relationship and their placement within the Columbidae. The genetic evidence was interpreted as showing the Southeast Asian Nicobar pigeon (\"Caloenas nicobarica\") to be their closest living relative, followed by the crowned pigeons (\"Goura\") of New Guinea, and the superficially dodo-like tooth-billed pigeon (\"Didunculus strigirostris\") from Samoa (its scientific name refers to its dodo-like beak). This clade consists of generally ground-dwelling island endemic pigeons. The following cladogram shows the dodo's closest relationships within the Columbidae, based on Shapiro and colleagues, 2002:\nA similar cladogram was published in 2007, inverting the placement of \"Goura\" and \"Didunculus\" and including the pheasant pigeon (\"Otidiphaps nobilis\") and the thick-billed ground pigeon (\"Trugon terrestris\") at the base of the clade. The DNA used in these studies was obtained from the Oxford specimen, and since this material is degraded, and no usable DNA has been extracted from subfossil remains, these findings still need to be independently verified. Based on behavioural and morphological evidence, Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire should be placed in the subfamily Gourinae along with the \"Goura\" pigeons and others, in agreement with the genetic evidence. In 2014, DNA of the only known specimen of the recently extinct spotted green pigeon (\"Caloenas maculata\") was analysed, and it was found to be a close relative of the Nicobar pigeon, and thus also the dodo and Rodrigues solitaire.\nThe 2002 study indicated that the ancestors of the dodo and the solitaire diverged around the Paleogene-Neogene boundary, about 23.03\u00a0million years ago. The Mascarene Islands (Mauritius, R\u00e9union, and Rodrigues), are of volcanic origin and are less than 10\u00a0million years old. Therefore, the ancestors of both birds probably remained capable of flight for a considerable time after the separation of their lineage. The Nicobar and spotted green pigeon were placed at the base of a lineage leading to the Raphinae, which indicates the flightless raphines had ancestors that were able to fly, were semi-terrestrial, and inhabited islands. This in turn supports the hypothesis that the ancestors of those birds reached the Mascarene islands by island hopping from South Asia. The lack of mammalian herbivores competing for resources on these islands allowed the solitaire and the dodo to attain very large sizes and flightlessness. Despite its divergent skull morphology and adaptations for larger size, many features of its skeleton remained similar to those of smaller, flying pigeons. Another large, flightless pigeon, the Viti Levu giant pigeon (\"Natunaornis gigoura\"), was described in 2001 from subfossil material from Fiji. It was only slightly smaller than the dodo and the solitaire, and it too is thought to have been related to the crowned pigeons.\nEtymology.\nOne of the original names for the dodo was the Dutch \"Walghvoghel\", first used in the journal of Dutch Vice Admiral Wybrand van Warwijck, who visited Mauritius during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia in 1598. \"Walghe\" means \"tasteless\", \"insipid\", or \"sickly\", and means \"bird\". The name was translated by Jakob Friedlib into German as \"Walchst\u00f6k\" or \"Walchv\u00f6gel\". The original Dutch report titled \"Waarachtige Beschryving\" was lost, but the English translation survived:\nAnother account from that voyage, perhaps the first to mention the dodo, states that the Portuguese referred to them as penguins. The meaning may not have been derived from \"penguin\" (the Portuguese referred to those birds as \"fotilicaios\" at the time), but from \"pinion\", a reference to the small wings. The crew of the Dutch ship \"Gelderland\" referred to the bird as \"Dronte\" (meaning \"swollen\") in 1602, a name that is still used in some languages. This crew also called them \"griff-eendt\" and \"kermisgans\", in reference to fowl fattened for the Kermesse festival in Amsterdam, which was held the day after they anchored on Mauritius.\nThe etymology of the word \"dodo\" is unclear. Some ascribe it to the Dutch word \"dodoor\" for \"sluggard\", but it is more probably related to \"Dodaars\", which means either \"fat-arse\" or \"knot-arse\", referring to the knot of feathers on the hind end. The first record of the word \"Dodaars\" is in Captain Willem Van West-Zanen's journal in 1602. The English writer Sir Thomas Herbert was the first to use the word \"dodo\" in print in his 1634 travelogue claiming it was referred to as such by the Portuguese, who had visited Mauritius in 1507. Another Englishman, Emmanuel Altham, had used the word in a 1628 letter in which he also claimed its origin was Portuguese. The name \"dodar\" was introduced into English at the same time as dodo, but was only used until the 18th century. As far as is known, the Portuguese never mentioned the bird. Nevertheless, some sources still state that the word \"dodo\" derives from the Portuguese word \"doudo\" (currently \"doido\"), meaning \"fool\" or \"crazy\". It has also been suggested that \"dodo\" was an onomatopoeic approximation of the bird's call, a two-note pigeon-like sound resembling \"doo-doo\".\nThe Latin name \"cucullatus\" (\"hooded\") was first used by Juan Eusebio Nieremberg in 1635 as \"Cygnus cucullatus\", in reference to Carolus Clusius's 1605 depiction of a dodo. In his 18th-century classic work \"Systema Naturae\", Carl Linnaeus used \"cucullatus\" as the specific name, but combined it with the genus name \"Struthio\" (ostrich). Mathurin Jacques Brisson coined the genus name \"Raphus\" (referring to the bustards) in 1760, resulting in the current name \"Raphus cucullatus\". In 1766, Linnaeus coined the new binomial \"Didus ineptus\" (meaning \"inept dodo\"). This has become a synonym of the earlier name because of nomenclatural priority.\nDescription.\nAs no complete dodo specimens exist, its external appearance, such as plumage and colouration, is hard to determine. Illustrations and written accounts of encounters with the dodo between its discovery and its extinction (1598\u20131662) are the primary evidence for its external appearance. According to most representations, the dodo had greyish or brownish plumage, with lighter primary feathers and a tuft of curly light feathers high on its rear end. The head was grey and naked, the beak green, black and yellow, and the legs were stout and yellowish, with black claws. A study of the few remaining feathers on the Oxford specimen head showed that they were pennaceous rather than plumaceous (downy) and most similar to those of other pigeons.\nSubfossil remains and remnants of the birds that were brought to Europe in the 17th century show that dodos were very large birds, measuring about in height. The bird was sexually dimorphic; males were larger and had proportionally longer beaks. Weight estimates have varied from study to study. In 1993, Bradley C. Livezey proposed that males would have weighed and females . Also in 1993, Andrew C. Kitchener attributed a high contemporary weight estimate and the roundness of dodos depicted in Europe to these birds having been overfed in captivity; weights in the wild were estimated to have been in the range of , and fattened birds could have weighed . A 2011 estimate by Angst and colleagues gave an average weight as low as . This has also been questioned, and there is still controversy over weight estimates. A 2016 study estimated the weight at , based on CT scans of composite skeletons. It has also been suggested that the weight depended on the season, and that individuals were fat during cool seasons, but less so during hot.\nSkeleton.\nThe skull of the dodo differed much from those of other pigeons, especially in being more robust, the bill having a hooked tip, and in having a short cranium compared to the jaws. The upper bill was nearly twice as long as the cranium, which was short compared to those of its closest pigeon relatives. The openings of the bony nostrils were elongated along the length of the beak, and they contained no bony septum. The cranium (excluding the beak) was wider than it was long, and the frontal bone formed a dome-shape, with the highest point above the hind part of the eye sockets. The skull sloped downwards at the back. The eye sockets occupied much of the hind part of the skull. The sclerotic rings inside the eye were formed by eleven ossicles (small bones), similar to the amount in other pigeons. The mandible was slightly curved, and each half had a single fenestra (opening), as in other pigeons.\nThe dodo had about nineteen presynsacral vertebrae (those of the neck and thorax, including three fused into a notarium), sixteen synsacral vertebrae (those of the lumbar region and sacrum), six free tail (caudal) vertebrae, and a pygostyle. The neck had well-developed areas for muscle and ligament attachment, probably to support the heavy skull and beak. On each side, it had six ribs, four of which articulated with the sternum through sternal ribs. The sternum was large, but small in relation to the body compared to those of much smaller pigeons that are able to fly. The sternum was highly pneumatic, broad, and relatively thick in cross-section. The bones of the pectoral girdle, shoulder blades, and wing bones were reduced in size compared to those of flighted pigeon, and were more gracile compared to those of the Rodrigues solitaire, but none of the individual skeletal components had disappeared. The carpometacarpus of the dodo was more robust than that of the solitaire, however. The pelvis was wider than that of the solitaire and other relatives, yet was comparable to the proportions in some smaller, flighted pigeons. Most of the leg bones were more robust than those of extant pigeons and the solitaire, but the length proportions were little different.\nMany of the skeletal features that distinguish the dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire, its closest relative, from other pigeons have been attributed to their flightlessness. The pelvic elements were thicker than those of flighted pigeons to support the higher weight, and the pectoral region and the small wings were paedomorphic, meaning that they were underdeveloped and retained juvenile features. The skull, trunk and pelvic limbs were peramorphic, meaning that they changed considerably with age. The dodo shared several other traits with the Rodrigues solitaire, such as features of the skull, pelvis, and sternum, as well as their large size. It differed in other aspects, such as being more robust and shorter than the solitaire, having a larger skull and beak, a rounded skull roof, and smaller orbits. The dodo's neck and legs were proportionally shorter, and it did not possess an equivalent to the knob present on the solitaire's wrists.\nContemporary descriptions.\nMost contemporary descriptions of the dodo are found in ship's logs and journals of the Dutch East India Company vessels that docked in Mauritius when the Dutch Empire ruled the island. These records were used as guides for future voyages. Few contemporary accounts are reliable, as many seem to be based on earlier accounts, and none were written by scientists. One of the earliest accounts, from van Warwijck's 1598 journal, describes the bird as follows:\nOne of the most detailed descriptions is by Herbert in \"A Relation of Some Yeares Travaille into Afrique and the Greater Asia\" from 1634:\nContemporary depictions.\nThe travel journal of the Dutch ship \"Gelderland\" (1601\u20131603), rediscovered in the 1860s, contains the only known sketches of living or recently killed specimens drawn on Mauritius. They have been attributed to the professional artist Joris Joostensz Laerle, who also drew other now-extinct Mauritian birds, and to a second, less refined artist. Apart from these sketches, it is unknown how many of the twenty or so 17th-century illustrations of the dodos were drawn from life or from stuffed specimens, which affects their reliability. Since dodos are otherwise only known from limited physical remains and descriptions, contemporary artworks are important to reconstruct their appearance in life. While there has been an effort since the mid-19th century to list all historical illustrations of dodos, previously unknown depictions continue to be discovered occasionally.\nThe traditional image of the dodo is of a very fat and clumsy bird, but this view may be exaggerated. The general opinion of scientists today is that many old European depictions were based on overfed captive birds or crudely stuffed specimens. It has also been suggested that the images might show dodos with puffed feathers, as part of display behaviour. The Dutch painter Roelant Savery was the most prolific and influential illustrator of the dodo, having made at least twelve depictions, often showing it in the lower corners. A famous painting of his from 1626, now called \"Edwards's Dodo\" as it was once owned by the ornithologist George Edwards, has since become the standard image of a dodo. It is housed in the Natural History Museum, London. The image shows a particularly fat bird and is the source for many other dodo illustrations.\nAn Indian Mughal painting rediscovered in the Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg, in 1955 shows a dodo along with native Indian birds. It depicts a slimmer, brownish bird, and its discoverer Aleksander Iwanow and British palaeontologist Julian Hume regarded it as one of the most accurate depictions of the living dodo; the surrounding birds are clearly identifiable and depicted with appropriate colouring. It is believed to be from the 17th century and has been attributed to the Mughal painter Ustad Mansur. The bird depicted probably lived in the menagerie of the Mughal Emperor Jahangir, located in Surat, where the English traveller Peter Mundy also claimed to have seen two dodos sometime between 1628 and 1633. In 2014, another Indian illustration of a dodo was reported, but it was found to be derivative of an 1836 German illustration.\nAll post-1638 depictions appear to be based on earlier images, around the time reports mentioning dodos became rarer. Differences in the depictions led ornithologists such as Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans and Masauji Hachisuka to speculate about sexual dimorphism, ontogenic traits, seasonal variation, and even the existence of different species, but these theories are not accepted today. Because details such as markings of the beak, the form of the tail feathers, and colouration vary from account to account, it is impossible to determine the exact morphology of these features, whether they signal age or sex, or if they even reflect reality. Hume argued that the nostrils of the living dodo would have been slits, as seen in the \"Gelderland\", Cornelis Saftleven, Savery's Crocker Art Gallery, and Mansur images. According to this claim, the gaping nostrils often seen in paintings indicate that taxidermy specimens were used as models. Most depictions show that the wings were held in an extended position, unlike flighted pigeons, but similar to ratites such as the ostrich and kiwi.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nLittle is known of the behaviour of the dodo, as most contemporary descriptions are very brief. Based on weight estimates, it has been suggested the male could reach the age of 21, and the female 17. Studies of the cantilever strength of its leg bones indicate that it could run quite fast. The legs were robust and strong to support the bulk of the bird, and also made it agile and manoeuvrable in the dense, pre-human landscape. Though the wings were small, well-developed muscle scars on the bones show that they were not completely vestigial, and may have been used for display behaviour and balance; extant pigeons also use their wings for such purposes. Unlike the Rodrigues solitaire, there is no evidence that the dodo used its wings in intraspecific combat. Though some dodo bones have been found with healed fractures, it had weak pectoral muscles and more reduced wings in comparison. The dodo may instead have used its large, hooked beak in territorial disputes. Since Mauritius receives more rainfall and has less seasonal variation than Rodrigues, which would have affected the availability of resources on the island, the dodo would have less reason to evolve aggressive territorial behaviour. The Rodrigues solitaire was therefore probably the more aggressive of the two. In 2016, the first 3D endocast was made from the brain of the dodo; the brain-to-body-size ratio was similar to that of modern pigeons, indicating that dodos were probably equal in intelligence.\nThe preferred habitat of the dodo is unknown, but old descriptions suggest that it inhabited the woods on the drier coastal areas of south and west Mauritius. This view is supported by the fact that the Mare aux Songes swamp, where most dodo remains have been excavated, is close to the sea in south-eastern Mauritius. Such a limited distribution across the island could well have contributed to its extinction. A 1601 map from the \"Gelderland\" journal shows a small island off the coast of Mauritius where dodos were caught. Julian Hume has suggested this island was l'\u00eele aux B\u00e9nitiers in Tamarin Bay, on the west coast of Mauritius. Subfossil bones have also been found inside caves in highland areas, indicating that it once occurred on mountains. Work at the Mare aux Songes swamp has shown that its habitat was dominated by tambalacoque and \"Pandanus\" trees and endemic palms. The near-coastal placement and wetness of the Mare aux Songes led to a high diversity of plant species, whereas the surrounding areas were drier.\nMany endemic species of Mauritius became extinct after the arrival of humans, so the ecosystem of the island is badly damaged and hard to reconstruct. Before humans arrived, Mauritius was entirely covered in forests, but very little remains of them today, because of deforestation. The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened. The dodo lived alongside other recently extinct Mauritian birds such as the flightless red rail, the broad-billed parrot, the Mascarene grey parakeet, the Mauritius blue pigeon, the Mauritius scops owl, the Mascarene coot, the Mauritian shelduck, the Mauritian duck, and the Mauritius night heron. Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise, the domed Mauritius giant tortoise, the Mauritian giant skink, and the Round Island burrowing boa. The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail \"Tropidophora carinata\" lived on Mauritius and R\u00e9union, but vanished from both islands. Some plants, such as \"Casearia tinifolia\" and the palm orchid, have also become extinct.\nDiet and feeding.\nA 1631 Dutch letter (long thought lost, but rediscovered in 2017) is the only account of the dodo's diet, and also mentions that it used its beak for defence. The document uses word-play to refer to the animals described, with dodos presumably being an allegory for wealthy mayors:\nIn addition to fallen fruits, the dodo probably subsisted on nuts, seeds, bulbs, and roots. It has also been suggested that the dodo might have eaten crabs and shellfish, like their relatives the crowned pigeons. Its feeding habits must have been versatile, since captive specimens were probably given a wide range of food on the long sea journeys. Oudemans suggested that as Mauritius has marked dry and wet seasons, the dodo probably fattened itself on ripe fruits at the end of the wet season to survive the dry season, when food was scarce; contemporary reports describe the bird's \"greedy\" appetite. The Mauritian ornithologist France Staub suggested in 1996 that they mainly fed on palm fruits, and he attempted to correlate the fat-cycle of the dodo with the fruiting regime of the palms.\nSkeletal elements of the upper jaw appear to have been rhynchokinetic (movable in relation to each other), which must have affected its feeding behaviour. In extant birds, such as frugivorous (fruit-eating) pigeons, kinetic premaxillae help with consuming large food items. The beak also appears to have been able to withstand high force loads, which indicates a diet of hard food. Examination of the brain endocast found that though the brain was similar to that of other pigeons in most respects, the dodo had a comparatively large olfactory bulb. This gave the dodo a good sense of smell, which may have aided in locating fruit and small prey.\nSeveral contemporary sources state that the dodo used Gastroliths (gizzard stones) to aid digestion. The English writer Sir Hamon L'Estrange witnessed a live bird in London and described it as follows:\nIt is not known how the young were fed, but related pigeons provide crop milk. Contemporary depictions show a large crop, which was probably used to add space for food storage and to produce crop milk. It has been suggested that the maximum size attained by the dodo and the solitaire was limited by the amount of crop milk they could produce for their young during early growth.\nIn 1973, the tambalacoque, also known as the dodo tree, was thought to be dying out on Mauritius, to which it is endemic. There were supposedly only 13 specimens left, all estimated to be about 300 years old. Stanley Temple hypothesised that it depended on the dodo for its propagation, and that its seeds would germinate only after passing through the bird's digestive tract. He claimed that the tambalacoque was now nearly coextinct because of the disappearance of the dodo. Temple overlooked reports from the 1940s that found that tambalacoque seeds germinated, albeit very rarely, without being abraded during digestion. Others have contested his hypothesis and suggested that the decline of the tree was exaggerated or seeds were also distributed by other extinct animals such as \"Cylindraspis\" tortoises, fruit bats, or the broad-billed parrot. According to Wendy Strahm and Anthony Cheke, two experts in the ecology of the Mascarene Islands, the tree, while rare, has germinated since the demise of the dodo and numbers several hundred, not 13 as claimed by Temple, hence, discrediting Temple's view as to the dodo and the tree's sole survival relationship.\nThe Brazilian ornithologist Carlos Yamashita suggested in 1997 that the broad-billed parrot may have depended on dodos and \"Cylindraspis\" tortoises to eat palm fruits and excrete their seeds, which became food for the parrots. \"Anodorhynchus\" macaws depended on now-extinct South American megafauna in the same way, but now rely on domesticated cattle for this service.\nReproduction and development.\nAs it was flightless and terrestrial and there were no mammalian predators or other kinds of natural enemy on Mauritius, the dodo probably nested on the ground. The account by Fran\u00e7ois Cauche from 1651 is the only description of the egg and the call:\nCauche's account is problematic, since it also mentions that the bird he was describing had three toes and no tongue, unlike dodos. This led some to believe that Cauche was describing a new species of dodo (\"Didus nazarenus\"). The description was most probably mingled with that of a cassowary, and Cauche's writings have other inconsistencies. A mention of a \"young ostrich\" taken on board a ship in 1617 is the only other reference to a possible juvenile dodo. An egg claimed to be that of a dodo is stored in the East London Museum in South Africa. It was donated by the South African museum official Marjorie Courtenay-Latimer, whose great aunt had received it from a captain who claimed to have found it in a swamp on Mauritius. In 2010, the curator of the museum proposed using genetic studies to determine its authenticity. It may instead be an aberrant ostrich egg.\nBecause of the possible single-egg clutch and the bird's large size, it has been proposed that the dodo was K-selected, meaning that it produced few altricial offspring, which required parental care until they matured. Some evidence, including the large size and the fact that tropical and frugivorous birds have slower growth rates, indicates that the bird may have had a protracted development period. The fact that no juvenile dodos have been found in the Mare aux Songes swamp may indicate that they produced little offspring, that they matured rapidly, that the breeding grounds were far away from the swamp, or that the risk of miring was seasonal.\nA 2017 study examined the histology of thin-sectioned dodo bones, modern Mauritian birds, local ecology, and contemporary accounts, to recover information about the life history of the dodo. The study suggested that dodos bred around August, after having potentially fattened themselves, corresponding with the fat and thin cycles of many vertebrates of Mauritius. The chicks grew rapidly, reaching robust, almost adult, sizes, and sexual maturity before Austral summer or the cyclone season. Adult dodos which had just bred moulted after Austral summer, around March. The feathers of the wings and tail were replaced first, and the moulting would have completed at the end of July, in time for the next breeding season. Different stages of moulting may also account for inconsistencies in contemporary descriptions of dodo plumage.\nRelationship with humans.\nMauritius had previously been visited by Arab vessels in the Middle Ages and Portuguese ships between 1507 and 1513, but was settled by neither. No records of dodos by these are known, although the Portuguese name for Mauritius, \"Cerne (swan) Island\", may have been a reference to dodos. The Dutch Empire acquired Mauritius in 1598, renaming it after Maurice of Nassau, and it was used for the provisioning of trade vessels of the Dutch East India Company henceforward. The earliest known accounts of the dodo were provided by Dutch travellers during the Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia, led by admiral Jacob van Neck in 1598. They appear in reports published in 1601, which also contain the first published illustration of the bird. Since the first sailors to visit Mauritius had been at sea for a long time, their interest in these large birds was mainly culinary. The 1602 journal by Willem Van West-Zanen of the ship \"Bruin-Vis\" mentions that 24\u201325 dodos were hunted for food, which were so large that two could scarcely be consumed at mealtime, their remains being preserved by salting. An illustration made for the 1648 published version of this journal, showing the killing of dodos, a dugong, and possibly Mascarene grey parakeets, was captioned with a Dutch poem, here in Hugh Strickland's 1848 translation:\nSome early travellers found dodo meat unsavoury, and preferred to eat parrots and pigeons; others described it as tough, but good. Some hunted dodos only for their gizzards, as this was considered the most delicious part of the bird. Dodos were easy to catch, but hunters had to be careful not to be bitten by their powerful beaks.\nThe appearance of the dodo and the red rail led Peter Mundy to speculate, 230 years before Charles Darwin's theory of evolution:\nDodos transported abroad.\nThe dodo was found interesting enough that living specimens were sent to Europe and the East. The number of transported dodos that reached their destinations alive is uncertain, and it is unknown how they relate to contemporary depictions and the few non-fossil remains in European museums. Based on a combination of contemporary accounts, paintings, and specimens, Julian Hume has inferred that at least eleven transported dodos reached their destinations alive.\nHamon L'Estrange's description of a dodo that he saw in London in 1638 is the only account that specifically mentions a live specimen in Europe. In 1626 Adriaen van de Venne drew a dodo that he claimed to have seen in Amsterdam, but he did not mention if it was alive, and his depiction is reminiscent of Savery's \"Edwards's Dodo\". Two live specimens were seen by Peter Mundy in Surat, India, between 1628 and 1634, one of which may have been the individual painted by Mansur around 1625. In 1628, Emmanuel Altham visited Mauritius and sent a letter to his brother in England:\nWhether the dodo survived the journey is unknown, and the letter was destroyed by fire in the 19th century.\nThe earliest known picture of a dodo specimen in Europe is from a collection of paintings depicting animals in the royal menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II in Prague. This collection includes paintings of other Mauritian animals as well, including a red rail. The dodo, which may be a juvenile, seems to have been dried or embalmed, and had probably lived in the emperor's zoo for a while together with the other animals. That whole stuffed dodos were present in Europe indicates they had been brought alive and died there; it is unlikely that taxidermists were on board the visiting ships, and spirits were not yet used to preserve biological specimens. Most tropical specimens were preserved as dried heads and feet.\nOne dodo was reportedly sent as far as Nagasaki, Japan, in 1647, but it was long unknown whether it arrived. Contemporary documents first published in 2014 proved the story, and showed that it had arrived alive. It was meant as a gift, and, despite its rarity, was considered of equal value to a white deer and a bezoar stone. It is the last recorded live dodo in captivity.\nExtinction.\nLike many animals that evolved in isolation from significant predators, the dodo was entirely fearless of humans. This fearlessness and its inability to fly made the dodo easy prey, but predation by humans was not the main cause of extinction, contrary to popular belief. Although some scattered reports describe mass killings of dodos for ships' provisions, archaeological investigations have found scant evidence of human predation. Bones of at least two dodos were found in caves at Baie du Cap that sheltered fugitive slaves and convicts in the 17th century, which would not have been easily accessible to dodos because of the high, broken terrain. The human population on Mauritius (an area of ) never exceeded 50 people in the 17th century, but they introduced other animals, including dogs, pigs, cats, rats, and crab-eating macaques, which plundered dodo nests and competed for the limited food resources. At the same time, humans destroyed the forest habitat of the dodos. The impact of the introduced animals on the dodo population, especially the pigs and macaques, is today considered more severe than that of hunting. Rats were perhaps not much of a threat to the nests, since dodos would have been used to dealing with local land crabs.\nIt has been suggested that the dodo may already have been rare or localised before the arrival of humans on Mauritius, since it would have been unlikely to become extinct so rapidly if it had occupied all the remote areas of the island. A 2005 expedition found subfossil remains of dodos and other animals killed by a flash flood. Such mass mortalities would have further jeopardised a species already in danger of becoming extinct. Yet the fact that the dodo survived hundreds of years of volcanic activity and climatic changes shows the bird was resilient within its ecosystem.\nSome controversy surrounds the date of its extinction. The last widely accepted record of a dodo sighting is the 1662 report by shipwrecked mariner Volkert Evertsz of the Dutch ship \"Arnhem\", who described birds caught on a small islet off Mauritius, now suggested to be Amber Island:\nThe dodos on this islet may not necessarily have been the last members of the species. The last claimed sighting of a dodo was reported in the hunting records of Isaac Johannes Lamotius in 1688. A 2003 statistical analysis of these records by the biologists David L. Roberts and Andrew R. Solow gave a new estimated extinction date of 1693, with a 95% confidence interval of 1688\u20131715. These authors also pointed out that because the last sighting before 1662 was in 1638, the dodo was probably already quite rare by the 1660s, and thus a disputed report from 1674 by an escaped slave could not be dismissed out of hand.\nThe British ornithologist Alfred Newton suggested in 1868 that the name of the dodo was transferred to the red rail after the former had gone extinct. Cheke also pointed out that some descriptions after 1662 use the names \"Dodo\" and \"Dodaers\" when referring to the red rail, indicating that they had been transferred to it. He therefore pointed to the 1662 description as the last credible observation. A 1668 account by English traveller John Marshall, who used the names \"Dodo\" and \"Red Hen\" interchangeably for the red rail, mentioned that the meat was \"hard\", which echoes the description of the meat in the 1681 account. Even the 1662 account has been questioned by the writer Errol Fuller, as the reaction to distress cries matches what was described for the red rail. Until this explanation was proposed, a description of \"dodos\" from 1681 was thought to be the last account, and that date still has proponents.\nCheke stated in 2014 that then recently accessible Dutch manuscripts indicate that no dodos were seen by settlers in 1664\u20131674. In 2020, Cheke and the British researcher Jolyon C. Parish suggested that all mentions of dodos after the mid-17th century instead referred to red rails, and that the dodo had disappeared due to predation by feral pigs during a hiatus in settlement of Mauritius (1658\u20131664). The dodo's extinction therefore was not realised at the time, since new settlers had not seen real dodos, but as they expected to see flightless birds, they referred to the red rail by that name instead. Since red rails probably had larger clutches than dodos and their eggs could be incubated faster, and their nests were perhaps concealed, they probably bred more efficiently, and were less vulnerable to pigs.\nIt is unlikely the issue will ever be resolved, unless late reports mentioning the name alongside a physical description are rediscovered. The IUCN Red List accepts Cheke's rationale for choosing the 1662 date, taking all subsequent reports to refer to red rails. In any case, the dodo was probably extinct by 1700, about a century after its discovery in 1598. The Dutch left Mauritius in 1710, but by then the dodo and most of the large terrestrial vertebrates there had become extinct.\nEven though the rareness of the dodo was reported already in the 17th century, its extinction was not recognised until the 19th century. This was partly because, for religious reasons, extinction was not believed possible until later proved so by Georges Cuvier, and partly because many scientists doubted that the dodo had ever existed. It seemed altogether too strange a creature, and many believed it a myth. The bird was first used as an example of human-induced extinction in \"Penny Magazine\" in 1833, and has since been referred to as an \"icon\" of extinction.\nPhysical remains.\n17th-century specimens.\nThe only extant remains of dodo specimens taken to Europe in the 17th century are a dried head and foot in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, a foot once housed in the British Museum but now lost, a skull in the University of Copenhagen Zoological Museum, and an upper jaw in the National Museum, Prague. The last two were rediscovered and identified as dodo remains in the mid-19th century. Several stuffed dodos were also mentioned in old museum inventories, but none are known to have survived. Apart from these remains, a dried foot which belonged to Dutch professor Pieter Pauw was mentioned by Carolus Clusius in 1605. Its provenance is unknown, and it is now lost, but it may have been collected during the Van Neck voyage. Purported stuffed dodos seen in museums around the world today have in fact been made from feathers of other birds; many by British taxidermist Rowland Ward's company.\nThe only known soft tissue remains, the Oxford head (specimen OUM 11605) and foot, belonged to the last known stuffed dodo, which was first mentioned as part of the Tradescant collection in 1656 and was moved to the Ashmolean Museum in 1659. It has been suggested that this might be the remains of the bird that Hamon L'Estrange saw in London, the bird sent by Emanuel Altham, or a donation by Thomas Herbert. Since the remains do not show signs of having been mounted, the specimen might instead have been preserved as a study skin. In 2018, it was reported that scans of the Oxford dodo's head showed that its skin and bone contained lead shot, which was used to hunt birds in the 17th century. This indicates that the Oxford dodo was shot either before being transported to Britain, or some time after arriving. The circumstances of its killing are unknown, and the pellets are to be examined to identify where the lead was mined from.\nMany sources state that the Ashmolean Museum burned the stuffed dodo around 1755 because of severe decay, saving only the head and leg. Statute\u00a08 of the museum states \"That as any particular grows old and perishing the keeper may remove it into one of the closets or other repository; and some other to be substituted.\" The deliberate destruction of the specimen is now believed to be a myth; it was removed from exhibition to preserve what remained of it. This remaining soft tissue has since degraded further; the head was dissected by Strickland and Melville, separating the skin from the skull in two-halves. The foot is in a skeletal state, with only scraps of skin and tendons. Very few feathers remain on the head. It is probably a female, as the foot is 11% smaller and more gracile than the London foot, yet appears to be fully grown. The specimen was exhibited at the Oxford museum from at least the 1860s and until 1998, where-after it was mainly kept in storage to prevent damage. Casts of the head can today be found in many museums worldwide.\nThe dried London foot, first mentioned in 1665, and transferred to the British Museum in the 18th century, was displayed next to Savery's \"Edwards's Dodo\" painting until the 1840s, and it too was dissected by Strickland and Melville. It was not posed in a standing posture, which suggests that it was severed from a fresh specimen, not a mounted one. By 1896 it was mentioned as being without its integuments, and only the bones are believed to remain today, though its present whereabouts are unknown.\nThe Copenhagen skull (specimen ZMUC 90-806) is known to have been part of the collection of Bernardus Paludanus in Enkhuizen until 1651, when it was moved to the museum in Gottorf Castle, Schleswig. After the castle was occupied by Danish forces in 1702, the museum collection was assimilated into the Royal Danish collection. The skull was rediscovered by J. T. Reinhardt in 1840. Based on its history, it may be the oldest known surviving remains of a dodo brought to Europe in the 17th century. It is shorter than the Oxford skull, and may have belonged to a female. It was mummified, but the skin has perished.\nThe front part of a skull (specimen NMP P6V-004389) in the National Museum of Prague was found in 1850 among the remains of the B\u00f6hmisches Museum. Other elements supposedly belonging to this specimen have been listed in the literature, but it appears only the partial skull was ever present (a partial right limb in the museum appears to be from a Rodrigues solitaire). It may be what remains of one of the stuffed dodos known to have been at the menagerie of Emperor Rudolph II, possibly the specimen painted by Hoefnagel or Savery there.\nSubfossil specimens.\nUntil 1860, the only known dodo remains were the four incomplete 17th-century specimens. Philip Burnard Ayres found the first subfossil bones in 1860, which were sent to Richard Owen at the British Museum, who did not publish the findings. In 1863, Owen requested the Mauritian Bishop Vincent Ryan to spread word that he should be informed if any dodo bones were found. In 1865, George Clark, the government schoolmaster at Mah\u00e9bourg, finally found an abundance of subfossil dodo bones in the swamp of Mare aux Songes in Southern Mauritius, after a 30-year search inspired by Strickland and Melville's monograph. In 1866, Clark explained his procedure to \"The Ibis\", an ornithology journal: he had sent his coolies to wade through the centre of the swamp, feeling for bones with their feet. At first they found few bones, until they cut away herbage that covered the deepest part of the swamp, where they found many fossils. Harry Pasley Higginson, a railway engineer from Yorkshire, reports discovering the Mare aux Songes bones at the same time as Clark and there is some dispute over who found them first. Higginson sent boxes of these bones to Liverpool, Leeds and York museums. The swamp yielded the remains of over 300 dodos, but very few skull and wing bones, possibly because the upper bodies were washed away or scavenged while the lower body was trapped. The situation is similar to many finds of moa remains in New Zealand marshes. Most dodo remains from the Mare aux Songes have a medium to dark brown colouration.\nClark's reports about the finds rekindled interest in the bird. Sir Richard Owen and Alfred Newton both wanted to be first to describe the post-cranial anatomy of the dodo, and Owen bought a shipment of dodo bones originally meant for Newton, which led to rivalry between the two. Owen described the bones in \"Memoir on the Dodo\" in October 1866, but erroneously based his reconstruction on the \"Edwards's Dodo\" painting by Savery, making it too squat and obese. In 1869 he received more bones and corrected its stance, making it more upright. Newton moved his focus to the R\u00e9union solitaire instead. The remaining bones not sold to Owen or Newton were auctioned off or donated to museums. In 1889, Th\u00e9odor Sauzier was commissioned to explore the \"historical souvenirs\" of Mauritius and find more dodo remains in the Mare aux Songes. He was successful, and also found remains of other extinct species.\nIn 2005, after a hundred years of neglect, a part of the Mare aux Songes swamp was excavated by an international team of researchers (International Dodo Research Project). To prevent malaria, the British had covered the swamp with hard core during their rule over Mauritius, which had to be removed. Many remains were found, including bones of at least 17 dodos in various stages of maturity (though no juveniles), and several bones obviously from the skeleton of one individual bird, which have been preserved in their natural position. These findings were made public in December 2005 in the Naturalis museum in Leiden. 63% of the fossils found in the swamp belonged to turtles of the extinct genus \"Cylindraspis\", and 7.1% belonged to dodos, which had been deposited within several centuries, 4,000 years ago. Subsequent excavations suggested that dodos and other animals became mired in the Mare aux Songes while trying to reach water during a long period of severe drought about 4,200 years ago. Furthermore, cyanobacteria thrived in the conditions created by the excrements of animals gathered around the swamp, which died of intoxication, dehydration, trampling, and miring. Though many small skeletal elements were found during the recent excavations of the swamp, few were found during the 19th century, probably owing to the employment of less refined methods when collecting.\nLouis \u00c9tienne Thirioux, an amateur naturalist at Port Louis, also found many dodo remains around 1900 from several locations. They included the first articulated specimen, which is the first subfossil dodo skeleton found outside the Mare aux Songes, and the only remains of a juvenile specimen, a now lost tarsometatarsus. The former specimen was found in 1904 in a cave near Le Pouce mountain, and is the only known complete skeleton of an individual dodo. Thirioux donated the specimen to the Museum Desjardins (now Natural History Museum at Mauritius Institute). Thrioux's heirs sold a second mounted composite skeleton (composed of at least two skeletons, with a mainly reconstructed skull) to the Durban Museum of Natural Science in South Africa in 1918. Together, these two skeletons represent the most completely known dodo remains, including bone elements previously unrecorded (such as knee-caps and wing bones). Though some contemporary writers noted the importance of Thrioux's specimens, they were not scientifically studied, and were largely forgotten until 2011, when sought out by a group of researchers. The mounted skeletons were laser scanned, from which 3-D models were reconstructed, which became the basis of a 2016 monograph about the osteology of the dodo. In 2006, explorers discovered a complete skeleton of a dodo in a lava cave in Mauritius. This was only the second associated skeleton of an individual specimen ever found, and the only one in recent times.\nWorldwide, 26 museums have significant holdings of dodo material, almost all found in the Mare aux Songes. The Natural History Museum, American Museum of Natural History, Cambridge University Museum of Zoology, the Senckenberg Museum, and others have almost complete skeletons, assembled from the dissociated subfossil remains of several individuals. In 2011, a wooden box containing dodo bones from the Edwardian era was rediscovered at the Grant Museum at University College London during preparations for a move. They had been stored with crocodile bones until then.\nWhite dodo.\nThe supposed \"white dodo\" (or \"solitaire\") of R\u00e9union is now considered an erroneous conjecture based on contemporary reports of the R\u00e9union ibis and 17th-century paintings of white, dodo-like birds by Pieter Withoos and Pieter Holsteyn that surfaced in the 19th century. The confusion began when Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe, who visited R\u00e9union around 1619, mentioned fat, flightless birds that he referred to as \"Dod-eersen\" in his journal, though without mentioning their colouration. When the journal was published in 1646, it was accompanied by an engraving of a dodo from Savery's \"Crocker Art Gallery sketch\". A white, stocky, and flightless bird was first mentioned as part of the R\u00e9union fauna by Chief Officer J. Tatton in 1625. Sporadic mentions were subsequently made by Sieur Dubois and other contemporary writers.\nBaron Edmond de S\u00e9lys Longchamps coined the name \"Raphus solitarius\" for these birds in 1848, as he believed the accounts referred to a species of dodo. When 17th-century paintings of white dodos were discovered by 19th-century naturalists, it was assumed they depicted these birds. Oudemans suggested that the discrepancy between the paintings and the old descriptions was that the paintings showed females, and that the species was therefore sexually dimorphic. Some authors also believed the birds described were of a species similar to the Rodrigues solitaire, as it was referred to by the same name, or even that there were white species of both dodo and solitaire on the island.\nThe Pieter Withoos painting, which was discovered first, appears to be based on an earlier painting by Pieter Holsteyn, three versions of which are known to have existed. According to Hume, Cheke, and Valledor de Lozoya, it appears that all depictions of white dodos were based on Roelant Savery's painting \"Landscape with Orpheus and the animals\", or on copies of it. The painting has generally been dated to 1611, though a post-1614, or even post-1626, date has also been proposed. The painting shows a whitish specimen and was apparently based on a stuffed specimen then in Prague; a \"walghvogel\" described as having a \"dirty off-white colouring\" was mentioned in an inventory of specimens in the Prague collection of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II, to whom Savery was contracted at the time (1607\u20131611). Savery's several later images all show greyish birds, possibly because he had by then seen another specimen. Cheke and Hume believe the painted specimen was white, owing to albinism. Valledor de Lozoya has instead suggested that the light plumage was a juvenile trait, a result of bleaching of old taxidermy specimens, or simply artistic license.\nIn 1987, scientists described fossils of a recently extinct species of ibis from R\u00e9union with a relatively short beak, \"Borbonibis latipes\", before a connection to the solitaire reports had been made. Cheke suggested to one of the authors, Francois Moutou, that the fossils may have been of the R\u00e9union solitaire, and this suggestion was published in 1995. The ibis was reassigned to the genus \"Threskiornis\", now combined with the specific epithet \"\" from the binomial \"R. solitarius\". Birds of this genus are also white and black with slender beaks, fitting the old descriptions of the R\u00e9union solitaire. No fossil remains of dodo-like birds have ever been found on the island.\nCultural significance.\nThe dodo's significance as one of the best-known extinct animals and its singular appearance led to its use in literature and popular culture as a symbol of an outdated concept or object, as in the expression \"dead as a dodo,\" which has come to mean unquestionably dead or obsolete. Similarly, the phrase \"to go the way of the dodo\" means to become extinct or obsolete, to fall out of common usage or practice, or to become a thing of the past. \"Dodo\" is also a slang term for a stupid, dull-witted person, as it was said to be stupid and easily caught.\nThe dodo appears frequently in works of popular fiction, and even before its extinction, it was featured in European literature, as a symbol for exotic lands, and of gluttony, due to its apparent fatness. In 1865, the same year that George Clark started to publish reports about excavated dodo fossils, the newly vindicated bird was featured as a character in Lewis Carroll's \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\". It is thought that he included the dodo because he identified with it and had adopted the name as a nickname for himself because of his stammer, which made him accidentally introduce himself as \"Do-do-dodgson\", his legal surname. Carroll and the girl who served as inspiration for Alice, Alice Liddell, had enjoyed visiting the Oxford museum to see the dodo remains there. The book's popularity made the dodo a well-known icon of extinction. Popular depictions of the dodo often became more exaggerated and cartoonish following its \"Alice in Wonderland\" fame, which was in line with the inaccurate belief that it was clumsy, tragic, and destined for extinction.\nThe dodo is used as a mascot for many kinds of products, especially in Mauritius. It appears as a supporter on the coat of arms of Mauritius, on Mauritius coins, is used as a watermark on all Mauritian rupee banknotes, and features as the background of the Mauritian immigration form. A smiling dodo is the symbol of the Brasseries de Bourbon, a popular brewer on R\u00e9union, whose emblem displays the white species once thought to have lived there. \nThe dodo is used to promote the protection of endangered species by environmental organisations, such as the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust and the Durrell Wildlife Park. The Center for Biological Diversity gives an annual 'Rubber Dodo Award', to \"those who have done the most to destroy wild places, species and biological diversity\". In 2011, the nephiline spider \"Nephilengys dodo\", which inhabits the same woods as the dodo once did, was named after the bird to raise awareness of the urgent need for protection of the Mauritius biota. Two species of ant from Mauritius have been named after the dodo: \"Pseudolasius dodo\" in 1946 and \"Pheidole dodo\" in 2013. A species of isopod from a coral reef off R\u00e9union was named \"Hansenium dodo\" in 1991.\nThe name dodo has been used by scientists naming genetic elements, honouring the dodo's flightless nature. A fruitfly gene within a region of a chromosome required for flying ability was named \"dodo\". In addition, a defective transposable element family from \"Phytophthora infestans\" was named \"DodoPi\" as it contained mutations that eliminated the element's ability to jump to new locations in a chromosome.\nIn 2009, a previously unpublished 17th-century Dutch illustration of a dodo went for sale at Christie's and was expected to sell for \u00a36,000. It is unknown whether the illustration was based on a specimen or on a previous image, and the artist is unidentified. It sold for \u00a344,450. Parrish suggested it depicts a stuffed specimen, as the legs look dried.\nThe poet Hilaire Belloc included the following poem about the dodo in his \"Bad Child's Book of Beasts\" from 1896:"}
{"id": "8421", "revid": "905811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8421", "title": "Sideroxylon grandiflorum", "text": "Sideroxylon grandiflorum, also known as the tambalacoque or dodo tree, is a long-lived species of tree in the sapote family Sapotaceae. It is endemic to Mauritius.\nDescription.\nThe fruit of \"Sideroxylon grandiflorum\" is analogous to a peach. Each is termed a drupe because each has a hard endocarp, or pit, surrounding the seed. The plant itself superficially resembles the unrelated \"Plumeria\", but the dodo tree's flowers and fruit are cauliflorous.\nEcology.\nIn 1973, it was argued that the species was becoming extinct. There were supposedly only 13 specimens left, all estimated to be about 300 years old; the true age could not be determined because tambalacoque has no growth rings. Stanley Temple hypothesized that the dodo, which became extinct in the 17th century, ate tambalacoque fruits, and that only after passing through the digestive tract of the dodo could the seeds germinate. Temple force-fed seventeen tambalacoque fruits to wild turkeys in 1977. Seven of the fruits were crushed by the bird's gizzard, while the remaining ten were either regurgitated or passed with the bird's feces. Temple planted the remaining ten fruits, three of which germinated. Temple did not try to germinate any seeds from control fruits that had not been fed to turkeys so the effect on germination of feeding fruits to turkeys was unknown. Studies on tambalacoque seed germination by Hill (1941) and King (1946) found that the seeds germinated without abrading.\nTemple's hypothesis that the tree required the dodo was contested. Others have suggested that the decline of the tree was exaggerated or that other extinct animals, such as giant tortoises, fruit bats, or the broad-billed parrot, may also have been distributing the seeds. The decline of the tree may be due to introduction of domestic pigs and crab-eating macaques, and competition from introduced plants. Alternatively, the difference in reported tree numbers may arise from the fact that young trees are not distinct in appearance and may easily be confused with similar species. Catling (2001) in a summary cites Owadally and Temple (1979) and Witmer (1991), while Hershey (2004) reviewed the flaws in Temple's dodo-tambalacoque hypothesis.\nIn 2004, the Botanical Society of America's Plant Science Bulletin disputed Temple's research as flawed. The Bulletin published evidence as to why the dodo's extinction did not directly cause the increasing disappearance of young trees, including suggestions that the \"Cylindraspis\" giant tortoises would have been more likely to disperse the seeds than dodos, casting doubt on Temple's view as to the dodo and the tree's sole survival relationship.\nUses.\nThe dodo tree is highly valued for its wood in Mauritius, which has led some foresters to scrape the pits by hand to make them sprout and grow."}
{"id": "8423", "revid": "928626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8423", "title": "DragonMagazine", "text": ""}
{"id": "8424", "revid": "29210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8424", "title": "DungeonMagazine", "text": ""}
{"id": "8425", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8425", "title": "Dwight Schultz", "text": "William Dwight Schultz (born November 24, 1947) is an American television, film and voice actor.\nHe is known for his roles as Captain \"Howling Mad\" Murdock on the 1980s action series \"The A-Team\" and as Reginald Barclay in the \"Star Trek\" franchise.\nHe is also known in animation as the megalomaniacal mad scientist Dr. Animo in the \"Ben 10\" series, Adrian Toomes/Vulture in some Marvel video games, Chef Mung Daal in the children's animated series \"Chowder\", and Eddie the Squirrel in \"CatDog\".\nEarly life.\nSchultz was born in Baltimore on November 24, 1947. He is of German descent and a Roman Catholic. He attended Calvert Hall College High School and Towson University.\nCareer.\nSchultz's breakthrough role was that of Captain \"Howling Mad\" Murdock on \"The A-Team\". He appeared in several films, including \"The Fan\" (1981), and he starred in \"Fat Man and Little Boy\" (1989) as J. Robert Oppenheimer. In the early 1990s, he had a recurring role as Lieutenant Reginald Barclay in \";\" he reprised the role in ' and the film '. He played in the 1992 television film \"Child of Rage\", starring opposite Mel Harris as a compassionate couple who adopt a troubled girl who has been sexually abused. In November 2009, Schultz confirmed that he and former \"A-Team\" co-star Dirk Benedict would make cameo appearances in the feature film \"The A-Team\".\nSchultz hosted a conservative talk-radio podcast called \"Howling Mad Radio\" which ended in March 2009. He has also guest-hosted on numerous occasions for Michael Savage on \"The Savage Nation\", Jerry Doyle on \"The Jerry Doyle Show\", and Rusty Humphries on \"The Rusty Humphries Show\". He also posts political commentaries and podcasts on his official fansite.\nPersonal life.\nSchultz married actress Wendy Fulton in 1983. They have a daughter.\nSchultz is Catholic and a conservative. In 2012 he began regular appearances on \"The Glazov Gang\", an Internet political talk show hosted by Jamie Glazov, managing editor of \"FrontPage Magazine\"."}
{"id": "8428", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8428", "title": "DFLP", "text": ""}
{"id": "8429", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8429", "title": "Density", "text": "Density (volumetric mass density or specific mass) is a substance's mass per unit of volume. The symbol most often used for density is \"\u03c1\" (the lower case Greek letter rho), although the Latin letter \"D\" can also be used. Mathematically, density is defined as mass divided by volume: \nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the density, \"m\" is the mass, and \"V\" is the volume. In some cases (for instance, in the United States oil and gas industry), density is loosely defined as its weight per unit volume, although this is scientifically inaccurate this quantity is more specifically called specific weight.\nFor a pure substance the density has the same numerical value as its mass concentration.\nDifferent materials usually have different densities, and density may be relevant to buoyancy, purity and packaging. Osmium is the densest known element at standard conditions for temperature and pressure.\nTo simplify comparisons of density across different systems of units, it is sometimes replaced by the dimensionless quantity \"relative density\" or \"specific gravity\", i.e. the ratio of the density of the material to that of a standard material, usually water. Thus a relative density less than one relative to water means that the substance floats in water.\nThe density of a material varies with temperature and pressure. This variation is typically small for solids and liquids but much greater for gases. Increasing the pressure on an object decreases the volume of the object and thus increases its density. Increasing the temperature of a substance (with a few exceptions) decreases its density by increasing its volume. In most materials, heating the bottom of a fluid results in convection of the heat from the bottom to the top, due to the decrease in the density of the heated fluid, which causes it to rise relative to denser unheated material.\nThe reciprocal of the density of a substance is occasionally called its specific volume, a term sometimes used in thermodynamics. Density is an intensive property in that increasing the amount of a substance does not increase its density; rather it increases its mass.\nOther conceptually comparable quantities or ratios include specific density, relative density (specific gravity), and specific weight.\nHistory.\nDensity, floating, and sinking.\nThe understanding that different materials have different densities, and of a relationship between density, floating, and sinking must date to prehistoric times. Much later it was put in writing. Aristotle, for example, wrote:\nVolume vs. density; volume of an irregular shape.\nIn a well-known but probably apocryphal tale, Archimedes was given the task of determining whether King Hiero's goldsmith was embezzling gold during the manufacture of a golden wreath dedicated to the gods and replacing it with another, cheaper alloy. Archimedes knew that the irregularly shaped wreath could be crushed into a cube whose volume could be calculated easily and compared with the mass; but the king did not approve of this. Baffled, Archimedes is said to have taken an immersion bath and observed from the rise of the water upon entering that he could calculate the volume of the gold wreath through the displacement of the water. Upon this discovery, he leapt from his bath and ran naked through the streets shouting, \"Eureka! Eureka!\" (). As a result, the term \"eureka\" entered common parlance and is used today to indicate a moment of enlightenment.\nThe story first appeared in written form in Vitruvius' \"books of architecture\", two centuries after it supposedly took place. Some scholars have doubted the accuracy of this tale, saying among other things that the method would have required precise measurements that would have been difficult to make at the time.\nNevertheless, in 1586, Galileo Galilei, in one of his first experiments, made a possible reconstruction of how the experiment could have been performed with ancient Greek resources\nUnits.\nFrom the equation for density (), mass density has any unit that is \"mass divided by volume\". As there are many units of mass and volume covering many different magnitudes there are a large number of units for mass density in use. The SI unit of kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m3) and the cgs unit of gram per cubic centimetre (g/cm3) are probably the most commonly used units for density. One g/cm3 is equal to 1000\u00a0kg/m3. One cubic centimetre (abbreviation cc) is equal to one millilitre. In industry, other larger or smaller units of mass and or volume are often more practical and US customary units may be used. See below for a list of some of the most common units of density.\nThe litre and tonne are not part of the SI, but are acceptable for use with it, leading to the following units:\nDensities using the following metric units all have exactly the same numerical value, one thousandth of the value in (kg/m3). Liquid water has a density of about 1\u00a0kg/dm3, making any of these SI units numerically convenient to use as most solids and liquids have densities between 0.1 and 20\u00a0kg/dm3.\nIn US customary units density can be stated in:\nImperial units differing from the above (as the Imperial gallon and bushel differ from the US units) in practice are rarely used, though found in older documents. The Imperial gallon was based on the concept that an Imperial fluid ounce of water would have a mass of one Avoirdupois ounce, and indeed 1\u00a0g/cm3 \u2248 1.00224129 ounces per Imperial fluid ounce = 10.0224129 pounds per Imperial gallon. The density of precious metals could conceivably be based on Troy ounces and pounds, a possible cause of confusion.\nKnowing the volume of the unit cell of a crystalline material and its formula weight (in daltons), the density can be calculated. One dalton per cubic \u00e5ngstr\u00f6m is equal to a density of 1.660\u00a0539\u00a0066\u00a060\u00a0g/cm3.\nMeasurement.\nA number of techniques as well as standards exist for the measurement of density of materials. Such techniques include the use of a hydrometer (a buoyancy method for liquids), Hydrostatic balance (a buoyancy method for liquids and solids), immersed body method (a buoyancy method for liquids), pycnometer (liquids and solids), air comparison pycnometer (solids), oscillating densitometer (liquids), as well as pour and tap (solids). However, each individual method or technique measures different types of density (e.g. bulk density, skeletal density, etc.), and therefore it is necessary to have an understanding of the type of density being measured as well as the type of material in question.\nHomogeneous materials.\nThe density at all points of a homogeneous object equals its total mass divided by its total volume. The mass is normally measured with a scale or balance; the volume may be measured directly (from the geometry of the object) or by the displacement of a fluid. To determine the density of a liquid or a gas, a hydrometer, a dasymeter or a Coriolis flow meter may be used, respectively. Similarly, hydrostatic weighing uses the displacement of water due to a submerged object to determine the density of the object.\nHeterogeneous materials.\nIf the body is not homogeneous, then its density varies between different regions of the object. In that case the density around any given location is determined by calculating the density of a small volume around that location. In the limit of an infinitesimal volume the density of an inhomogeneous object at a point becomes: formula_2, where formula_3 is an elementary volume at position formula_4. The mass of the body then can be expressed as\nformula_5\nNon-compact materials.\nIn practice, bulk materials such as sugar, sand, or snow contain voids. Many materials exist in nature as flakes, pellets, or granules.\nVoids are regions which contain something other than the considered material. Commonly the void is air, but it could also be vacuum, liquid, solid, or a different gas or gaseous mixture.\nThe \"bulk volume\" of a material \u2014inclusive of the void space fraction\u2014 is often obtained by a simple measurement (e.g. with a calibrated measuring cup) or geometrically from known dimensions.\nMass divided by bulk volume determines \"bulk density\". This is not the same thing as the material volumetric mass density.\nTo determine the material volumetric mass density, one must first discount the volume of the void fraction. Sometimes this can be determined by geometrical reasoning. For the close-packing of equal spheres the non-void fraction can be at most about 74%. It can also be determined empirically. Some bulk materials, however, such as sand, have a \"variable\" void fraction which depends on how the material is agitated or poured. It might be loose or compact, with more or less air space depending on handling.\nIn practice, the void fraction is not necessarily air, or even gaseous. In the case of sand, it could be water, which can be advantageous for measurement as the void fraction for sand saturated in water\u2014once any air bubbles are thoroughly driven out\u2014is potentially more consistent than dry sand measured with an air void.\nIn the case of non-compact materials, one must also take care in determining the mass of the material sample. If the material is under pressure (commonly ambient air pressure at the earth's surface) the determination of mass from a measured sample weight might need to account for buoyancy effects due to the density of the void constituent, depending on how the measurement was conducted. In the case of dry sand, sand is so much denser than air that the buoyancy effect is commonly neglected (less than one part in one thousand).\nMass change upon displacing one void material with another while maintaining constant volume can be used to estimate the void fraction, if the difference in density of the two voids materials is reliably known.\nChanges of density.\nIn general, density can be changed by changing either the pressure or the temperature. Increasing the pressure always increases the density of a material. Increasing the temperature generally decreases the density, but there are notable exceptions to this generalization. For example, the density of water increases between its melting point at 0\u00a0\u00b0C and 4\u00a0\u00b0C; similar behavior is observed in silicon at low temperatures.\nThe effect of pressure and temperature on the densities of liquids and solids is small. The compressibility for a typical liquid or solid is 10\u22126\u00a0bar\u22121 (1\u00a0bar = 0.1\u00a0MPa) and a typical thermal expansivity is 10\u22125\u00a0K\u22121. This roughly translates into needing around ten thousand times atmospheric pressure to reduce the volume of a substance by one percent. (Although the pressures needed may be around a thousand times smaller for sandy soil and some clays.) A one percent expansion of volume typically requires a temperature increase on the order of thousands of degrees Celsius.\nIn contrast, the density of gases is strongly affected by pressure. The density of an ideal gas is\nformula_6\nwhere is the molar mass, is the pressure, is the universal gas constant, and is the absolute temperature. This means that the density of an ideal gas can be doubled by doubling the pressure, or by halving the absolute temperature.\nIn the case of volumic thermal expansion at constant pressure and small intervals of temperature the temperature dependence of density is\nformula_7\nwhere formula_8 is the density at a reference temperature, formula_9 is the thermal expansion coefficient of the material at temperatures close to formula_10.\nDensity of solutions.\nThe density of a solution is the sum of mass (massic) concentrations of the components of that solution.\nMass (massic) concentration of each given component formula_11 in a solution sums to density of the solution,\nformula_12\nExpressed as a function of the densities of pure components of the mixture and their volume participation, it allows the determination of excess molar volumes:\nformula_13\nprovided that there is no interaction between the components.\nKnowing the relation between excess volumes and activity coefficients of the components, one can determine the activity coefficients:\nformula_14"}
{"id": "8432", "revid": "45017631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8432", "title": "Dave Barry", "text": "David McAlister Barry (born July 3, 1947) is an American author and columnist who wrote a nationally syndicated humor column for the \"Miami Herald\" from 1983 to 2005. He has also written numerous books of humor and parody, as well as comic novels and children's novels. Barry's honors include the Pulitzer Prize for Commentary (1988) and the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism (2005).\nBarry has defined a sense of humor as \"a measurement of the extent to which we realize that we are trapped in a world almost totally devoid of reason. Laughter is how we express the anxiety we feel at this knowledge.\"\nEarly life and education.\nBarry was born in Armonk, New York, where his father, David W. Barry, was a Presbyterian minister. He was educated at Wampus Elementary School, Harold C. Crittenden Junior High School (both in Armonk), and Pleasantville High School, where he was elected \"Class Clown\" in 1965. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from Haverford College in 1969.\nAs an alumnus of a Quaker-affiliated college, he avoided military service during the Vietnam War by registering as a religious conscientious objector. Barry decided \"early on\" that he was an atheist. He said, \"The problem with writing about religion is that you run the risk of offending sincerely religious people, and then they come after you with machetes.\"\nWriting career.\nBarry began his journalism career in 1971, working as a general-assignment reporter for the \"Daily Local News\" in West Chester, Pennsylvania, near his alma mater, Haverford College. He covered local government and civic events and was promoted to City Editor after about two years. He also started writing a weekly humor column for the paper and began to develop his unique style. He remained at the newspaper through 1974. He then worked briefly as a copy editor at the Associated Press's Philadelphia bureau before joining Burger Associates, a consulting firm.\nAt Burger, he taught effective writing to businesspeople. In his own words, he \"spent nearly eight years trying to get various businesspersons to...stop writing things like 'Enclosed please find the enclosed enclosures,' but...eventually realized that it was hopeless.\"\nIn 1981 he wrote a humorous guest column in \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" about watching the birth of his son, which attracted the attention of Gene Weingarten, then an editor of the \"Miami Herald\"s Sunday magazine \"Tropic\". Weingarten hired Barry as a humor columnist in 1983. Barry's column was syndicated nationally. Barry won a Pulitzer Prize for Commentary in 1988 for \"his consistently effective use of humor as a device for presenting fresh insights into serious concerns.\"\nBarry's first novel, \"Big Trouble\", was published in 1999. The book was adapted into a motion picture directed by Barry Sonnenfeld and starring Tim Allen, Rene Russo, and Patrick Warburton, with a cameo by Barry (deleted in post-production). The movie was originally due for release in September 2001 but was postponed following the September 11, 2001, attacks because the story involved terrorists smuggling a nuclear weapon onto an airplane. The film was released in April 2002.\nIn response to a column in which Barry mocked the cities of Grand Forks, North Dakota, and East Grand Forks, Minnesota, for calling themselves the \"Grand Cities\", Grand Forks named a sewage pumping station after Barry in January 2002. Barry traveled to Grand Forks for the dedication ceremony.\nArticles written by Barry have appeared in publications such as \"Boating\", \"Home Office Computing\", and \"Reader's Digest\", in addition to the \"Chicken Soup for the Soul\" inspirational book series. Two of his articles have been included in \"The Best American Sports Writing\" series. One of his columns was used as the introduction to the book \"Pirattitude!: So You Wanna Be a Pirate? Here's How!\" (), a follow-up to Barry's role in publicizing International Talk Like a Pirate Day. His books have frequently appeared on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nOn October 31, 2004, Barry announced that he would be taking an indefinite leave of absence of at least a year from his weekly column to spend more time with his family. In December 2005, Barry said in an interview with \"Editor &amp; Publisher\" that he would not resume his weekly column, although he would continue such features as his yearly gift guide, his year-in-review feature, and his blog, as well as an occasional article or column.\nIn 2005, Barry won the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in Journalism.\n\"Dave's World\" television series.\nFrom 1993 to 1997, CBS broadcast the sitcom \"Dave's World\" based on the books \"Dave Barry Turns 40\" and \"Dave Barry's Greatest Hits\". The show starred Harry Anderson as Barry and DeLane Matthews as his wife Beth. In an early episode, Barry appeared in a cameo role. After four seasons, the program was canceled shortly after being moved from its \"coveted\" Monday night slot to the \"Friday night death slot\", so named because of its association with low viewership.\nMusic.\nDuring college, Barry was in a band called the Federal Duck (the band actually issued a self-titled album on Musicor Records in 1968, but Barry was no longer in the group by that point). While at the \"Miami Herald\", he and several of his colleagues created a band called the Urban Professionals, with Barry on lead guitar and vocals. They performed an original song called \"The Tupperware Song\" at the Tupperware headquarters in Orlando, Florida.\nBeginning in 1992, Barry played lead guitar in the Rock Bottom Remainders, a rock band made up of published authors. \"(Remainder\" is a publishing term for a book that does not sell.) The band was founded by Barry's sister-in-law, Kathi Kamen Goldmark, for an American Booksellers Association convention, and has also included Stephen King, Amy Tan, Ridley Pearson, Scott Turow, Mitch Albom, Roy Blount Jr., Barbara Kingsolver, Matt Groening, and Barry's brother Sam, among others. The band's members \"are not musically skilled, but they are extremely loud,\" according to Barry. Several high-profile musicians, including Al Kooper, Warren Zevon, and Roger McGuinn, have performed with the band, and Bruce Springsteen sat in at least once. The band's road tour resulted in the book \"Mid-Life Confidential: The Rock Bottom Remainders Tour America with Three Chords and an Attitude\". The Rock Bottom Remainders disbanded in 2012 following Goldmark's death from breast cancer. They have reunited several times, performing at the Tucson Festival of Books in 2016 and 2018.\nOther activities.\nBeginning in 1984, Barry and \"Tropic\" editors Gene Weingarten and Tom Shroder have organized the Tropic Hunt (now the Herald Hunt), an annual puzzlehunt in Miami. A Washington, D.C., spinoff, the Post Hunt, began in 2008.\nBarry has run several mock campaigns for President of the United States, running on a libertarian platform. He has also written for the Libertarian Party's national newsletter.\nThe screen adaptation of Barry's book \"Dave Barry's Complete Guide to Guys\" was released in 2005; it is available on DVD.\nBarry is the co-host of the finance-based podcast called \u201cBusiness Untitled\u201d with Mel Carter and Michael Novogratz.\nPersonal life.\nBarry married Lois Ann Shelnutt in 1969. He married Beth Lenox in 1976. Barry and Lenox worked together at the \"Daily Local News\", where they began their journalism careers on the same day in September 1971; they had one child, Robert, born 1980. Barry and Lenox divorced in 1993. In 1996, Barry married \"Miami Herald\" sportswriter Michelle Kaufman; they had a daughter, Sophie, in 2000.\nBarry's father and his youngest brother suffered from alcoholism, and his father died in 1984; his sister Mary Katherine was institutionalized for schizophrenia; and his mother died by suicide in 1987.\nBarry has had dogs named Goldie, Earnest, Zippy, and now Lucy. All have been mentioned regularly in Barry's columns."}
{"id": "8436", "revid": "41182813", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8436", "title": "David Angell", "text": "David Lawrence Angell (April 10, 1946 \u2013 September 11, 2001) was an American screenwriter and television producer, known for his work in sitcoms. He won multiple Emmy Awards as a \"Cheers\" writer and as the creator and executive producer of the sitcoms \"Wings\" and \"Frasier\" with Peter Casey and David Lee. Heading home from their vacation on Cape Cod, Angell and his wife, Lynn, were killed aboard American Airlines Flight 11, the first plane to hit the World Trade Center during the September 11 attacks.\nEarly life.\nAngell was born in Providence, Rhode Island, to Henry and Mae (n\u00e9e Cooney) Angell. He received a bachelor's degree in English literature from Providence College. He married Lynn Edwards on August 14, 1971. Soon after Angell entered the U.S. Army upon graduation and served at the Pentagon until 1972. He then moved to Boston and worked as a methods analyst at an engineering company and later at an insurance firm in Rhode Island. His brother, the Most Rev. Kenneth Angell, was a Roman Catholic prelate and Bishop of Burlington, Vermont.\nCareer.\nAngell moved to Los Angeles in 1977. His first script was sold to the producers of the \"Annie Flynn\" series. Five years later, he sold his second script, for the sitcom \"Archie Bunker's Place\". In 1983, he joined \"Cheers\" as a staff writer. In 1985, Angell joined forces with Peter Casey and David Lee as \"Cheers\" supervising producers/writers. The trio received 37 Emmy Award nominations and won 24 Emmy Awards, including the above-mentioned for \"Frasier\". They also won an Outstanding Comedy Series Emmy for \"Cheers\", in 1989, which Angell, Casey, Lee and the series' other producers shared, and an Outstanding Writing/Comedy Emmy for \"Cheers\", which Angell received in 1984. After working together as producers on \"Cheers\", Angell, Casey and Lee formed Grub Street Productions. In 1990, they created and executive-produced the comedy series \"Wings\".\nDeath.\nAngell and his wife Lynn died in the 2001 September 11 attacks at the World Trade Center in Manhattan. They were among the passengers of American Airlines Flight 11, who were all killed when the plane struck the North Tower of the complex.\nLegacy.\nThe American Screenwriters Association awards the annual David Angell Humanitarian Award to any individual in the entertainment industry who contributes to global well-being through donations of time, expertise or other support to improve the human condition.\nIn 2004, The Angell Foundation of Los Angeles, California, awarded Providence College a gift of $2 million for the Smith Center for the Arts.\nThe two-part episode of \"Frasier\" to air after the attacks, \"Don Juan in Hell\" airing on September 25, 2001, ended with the memorial tribute, \"In loving memory of our friends Lynn and David Angell\". In \"Goodnight, Seattle\", the series finale that aired May 13, 2004, Niles Crane and Daphne Moon's son was born, named David in tribute.\nAt the National September 11 Memorial, Angell and his wife are memorialized at the North Pool, on Panel N-1, along with other passengers from Flight 11."}
{"id": "8437", "revid": "1264972099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8437", "title": "Diedrich Hermann Westermann", "text": "Diedrich Hermann Westermann (24 June 1875 \u2013 31 May 1956) was a German missionary, Africanist, and linguist. He substantially extended and revised the work of Carl Meinhof, his teacher, although he rejected some of Meinhof's theories only implicitly. Westermann is seen as one of the founders of modern African linguistics.\nHe carried out extensive linguistic and anthropological research in the area ranging from Senegal eastwards to the Upper Nile. His linguistic publications cover a wide range of African languages, including the Gbe languages, Nuer, Kpelle, Shilluk, Hausa, and Guang.\nWestermann's comparative work, begun in 1911, initially brought together much of today's Niger\u2013Congo and Nilo-Saharan language phyla under the name Sudanic languages. His most important later publication \"Die westlichen Sudansprachen\" 1927a divided these into East and West Sudanic languages and laid the basis for what would become Niger\u2013Congo. In this book and a series of associated articles between 1925 and 1928, Westermann both identified a large number of roots that form the basis of our understanding of Niger\u2013Congo and set out the evidence for the coherence of many of the families that constitute it. Much of the classification of African languages associated with Joseph Greenberg actually derives from the work of Westermann.\nIn 1927 Westermann published a \"Practical Orthography of African Languages\", which became later known as the \"Westermann script\". Subsequently, he published the influential and oft-reprinted \"Practical Phonetics for Students of African Languages\" in collaboration with Ida C. Ward (1933).\nHe was born in Baden near Bremen and also died there."}
{"id": "8438", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8438", "title": "Diedrich Westermann", "text": ""}
{"id": "8439", "revid": "1264151507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8439", "title": "Diacritic", "text": "A diacritic (also diacritical mark, diacritical point, diacritical sign, or accent) is a glyph added to a letter or to a basic glyph. The term derives from the Ancient Greek (, \"distinguishing\"), from (, \"to distinguish\"). The word \"diacritic\" is a noun, though it is sometimes used in an attributive sense, whereas \"diacritical\" is only an adjective. Some diacritics, such as the acute , grave , and circumflex (all shown above an 'o'), are often called \"accents\". Diacritics may appear above or below a letter or in some other position such as within the letter or between two letters.\nThe main use of diacritics in Latin script is to change the sound-values of the letters to which they are added. Historically, English has used the diaeresis diacritic to indicate the correct pronunciation of ambiguous words, such as \"co\u00f6perate\", without which the &lt;oo&gt; letter sequence could be misinterpreted to be pronounced . Other examples are the acute and grave accents, which can indicate that a vowel is to be pronounced differently than is normal in that position, for example not reduced to /\u0259/ or silent as in the case of the two uses of the letter e in the noun \"r\u00e9sum\u00e9\" (as opposed to the verb \"resume\") and the help sometimes provided in the pronunciation of some words such as \"dogg\u00e8d\", \"learn\u00e8d\", \"bless\u00e8d\", and especially words pronounced differently than normal in poetry (for example \"mov\u00e8d\", \"breath\u00e8d\").\nMost other words with diacritics in English are borrowings from languages such as French to better preserve the spelling, such as the diaeresis on and , the acute from , the circumflex in the word , and the cedille in . All these diacritics, however, are frequently omitted in writing, and English is the only major modern European language that does not have diacritics in common usage.\nIn Latin-script alphabets in other languages, diacritics may distinguish between homonyms, such as the French (\"there\") versus (\"the\"), which are both pronounced . In Gaelic type, a dot over a consonant indicates lenition of the consonant in question. In other writing systems, diacritics may perform other functions. Vowel pointing systems, namely the Arabic harakat and the Hebrew niqqud systems, indicate vowels that are not conveyed by the basic alphabet. The Indic virama (\u2009\u094d\u2009etc.) and the Arabic suk\u016bn (\u2009\u2009) mark the absence of vowels. Cantillation marks indicate prosody. Other uses include the Early Cyrillic titlo stroke (\u2009\u25cc\u0483\u2009) and the Hebrew gershayim (\u2009\u2009), which, respectively, mark abbreviations or acronyms, and Greek diacritical marks, which showed that letters of the alphabet were being used as numerals. In Vietnamese and the Hanyu Pinyin official romanization system for Mandarin in China, diacritics are used to mark the tones of the syllables in which the marked vowels occur.\nIn orthography and collation, a letter modified by a diacritic may be treated either as a new, distinct letter or as a letter\u2013diacritic combination. This varies from language to language and may vary from case to case within a language.\nIn some cases, letters are used as \"in-line diacritics\", with the same function as ancillary glyphs, in that they modify the sound of the letter preceding them, as in the case of the \"h\" in the English pronunciation of \"sh\" and \"th\". Such letter combinations are sometimes even collated as a single distinct letter. For example, the spelling sch was traditionally often treated as a separate letter in German. Words with that spelling were listed after all other words spelled with s in card catalogs in the Vienna public libraries, for example (before digitization).\nTypes.\nAmong the types of diacritic used in alphabets based on the Latin script are:\nThe tilde, dot, comma, titlo, apostrophe, bar, and colon are sometimes diacritical marks, but also have other uses.\nNot all diacritics occur adjacent to the letter they modify. In the Wali language of Ghana, for example, an apostrophe indicates a change of vowel quality, but occurs at the beginning of the word, as in the dialects \"\u2019Bulengee\" and \"\u2019Dolimi\". Because of vowel harmony, all vowels in a word are affected, so the scope of the diacritic is the entire word. In abugida scripts, like those used to write Hindi and Thai, diacritics indicate vowels, and may occur above, below, before, after, or around the consonant letter they modify.\nThe tittle (dot) on the letter or the letter , of the Latin alphabet originated as a diacritic to clearly distinguish from the minims (downstrokes) of adjacent letters. It first appeared in the 11th century in the sequence \"ii\" (as in ), then spread to \"i\" adjacent to \"m, n, u\", and finally to all lowercase \"i\"s. The , originally a variant of \"i\", inherited the tittle. The shape of the diacritic developed from initially resembling today's acute accent to a long flourish by the 15th century. With the advent of Roman type it was reduced to the round dot we have today.\nSeveral languages of eastern Europe use diacritics on both consonants and vowels, whereas in western Europe digraphs are more often used to change consonant sounds. Most languages in Europe use diacritics on vowels, aside from English where there are typically none (with some exceptions).\nDiacritics specific to non-Latin alphabets.\nGreek.\nThese diacritics are used in addition to the acute, grave, and circumflex accents and the diaeresis:\nKorean.\nThe diacritics \u302e and \u302f\u00a0, known as Bangjeom (), were used to mark pitch accents in Hangul for Middle Korean. They were written to the left of a syllable in vertical writing and above a syllable in horizontal writing.\nSyriac.\nIn addition to the above vowel marks, transliteration of Syriac sometimes includes \"\u0259\", \"e\u030a\" or superscript \"e\" (or often nothing at all) to represent an original Aramaic schwa that became lost later on at some point in the development of Syriac. Some transliteration schemes find its inclusion necessary for showing spirantization or for historical reasons.\nNon-alphabetic scripts.\nSome non-alphabetic scripts also employ symbols that function essentially as diacritics.\nAlphabetization or collation.\nDifferent languages use different rules to put diacritic characters in alphabetical order. For example, French and Portuguese treat letters with diacritical marks the same as the underlying letter for purposes of ordering and dictionaries. The Scandinavian languages and the Finnish language, by contrast, treat the characters with diacritics , , and as distinct letters of the alphabet, and sort them after . Usually (a-umlaut) and (o-umlaut) [used in Swedish and Finnish] are sorted as equivalent to (ash) and (o-slash) [used in Danish and Norwegian]. Also, \"aa\", when used as an alternative spelling to , is sorted as such. Other letters modified by diacritics are treated as variants of the underlying letter, with the exception that is frequently sorted as .\nLanguages that treat accented letters as variants of the underlying letter usually alphabetize words with such symbols immediately after similar unmarked words. For instance, in German where two words differ only by an umlaut, the word without it is sorted first in German dictionaries (e.g. \"schon\" and then \"sch\u00f6n\", or \"fallen\" and then \"f\u00e4llen\"). However, when names are concerned (e.g. in phone books or in author catalogues in libraries), umlauts are often treated as combinations of the vowel with a suffixed ; Austrian phone books now treat characters with umlauts as separate letters (immediately following the underlying vowel).\nIn Spanish, the grapheme is considered a distinct letter, different from and collated between and , as it denotes a different sound from that of a plain . But the accented vowels , , , , are not separated from the unaccented vowels , , , , , as the acute accent in Spanish only modifies stress within the word or denotes a distinction between homonyms, and does not modify the sound of a letter.\nFor a comprehensive list of the collating orders in various languages, see Collating sequence.\nGeneration with computers.\nModern computer technology was developed mostly in countries that speak Western European languages (particularly English), and many early binary encodings were developed with a bias favoring Englisha language written without diacritical marks. With computer memory and computer storage at premium, early character sets were limited to the Latin alphabet, the ten digits and a few punctuation marks and conventional symbols. The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), first published in 1963, encoded just 95 printable characters. It included just four free-standing diacriticsacute, grave, circumflex and tildewhich were to be used by backspacing and overprinting the base letter. The ISO/IEC 646 standard (1967) defined national variations that replace some American graphemes with precomposed characters (such as , and ), according to languagebut remained limited to 95 printable characters.\nUnicode was conceived to solve this problem by assigning every known character its own code; if this code is known, most modern computer systems provide a method to input it. For historical reasons, almost all the letter-with-accent combinations used in European languages were given unique code points and these are called precomposed characters. For other languages, it is usually necessary to use a combining character diacritic together with the desired base letter. Unfortunately, even as of 2024, many applications and web browsers remain unable to operate the combining diacritic concept properly.\nDepending on the keyboard layout and keyboard mapping, it is more or less easy to enter letters with diacritics on computers and typewriters. Keyboards used in countries where letters with diacritics are the norm, have keys engraved with the relevant symbols. In other cases, such as when the US international or UK extended mappings are used, the accented letter is created by first pressing the key with the diacritic mark, followed by the letter to place it on. This method is known as the dead key technique, as it produces no output of its own but modifies the output of the key pressed after it.\nLanguages with letters containing diacritics.\nThe following languages have letters with diacritics that are orthographically distinct from those without diacritics.\nDiacritics that do not produce new letters.\nEnglish.\nEnglish is one of the few European languages that does not have many words that contain diacritical marks. Instead, digraphs are the main way the Modern English alphabet adapts the Latin to its phonemes. Exceptions are unassimilated foreign loanwords, including borrowings from French (and, increasingly, Spanish, like \"jalape\u00f1o\" and \"pi\u00f1ata\"); however, the diacritic is also sometimes omitted from such words. Loanwords that frequently appear with the diacritic in English include \"caf\u00e9\", \"r\u00e9sum\u00e9\" or \"resum\u00e9\" (a usage that helps distinguish it from the verb \"resume\"), \"souffl\u00e9\", and \"na\u00efvet\u00e9\" (see \"English terms with diacritical marks\"). In older practice (and even among some orthographically conservative modern writers), one may see examples such as \"\u00e9lite\", \"m\u00eal\u00e9e\" and \"r\u00f4le.\"\nEnglish speakers and writers once used the diaeresis more often than now in words such as \"co\u00f6peration\" (from Fr. \"coop\u00e9ration\"), \"zo\u00f6logy\" (from Grk. \"zoologia\"), and \"see\u00ebr\" (now more commonly \"see-er \"or simply\" seer\") as a way of indicating that adjacent vowels belonged to separate syllables, but this practice has become far less common. \"The New Yorker\" magazine is a major publication that continues to use the diaeresis in place of a hyphen for clarity and economy of space.\nA few English words, often when used out of context, especially in isolation, can only be distinguished from other words of the same spelling by using a diacritic or modified letter. These include \"expos\u00e9\", \"lam\u00e9\", \"mat\u00e9\", \"\u00f6re\", \"\u00f8re\", \"r\u00e9sum\u00e9\" and \"ros\u00e9.\" In a few words, diacritics that did not exist in the original have been added for disambiguation, as in \"mat\u00e9\" (\"from Sp. and Port.\" mate)\", sak\u00e9\" (\"the standard Romanization of the Japanese has no accent mark\")\", and\" Mal\u00e9 (\"from Dhivehi \u0789\u07a7\u078d\u07ac\")\",\" to clearly distinguish them from the English words \"mate, sake,\" and \"male.\"\nThe acute and grave accents are occasionally used in poetry and lyrics: the acute to indicate stress overtly where it might be ambiguous (\"r\u00e9bel\" vs. \"reb\u00e9l\") or nonstandard for metrical reasons (\"cal\u00e9ndar\"), the grave to indicate that an ordinarily silent or elided syllable is pronounced (\"warn\u00e8d,\" \"parl\u00ecament\").\nIn certain personal names such as \"Ren\u00e9e\" and \"Zo\u00eb\", often two spellings exist, and the person's own preference will be known only to those close to them. Even when the name of a person is spelled with a diacritic, like \"Charlotte Bront\u00eb\", this may be dropped in English-language articles, and even in official documents such as passports, due either to carelessness, the typist not knowing how to enter letters with diacritical marks, or technical reasons (California, for example, does not allow names with diacritics, as the computer system cannot process such characters). They also appear in some worldwide company names and/or trademarks, such as \"Nestl\u00e9\" and \"Citro\u00ebn\".\nOther languages.\nThe following languages have letter-diacritic combinations that are not considered independent letters.\nTransliteration.\nSeveral languages that are not written with the Roman alphabet are transliterated, or romanized, using diacritics. Examples:\nLimits.\nOrthographic.\nPossibly the greatest number of combining diacritics \"required\" to compose a valid character in any Unicode language is 8, for the \"well-known grapheme cluster in Tibetan and Ranjana scripts\" or .\nIt consists of\nAn example of rendering, may be broken depending on browser:\nUnorthographic/ornamental.\nSome users have explored the limits of rendering in web browsers and other software by \"decorating\" words with excessive nonsensical diacritics per character to produce so-called Zalgo text.\nList of diacritics in Unicode.\nDiacritics for Latin script in Unicode:"}
{"id": "8442", "revid": "1239319920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8442", "title": "Digraph", "text": "Digraph, often misspelled as diagraph, may refer to:"}
{"id": "8443", "revid": "1272483374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8443", "title": "Didgeridoo", "text": "The didgeridoo (), also spelt didjeridu, among other variants, is a wind instrument, played with vibrating lips to produce a continuous drone while using a special breathing technique called circular breathing. The didgeridoo was developed by Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia at least 1,000 years ago, and is now in use around the world, though still most strongly associated with Indigenous Australian music. In the Yol\u014bu languages of the indigenous people of northeast Arnhem Land the name for the instrument is the yi\u1e0faki, or more recently by some, mandapul. In the Bininj Kunwok language of West Arnhem Land it is known as mako.\nA didgeridoo is usually cylindrical or conical, and can measure anywhere from long. Most are around long. Generally, the longer the instrument, the lower its pitch or key. Flared instruments play a higher pitch than unflared instruments of the same length.\nHistory.\nThere are no reliable sources of the exact age of the didgeridoo. Archaeological studies suggest that people of the Kakadu region in Northern Australia have been using the didgeridoo for less than 1,000 years, based on the dating of rock art paintings. A clear rock painting in Ginga Wardelirrhmeng, on the northern edge of the Arnhem Land plateau, from the freshwater period (that had begun 1500 years ago) shows a didgeridoo player and two song-men participating in an Ubarr ceremony. It is thus thought that it was developed by Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia, possibly in Arnhem Land.\nT. B. Wilson's \"Narrative of a Voyage Round the World\" (1835) includes a drawing of an Aboriginal man from Raffles Bay on the Cobourg Peninsula (about east of Darwin) playing the instrument. Others observed such an instrument in the same area, made of bamboo and about long. In 1893, English palaeontologist Robert Etheridge, Junior observed the use of \"three very curious trumpets\" made of bamboo in northern Australia. There were then two native species of bamboo growing along the Adelaide River, Northern Territory\".\nAccording to A. P. Elkin, in 1938, the instrument was \"only known in the eastern Kimberley [region in Western Australia] and the northern third of the Northern Territory\".\nEtymology.\nThe name \"didgeridoo\" is not of Aboriginal Australian linguistic origin and is considered to be an onomatopoetic word. The earliest occurrences of the word in print include a 1908 edition of the \"Hamilton Spectator\" referring to a did-gery-do' (hollow bamboo)\", a 1914 edition of \"The Northern Territory Times and Gazette\", and a 1919 issue of \"Smith's Weekly\", in which it was referred to as a \"didjerry\" and was said to produce the sound \"didjerry, didjerry, didjerry and so on ad infinitum\".\nA rival explanation, that \"didgeridoo\" is a corruption of the Irish phrase or Scottish Gaelic , is controversial. Irish or , and Scottish Gaelic , are nouns that, depending on the context, may mean \"trumpeter\", \"hummer\", \"crooner\" or \"puffer\", while Irish means \"black\", and Scottish Gaelic means \"native\".\nOther names.\nThere are numerous names for the instrument among the Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia, none of which closely resemble the word \"didgeridoo\" (see below). Some didgeridoo enthusiasts, scholars and Aboriginal people advocate using local language names for the instrument.\n\"Yi\u1e0faki\" (transcribed \"yidaki\" in English, sometimes spelt \"yirdaki\") is one of the most commonly used names although, strictly speaking, it refers to a specific type of the instrument made and used by the Yolngu peoples of north-east Arnhem Land. Some Yolngu people began using the word \"mandapul\" after 2011, out of respect for the passing of a Manggalili man who had a name sounding similar to yidaki.\nIn west Arnhem Land, it is known as a \"mako\", a name popularised by virtuoso player David Blanasi, a Bininj man, whose language was Kunwinjku, and who brought the didgeridoo to world prominence. However the mako is slightly different from the Yi\u1e0faki: usually shorter, and sounding somewhat different \u2013 a slightly fuller and richer sound, but without the \"overtone\" note.\nThere are at least 45 names for the didgeridoo, several of which suggest its original construction of bamboo, such as \"bambu\", \"bombo\", \"kambu\", and \"pampu\", which are still used in the \"lingua franca\" by some Aboriginal people. The following are some of the more common regional names.\nDescription and construction.\nA didgeridoo is usually cylindrical or conical, and can measure anywhere from long. Most are around long. Generally, the longer the instrument, the lower its pitch or key. However, flared instruments play a higher pitch than unflared instruments of the same length.\nThe didgeridoo is classified as a wind instrument and is similar in form to a straight trumpet, but made of wood. It has also been called a dronepipe.\nTraditional.\nTraditional didgeridoos are usually made from hardwoods, especially the various eucalyptus species that are endemic to northern and central Australia. Generally the main trunk of the tree is harvested, though a substantial branch may be used instead. Traditional didgeridoo makers seek suitably hollow live trees in areas with obvious termite activity. Termites attack these living eucalyptus trees, removing only the dead heartwood of the tree, as the living sapwood contains a chemical that repels the insects. Various techniques are employed to find trees with a suitable hollow, including knowledge of landscape and termite activity patterns, and a kind of tap or knock test, in which the bark of the tree is peeled back, and a fingernail or the blunt end of a tool, such as an axe, is knocked against the wood to determine if the hollow produces the right resonance. Once a suitably hollow tree is found, it is cut down and cleaned out, the bark is taken off, the ends trimmed, and the exterior is shaped; this results in a finished instrument. A rim of beeswax may be applied to the mouthpiece end.\nModern.\nNon-traditional didgeridoos can be made from native or non-native hard woods (typically split, hollowed and rejoined), glass, fibreglass, metal, agave, clay, resin, PVC piping and carbon fibre. These typically have an upper inside diameter of around down to a bell end of anywhere between and have a length corresponding to the desired key. The end of the pipe can be shaped and smoothed to create a comfortable mouthpiece or an added mouthpiece can be made of any shaped and smoothed material such as rubber, a rubber stopper with a hole or beeswax.\nModern didgeridoo designs are distinct from the traditional Australian Aboriginal didgeridoo, and are innovations recognised by musicologists. Didgeridoo design innovation started in the late 20th century, using non-traditional materials and non-traditional shapes. The practice has sparked, however, a good deal of debate among indigenous practitioners and non-indigenous people about its aesthetic, ethical, and legal issues.\nDecoration.\nDidgeridoos can be painted by their maker or a dedicated artist using traditional or modern paints while others retain the natural wood grain design with minimal or no decoration.\nPlaying.\nA didgeridoo can be played simply by producing a vibrating sound of the lips to produce the basic drone. More advanced playing involves the technique known as circular breathing. The circular breathing technique requires breathing in through the nose whilst simultaneously using the muscles of the cheeks to compress the cheeks and release the stored air out of the mouth. By using this technique, a skilled player can replenish the air in their lungs, and with practice they can sustain a note for as long as desired. Recordings exist of modern didgeridoo players playing continuously for more than 40 minutes; Mark Atkins on \"Didgeridoo Concerto\" (1994) plays for over 50 minutes continuously. Although circular breathing does eliminate the need to stop playing to take a breath, discomfort might still develop during a period of extended play due to chapped lips or other oral discomfort. \nThe didgeridoo functions \"...as an aural kaleidoscope of timbres\" and \"the extremely difficult virtuoso techniques developed by expert performers find no parallel elsewhere.\"\nThe didgeridoo virtuoso and composer William Barton has expanded the role of the instrument in the concert hall both with his own orchestral and chamber music works and with those written or arranged for him by prominent Australian composer Peter Sculthorpe.\nPhysics and operation.\nA termite-bored didgeridoo has an irregular shape that, overall, usually increases in diameter towards the lower end. This shape means that its resonances occur at frequencies that are not harmonically spaced in frequency. This contrasts with the harmonic spacing of the resonances in a cylindrical plastic pipe, whose resonant frequencies fall in the ratio 1:3:5 etc. The second resonance of a didgeridoo (the note sounded by overblowing) is usually around an 11th higher than the fundamental frequency (a frequency ratio of 8:3).\nThe vibration produced by the player's lips has harmonics in the ratio 1:2:3 etc. However, the non-harmonic spacing of the instrument's resonances means that the harmonics of the fundamental note are not systematically assisted by instrument's resonances, as is usually the case for Western wind instruments (e.g., in the low range of the clarinet, the 1st, 3rd, and 5th harmonics of the reed are assisted by resonances of the bore).\nSufficiently strong resonances of the vocal tract can strongly influence the timbre of the instrument.\nAt some frequencies, whose values depend on the position of the player's tongue, resonances of the vocal tract inhibit the oscillatory flow of air into the instrument.\nBands of frequencies that are not thus inhibited produce formants in the output sound.\nThese formants, and especially their variation during the inhalation and exhalation phases of circular breathing, give the instrument its readily recognisable sound.\nOther variations in the didgeridoo's sound can be made by adding vocalisations to the drone. Most of the vocalisations are related to sounds emitted by Australian animals, such as the dingo or the kookaburra. To produce these sounds, the players use their vocal folds to produce the sounds of the animals whilst continuing to blow air through the instrument. The results range from very high-pitched sounds to much lower sounds involving interference between the lip and vocal fold vibrations. Adding vocalisations increases the complexity of the playing.\nIn popular culture.\nCharlie McMahon, who formed the group Gondwanaland, was one of the first non-Aboriginal players to gain fame as a professional didgeridoo player. He has toured internationally with Midnight Oil. He invented the didjeribone, a sliding didgeridoo made from two lengths of plastic tubing; its playing style is somewhat in the manner of a trombone.\nThe didgeridoo has been used by a number of modern bands in various types of music. \nIt was featured on the British children's TV series \"Blue Peter\".\nIndustrial music bands like Test Dept use the didgeridoo. \nEarly songs by the acid jazz band Jamiroquai featured didgeridoo player Wallis Buchanan, including the band's first single \"When You Gonna Learn\", which features prominent didgeridoo in the introduction and solo sections.\nAmbient artist Steve Roach uses it in his collaborative work \"\" with Australian Aboriginal artist David Hudson and cellist Sarah Hopkins, as well as \"Dreamtime Return\".\nIt is used in the Indian song \"Jaane Kyon\" from the film \"Dil Chahta Hai\".\nChris Brooks, lead singer of the New Zealand hard rock band Like a Storm, uses the didgeridoo in some songs, including \"Love the Way You Hate Me\" from their album \"\" (2012).\nKate Bush made extensive use of the didgeridoo, played by Australian musician Rolf Harris, on her album \"The Dreaming\" (1982), which was written and recorded after a holiday in Australia.\nSinger and Multi-instrumentalist Xavier Rudd plays the didgeridoo and features the instrument frequently in his recordings \nCultural significance.\nTraditionally, the didgeridoo was played as an accompaniment to ceremonial dancing and singing and for solo or recreational purposes. For Aboriginal peoples of northern Australia, the yidaki is still used to accompany singers and dancers in cultural ceremonies. For the Yolngu people, the yidaki is part of their whole physical and cultural landscape and environment, comprising the people and spirit beings which belong to their country, kinship system and the Yolngu Matha language. It is connected to Yolngu Law and underpinned by ceremony, in song, dance, visual art and stories.\nPair sticks, sometimes called clapsticks (\"bilma\" or \"bimla\" by some traditional groups), establish the beat for the songs during ceremonies. The rhythm of the didgeridoo and the beat of the clapsticks are precise, and these patterns have been handed down for many generations. In the Wangga genre, the song-man starts with vocals and then introduces \"bilma\" to the accompaniment of didgeridoo.\nSex-based traditional prohibition debate.\nTraditionally, only men play the didgeridoo and sing during ceremonial occasions; playing by women is sometimes discouraged by Aboriginal communities and elders. In 2008, publisher HarperCollins apologised for its book \"The Daring Book for Girls\", which openly encouraged girls to play the instrument after Aboriginal academic Mark Rose described such encouragement as \"extreme cultural insensitivity\" and \"an extreme faux pas... part of a general ignorance that mainstream Australia has about Aboriginal culture.\" However, Linda Barwick, an ethnomusicologist, said that though traditionally women have not played the didgeridoo in ceremony, in informal situations there is no prohibition in the Dreaming Law. For example, in 1966, ethnomusicologist Alice Marshall Moyle made a recording in Borroloola of Jemima Wimalu, a Mara woman from the Roper River, proficiently playing the didgeridoo. In 1995, musicologist Steve Knopoff observed Yirrkala women performing \"djatpangarri\" songs that are traditionally performed by men and in 1996, ethnomusicologist Elizabeth MacKinley reported women of the Yanyuwa group giving public performances.\nAlthough there is no prohibition in the area of the didgeridoo's origin, such restrictions have been applied by other Indigenous communities. The didgeridoo was introduced to the Kimberleys in the early 20th century but it was only much later, such as in Rose's 2008 criticism of \"The Daring Book for Girls\", that Aboriginal men showed adverse reactions to women playing the instrument and prohibitions are especially evident in the South East of Australia. The belief that women are prohibited from playing is widespread among non-Aboriginal people and is also common among Aboriginal communities in Southern Australia; some ethnomusicologists believe that the dissemination of the taboo belief and other misconceptions is a result of commercial agendas and marketing. The majority of commercial didgeridoo recordings available are distributed by multinational recording companies and feature non-Aboriginal people playing a New Age style of music with liner notes promoting the instrument's spirituality which misleads consumers about the didgeridoo's secular role in traditional Aboriginal culture.\nThe taboo is particularly strong among many Aboriginal groups in the South East of Australia, where it is forbidden and considered \"cultural theft\" for non-Aboriginal women, and especially performers of New Age music regardless of sex, to play or even touch a didgeridoo.\nHealth benefits.\nA 2006 study reported in the \"British Medical Journal\" found that learning and practising the didgeridoo helped reduce snoring and obstructive sleep apnea by strengthening muscles in the upper airway, thus reducing their tendency to collapse during sleep. In the study, intervention subjects were trained in and practised didgeridoo playing, including circular breathing and other techniques. Control subjects were asked not to play the instrument. Subjects were surveyed before and after the study period to assess the effects of intervention. A small 2010 study noted marked improvements in the asthma management of 10 Aboriginal adults and children following a six-month programme of once-weekly didgeridoo lessons."}
{"id": "8449", "revid": "49065483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8449", "title": "Developmental biology", "text": "Developmental biology is the study of the process by which animals and plants grow and develop. Developmental biology also encompasses the biology of regeneration, asexual reproduction, metamorphosis, and the growth and differentiation of stem cells in the adult organism.\nPerspectives.\nThe main processes involved in the embryonic development of animals are: tissue patterning (via regional specification and patterned cell differentiation); tissue growth; and tissue morphogenesis.\nThe development of plants involves similar processes to that of animals. However, plant cells are mostly immotile so morphogenesis is achieved by differential growth, without cell movements. Also, the inductive signals and the genes involved are different from those that control animal development.\nGenerative biology.\nGenerative biology is the generative science that explores the dynamics guiding the development and evolution of a biological morphological form.\nDevelopmental processes.\nCell differentiation.\nCell differentiation is the process whereby different functional cell types arise in development. For example, neurons, muscle fibers and hepatocytes (liver cells) are well known types of differentiated cells. Differentiated cells usually produce large amounts of a few proteins that are required for their specific function and this gives them the characteristic appearance that enables them to be recognized under the light microscope. The genes encoding these proteins are highly active. Typically their chromatin structure is very open, allowing access for the transcription enzymes, and specific transcription factors bind to regulatory sequences in the DNA in order to activate gene expression. For example, NeuroD is a key transcription factor for neuronal differentiation, myogenin for muscle differentiation, and HNF4 for hepatocyte differentiation.\nCell differentiation is usually the final stage of development, preceded by several states of commitment which are not visibly differentiated. A single tissue, formed from a single type of progenitor cell or stem cell, often consists of several differentiated cell types. Control of their formation involves a process of lateral inhibition, based on the properties of the Notch signaling pathway. For example, in the neural plate of the embryo this system operates to generate a population of neuronal precursor cells in which NeuroD is highly expressed.\nRegeneration.\nRegeneration indicates the ability to regrow a missing part. This is very prevalent amongst plants, which show continuous growth, and also among colonial animals such as hydroids and ascidians. But most interest by developmental biologists has been shown in the regeneration of parts in free living animals. In particular four models have been the subject of much investigation. Two of these have the ability to regenerate whole bodies: \"Hydra\", which can regenerate any part of the polyp from a small fragment, and planarian worms, which can usually regenerate both heads and tails. Both of these examples have continuous cell turnover fed by stem cells and, at least in planaria, at least some of the stem cells have been shown to be pluripotent. The other two models show only distal regeneration of appendages. These are the insect appendages, usually the legs of hemimetabolous insects such as the cricket, and the limbs of urodele amphibians. Considerable information is now available about amphibian limb regeneration and it is known that each cell type regenerates itself, except for connective tissues where there is considerable interconversion between cartilage, dermis and tendons. In terms of the pattern of structures, this is controlled by a re-activation of signals active in the embryo.\nThere is still debate about the old question of whether regeneration is a \"pristine\" or an \"adaptive\" property. If the former is the case, with improved knowledge, we might expect to be able to improve regenerative ability in humans. If the latter, then each instance of regeneration is presumed to have arisen by natural selection in circumstances particular to the species, so no general rules would be expected.\nEmbryonic development of animals.\nThe sperm and egg fuse in the process of fertilization to form a fertilized egg, or zygote. This undergoes a period of divisions to form a ball or sheet of similar cells called a blastula or blastoderm. These cell divisions are usually rapid with no growth so the daughter cells are half the size of the mother cell and the whole embryo stays about the same size. They are called cleavage divisions.\nMouse epiblast primordial germ cells (see Figure: \"The initial stages of human embryogenesis\") undergo extensive epigenetic reprogramming. This process involves genome-wide DNA demethylation, chromatin reorganization and epigenetic imprint erasure leading to totipotency. DNA demethylation is carried out by a process that utilizes the DNA base excision repair pathway.\nMorphogenetic movements convert the cell mass into a three layered structure consisting of multicellular sheets called ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. These sheets are known as germ layers. This is the process of gastrulation. During cleavage and gastrulation the first regional specification events occur. In addition to the formation of the three germ layers themselves, these often generate extraembryonic structures, such as the mammalian placenta, needed for support and nutrition of the embryo, and also establish differences of commitment along the anteroposterior axis (head, trunk and tail).\nRegional specification is initiated by the presence of cytoplasmic determinants in one part of the zygote. The cells that contain the determinant become a signaling center and emit an inducing factor. Because the inducing factor is produced in one place, diffuses away, and decays, it forms a concentration gradient, high near the source cells and low further away. The remaining cells of the embryo, which do not contain the determinant, are competent to respond to different concentrations by upregulating specific developmental control genes. This results in a series of zones becoming set up, arranged at progressively greater distance from the signaling center. In each zone a different combination of developmental control genes is upregulated. These genes encode transcription factors which upregulate new combinations of gene activity in each region. Among other functions, these transcription factors control expression of genes conferring specific adhesive and motility properties on the cells in which they are active. Because of these different morphogenetic properties, the cells of each germ layer move to form sheets such that the ectoderm ends up on the outside, mesoderm in the middle, and endoderm on the inside. \nMorphogenetic movements not only change the shape and structure of the embryo, but by bringing cell sheets into new spatial relationships they also make possible new phases of signaling and response between them. In addition, first morphogenetic movements of embryogenesis, such as gastrulation, epiboly and twisting, directly activate pathways involved in endomesoderm specification through mechanotransduction processes. This property was suggested to be evolutionary inherited from endomesoderm specification as mechanically stimulated by marine environmental hydrodynamic flow in first animal organisms (first metazoa). Twisting along the body axis by a left-handed chirality is found in all chordates (including vertebrates) and is addressed by the axial twist theory.\nGrowth in embryos is mostly autonomous. For each territory of cells the growth rate is controlled by the combination of genes that are active. Free-living embryos do not grow in mass as they have no external food supply. But embryos fed by a placenta or extraembryonic yolk supply can grow very fast, and changes to relative growth rate between parts in these organisms help to produce the final overall anatomy.\nThe whole process needs to be coordinated in time and how this is controlled is not understood. There may be a master clock able to communicate with all parts of the embryo that controls the course of events, or timing may depend simply on local causal sequences of events.\nMetamorphosis.\nDevelopmental processes are very evident during the process of metamorphosis. This occurs in various types of animal such as insects, amphibians, some fish, and many marine invertebrates.Well-known examples are seen in frogs, which usually hatch as a tadpole and metamorphoses to an adult frog, and certain insects which hatch as a larva and then become remodeled to the adult form during a pupal stage.\nAll the developmental processes listed above occur during metamorphosis. Examples that have been especially well studied include tail loss and other changes in the tadpole of the frog \"Xenopus\", and the biology of the imaginal discs, which generate the adult body parts of the fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\".\nPlant development.\nPlant development is the process by which structures originate and mature as a plant grows. It is studied in plant anatomy and plant physiology as well as plant morphology.\nPlants constantly produce new tissues and structures throughout their life from meristems located at the tips of organs, or between mature tissues. Thus, a living plant always has embryonic tissues. By contrast, an animal embryo will very early produce all of the body parts that it will ever have in its life. When the animal is born (or hatches from its egg), it has all its body parts and from that point will only grow larger and more mature.\nThe properties of organization seen in a plant are emergent properties which are more than the sum of the individual parts. \"The assembly of these tissues and functions into an integrated multicellular organism yields not only the characteristics of the separate parts and processes but also quite a new set of characteristics which would not have been predictable on the basis of examination of the separate parts.\"\nGrowth.\nA vascular plant begins from a single celled zygote, formed by fertilisation of an egg cell by a sperm cell. From that point, it begins to divide to form a plant embryo through the process of embryogenesis. As this happens, the resulting cells will organize so that one end becomes the first root, while the other end forms the tip of the shoot. In seed plants, the embryo will develop one or more \"seed leaves\" (cotyledons). By the end of embryogenesis, the young plant will have all the parts necessary to begin its life.\nOnce the embryo germinates from its seed or parent plant, it begins to produce additional organs (leaves, stems, and roots) through the process of organogenesis. New roots grow from root meristems located at the tip of the root, and new stems and leaves grow from shoot meristems located at the tip of the shoot. Branching occurs when small clumps of cells left behind by the meristem, and which have not yet undergone cellular differentiation to form a specialized tissue, begin to grow as the tip of a new root or shoot. Growth from any such meristem at the tip of a root or shoot is termed primary growth and results in the lengthening of that root or shoot. Secondary growth results in widening of a root or shoot from divisions of cells in a cambium.\nIn addition to growth by cell division, a plant may grow through cell elongation. This occurs when individual cells or groups of cells grow longer. Not all plant cells will grow to the same length. When cells on one side of a stem grow longer and faster than cells on the other side, the stem will bend to the side of the slower growing cells as a result. This directional growth can occur via a plant's response to a particular stimulus, such as light (phototropism), gravity (gravitropism), water, (hydrotropism), and physical contact (thigmotropism).\nPlant growth and development are mediated by specific plant hormones and plant growth regulators (PGRs) (Ross et al. 1983). Endogenous hormone levels are influenced by plant age, cold hardiness, dormancy, and other metabolic conditions; photoperiod, drought, temperature, and other external environmental conditions; and exogenous sources of PGRs, e.g., externally applied and of rhizospheric origin.\nMorphological variation.\nPlants exhibit natural variation in their form and structure. While all organisms vary from individual to individual, plants exhibit an additional type of variation. Within a single individual, parts are repeated which may differ in form and structure from other similar parts. This variation is most easily seen in the leaves of a plant, though other organs such as stems and flowers may show similar variation. There are three primary causes of this variation: positional effects, environmental effects, and juvenility.\nEvolution of plant morphology.\nTranscription factors and transcriptional regulatory networks play key roles in plant morphogenesis and their evolution. During plant landing, many novel transcription factor families emerged and are preferentially wired into the networks of multicellular development, reproduction, and organ development, contributing to more complex morphogenesis of land plants.\nMost land plants share a common ancestor, multicellular algae. An example of the evolution of plant morphology is seen in charophytes. Studies have shown that charophytes have traits that are homologous to land plants. There are two main theories of the evolution of plant morphology, these theories are the homologous theory and the antithetic theory. The commonly accepted theory for the evolution of plant morphology is the antithetic theory. The antithetic theory states that the multiple mitotic divisions that take place before meiosis, cause the development of the sporophyte. Then the sporophyte will development as an independent organism.\nDevelopmental model organisms.\nMuch of developmental biology research in recent decades has focused on the use of a small number of model organisms. It has turned out that there is much conservation of developmental mechanisms across the animal kingdom. In early development different vertebrate species all use essentially the same inductive signals and the same genes encoding regional identity. Even invertebrates use a similar repertoire of signals and genes although the body parts formed are significantly different. Model organisms each have some particular experimental advantages which have enabled them to become popular among researchers. In one sense they are \"models\" for the whole animal kingdom, and in another sense they are \"models\" for human development, which is difficult to study directly for both ethical and practical reasons. Model organisms have been most useful for elucidating the broad nature of developmental mechanisms. The more detail is sought, the more they differ from each other and from humans.\nOthers.\nAlso popular for some purposes have been sea urchins and ascidians. For studies of regeneration urodele amphibians such as the axolotl \"Ambystoma mexicanum\" are used, and also planarian worms such as \"Schmidtea mediterranea\". Organoids have also been demonstrated as an efficient model for development. Plant development has focused on the thale cress \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" as a model organism."}
{"id": "8452", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8452", "title": "December 27", "text": ""}
{"id": "8453", "revid": "377299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8453", "title": "Dartmoor wildlife", "text": ""}
{"id": "8454", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8454", "title": "Double planet", "text": "In astronomy, a double planet (also binary planet) is a binary satellite system where both objects are planets, or planetary-mass objects, and whose joint barycenter is external to both planetary bodies. \nAlthough up to a third of the star systems in the Milky Way are binary, double planets are expected to be much rarer given the typical planet to satellite mass ratio is around 1:10000, they are influenced heavily by the gravitational pull of the parent star and according to the giant-impact hypothesis are gravitationally stable only under particular circumstances.\nThe Solar System does not have an official double planet, however the Earth\u2013Moon system is sometimes considered to be one. In promotional materials advertising the SMART-1 mission, the European Space Agency referred to the Earth\u2013Moon system as a double planet.\nSeveral dwarf planet candidates can be described as binary planets. At its 2006 General Assembly, the International Astronomical Union considered a proposal that Pluto and Charon be reclassified as a double planet, but the proposal was abandoned in favor of the current IAU definition of planet. Other trans-Neptunian systems with proportionally large planetary-mass satellites include Eris\u2013Dysnomia, Orcus\u2013Vanth and Varda\u2013Ilmar\u00eb.\nBinary asteroids with components of roughly equal mass are sometimes referred to as double minor planets. These include binary asteroids 69230 Hermes and 90 Antiope and binary Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) 79360 Sila\u2013Nunam and .\nDefinition of \"double planet\".\nThere is debate as to what criteria should be used to distinguish a \"double planet\" from a \"planet\u2013moon system\". The following are considerations.\nBoth bodies satisfy planet criterion.\nA definition proposed in the \"Astronomical Journal\" calls for both bodies to individually satisfy an orbit-clearing criterion in order to be called a double planet.\nMass ratios closer to 1.\nOne important consideration for defining \"double planets\" is the ratio of the masses of the two bodies. A mass ratio of 1 would indicate bodies of equal mass, and bodies with mass ratios closer to 1 are more attractive to label as \"doubles\". Using this definition, the satellites of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune can all easily be excluded; they all have masses less than 0.00025 () of the planets around which they revolve. Some dwarf planets, too, have satellites substantially less massive than the dwarf planets themselves.\nThe most notable exception is the Pluto\u2013Charon system. The Charon-to-Pluto mass ratio of 0.122 (\u2248 ) is close enough to 1 that Pluto and Charon have frequently been described by many scientists as \"double dwarf planets\" (\"double planets\" prior to the 2006 definition of \"planet\"). The International Astronomical Union (IAU) earlier classified Charon as a satellite of Pluto, but had also explicitly expressed the willingness to reconsider the bodies as double dwarf planets in the future. However, a 2006 IAU report classified Charon\u2013Pluto as a double planet. \nThe Moon-to-Earth mass ratio of 0.01230 (\u2248 ) is also notably close to 1 when compared to all other satellite-to-planet ratios. Consequently, some scientists view the Earth\u2013Moon system as a double planet as well, though this is a minority view. Eris's lone satellite, Dysnomia, has a radius somewhere around that of Eris; assuming similar densities (Dysnomia's compositional make-up may or may not differ substantially from Eris's), the mass ratio would be near , a value intermediate to the Moon\u2013Earth and Charon\u2013Pluto ratios.\nCenter-of-mass position.\nCurrently, the most commonly proposed definition for a double-planet system is one in which the barycenter, around which both bodies orbit, lies outside both bodies. Under this definition, Pluto and Charon are double dwarf planets, since they orbit a point clearly outside of Pluto, as visible in animations created from images of the \"New Horizons\" space probe in June 2015.\nUnder this definition, the Earth\u2013Moon system is not currently a double planet; although the Moon is massive enough to cause the Earth to make a noticeable revolution around this center of mass, this point nevertheless lies well within Earth. However, the Moon currently migrates outward from Earth at a rate of approximately per year; in a few billion years, the Earth\u2013Moon system's center of mass will lie outside Earth, which would make it a double-planet system.\nThe center of mass of the Jupiter\u2013Sun system lies outside the surface of the Sun, though arguing that Jupiter and the Sun are a double star is not analogous to arguing Pluto\u2013Charon is a double dwarf planet. Jupiter is too light to be a fusor; were it thirteen times heavier, it would achieve deuterium fusion and become a brown dwarf.\nTug-of-war value.\nIsaac Asimov suggested a distinction between planet\u2013moon and double-planet structures based in part on what he called a \"tug-of-war\" value, which does not consider their relative sizes. This quantity is simply the ratio of the force exerted on the smaller body by the larger (primary) body to the force exerted on the smaller body by the Sun. This can be shown to equal\nformula_1\nwhere is the mass of the primary (the larger body), is the mass of the Sun, is the distance between the smaller body and the Sun, and is the distance between the smaller body and the primary. The tug-of-war value does not rely on the mass of the satellite (the smaller body).\nThis formula actually reflects the relation of the gravitational effects on the smaller body from the larger body and from the Sun. The tug-of-war figure for Saturn's moon Titan is 380, which means that Saturn's hold on Titan is 380 times as strong as the Sun's hold on Titan. Titan's tug-of-war value may be compared with that of Saturn's moon Phoebe, which has a tug-of-war value of just 3.5; that is, Saturn's hold on Phoebe is only 3.5 times as strong as the Sun's hold on Phoebe.\nAsimov calculated tug-of-war values for several satellites of the planets. He showed that even the largest gas giant, Jupiter, had only a slightly better hold than the Sun on its outer captured satellites, some with tug-of-war values not much higher than one. In nearly every one of Asimov's calculations the tug-of-war value was found to be greater than one, so in those cases the Sun loses the tug-of-war with the planets. The one exception was Earth's Moon, where the Sun wins the tug-of-war with a value of 0.46, which means that Earth's hold on the Moon is less than half as strong as the Sun's. Asimov included this with his other arguments that Earth and the Moon should be considered a binary planet.\nSee the Path of Earth and Moon around Sun section in the \"Orbit of the Moon\" article for a more detailed explanation.\nThis definition of double planet depends on the pair's distance from the Sun. If the Earth\u2013Moon system happened to orbit farther away from the Sun than it does now, then Earth would win the tug of war. For example, at the orbit of Mars, the Moon's tug-of-war value would be 1.05. Also, several tiny moons discovered since Asimov's proposal would qualify as double planets by this argument. Neptune's small outer moons Neso and Psamathe, for example, have tug-of-war values of 0.42 and 0.44, less than that of Earth's Moon. Yet their masses are tiny compared to Neptune's, with an estimated ratio of 1.5 () and 0.4 ().\nFormation of the system.\nA final consideration is the way in which the two bodies came to form a system. Both the Earth\u2013Moon and Pluto\u2013Charon systems are thought to have been formed as a result of giant impacts: one body was impacted by a second body, resulting in a debris disk, and through accretion, either two new bodies formed or one new body formed, with the larger body remaining (but changed). However, a giant impact is not a sufficient condition for two bodies being \"double planets\" because such impacts can also produce tiny satellites, such as the four small outer satellites of Pluto.\nA now-abandoned hypothesis for the origin of the Moon was actually called the \"double-planet hypothesis\"; the idea was that the Earth and the Moon formed in the same region of the Solar System's proto-planetary disk, forming a system under gravitational interaction. This idea, too, is a problematic condition for defining two bodies as \"double planets\" because planets can \"capture\" moons through gravitational interaction. For example, the moons of Mars (Phobos and Deimos) are thought to be asteroids captured long ago by Mars. Such a definition would also deem Neptune\u2013Triton a double planet, since Triton was a Kuiper belt body the same size and of similar composition to Pluto, later captured by Neptune.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\nCitations\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "8456", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8456", "title": "Denaturation (biochemistry)", "text": "In biochemistry, denaturation is a process in which proteins or nucleic acids lose folded structure present in their native state due to various factors, including application of some external stress or compound, such as a strong acid or base, a concentrated inorganic salt, an organic solvent (e.g., alcohol or chloroform), agitation and radiation, or heat. If proteins in a living cell are denatured, this results in disruption of cell activity and possibly cell death. Protein denaturation is also a consequence of cell death. Denatured proteins can exhibit a wide range of characteristics, from conformational change and loss of solubility or dissociation of cofactors to aggregation due to the exposure of hydrophobic groups. The loss of solubility as a result of denaturation is called \"coagulation\". Denatured proteins lose their 3D structure, and therefore, cannot function.\nProper protein folding is key to whether a globular or membrane protein can do its job correctly; it must be folded into the native shape to function. However, hydrogen bonds and cofactor-protein binding, which play a crucial role in folding, are rather weak, and thus, easily affected by heat, acidity, varying salt concentrations, chelating agents, and other stressors which can denature the protein. This is one reason why cellular homeostasis is physiologically necessary in most life forms.\nCommon examples.\nWhen food is cooked, some of its proteins become denatured. This is why boiled eggs become hard and cooked meat becomes firm.\nA classic example of denaturing in proteins comes from egg whites, which are typically largely egg albumins in water. Fresh from the eggs, egg whites are transparent and liquid. Cooking the thermally unstable whites turns them opaque, forming an interconnected solid mass. The same transformation can be effected with a denaturing chemical. Pouring egg whites into a beaker of acetone will also turn egg whites translucent and solid. The skin that forms on curdled milk is another common example of denatured protein. The cold appetizer known as ceviche is prepared by chemically \"cooking\" raw fish and shellfish in an acidic citrus marinade, without heat.\nProtein denaturation.\nDenatured proteins can exhibit a wide range of characteristics, from loss of solubility to protein aggregation.\nBackground.\nProteins or polypeptides are polymers of amino acids. A protein is created by ribosomes that \"read\" RNA that is encoded by codons in the gene and assemble the requisite amino acid combination from the genetic instruction, in a process known as translation. The newly created protein strand then undergoes posttranslational modification, in which additional atoms or molecules are added, for example copper, zinc, or iron. Once this post-translational modification process has been completed, the protein begins to fold (sometimes spontaneously and sometimes with enzymatic assistance), curling up on itself so that hydrophobic elements of the protein are buried deep inside the structure and hydrophilic elements end up on the outside. The final shape of a protein determines how it interacts with its environment.\nProtein folding consists of a balance between a substantial amount of weak intra-molecular interactions within a protein (Hydrophobic, electrostatic, and Van Der Waals Interactions) and protein-solvent interactions. As a result, this process is heavily reliant on environmental state that the protein resides in. These environmental conditions include, and are not limited to, temperature, salinity, pressure, and the solvents that happen to be involved. Consequently, any exposure to extreme stresses (e.g. heat or radiation, high inorganic salt concentrations, strong acids and bases) can disrupt a protein's interaction and inevitably lead to denaturation.\nWhen a protein is denatured, secondary and tertiary structures are altered but the peptide bonds of the primary structure between the amino acids are left intact. Since all structural levels of the protein determine its function, the protein can no longer perform its function once it has been denatured. This is in contrast to intrinsically unstructured proteins, which are unfolded in their native state, but still functionally active and tend to fold upon binding to their biological target.\nHow denaturation occurs at levels of protein structure.\nLoss of function.\nMost biological substrates lose their biological function when denatured. For example, enzymes lose their activity, because the substrates can no longer bind to the active site, and because amino acid residues involved in stabilizing substrates' transition states are no longer positioned to be able to do so. The denaturing process and the associated loss of activity can be measured using techniques such as dual-polarization interferometry, CD, QCM-D and MP-SPR.\nLoss of activity due to heavy metals and metalloids.\nBy targeting proteins, heavy metals have been known to disrupt the function and activity carried out by proteins. Heavy metals fall into categories consisting of transition metals as well as a select amount of metalloid. These metals, when interacting with native, folded proteins, tend to play a role in obstructing their biological activity. This interference can be carried out in a different number of ways. These heavy metals can form a complex with the functional side chain groups present in a protein or form bonds to free thiols. Heavy metals also play a role in oxidizing amino acid side chains present in protein. Along with this, when interacting with metalloproteins, heavy metals can dislocate and replace key metal ions. As a result, heavy metals can interfere with folded proteins, which can strongly deter protein stability and activity.\nReversibility and irreversibility.\nIn many cases, denaturation is reversible (the proteins can regain their native state when the denaturing influence is removed). This process can be called renaturation. This understanding has led to the notion that all the information needed for proteins to assume their native state was encoded in the primary structure of the protein, and hence in the DNA that codes for the protein, the so-called \"Anfinsen's thermodynamic hypothesis\".\nDenaturation can also be irreversible. This irreversibility is typically a kinetic, not thermodynamic irreversibility, as a folded protein generally has lower free energy than when it is unfolded. Through kinetic irreversibility, the fact that the protein is stuck in a local minimum can stop it from ever refolding after it has been irreversibly denatured.\nProtein denaturation due to pH.\nDenaturation can also be caused by changes in the pH which can affect the chemistry of the amino acids and their residues. The ionizable groups in amino acids are able to become ionized when changes in pH occur. A pH change to more acidic or more basic conditions can induce unfolding. Acid-induced unfolding often occurs between pH 2 and 5, base-induced unfolding usually requires pH 10 or higher.\nNucleic acid denaturation.\nNucleic acids (including RNA and DNA) are nucleotide polymers synthesized by polymerase enzymes during either transcription or DNA replication. Following 5'-3' synthesis of the backbone, individual nitrogenous bases are capable of interacting with one another via hydrogen bonding, thus allowing for the formation of higher-order structures. Nucleic acid denaturation occurs when hydrogen bonding between nucleotides is disrupted, and results in the separation of previously annealed strands. For example, denaturation of DNA due to high temperatures results in the disruption of base pairs and the separation of the double stranded helix into two single strands. Nucleic acid strands are capable of re-annealling when \"normal\" conditions are restored, but if restoration occurs too quickly, the nucleic acid strands may re-anneal imperfectly resulting in the improper pairing of bases.\nBiologically-induced denaturation.\nThe non-covalent interactions between antiparallel strands in DNA can be broken in order to \"open\" the double helix when biologically important mechanisms such as DNA replication, transcription, DNA repair or protein binding are set to occur. The area of partially separated DNA is known as the denaturation bubble, which can be more specifically defined as the opening of a DNA double helix through the coordinated separation of base pairs.\nThe first model that attempted to describe the thermodynamics of the denaturation bubble was introduced in 1966 and called the Poland-Scheraga Model. This model describes the denaturation of DNA strands as a function of temperature. As the temperature increases, the hydrogen bonds between the base pairs are increasingly disturbed and \"denatured loops\" begin to form. However, the Poland-Scheraga Model is now considered elementary because it fails to account for the confounding implications of DNA sequence, chemical composition, stiffness and torsion.\nRecent thermodynamic studies have inferred that the lifetime of a singular denaturation bubble ranges from 1 microsecond to 1 millisecond. This information is based on established timescales of DNA replication and transcription. Currently, biophysical and biochemical research studies are being performed to more fully elucidate the thermodynamic details of the denaturation bubble.\nDenaturation due to chemical agents.\nWith polymerase chain reaction (PCR) being among the most popular contexts in which DNA denaturation is desired, heating is the most frequent method of denaturation. Other than denaturation by heat, nucleic acids can undergo the denaturation process through various chemical agents such as formamide, guanidine, sodium salicylate, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), propylene glycol, and urea. These chemical denaturing agents lower the melting temperature (Tm) by competing for hydrogen bond donors and acceptors with pre-existing nitrogenous base pairs. Some agents are even able to induce denaturation at room temperature. For example, alkaline agents (e.g. NaOH) have been shown to denature DNA by changing pH and removing hydrogen-bond contributing protons. These denaturants have been employed to make Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis gel (DGGE), which promotes denaturation of nucleic acids in order to eliminate the influence of nucleic acid shape on their electrophoretic mobility.\nChemical denaturation as an alternative.\nThe optical activity (absorption and scattering of light) and hydrodynamic properties (translational diffusion, sedimentation coefficients, and rotational correlation times) of formamide denatured nucleic acids are similar to those of heat-denatured nucleic acids. Therefore, depending on the desired effect, chemically denaturing DNA can provide a gentler procedure for denaturing nucleic acids than denaturation induced by heat. Studies comparing different denaturation methods such as heating, beads mill of different bead sizes, probe sonication, and chemical denaturation show that chemical denaturation can provide quicker denaturation compared to the other physical denaturation methods described. Particularly in cases where rapid renaturation is desired, chemical denaturation agents can provide an ideal alternative to heating. For example, DNA strands denatured with alkaline agents such as NaOH renature as soon as phosphate buffer is added.\nDenaturation due to air.\nSmall, electronegative molecules such as nitrogen and oxygen, which are the primary gases in air, significantly impact the ability of surrounding molecules to participate in hydrogen bonding. These molecules compete with surrounding hydrogen bond acceptors for hydrogen bond donors, therefore acting as \"hydrogen bond breakers\" and weakening interactions between surrounding molecules in the environment. Antiparellel strands in DNA double helices are non-covalently bound by hydrogen bonding between base pairs; nitrogen and oxygen therefore maintain the potential to weaken the integrity of DNA when exposed to air. As a result, DNA strands exposed to air require less force to separate and exemplify lower melting temperatures.\nApplications.\nMany laboratory techniques rely on the ability of nucleic acid strands to separate. By understanding the properties of nucleic acid denaturation, the following methods were created:\nDenaturants.\nProtein denaturants.\nAcids.\nAcidic protein denaturants include:\nBases.\nBases work similarly to acids in denaturation. They include:\nSolvents.\nMost organic solvents are denaturing, including:\nCross-linking reagents.\nCross-linking agents for proteins include:\nChaotropic agents.\nChaotropic agents include:\nDisulfide bond reducers.\nAgents that break disulfide bonds by reduction include:\nChemically reactive agents.\nAgents such as hydrogen peroxide, elemental chlorine, hypochlorous acid (chlorine water), bromine, bromine water, iodine, nitric and oxidising acids, and ozone react with sensitive moieties such as sulfide/thiol, activated aromatic rings (phenylalanine) in effect damage the protein and render it useless.\nNucleic acid denaturants.\nChemical.\nAcidic nucleic acid denaturants include:\nBasic nucleic acid denaturants include:\nOther nucleic acid denaturants include:"}
{"id": "8457", "revid": "6334945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8457", "title": "Diploidy", "text": ""}
{"id": "8459", "revid": "1270635740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8459", "title": "Dwight L. Moody", "text": "Dwight Lyman Moody (February 5, 1837 \u2013 December 22, 1899), also known as D.\u00a0L. Moody, was an American evangelist and publisher connected with Keswickianism, who founded the Moody Church, Northfield School and Mount Hermon School in Massachusetts (now Northfield Mount Hermon School), Moody Bible Institute, and Moody Publishers. One of his most famous quotes was \"Faith makes all things possible... Love makes all things easy.\" Moody gave up his lucrative boot and shoe business to devote his life to revivalism, working first in the Civil War with Union troops through YMCA in the United States Christian Commission. In Chicago, he built one of the major evangelical centers in the nation, which is still active. Working with singer Ira Sankey, he toured the country and the British Isles, drawing large crowds with a dynamic speaking style.\nEarly life.\nDwight Moody was born in Northfield, Massachusetts, as the seventh child of a large family. His father, Edwin J. Moody (1800\u20131841), was a small farmer and stonemason. His mother was Betsey Moody (n\u00e9e Holton; 1805\u20131896). They had five sons and a daughter before Dwight's birth. His father died when Dwight was age four; fraternal twins, a boy, and a girl were born one month after the father's death. Their mother struggled to support the nine children, but she still found it necessary to send some off to work for their room and board. Dwight too was sent off, where he received cornmeal porridge, and milk three times a day. He complained to his mother, but when she learned that he was getting all he wanted to eat, she sent him back. During this time, she continued to send the children to church. Together with his eight siblings, Dwight was raised in the Unitarian church. His oldest brother ran away and was not heard from by the family until many years later.\nWhen Moody turned 17, he moved to Boston to work (after receiving many job rejections locally) in an uncle's shoe store. One of the uncle's requirements was that Moody attend the Congregational Church of Mount Vernon, where Dr. Edward Norris Kirk served as the pastor. In April 1855 Moody was converted to evangelical Christianity when his Sunday school teacher, Edward Kimball, talked to him about how much God loved him. His conversion sparked the start of his career as an evangelist. Moody first applied to the church in May 1855, but he was not received as a church member until May 4, 1856.\nAccording to Moody's memoir, his teacher, Edward Kimball, said:\nCivil War.\nD. L. Moody \"could not conscientiously enlist\" in the Union Army during the Civil War, later describing himself as \"a Quaker\" in this respect. After the Civil War started, he became involved with the United States Christian Commission of YMCA. He paid nine visits to the battlefront, being present among the Union soldiers after the Battle of Shiloh (a.k.a. Pittsburg Landing) and the Battle of Stones River; he also entered Richmond, Virginia, with the troops of General Grant.\nOn August 28, 1862, Moody married Emma C. Revell, with whom he had a daughter, Emma Reynolds Moody, and two sons, William Revell Moody and Paul Dwight Moody.\nChicago and the postwar years.\nIn 1858, he started a Sunday school. \nThe growing Sunday School congregation needed a permanent home, so Moody started a church in Chicago, the Illinois Street Church in 1864.\nIn June 1871 at an International Sunday School Convention in Indianapolis, Indiana, Dwight Moody met Ira D. Sankey. He was a gospel singer, with whom Moody soon began to cooperate and collaborate.\nFour months later, in October 1871, the Great Chicago Fire destroyed Moody's church building, as well as his house and those of most of his congregation. Many had to flee the flames, saving only their lives, and ending up completely destitute. Moody, reporting on the disaster, said about his own situation that: \"...he saved nothing but his reputation and his Bible.\"\nIn the years after the fire, Moody's wealthy Chicago patron John V. Farwell tried to persuade him to make his permanent home in the city, offering to build a new house for Moody and his family. But the newly famous Moody, also sought by supporters in New York, Philadelphia, and elsewhere, chose a tranquil farm he had purchased near his birthplace in Northfield, Massachusetts. He felt he could better recover from his lengthy preaching trips in a rural setting.\nNorthfield became an important location in evangelical Christian history in the late 19th century as Moody organized summer conferences. These were led and attended by prominent Christian preachers and evangelists from around the world. Western Massachusetts has had a rich evangelical tradition including Jonathan Edwards preaching in colonial Northampton and C.I. Scofield preaching in Northfield. A prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Moody founded Moores Corner Church, in Leverett, Massachusetts.\nMoody founded two schools here: Northfield School for Girls, founded in 1879, and the Mount Hermon School for Boys, founded in 1881. In the late 20th century, these merged, forming today's co-educational, nondenominational Northfield Mount Hermon School.\nEvangelistic travels.\nDuring a trip to the United Kingdom in the spring of 1872, Moody became well known as an evangelist. Literary works published by the Moody Bible Institute claim that he was the greatest evangelist of the 19th century. He preached almost a hundred times and came into communion with the Plymouth Brethren. On several occasions, he filled stadia of a capacity of 2,000 to 4,000. According to his memoir, in the Botanic Gardens Palace, he attracted an audience estimated at between 15,000 and 30,000.\nThat turnout continued throughout 1874 and 1875, with crowds of thousands at all of his meetings. During his visit to Scotland, Moody was helped and encouraged by Andrew A. Bonar. The famous London Baptist preacher Charles Spurgeon invited him to speak, and he promoted the American as well. When Moody returned to the US, he was said to frequently attract crowds of 12,000 to 20,000, such crowds being as common as they had been in England. President Grant and some of his cabinet officials attended a Moody meeting on January 19, 1876. Moody held evangelistic meetings from Boston to New York, throughout New England, and as far west as San Francisco, also visiting other West Coast towns from Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada to San Diego.\nMoody aided the work of cross-cultural evangelism by promoting \"The Wordless Book\", a teaching tool Charles Spurgeon had developed in 1866. In 1875, Moody added a fourth color to the design of the three-color evangelistic device: gold \u2014 to \"represent heaven.\" This \"book\" has been and is still used to teach uncounted thousands of illiterate people, young and old, around the globe about the gospel message.\nMoody visited Britain with Ira D. Sankey, with Moody preaching and Sankey singing at meetings. Together they published books of Christian hymns. In 1883, they visited Edinburgh and raised \u00a310,000 for the building of a new home for the Carrubbers Close Mission. Moody later preached at the laying of the foundation stone for what is now called the Carrubbers Christian Centre, one of the few buildings on the Royal Mile which continues to be used for its original purpose.\nMoody greatly influenced the cause of cross-cultural Christian missions after he met Hudson Taylor, a pioneer missionary to China. He actively supported the China Inland Mission and encouraged many of his congregation to volunteer for service overseas.\nInternational acclaim.\nHis influence was felt among Swedes. Being of English heritage, never visiting Sweden or any other Scandinavian country, and never speaking a word of Swedish, nonetheless, he became a hero revivalist among Swedish Mission Friends () in Sweden and America.\nNews of Moody's large revival campaigns in Great Britain from 1873 through 1875 traveled quickly to Sweden, making \"Mr. Moody\" a household name in homes of many Mission Friends. Moody's sermons published in Sweden were distributed in books, newspapers, and colporteur tracts, and they led to the spread of Sweden's \"Moody fever\" from 1875 through 1880.\nHe preached his last sermon on November 16, 1899, in Kansas City, Missouri. Becoming ill, he returned home by train to Northfield. During the preceding several months, friends had observed he had added some to his already ample frame. Although his illness was never diagnosed, it has been speculated that he suffered from congestive heart failure. He died on December 22, 1899, surrounded by his family. Already installed as the leader of the Chicago Bible Institute, R. A. Torrey succeeded Moody as its pastor.\nLegacy.\nReligious historian James Findlay says that:\nTen years after Moody's death the Chicago Avenue Church was renamed the Moody Church in his honor, and the Chicago Bible Institute was likewise renamed the Moody Bible Institute.\nDwight D. Eisenhower, who was born in 1890, was named after him. During World War II, the Liberty ship was built in Panama City, Florida, and named in his honor. "}
{"id": "8460", "revid": "1271342736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8460", "title": "Dieting", "text": "Dieting is the practice of eating food in a regulated way to decrease, maintain, or increase body weight, or to prevent and treat diseases such as diabetes and obesity. As weight loss depends on calorie intake, different kinds of calorie-reduced diets, such as those emphasising particular macronutrients (low-fat, low-carbohydrate, etc.), have been shown to be no more effective than one another. As weight regain is common, diet success is best predicted by long-term adherence. Regardless, the outcome of a diet can vary widely depending on the individual.\nThe first popular diet was \"Banting\", named after William Banting. In his 1863 pamphlet, \"Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public\", he outlined the details of a particular low-carbohydrate, low-calorie diet that led to his own dramatic weight loss.\nSome guidelines recommend dieting to lose weight for people with weight-related health problems, but not for otherwise healthy people. One survey found that almost half of all American adults attempt to lose weight through dieting, including 66.7% of obese adults and 26.5% of normal weight or underweight adults. Dieters who are overweight (but not obese), who are normal weight, or who are underweight may have an increased mortality rate as a result of dieting.\nHistory.\nThe word \"diet\" comes from the Greek \"\u03b4\u03af\u03b1\u03b9\u03c4\u03b1 (diaita)\", which represents a notion of a whole way healthy lifestyle including both mental and physical health, rather than a narrow weight-loss regimen.\nOne of the first dietitians was the English doctor George Cheyne. He himself was tremendously overweight and would constantly eat large quantities of rich food and drink. He began a meatless diet, taking only milk and vegetables, and soon regained his health. He began publicly recommending his diet for everyone who was obese. In 1724, he wrote \"An Essay of Health and Long Life\", in which he advises exercise and fresh air and avoiding luxury foods.\nThe Scottish military surgeon, John Rollo, published \"Notes of a Diabetic Case\" in 1797. It described the benefits of a meat diet for those with diabetes, basing this recommendation on Matthew Dobson's discovery of glycosuria in diabetes mellitus. By means of Dobson's testing procedure (for glucose in the urine) Rollo worked out a diet that had success for what is now called type 2 diabetes.\nThe first popular diet was \"Banting\", named after the English undertaker William Banting. In 1863, he wrote a booklet called \"Letter on Corpulence, Addressed to the Public\", which contained the particular plan for the diet he had successfully followed. His own diet was four meals per day, consisting of meat, greens, fruits, and dry wine. The emphasis was on avoiding sugar, sweet foods, starch, beer, milk and butter. Banting's pamphlet was popular for years to come, and would be used as a model for modern diets. The pamphlet's popularity was such that the question \"Do you bant?\" referred to his method, and eventually to dieting in general. His booklet remains in print as of 2007.\nThe first weight-loss book to promote calorie counting, and the first weight-loss book to become a bestseller, was the 1918 \"\" by American physician and columnist Lulu Hunt Peters.\nIt was estimated that over 1000 weight-loss diets have been developed up to 2014.\nTypes.\nA restricted diet is most commonly pursued by those who want to lose weight. Some people follow a diet to gain weight (such as people who are underweight or who are attempting to gain more muscle). Diets can also be used to maintain a stable body weight or to improve health.\nLow-fat.\nLow-fat diets involve the reduction of the percentage of fat in one's diet. Calorie consumption is reduced because less fat is consumed. Diets of this type include NCEP Step I and II. A meta-analysis of 16 trials of 2\u201312\u00a0months' duration found that low-fat diets (without intentional restriction of caloric intake) resulted in average weight loss of over habitual eating.\nA low-fat, plant-based diet has been found to improve control of weight, blood sugar levels, and cardiovascular health.\nLow-calorie.\nLow-calorie diets usually produce an energy deficit of 500\u20131,000 calories per day, which can result in a weight loss per week. The National Institutes of Health reviewed 34 randomized controlled trials to determine the effectiveness of low-calorie diets. They found that these diets lowered total body mass by 8% in the short term, over 3\u201312 months. Women doing low-calorie diets should have at least 1,000 calories per day and men should have approximately 1,200 calories per day. These caloric intake values vary depending on additional factors, such as age and weight.\nVery low-calorie.\nVery low calorie diets provide 200\u2013800 calories per day, maintaining protein intake but limiting calories from both fat and carbohydrates. They subject the body to starvation and produce an average loss of per week. \"2-4-6-8\", a popular diet of this variety, follows a four-day cycle in which only 200 calories are consumed the first day, 400 the second day, 600 the third day, 800 the fourth day, and then totally fasting, after which the cycle repeats. There is some evidence that these diets results in considerable weight loss. These diets are not recommended for general use and should be reserved for the management of obesity as they are associated with adverse side effects such as loss of lean muscle mass, increased risks of gout, and electrolyte imbalances. People attempting these diets must be monitored closely by a physician to prevent complications.\nThe concept of crash dieting is to drastically reduce calories, using a very-low-calorie diet. Crash dieting can be highly dangerous because it can cause various kind of issues for the human body. Crash dieting can produce weight loss but without professional supervision all along, the extreme reduction in calories and potential unbalance in the diet's composition can lead to detrimental effects, including sudden death.\nFasting.\nFasting is the act of intentional taking a long time interval between meals. Lengthy fasting (multiple days in a week) might be dangerous due to the risk of malnutrition. During prolonged fasting or very low calorie diets the reduction of blood glucose, the preferred energy source of the brain, causes the body to deplete its glycogen stores. Once glycogen is depleted the body begins to fuel the brain using ketones, while also metabolizing body protein (including but not limited to skeletal muscle) to be used to synthesize sugars for use as energy by the rest of the body. Most experts believe that a prolonged fast can lead to muscle wasting, although some dispute this. The use of short-term fasting, or various forms of intermittent fasting, have been used as a form of dieting to circumvent the issues of long fasting.\nIntermittent fasting commonly takes the form of periodic fasting, alternate-day fasting, time-restricted feeding, and/or religious fasting. It can be a form of reduced-calorie dieting but pertains entirely to when the metabolism is activated during the day for digestion. The changes to eating habits on a regular basis do not have to be severe or absolutely restrictive to see benefits to cardiovascular health, such as improved glucose metabolism, reduced inflammation, and reduced blood pressure. Studies have suggested that for people in intensive care, an intermittent fasting regimen might \"[preserve] energy supply to vital organs and tissues... [and] powerfully activates cell-protective and cellular repair pathways, including autophagy, mitochondrial biogenesis and antioxidant defenses, which may promote resilience to cellular stress.\" The effects of decreased serum glucose and depleted hepatic glycogen causing the body to switch to ketogenic metabolism are similar to the effects of reduced carbohydrate-based diets. There is evidence demonstrating profound metabolic benefits of intermittent fasting in rodents. However, evidence is lacking or contradictory in humans and requires further investigation, especially over the long-term. Some evidence suggests that intermittent restriction of caloric intake has no weight-loss advantages over continuous calorie restriction plans. For adults, fasting diets appear to be safe and tolerable, however there is a possibility that periods of fasting and hunger could lead to overeating and to weight regain after the fasting period. Adverse effects of fasting are often moderate and include halitosis, fatigue, weakness, and headaches. Fasting diets may be harmful to children and the elderly.\nExclusion Diet.\nThis type of diet is based on the restriction of specific foods or food groups. Examples include gluten-free, Paleo, plant-based, and Mediterranean diets.\nPlant-based diets include vegetarian and vegan diets, and can range from the simple exclusion of meat products to diets that only include raw vegetables, fruits, nuts, seeds, legumes, and sprouted grains. Exclusion of animal products can reduce the intake of certain nutrients, which might lead to nutritional deficiencies of protein, iron, zinc, calcium, and vitamins D and B12. Therefore, long term implementation of a plant-based diet requires effective counseling and nutritional supplementation as necessary. Plant-based diets are effective for short-term treatment of overweight and obesity, likely due to the high consumption of low energy density foods. However, evidence for long-term efficacy is limited.\nThe Paleo diet includes foods that it identifies as having been available to Paleolithic peoples including meat, nuts, eggs, some oils, fresh fruits, and vegetables. Overall, it is high in protein and moderate in fats and carbohydrates. Some limited evidence suggests various health benefits and effective weight loss with this diet. However, similar to the plant-based diet, the Paleo diet has potential nutritional deficiency risks, specifically with vitamin D, calcium, and iodine.\nGluten-free diets are often used for weight loss but little has been studied about the efficacy of this diet and metabolic mechanism for its effectiveness is unclear.\nThe Mediterranean diet is characterized by high consumption of vegetables, fruits, legumes, whole-grain cereals, seafood, olive oil, and nuts. Red meat, dairy and alcohol are only recommended in moderation. Studies show that the Mediterranean diet is associated with short term as well as long term weight loss in addition to health and metabolic benefits.\nDetox.\nDetox diets are promoted with unsubstantiated claims that they can eliminate \"toxins\" from the human body. Many of these diets use herbs or celery and other juicy low-calorie vegetables. Detox diets can include fasting or exclusion (as in juice fasting). Detox diets tend to result in short-term weight loss (because of calorie restriction), followed by weight gain.\nEnvironmentally sustainable.\nAnother kind of diet focuses not on the dieter's health effects, but on its environment. The One Blue Dot plan of the BDA offers recommendations towards reducing diets' environmental impacts, by:\nEffectiveness.\nSeveral diets are effective for short-term weight loss for obese individuals, with diet success most predicted by adherence and little effect resulting from the type or brand of diet. As weight maintenance depends on calorie intake, diets emphasising certain macronutrients (low-fat, low-carbohydrate, etc.) have been shown to be no more effective than one another and no more effective than diets that maintain a typical mix of foods with smaller portions and perhaps some substitutions (e.g. low-fat milk, or less salad dressing). A meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials found no difference between low-calorie, low-carbohydrate, and low-fat diets in terms of short-term weight loss, with a 2\u20134 kilogram weight loss over 12\u201318 months in all studies. Diets that severely restrict calorie intake do not lead to long term weight loss. Extreme diets may, in some cases, lead to malnutrition.\nA major challenge regarding weight loss and dieting relates to compliance. While dieting can effectively promote weight loss in the short term, the intervention is hard to maintain over time and suppresses skeletal muscle thermogenesis. Suppressed thermogenesis accelerates weight regain once the diet stops, unless that phase is accompanied by a well-timed exercise intervention, as described by the Summermatter cycle. Most diet studies do not assess long-term weight loss.\nSome studies have found that, on average, short-term dieting results in a \"meaningful\" long-term weight-loss, although limited because of gradual 1 to 2\u00a0kg/year weight regain. Because people who do not participate in weight-loss programs also tend to gain weight over time, and baseline data from such \"untreated\" participants are typically not included in diet studies, it is possible that diets do result in lower weights in the long-term relative to people who do not diet. Others have suggested that dieting is ineffective as a long-term intervention. For each individual, the results will be different, with some even regaining more weight than they lost, while a few others achieve a tremendous loss, so that the \"average weight loss\" of a diet is not indicative of the results other dieters may achieve. A 2001 meta-analysis of 29 American studies found that participants of structured weight-loss programs maintained an average of 23% (3\u00a0kg) of their initial weight loss after five years, representing a sustained 3.2% reduction in body mass. Unfortunately, patients are generally unhappy with weight loss of &lt;10%, and reductions even as high as 10% are insufficient for changing someone with an \"obese\" BMI to a \"normal weight\" BMI.\nPartly because diets do not reliably produce long-term positive health outcomes, some argue against using weight loss as a goal, preferring other measures of health such as improvements in cardiovascular biomarkers, sometimes called a Health at Every Size (HAES) approach or a \"weight neutral\" approach.\nLong term losses from dieting are best maintained with continuing professional support, long term increases in physical activity, the use of anti-obesity medications, continued use of meal replacements, and additional periods of dieting to undo weight regain. The most effective approach to weight loss is an in-person, high-intensity, comprehensive lifestyle intervention: overweight or obese adults should maintain regular (at least monthly) contact with a trained interventionalist who can help them engage in exercise, monitor their body weight, and reduce their calorie consumption. Even with high-intensity, comprehensive lifestyle interventions (consisting of diet, physical exercise, and bimonthly or even more frequent contact with trained interventionists), gradual weight regain of 1\u20132\u00a0kg/year still occurs. For patients at high medical risk, bariatric surgery or medications may be warranted in addition to the lifestyle intervention, as dieting by itself may not lead to sustained weight loss.\nMany studies overestimate the benefits of calorie restriction because the studies confound exercise and diet (testing the effects of diet and exercise as a combined intervention, rather than the effects of diet alone).\nAdverse effects.\nIncreased mortality rate.\nA number of studies have found that intentional weight loss is associated with an increase in mortality in people without weight-related health problems. A 2009 meta-analysis of 26 studies found that \"intentional weight loss had a small benefit for individuals classified as unhealthy (with obesity-related risk factors), especially unhealthy obese, but appeared to be associated with slightly increased mortality for healthy individuals, and for those who were overweight but not obese.\"\nDietary supplements.\nDue to extreme or unbalanced diets, dietary supplements are sometimes taken in an attempt to replace missing vitamins or minerals. While some supplements could be helpful for people eating an unbalanced diet (if replacing essential nutrients, for example), overdosing on any dietary supplement can cause a range of side effects depending on the supplement and dose that is taken. Supplements should not replace foods that are important to a healthy diet.\nEating disorders.\nIn an editorial for \"Psychological Medicine\", George Hsu concludes that dieting is likely to lead to the development of an eating disorder in the presence of certain risk factors. A 2006 study found that dieting and unhealthy weight-control behaviors were predictive of obesity and eating disorders five years later, with the authors recommending a \"shift away from dieting and drastic weight-control measures toward the long-term implementation of healthful eating and physical activity\".\nMechanism.\nWhen the body is expending more energy than it is consuming (e.g. when exercising), the body's cells rely on internally stored energy sources, such as complex carbohydrates and fats, for energy. The first source to which the body turns is glycogen (by glycogenolysis). Glycogen is a complex carbohydrate, 65% of which is stored in skeletal muscles and the remainder in the liver (totaling about 2,000 kcal in the whole body). It is created from the excess of ingested macronutrients, mainly carbohydrates. When glycogen is nearly depleted, the body begins lipolysis, the mobilization and catabolism of fat stores for energy. In this process fats, obtained from adipose tissue, or fat cells, are broken down into glycerol and fatty acids, which can be used to generate energy. The primary by-products of metabolism are carbon dioxide and water; carbon dioxide is expelled through the respiratory system.\nSet-Point Theory.\nThe Set-Point Theory, first introduced in 1953, postulated that each body has a preprogrammed fixed weight, with regulatory mechanisms to compensate. This theory was quickly adopted and used to explain failures in developing effective and sustained weight loss procedures. A 2019 systematic review of multiple weight change procedures, including alternate day fasting and time-restricted feeding but also exercise and overeating, found systematic \"energetic errors\" for all these procedures. This shows that the body cannot precisely compensate for errors in energy/calorie intake, countering the Set-Point Theory and potentially explaining both weight loss and weight gain such as obesity. This review was conducted on short-term studies, therefore such a mechanism cannot be excluded in the long term, as evidence is currently lacking on this timeframe.\nMethods.\nMeal timing.\nA meal timing schedule is known to be an important factor of any diet. Recent evidence suggest that new scheduling strategies, such as intermittent fasting or skipping meals, and strategically placed snacks before meals, may be recommendable to reduce cardiovascular risks as part of a broader lifestyle and dietary change.\nFood diary.\nA 2008 study published in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine showed that dieters who kept a daily food diary (or diet journal), lost twice as much weight as those who did not keep a food log, suggesting that if a person records their eating, they are more aware of what they consume and therefore eat fewer calories.\nWater.\nA 2009 review found limited evidence suggesting that encouraging water consumption and substituting energy-free beverages for energy-containing beverages (i.e., reducing caloric intake) may facilitate weight management. A 2009 article found that drinking 500\u00a0ml of water prior to meals for a 12-week period resulted in increased long-term weight reduction. (References given in main article.)\nSociety.\nIt is estimated that about 1 out of 3 Americans is dieting at any given time. 85% of dieters are women. Approximately sixty billion dollars are spent every year in the USA on diet products, including \"diet foods\", such as light sodas, gym memberships or specific regimes. 80% of dieters start by themselves, whereas 20% see a professional or join a paid program. The typical dieter attempts 4 tries per year.\nWeight loss groups.\nSome weight loss groups aim to make money, others work as charities. The former include Weight Watchers and Peertrainer. The latter include Overeaters Anonymous, TOPS Club and groups run by local organizations.\nThese organizations' customs and practices differ widely. Some groups are modelled on twelve-step programs, while others are quite informal. Some groups advocate certain prepared foods or special menus, while others train dieters to make healthy choices from restaurant menus and while grocery-shopping and cooking.\nAttending group meetings for weight reduction programmes rather than receiving one-on-one support may increase the likelihood that obese people will lose weight. Those who participated in groups had more treatment time and were more likely to lose enough weight to improve their health. Study authors suggested that one explanation for the difference is that group participants spent more time with the clinician (or whoever delivered the programme) than those receiving one-on-one support."}
{"id": "8461", "revid": "21857263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8461", "title": "Diet", "text": "Diet may refer to:"}
{"id": "8463", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8463", "title": "Dubnium", "text": "Dubnium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Db and atomic number 105. It is highly radioactive: the most stable known isotope, dubnium-268, has a half-life of about 16 hours. This greatly limits extended research on the element.\nDubnium does not occur naturally on Earth and is produced artificially. The Soviet Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) claimed the first discovery of the element in 1968, followed by the American Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in 1970. Both teams proposed their names for the new element and used them without formal approval. The long-standing dispute was resolved in 1993 by an official investigation of the discovery claims by the Transfermium Working Group, formed by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, resulting in credit for the discovery being officially shared between both teams. The element was formally named \"dubnium\" in 1997 after the town of Dubna, the site of the JINR.\nTheoretical research establishes dubnium as a member of group 5 in the 6d series of transition metals, placing it under vanadium, niobium, and tantalum. Dubnium should share most properties, such as its valence electron configuration and having a dominant +5 oxidation state, with the other group 5 elements, with a few anomalies due to relativistic effects. A limited investigation of dubnium chemistry has confirmed this.\nDiscovery.\nBackground.\nUranium, element 92, is the heaviest element to occur in significant quantities in nature; heavier elements can only be practically produced by synthesis. The first synthesis of a new element\u2014neptunium, element 93\u2014was achieved in 1940 by a team of researchers in the United States. In the following years, American scientists synthesized the elements up to mendelevium, element 101, which was synthesized in 1955. From element 102, the priority of discoveries was contested between American and Soviet physicists. Their rivalry resulted in a race for new elements and credit for their discoveries, later named the Transfermium Wars.\nReports.\nThe first report of the discovery of element 105 came from the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Moscow Oblast, Soviet Union, in April 1968. The scientists bombarded 243Am with a beam of 22Ne ions, and reported 9.4\u00a0MeV (with a half-life of 0.1\u20133 seconds) and 9.7\u00a0MeV (\"t\"1/2\u00a0&gt;\u00a00.05\u00a0s) alpha activities followed by alpha activities similar to those of either 256103 or 257103. Based on prior theoretical predictions, the two activity lines were assigned to 261105 and 260105, respectively.\nAfter observing the alpha decays of element 105, the researchers aimed to observe spontaneous fission (SF) of the element and study the resulting fission fragments. They published a paper in February 1970, reporting multiple examples of two such activities, with half-lives of 14\u00a0ms and . They assigned the former activity to 242mfAm and ascribed the latter activity to an isotope of element 105. They suggested that it was unlikely that this activity could come from a transfer reaction instead of element 105, because the yield ratio for this reaction was significantly lower than that of the 242mfAm-producing transfer reaction, in accordance with theoretical predictions. To establish that this activity was not from a (22Ne,\"x\"n) reaction, the researchers bombarded a 243Am target with 18O ions; reactions producing 256103 and 257103 showed very little SF activity (matching the established data), and the reaction producing heavier 258103 and 259103 produced no SF activity at all, in line with theoretical data. The researchers concluded that the activities observed came from SF of element 105.\nIn April 1970, a team at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL), in Berkeley, California, United States, claimed to have synthesized element 105 by bombarding californium-249 with nitrogen-15 ions, with an alpha activity of 9.1\u00a0MeV. To ensure this activity was not from a different reaction, the team attempted other reactions: bombarding 249Cf with 14N, Pb with 15N, and Hg with 15N. They stated no such activity was found in those reactions. The characteristics of the daughter nuclei matched those of 256103, implying that the parent nuclei were of 260105.\nThese results did not confirm the JINR findings regarding the 9.4\u00a0MeV or 9.7\u00a0MeV alpha decay of 260105, leaving only 261105 as a possibly produced isotope.\nJINR then attempted another experiment to create element 105, published in a report in May 1970. They claimed that they had synthesized more nuclei of element 105 and that the experiment confirmed their previous work. According to the paper, the isotope produced by JINR was probably 261105, or possibly 260105. This report included an initial chemical examination: the thermal gradient version of the gas-chromatography method was applied to demonstrate that the chloride of what had formed from the SF activity nearly matched that of niobium pentachloride, rather than hafnium tetrachloride. The team identified a 2.2-second SF activity in a volatile chloride portraying eka-tantalum properties, and inferred that the source of the SF activity must have been element 105.\nIn June 1970, JINR made improvements on their first experiment, using a purer target and reducing the intensity of transfer reactions by installing a collimator before the catcher. This time, they were able to find 9.1\u00a0MeV alpha activities with daughter isotopes identifiable as either 256103 or 257103, implying that the original isotope was either 260105 or 261105.\nNaming controversy.\nJINR did not propose a name after their first report claiming synthesis of element 105, which would have been the usual practice. This led LBL to believe that JINR did not have enough experimental data to back their claim. After collecting more data, JINR proposed the name \"bohrium\" (Bo) in honor of the Danish nuclear physicist Niels Bohr, a founder of the theories of atomic structure and quantum theory; they soon changed their proposal to \"nielsbohrium\" (Ns) to avoid confusion with boron. Another proposed name was \"dubnium\". When LBL first announced their synthesis of element 105, they proposed that the new element be named \"hahnium\" (Ha) after the German chemist Otto Hahn, the \"father of nuclear chemistry\", thus creating an element naming controversy.\nIn the early 1970s, both teams reported synthesis of the next element, element 106, but did not suggest names. JINR suggested establishing an international committee to clarify the discovery criteria. This proposal was accepted in 1974 and a neutral joint group formed. Neither team showed interest in resolving the conflict through a third party, so the leading scientists of LBL\u2014Albert Ghiorso and Glenn Seaborg\u2014traveled to Dubna in 1975 and met with the leading scientists of JINR\u2014Georgy Flerov, Yuri Oganessian, and others\u2014to try to resolve the conflict internally and render the neutral joint group unnecessary; after two hours of discussions, this failed. The joint neutral group never assembled to assess the claims, and the conflict remained unresolved. In 1979, IUPAC suggested systematic element names to be used as placeholders until permanent names were established; under it, element 105 would be \"unnilpentium\", from the Latin roots \"un-\" and \"nil-\" and the Greek root \"pent-\" (meaning \"one\", \"zero\", and \"five\", respectively, the digits of the atomic number). Both teams ignored it as they did not wish to weaken their outstanding claims.\nIn 1981, the Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Schwerionenforschung (GSI; \"Society for Heavy Ion Research\") in Darmstadt, Hesse, West Germany, claimed synthesis of element 107; their report came out five years after the first report from JINR but with greater precision, making a more solid claim on discovery. GSI acknowledged JINR's efforts by suggesting the name \"nielsbohrium\" for the new element. JINR did not suggest a new name for element 105, stating it was more important to determine its discoverers first.\nIn 1985, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) formed a Transfermium Working Group (TWG) to assess discoveries and establish final names for the controversial elements. The party held meetings with delegates from the three competing institutes; in 1990, they established criteria on recognition of an element, and in 1991, they finished the work on assessing discoveries and disbanded. These results were published in 1993. According to the report, the first definitely successful experiment was the April 1970 LBL experiment, closely followed by the June 1970 JINR experiment, so credit for the discovery of the element should be shared between the two teams.\nLBL said that the input from JINR was overrated in the review. They claimed JINR was only able to unambiguously demonstrate the synthesis of element 105 a year after they did. JINR and GSI endorsed the report.\nIn 1994, IUPAC published a recommendation on naming the disputed elements. For element 105, they proposed \"joliotium\" (Jl) after the French physicist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot-Curie, a contributor to the development of nuclear physics and chemistry; this name was originally proposed by the Soviet team for element 102, which by then had long been called nobelium. This recommendation was criticized by the American scientists for several reasons. Firstly, their suggestions were scrambled: the names \"rutherfordium\" and \"hahnium\", originally suggested by Berkeley for elements 104 and 105, were respectively reassigned to elements 106 and 108. Secondly, elements 104 and 105 were given names favored by JINR, despite earlier recognition of LBL as an equal co-discoverer for both of them. Thirdly and most importantly, IUPAC rejected the name \"seaborgium\" for element 106, having just approved a rule that an element could not be named after a living person, even though the 1993 report had given the LBL team the sole credit for its discovery.\nIn 1995, IUPAC abandoned the controversial rule and established a committee of national representatives aimed at finding a compromise. They suggested \"seaborgium\" for element 106 in exchange for the removal of all the other American proposals, except for the established name \"lawrencium\" for element 103. The equally entrenched name \"nobelium\" for element 102 was replaced by \"flerovium\" after Georgy Flerov, following the recognition by the 1993 report that that element had been first synthesized in Dubna. This was rejected by American scientists and the decision was retracted. The name \"flerovium\" was later used for element 114.\nIn 1996, IUPAC held another meeting, reconsidered all names in hand, and accepted another set of recommendations; it was approved and published in 1997. Element 105 was named \"dubnium\" (Db), after Dubna in Russia, the location of the JINR; the American suggestions were used for elements 102, 103, 104, and 106. The name \"dubnium\" had been used for element 104 in the previous IUPAC recommendation. The American scientists \"reluctantly\" approved this decision. IUPAC pointed out that the Berkeley laboratory had already been recognized several times, in the naming of berkelium, californium, and americium, and that the acceptance of the names \"rutherfordium\" and \"seaborgium\" for elements 104 and 106 should be offset by recognizing JINR's contributions to the discovery of elements 104, 105, and 106.\nEven after 1997, LBL still sometimes used the name \"hahnium\" for element 105 in their own material, doing so as recently as 2014. However, the problem was resolved in the literature as Jens Volker Kratz, editor of \"Radiochimica Acta\", refused to accept papers not using the 1997 IUPAC nomenclature.\nIsotopes.\nDubnium, having an atomic number of 105, is a superheavy element; like all elements with such high atomic numbers, it is very unstable. The longest-lasting known isotope of dubnium, 268Db, has a half-life of around a day. No stable isotopes have been seen, and a 2012 calculation by JINR suggested that the half-lives of all dubnium isotopes would not significantly exceed a day. Dubnium can only be obtained by artificial production.\nThe short half-life of dubnium limits experimentation. This is exacerbated by the fact that the most stable isotopes are the hardest to synthesize. Elements with a lower atomic number have stable isotopes with a lower neutron\u2013proton ratio than those with higher atomic number, meaning that the target and beam nuclei that could be employed to create the superheavy element have fewer neutrons than needed to form these most stable isotopes. (Different techniques based on rapid neutron capture and transfer reactions are being considered as of the 2010s, but those based on the collision of a large and small nucleus still dominate research in the area.)\nOnly a few atoms of 268Db can be produced in each experiment, and thus the measured lifetimes vary significantly during the process. As of 2022, following additional experiments performed at the JINR's Superheavy Element Factory (which started operations in 2019), the half-life of 268Db is measured to be hours. The second most stable isotope, 270Db, has been produced in even smaller quantities: three atoms in total, with lifetimes of 33.4 h, 1.3 h, and 1.6 h. These two are the heaviest isotopes of dubnium to date, and both were produced as a result of decay of the heavier nuclei 288Mc and 294Ts rather than directly, because the experiments that yielded them were originally designed in Dubna for 48Ca beams. For its mass, 48Ca has by far the greatest neutron excess of all practically stable nuclei, both quantitative and relative, which correspondingly helps synthesize superheavy nuclei with more neutrons, but this gain is compensated by the decreased likelihood of fusion for high atomic numbers.\nPredicted properties.\nAccording to the periodic law, dubnium should belong to group 5, with vanadium, niobium, and tantalum. Several studies have investigated the properties of element 105 and found that they generally agreed with the predictions of the periodic law. Significant deviations may nevertheless occur, due to relativistic effects, which dramatically change physical properties on both atomic and macroscopic scales. These properties have remained challenging to measure for several reasons: the difficulties of production of superheavy atoms, the low rates of production, which only allows for microscopic scales, requirements for a radiochemistry laboratory to test the atoms, short half-lives of those atoms, and the presence of many unwanted activities apart from those of synthesis of superheavy atoms. So far, studies have only been performed on single atoms.\nAtomic and physical.\nA direct relativistic effect is that as the atomic numbers of elements increase, the innermost electrons begin to revolve faster around the nucleus as a result of an increase of electromagnetic attraction between an electron and a nucleus. Similar effects have been found for the outermost s orbitals (and p1/2 ones, though in dubnium they are not occupied): for example, the 7s orbital contracts by 25% in size and is stabilized by 2.6\u00a0eV.\nA more indirect effect is that the contracted s and p1/2 orbitals shield the charge of the nucleus more effectively, leaving less for the outer d and f electrons, which therefore move in larger orbitals. Dubnium is greatly affected by this: unlike the previous group 5 members, its 7s electrons are slightly more difficult to extract than its 6d electrons.\nAnother effect is the spin\u2013orbit interaction, particularly spin\u2013orbit splitting, which splits the 6d subshell\u2014the azimuthal quantum number \u2113 of a d\u00a0shell is 2\u2014into two subshells, with four of the ten orbitals having their \u2113 lowered to 3/2 and six raised to 5/2. All ten energy levels are raised; four of them are lower than the other six. (The three 6d electrons normally occupy the lowest energy levels, 6d3/2.)\nA singly ionized atom of dubnium (Db+) should lose a 6d electron compared to a neutral atom; the doubly (Db2+) or triply (Db3+) ionized atoms of dubnium should eliminate 7s electrons, unlike its lighter homologs. Despite the changes, dubnium is still expected to have five valence electrons. As the 6d orbitals of dubnium are more destabilized than the 5d ones of tantalum, and Db3+ is expected to have two 6d, rather than 7s, electrons remaining, the resulting +3 oxidation state is expected to be unstable and even rarer than that of tantalum. The ionization potential of dubnium in its maximum +5 oxidation state should be slightly lower than that of tantalum and the ionic radius of dubnium should increase compared to tantalum; this has a significant effect on dubnium's chemistry.\nAtoms of dubnium in the solid state should arrange themselves in a body-centered cubic configuration, like the previous group 5 elements. The predicted density of dubnium is 21.6\u00a0g/cm3.\nChemical.\nComputational chemistry is simplest in gas-phase chemistry, in which interactions between molecules may be ignored as negligible. Multiple authors have researched dubnium pentachloride; calculations show it to be consistent with the periodic laws by exhibiting the properties of a compound of a group 5 element. For example, the molecular orbital levels indicate that dubnium uses three 6d electron levels as expected. Compared to its tantalum analog, dubnium pentachloride is expected to show increased covalent character: a decrease in the effective charge on an atom and an increase in the overlap population (between orbitals of dubnium and chlorine).\nCalculations of solution chemistry indicate that the maximum oxidation state of dubnium, +5, will be more stable than those of niobium and tantalum and the +3 and +4 states will be less stable. The tendency towards hydrolysis of cations with the highest oxidation state should continue to decrease within group 5 but is still expected to be quite rapid. Complexation of dubnium is expected to follow group 5 trends in its richness. Calculations for hydroxo-chlorido- complexes have shown a reversal in the trends of complex formation and extraction of group 5 elements, with dubnium being more prone to do so than tantalum.\nExperimental chemistry.\nExperimental results of the chemistry of dubnium date back to 1974 and 1976. JINR researchers used a thermochromatographic system and concluded that the volatility of dubnium bromide was less than that of niobium bromide and about the same as that of hafnium bromide. It is not certain that the detected fission products confirmed that the parent was indeed element 105. These results may imply that dubnium behaves more like hafnium than niobium.\nThe next studies on the chemistry of dubnium were conducted in 1988, in Berkeley. They examined whether the most stable oxidation state of dubnium in aqueous solution was +5. Dubnium was fumed twice and washed with concentrated nitric acid; sorption of dubnium on glass cover slips was then compared with that of the group 5 elements niobium and tantalum and the group 4 elements zirconium and hafnium produced under similar conditions. The group 5 elements are known to sorb on glass surfaces; the group 4 elements do not. Dubnium was confirmed as a group 5 member. Surprisingly, the behavior on extraction from mixed nitric and hydrofluoric acid solution into methyl isobutyl ketone differed between dubnium, tantalum, and niobium. Dubnium did not extract and its behavior resembled niobium more closely than tantalum, indicating that complexing behavior could not be predicted purely from simple extrapolations of trends within a group in the periodic table.\nThis prompted further exploration of the chemical behavior of complexes of dubnium. Various labs jointly conducted thousands of repetitive chromatographic experiments between 1988 and 1993. All group 5 elements and protactinium were extracted from concentrated hydrochloric acid; after mixing with lower concentrations of hydrogen chloride, small amounts of hydrogen fluoride were added to start selective re-extraction. Dubnium showed behavior different from that of tantalum but similar to that of niobium and its pseudohomolog protactinium at concentrations of hydrogen chloride below 12 moles per liter. This similarity to the two elements suggested that the formed complex was either or . After extraction experiments of dubnium from hydrogen bromide into diisobutyl carbinol (2,6-dimethylheptan-4-ol), a specific extractant for protactinium, with subsequent elutions with the hydrogen chloride/hydrogen fluoride mix as well as hydrogen chloride, dubnium was found to be less prone to extraction than either protactinium or niobium. This was explained as an increasing tendency to form non\u2010extractable complexes of multiple negative charges. Further experiments in 1992 confirmed the stability of the +5 state: Db(V) was shown to be extractable from cation\u2010exchange columns with \u03b1\u2010hydroxyisobutyrate, like the group 5 elements and protactinium; Db(III) and Db(IV) were not. In 1998 and 1999, new predictions suggested that dubnium would extract nearly as well as niobium and better than tantalum from halide solutions, which was later confirmed.\nThe first isothermal gas chromatography experiments were performed in 1992 with 262Db (half-life 35 seconds). The volatilities for niobium and tantalum were similar within error limits, but dubnium appeared to be significantly less volatile. It was postulated that traces of oxygen in the system might have led to formation of , which was predicted to be less volatile than . Later experiments in 1996 showed that group 5 chlorides were more volatile than the corresponding bromides, with the exception of tantalum, presumably due to formation of . Later volatility studies of chlorides of dubnium and niobium as a function of controlled partial pressures of oxygen showed that formation of oxychlorides and general volatility are dependent on concentrations of oxygen. The oxychlorides were shown to be less volatile than the chlorides.\nIn 2004\u201305, researchers from Dubna and Livermore identified a new dubnium isotope, 268Db, as a fivefold alpha decay product of the newly created element 115. This new isotope proved to be long-lived enough to allow further chemical experimentation, with a half-life of over a day. In the 2004 experiment, a thin layer with dubnium was removed from the surface of the target and dissolved in aqua regia with tracers and a lanthanum carrier, from which various +3, +4, and +5 species were precipitated on adding ammonium hydroxide. The precipitate was washed and dissolved in hydrochloric acid, where it converted to nitrate form and was then dried on a film and counted. Mostly containing a +5 species, which was immediately assigned to dubnium, it also had a +4 species; based on that result, the team decided that additional chemical separation was needed. In 2005, the experiment was repeated, with the final product being hydroxide rather than nitrate precipitate, which was processed further in both Livermore (based on reverse phase chromatography) and Dubna (based on anion exchange chromatography). The +5 species was effectively isolated; dubnium appeared three times in tantalum-only fractions and never in niobium-only fractions. It was noted that these experiments were insufficient to draw conclusions about the general chemical profile of dubnium.\nIn 2009, at the JAEA tandem accelerator in Japan, dubnium was processed in nitric and hydrofluoric acid solution, at concentrations where niobium forms and tantalum forms . Dubnium's behavior was close to that of niobium but not tantalum; it was thus deduced that dubnium formed . From the available information, it was concluded that dubnium often behaved like niobium, sometimes like protactinium, but rarely like tantalum.\nIn 2021, the volatile heavy group 5 oxychlorides MOCl3 (M = Nb, Ta, Db) were experimentally studied at the JAEA tandem accelerator. The trend in volatilities was found to be NbOCl3 &gt; TaOCl3 \u2265 DbOCl3, so that dubnium behaves in line with periodic trends."}
{"id": "8464", "revid": "13266769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8464", "title": "Disaccharide", "text": "A disaccharide (also called a double sugar or biose) is the sugar formed when two monosaccharides are joined by glycosidic linkage. Like monosaccharides, disaccharides are simple sugars soluble in water. Three common examples are sucrose, lactose, and maltose.\nDisaccharides are one of the four chemical groupings of carbohydrates (monosaccharides, disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides). The most common types of disaccharides\u2014sucrose, lactose, and maltose\u2014have 12 carbon atoms, with the general formula C12H22O11. The differences in these disaccharides are due to atomic arrangements within the molecule.\nThe joining of monosaccharides into a double sugar happens by a condensation reaction, which involves the elimination of a water molecule from the functional groups only. Breaking apart a double sugar into its two monosaccharides is accomplished by hydrolysis with the help of a type of enzyme called a disaccharidase. As building the larger sugar ejects a water molecule, breaking it down consumes a water molecule. These reactions are vital in metabolism. Each disaccharide is broken down with the help of a corresponding disaccharidase (sucrase, lactase, and maltase).\nClassification.\nThere are two functionally different classes of disaccharides: \nFormation.\nThe formation of a disaccharide molecule from two monosaccharide molecules proceeds by displacing a hydroxy group from one molecule and a hydrogen nucleus (a proton) from the other, so that the new vacant bonds on the monosaccharides join the two monomers together. Because of the removal of the water molecule from the product, the term of convenience for such a process is \"dehydration reaction\" (also \"condensation reaction\" or \"dehydration synthesis\"). For example, milk sugar (lactose) is a disaccharide made by condensation of one molecule of each of the monosaccharides glucose and galactose, whereas the disaccharide sucrose in sugar cane and sugar beet, is a condensation product of glucose and fructose. Maltose, another common disaccharide, is condensed from two glucose molecules.\nThe dehydration reaction that bonds monosaccharides into disaccharides (and also bonds monosaccharides into more complex polysaccharides) forms what are called glycosidic bonds.\nProperties.\nThe glycosidic bond can be formed between any hydroxy group on the component monosaccharide. So, even if both component sugars are the same (e.g., glucose), different bond combinations (regiochemistry) and stereochemistry (\"alpha-\" or \"beta-\") result in disaccharides that are diastereoisomers with different chemical and physical properties. Depending on the monosaccharide constituents, disaccharides are sometimes crystalline, sometimes water-soluble, and sometimes sweet-tasting and sticky-feeling. Disaccharides can serve as functional groups by forming glycosidic bonds with other organic compounds, forming glycosides.\nAssimilation.\nDigestion of disaccharides involves breakdown into monosaccharides.\nCommon disaccharides.\nMaltose, cellobiose, and chitobiose are hydrolysis products of the polysaccharides starch, cellulose, and chitin, respectively.\nLess common disaccharides include:"}
{"id": "8465", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8465", "title": "Dactylic hexameter", "text": "Dactylic hexameter (also known as heroic hexameter and the meter of epic) is a form of meter or rhythmic scheme frequently used in Ancient Greek and Latin poetry. The scheme of the hexameter is usually as follows (writing \u2013 for a long syllable, u for a short, and u u for a position that may be a long or two shorts):\nHere, \"|\" (pipe symbol) marks the beginning of a foot in the line.\nThus there are six feet, each of which is either a dactyl (\u2013 u u) or a spondee (\u2013 \u2013). The first four feet can either be dactyls, spondees, or a mix. The fifth foot can also sometimes be a spondee, but this is rare, as it most often is a dactyl. The last foot is a spondee.\nThe hexameter is traditionally associated with classical epic poetry in both Greek and Latin and was consequently considered to be \"the\" grand style of Western classical poetry. Some well known examples of its use are Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", Apollonius of Rhodes's \"Argonautica\", Virgil's \"Aeneid\", Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", Lucan's \"Pharsalia\" (an epic on Caesar's civil war), Valerius Flaccus's \"Argonautica\", and Statius's \"Thebaid\".\nHowever, hexameters had a wide use outside of epic. Greek works in hexameters include Hesiod's \"Works and Days\" and \"Theogony\", Theocritus's \"Idylls\", and Callimachus's hymns. In Latin famous works include Lucretius's philosophical , Virgil's \"Eclogues\" and \"Georgics\", book 10 of Columella's manual on agriculture, as well as Latin satirical poems by the poets Lucilius, Horace, Persius, and Juvenal. The hexameter continued to be used in Christian times, for example in the of the 5th-century Irish poet Sedulius and Bernard of Cluny's 12th-century satire among many others.\nHexameters also form part of elegiac poetry in both languages, the elegiac couplet being a dactylic hexameter line paired with a dactylic pentameter line. This form of verse was used for love poetry by Propertius, Tibullus, and Ovid, for Ovid's letters from exile, and for many of the epigrams of Martial.\nStructure.\nSyllables.\nAncient Greek and Latin poetry is made up of long and short syllables arranged in various patterns. In Greek, a long syllable is () and a short syllable is (). In Latin the terms are and . The process of deciding which syllables are long and which are short is known as scansion.\nA syllable is long if it contains a long vowel or a diphthong: , . It is also long (with certain exceptions) if it has a short vowel followed by two consonants, even if these are in different words: , , . In this case a syllable like \"et\" is said to be long by position.\nThere are some exceptions to the above rules, however. For example, \"tr\", \"cr\", \"pr\", \"gr\", and \"pl\" (and other combinations of a consonant with \"r\" or \"l\") can count as a single consonant, so that the word could be pronounced either with the first syllable short or with the first syllable long. Also the letter \"h\" is ignored in scansion, so that in the phrase the syllable \"et\" remains short. \"qu\" counts as a single consonant, so that in the word \"water\" the first syllable is short, not like the Italian .\nIn certain words like , , , , and , \"i\" is a consonant, pronounced like the English \"y,\" so has three syllables and \"he threw\" has two. But in , the name of Aeneas's son, \"I\" is a vowel and forms a separate syllable. \"Trojan\" has three syllables, but \"of Troy\" has two.\nIn some editions of Latin texts the consonant \"v\" is written as \"u\", in which case \"u\" is also often consonantal. This can sometimes cause ambiguity; e.g., in the word (= ) \"he rolls\" the second \"u\" is a consonant, but in (= ) \"he wanted\" the second \"u\" is a vowel.\nFeet.\nA hexameter line can be divided into six feet (Greek \u1f15\u03be \"hex\" = \"six\"). In strict dactylic hexameter, each foot would be a dactyl (a long and two short syllables, i.e. \u2013 u u), but classical meter allows for the substitution of a spondee (two long syllables, i.e. \u2013 \u2013) in place of a dactyl in most positions. Specifically, the first four feet can either be dactyls or spondees more or less freely. The fifth foot is usually a dactyl (around 95% of the lines in Homer).\nThe sixth foot can be filled by either a trochee (a long then short syllable) or a spondee. Thus the dactylic line most normally is scanned as follows:\nAn example of this in Latin is the first line of Virgil's \"Aeneid\":\nThe scansion is generally marked as follows, by placing long and short marks above the central vowel of each syllable:\n \u2013 u u | \u2013 u u | \u2013 \u2013 | \u2013 \u2013 | \u2013 u u | \u2013 \u2013\n ar ma vi | rum que ca | n\u014d Troj | jae qu\u012b | pr\u012b mu sa | b\u014d r\u012bs\n \"dactyl\" | \"dactyl\" | \"spondee\" | \"spondee\" | \"dactyl\" | \"spondee\"\nIn dactylic verse, short syllables always come in pairs, so words such as \"soldiers\" or \"more easily\" cannot be used in a hexameter.\nElision.\nIn Latin, when a word ends in a vowel or -m and is followed by a word starting with a vowel, the last vowel is usually elided (i.e. removed or pronounced quickly enough not to add to the length of the syllable), for example, . Again, \"h\" is ignored and does not prevent elision: .\nIn Greek, short vowels elide freely, and the elision is shown by an apostrophe, for example in line 2 of the \"Iliad\": () \"which caused countless sufferings for the Achaeans\". However, a long vowel is not elided: (). This feature is sometimes imitated in Latin for special effect, for example, \"with womanly wailing\" (\"Aen\". 9.477).\nWhen a vowel is elided, it does not count in the scansion; so for the purposes of scansion, has four syllables.\nCaesura.\nAlmost every hexameter has a word break, known as a caesura , in the middle of the 3rd foot, sometimes (but not always) coinciding with a break in sense. In most cases (85% of lines in Virgil) this comes after the first syllable of the 3rd foot, as in in the above example. This is known as a strong or masculine caesura.\nWhen the 3rd foot is a dactyl, the caesura can come after the second syllable of the 3rd foot; this is known as a weak or feminine caesura. It is more common in Greek than in Latin. An example is the first line of Homer's \"Odyssey\":\nIn Latin (but not in Greek, as the above example shows), whenever a feminine caesura is used in the 3rd foot, it is usually accompanied by masculine caesuras in the 2nd and 4th feet also:\nSometimes a line is found without a 3rd foot caesura, such as the following. In this case the 2nd and 4th foot caesuras are obligatory:\nIn Greek.\nThe hexameter was first used by early Greek poets of the oral tradition, and the most complete extant examples of their works are the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", which influenced the authors of all later classical epics that survive today. Early epic poetry was also accompanied by music, and pitch changes associated with the accented Greek must have highlighted the melody, though the exact mechanism is still a topic of discussion.\nThe first line of Homer's \"Iliad\" provides an example:\nDividing the line into metrical units or feet it can be scanned as follows:\nThis line also includes a masculine caesura after , a break that separates the line into two parts. Homer employs a feminine caesura more commonly than later writers. An example occurs in \"Iliad\" 1.5:\nHomer's hexameters contain a higher proportion of dactyls than later hexameter poetry. They are also characterised by a laxer following of verse principles than later epicists almost invariably adhered to. For example, Homer allows spondaic fifth feet (albeit not often), whereas many later authors do not.\nHomer also altered the forms of words to allow them to fit the hexameter, typically by using a dialectal form: \"ptolis\" is an epic form used instead of the Attic \"polis\" as necessary for the meter. Proper names sometimes take forms to fit the meter, for example \"Pouludamas\" instead of the metrically unviable \"Poludamas\".\nSome lines require a knowledge of the digamma for their scansion, e.g. \"Iliad\" 1.108:\nHere the word (\"epos\") was originally (\"wepos\") in Ionian; the digamma, later lost, lengthened the last syllable of the preceding (\"eipas\") and removed the apparent defect in the meter. A digamma also saved the hiatus in the third foot. This example demonstrates the oral tradition of the Homeric epics that flourished before they were written down sometime in the 7th century BC.\nMost of the later rules of hexameter composition have their origins in the methods and practices of Homer.\nIn Latin.\nThe hexameter came into Latin as an adaptation from Greek long after the practice of singing the epics had faded. Consequentially, the properties of the meter were learned as specific rules rather than as a natural result of musical expression. Also, because the Latin language generally has a higher proportion of long syllables than Greek, it is by nature more spondaic. Thus the Latin hexameter took on characteristics of its own.\nEnnius.\nThe earliest example of hexameter in Latin poetry is the \"Annales\" of Ennius (now mostly lost except for about 600 lines), which established it as the standard for later Latin epics; it was written towards the end of Ennius's life about 172 BC. Ennius experimented with different kinds of lines, for example, lines with five dactyls:\nor lines consisting entirely of spondees:\nlines without a caesura:\nlines ending in a one-syllable word or in words of more than three syllables:\nor even lines starting with two short syllables:\nHowever, most of these features were abandoned by later writers or used only occasionally for special effect.\nLater writers.\nLater Republican writers, such as Lucretius, Catullus, and even Cicero, wrote hexameter compositions, and it was at this time that the principles of Latin hexameter were firmly established and followed by later writers such as Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Lucan, and Juvenal. Virgil's opening line for the \"Aeneid\" is a classic example:\nIn Latin, lines were arranged so that the metrically long syllables\u2014those occurring at the beginning of a foot\u2014often avoided the natural stress of a word. In the earlier feet of a line, meter and stress were expected to clash, while in the last two feet they were expected to coincide, as in above. The coincidence of word accent and meter in the last two feet could be achieved by restricting the last word to one of two or three syllables.\nMost lines (about 85% in Virgil) have a caesura or word division after the first syllable of the 3rd foot, as above . This is known as a strong or masculine caesura. Because of the penultimate accent in Latin, this ensures that the word accent and meter will not coincide in the 3rd foot. But in those lines with a feminine or weak caesura, such as the following, there is inevitably a coincidence of meter and accent in the 3rd foot:\nTo offset this, whenever there was a feminine caesura in the 3rd foot, there was usually also a masculine caesura in the 2nd and 4th feet, to ensure that in those feet at least, the word accent and meter did not coincide.\nMetrical effects.\nBy the age of Augustus, poets like Virgil closely followed the rules of the meter and approached it in a highly rhetorical way, looking for effects that can be exploited in skilled recitation. For example, the following line from the \"Aeneid\" (8.596) describes the movement and sound of galloping horses:\nThis line is made up of five dactyls and a closing spondee, an unusual rhythmic arrangement that imitates the described action. A different effect is found in 8.452, where Virgil describes how the blacksmith sons of Vulcan forged Aeneas' shield. The five spondees and the word accents cutting across the verse rhythm give an impression of huge effort:\nA slightly different effect is found in the following line (3.658), describing the terrifying one-eyed giant Polyphemus, blinded by Ulysses. Here again there are five spondees but there are also three elisions, which cause the word accent of all the words but to coincide with the beginning of each foot:\nA succession of long syllables in some lines indicates slow movement, as in the following example where Aeneas and his companion the Sibyl (a priestess of Apollo) were entering the darkness of the world of the dead:\nThe following example (\"Aeneid\" 2.9) describes how Aeneas is reluctant to begin his narrative, since it is already past midnight. The feminine caesura after without a following 4th-foot caesura ensures that all the last four feet have word accent at the beginning, which is unusual. The monotonous effect is reinforced by the assonance of \"dent ... dent\" and the alliteration of S ... S:\nDactyls are associated with sleep again in the following unusual line, which describes the activity of a priestess who is feeding a magic serpent (\"Aen.\" 4.486). In this line, there are five dactyls, and every one is accented on the first syllable:\nA different technique, at 1.105, is used when describing a ship at sea during a storm. Here Virgil places a single-syllable word at the end of the line. This produces a jarring rhythm that echoes the crash of a large wave against the side of the ship:\nThe Roman poet Horace uses a similar trick to highlight the comedic irony in this famous line from his \"Ars Poetica\" (line 139):\nUsually in Latin the 5th foot of a hexameter is a dactyl. However, in his poem 64, Catullus several times uses a 5th foot spondee, which gives a Greek flavour to his verse, as in this line describing the forested Vale of Tempe in northern Greece:\nVirgil also occasionally imitates Greek practice, for example, in the first line of his 3rd Eclogue:\nHere there is a break in sense after a 4th-foot dactyl, a feature known as a bucolic diaeresis, because it is frequently used in Greek pastoral poetry. In fact it is common in Homer too (as in the first line of the \"Odyssey\" quoted above), but rare in Latin epic.\nStylistic features of epic.\nCertain stylistic features are characteristic of epic hexameter poetry, especially as written by Virgil.\nEnjambment.\nHexameters are frequently enjambed\u2014the meaning runs over from one line to the next, without terminal punctuation\u2014which helps to create the long, flowing narrative of epic. Sentences can also end in different places in the line, for example, after the first foot. In this, classical epic differs from medieval Latin, where the lines are often composed individually, with a break in sense at the end of each one.\nPoetic vocabulary.\nOften in poetry ordinary words are replaced by poetic ones, for example or for water, for sea, for ship, for river, and so on. Some ordinary Latin words are avoided, e.g. etc., simply because they cannot be fitted into a hexameter verse.\nHyperbaton.\nIt is common in poetry for adjectives to be widely separated from their nouns, and quite often one adjective\u2013noun pair is interleaved with another. This feature is known as hyperbaton \"stepping over\". An example is the opening line of Lucan's epic on the Civil War:\nAnother example is the opening of Ovid's mythological poem Metamorphoses where the word \"new\" is in a different line from \"bodies\" which it describes:\nOne particular arrangement of words that seems to have been particularly admired is the golden line, a line which contains two adjectives, a verb, and two nouns, with the first adjective corresponding to the first noun such as:\nCatullus was the first to use this kind of line, as in the above example. Later authors used it rarely (1% of lines in Ovid), but in silver Latin it became increasingly popular.\nAlliteration and assonance.\nVirgil in particular used alliteration and assonance frequently, although it is much less common in Ovid. Often more than one consonant was alliterated and not necessarily at the beginning of words, for example:\nAlso in Virgil:\nSometimes the same vowel is repeated:\nRhetorical techniques.\nRhetorical devices such as anaphora, antithesis, and rhetorical questions are frequently used in epic poetry. Tricolon is also common:\nGenre of subject matter.\nThe poems of Homer, Virgil, and Ovid often vary their narrative with speeches. Well known examples are the speech of Queen Dido cursing Aeneas in book 4 of the \"Aeneid\", the lament of the nymph Juturna when she is unable to save her brother Turnus in book 12 of the \"Aeneid\", and the quarrel between Ajax and Ulysses over the arms of Achilles in book 13 of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". Some speeches are themselves narratives, as when Aeneas tells Queen Dido about the fall of Troy and his voyage to Africa in books 2 and 3 of the \"Aeneid\". Other styles of writing include vivid descriptions, such as Virgil's description of the god Charon in \"Aeneid\" 6, or Ovid's description of Daedalus's labyrinth in book 8 of the \"Metamorphoses\"; similes, such as Virgil's comparison of the souls of the dead to autumn leaves or clouds of migrating birds in \"Aeneid\" 6; and lists of names, such as when Ovid names 36 of the dogs who tore their master Actaeon to pieces in book 3 of the \"Metamorphoses\".\nConversational style.\nRaven divides the various styles of the hexameter in classical Latin into three types: the early stage (Ennius), the fully developed type (Cicero, Catullus, Virgil, and Ovid, with Lucretius about midway between Ennius and Cicero), and the conversational type, especially Horace, but also to an extent Persius and Juvenal. One feature which marks these off is their often irregular line endings (for example, words of one syllable) and also the very conversational, un-epic style. Horace in fact called his satires (\"conversations\"). The word order and vocabulary is much as might be expected in prose. An example is the opening of the 9th satire of book 1:\nSilver Age and Late Empire.\nThe verse innovations of the Augustan writers were carefully imitated by their successors in the Silver Age of Latin literature. The verse form itself then was little changed as the quality of a poet's hexameter was judged against the standard set by Virgil and the other Augustan poets, a respect for literary precedent encompassed by the Latin word '. Deviations were generally regarded as idiosyncrasies or hallmarks of personal style and were not imitated by later poets. Juvenal, for example, was fond of occasionally creating verses that placed a sense break between the fourth and fifth foot (instead of in the usual caesura positions), but this technique\u2014known as the bucolic diaeresis\u2014did not catch on with other poets.\nIn the late empire, writers experimented again by adding unusual restrictions to the standard hexameter. The rhopalic verse of Ausonius is a good example; besides following the standard hexameter pattern, each word in the line is one syllable longer than the previous, e.g.:\nAlso notable is the tendency among late grammarians to thoroughly dissect the hexameters of Virgil and earlier poets. A treatise on poetry by Diomedes Grammaticus is a good example, as this work categorizes dactylic hexameter verses in ways that were later interpreted under the golden line rubric. Independently, these two trends show the form becoming highly artificial\u2014more like a puzzle to solve than a medium for personal poetic expression.\nMiddle Ages.\nBy the Middle Ages, some writers adopted more relaxed versions of the meter. Bernard of Cluny, in the 12th century, for example, employs it in his \"De Contemptu Mundi\", but ignores classical conventions in favor of accentual effects and predictable rhyme both within and between verses, e.g.:\nNot all medieval writers are so at odds with the Virgilian standard, and with the rediscovery of classical literature, later Medieval and Renaissance writers are far more orthodox, but by then the form had become an academic exercise. Petrarch, for example, devoted much time to his \"Africa\", a dactylic hexameter epic on Scipio Africanus, completed in 1341, but this work was unappreciated in his time and remains little read today. It begins as follows:\nIn contrast, Dante decided to write his epic, the \"Divine Comedy\" in Italian\u2014a choice that defied the traditional epic choice of Latin dactylic hexameters\u2014and produced a masterpiece beloved both then and now.\nWith the Neo-Latin period, the language itself came to be regarded as a medium only for serious and learned expression, a view that left little room for Latin poetry. The emergence of Recent Latin in the 20th century restored classical orthodoxy among Latinists and sparked a general (if still academic) interest in the beauty of Latin poetry. Today, the modern Latin poets who use the dactylic hexameter are generally as faithful to Virgil as Rome's Silver Age poets.\nIn modern languages.\nIn English.\nMany poets have attempted to write dactylic hexameters in English, though few works composed in the meter have stood the test of time. Most such works are accentual rather than quantitative. Perhaps the most famous is Longfellow's \"Evangeline\", whose first lines are as follows:\nContemporary poet Annie Finch wrote her epic libretto \"Among the Goddesses\" in dactylic tetrameter, which she claims is the most accurate English accentual equivalent of dactylic hexameter. Poets who have written quantitative hexameters in English include Robert Bridges and Rodney Merrill, whose translation of part of the \"Iliad\" begins as follows (see External links below):\nAlthough the rules seem simple, it is hard to use classical hexameter in English because English is a stress-timed language that condenses vowels and consonants between stressed syllables, while hexameter relies on the regular timing of the phonetic sounds. Languages having the latter properties (i.e., languages that are not stress-timed) include Ancient Greek, Latin, Lithuanian and Hungarian.\nIn German.\nDactylic hexameter has proved more successful in German than in most modern languages. Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock's epic \"Der Messias\" popularized accentual dactylic hexameter in German. Subsequent German poets to employ the form include Goethe (notably in his \"Reineke Fuchs\") and Schiller.\nThe opening lines of Goethe's (\"Reynard the Fox\"), written in 1793\u20131794, are:\nIn French.\nJean-Antoine de Ba\u00eff (1532\u20131589) wrote poems regulated by quantity on the Greco\u2013Roman model, a system which came to be known as \"vers mesur\u00e9s\", or \"vers mesur\u00e9s \u00e0 l'antique\", which the French language of the Renaissance permitted. To do this, he invented a special phonetic alphabet. In works like his \"\u00c9tr\u00e9nes de po\u00e9zie Franzo\u0119ze an v\u0119rs mezur\u00e9s\" (1574) or \"Chansonnettes\" he used the dactylic hexameter, and other meters, in a quantitative way.\nAn example of one of his elegiac couplets is as follows. The final -e of , , and is sounded, and the word is pronounced /i/:\nA modern attempt at reproducing the dactylic hexameter in French is this one, by Andr\u00e9 Markowicz (1985), translating Catullus's poem 63. Again the final -e and -es of , , and are sounded:\nIn Hungarian.\nHungarian is extremely suitable to hexameter (and other forms of poetry based on quantitative meter). It has been applied to Hungarian since 1541, introduced by the grammarian J\u00e1nos Sylvester.\nA hexameter can even occur spontaneously. For example, a student may extricate themselves from failing to remember a poem by saying the following, which is a hexameter in Hungarian:\nS\u00e1ndor We\u00f6res included an ordinary nameplate text in one of his poems (this time, a pentameter):\nA label on a bar of chocolate went as follows, another hexameter, noticed by the poet D\u00e1niel Varr\u00f3:\nDue to this feature, the hexameter has been widely used both in translated (Greek and Roman) and in original Hungarian poetry up to the twentieth century (e.g. by Mikl\u00f3s Radn\u00f3ti).\nIn Lithuanian.\n\"The Seasons\" (\"Metai\") by Kristijonas Donelaitis is a famous Lithuanian poem in quantitative dactylic hexameters. Because of the nature of Lithuanian, more than half of the lines of the poem are entirely spondaic save for the mandatory dactyl in the fifth foot."}
{"id": "8466", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8466", "title": "Dorado", "text": "Dorado (, ) is a constellation in the Southern Sky. It was named in the late 16th century and is now one of the 88 modern constellations. Its name refers to the mahi-mahi (\"Coryphaena hippurus\"), which is known as \"dorado\" (\"golden\") in Spanish, although it has also been depicted as a swordfish. Dorado contains most of the Large Magellanic Cloud, the remainder being in the constellation Mensa. The South Ecliptic pole also lies within this constellation.\nEven though the name Dorado is not Latin but Spanish, astronomers give it the Latin genitive form \"Doradus\" when naming its stars; it is treated (like the adjacent asterism Argo Navis) as a feminine proper name of Greek origin ending in -\u014d (like \"Io\" or \"Callisto\" or \"Argo\"), which have a genitive ending \"-\u016bs\".\nHistory.\nDorado was one of twelve constellations named by Petrus Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman. It appeared:\nDorado represents a dolphinfish; it has also been called the goldfish because Dorado are gold-colored.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nAlpha Doradus is a blue-white star of magnitude 3.3, 176 light-years from Earth. It is the brightest star in Dorado. Beta Doradus is a notably bright Cepheid variable star. It is a yellow-tinged supergiant star that has a minimum magnitude of 4.1 and a maximum magnitude of 3.5. One thousand and forty light-years from Earth, Beta Doradus has a period of 9 days and 20 hours.\nR Doradus is one of the many variable stars in Dorado. S Dor, 9.721 hypergiant in the Large Magellanic Cloud, is the prototype of S Doradus variable stars. The variable star R Doradus 5.73 has the largest-known apparent size of any star other than the Sun. Gamma Doradus is the prototype of the Gamma Doradus variable stars.\nSupernova 1987A was the closest supernova to occur since the invention of the telescope. SNR 0509-67.5 is the remnant of an unusually energetic Type 1a supernova from about 400 years ago.\nHE 0437-5439 is a hypervelocity star escaping from the Milky Way/Magellanic Cloud system.\nDorado is also the location of the South Ecliptic pole, which lies near the fish's head. The pole was called \"Polus Doradinalis\" by Philipp von Zesen, aka Caesius.\nIn early 2020, the exoplanet TOI-700 d was discovered orbiting the star TOI-700 in Dorado. This is the first potentially Earth-like exoplanet to be discovered by the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite.\nDeep-sky objects.\nBecause Dorado contains part of the Large Magellanic Cloud, it is rich in deep sky objects. The Large Magellanic Cloud, 25,000 light-years in diameter, is a satellite galaxy of the Milky Way Galaxy, located at a distance of 179,000 light-years. It has been deformed by its gravitational interactions with the larger Milky Way. In 1987, it became host to SN 1987A, the first supernova of 1987 and the closest since 1604. This 25,000-light-year-wide galaxy contains over 10,000 million stars. All coordinates given are for Epoch J2000.0.\nEquivalents.\nIn Chinese astronomy, the stars of Dorado are in two of Xu Guangqi's Southern Asterisms (\u8fd1\u5357\u6975\u661f\u5340, \"J\u00ecnn\u00e1nj\u00edx\u012bng\u014du\"): the White Patches Attached (\u593e\u767d, \"Ji\u0101b\u00e1i\") and the Goldfish (\u91d1\u9b5a, \"J\u012bny\u00fa\")."}
{"id": "8467", "revid": "48080579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8467", "title": "Draco (lawgiver)", "text": "Draco (; , ), also called Drako or Drakon, according to Athenian tradition, was the first legislator of Athens in Ancient Greece. He replaced the system of oral law and blood feud by the Draconian constitution, a written code to be enforced only by a court of law. His laws were supposed to have been very harsh, establishing the death penalty for most offenses. Tradition held that all of his laws were repealed by Solon, save for those on homicide. An inscription from 409/8 BC contains part of the current law and refers to it as \"the law of Draco about homicide\". Nothing is known about the specifics of other laws established by Draco.\nAccording to some scholars, Draco may have been a fictional figure, entirely or in part. Biographical information about him is almost entirely lacking; he was held to have established his legal code in the year 621/620 BC. Since the 19th century, the adjective \"draconian\" (Greek: , ) refers to similarly unforgiving rules or laws in Greek, English, and other European languages.\nHistoricity.\nNothing is known about Draco's life except that he established his legal code during the reign of the archon Aristaechmus in the year 621/620 BC. The \"Suda\", the 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, records a folkloric story about Draco's death: he went to Aegina to establish laws and was suffocated in the theater when his supporters honored him by throwing many hats, shirts and cloaks on him. Some scholars question whether Draco was a real historical figure or consider that he may have been partially fictional. Karl Julius Beloch hypothesized that Draco was not a person; \"drakon\" means 'serpent' in Greek, and a sacred serpent on the acropolis was worshipped in the Athenian religion. Therefore, the \"laws of Draco\" may have been laws issued in the name of the sacred serpent by its priests; later, this origin was forgotten and Draco was reinterpreted as a lawgiver. Raphael Sealey notes that this hypothesis helps explain how the seemingly protracted development of Athenian homicide law could be attributed to a single source. However, most scholars believe that Draco really did establish laws on homicide and other offenses, and some accept the attribution to him of the inscription partially recording the homicide law.\nDraconian constitution.\nThe laws ( \u2013 ) that he laid were the first written constitution of Athens. So that no one would be unaware of them, they were posted on wooden tablets ( \u2013 ), where they were preserved for almost two centuries on steles of the shape of four-sided pyramids ( \u2013 ). The tablets were called , perhaps because they could be pivoted along the pyramid's axis to read any side.\nThe constitution featured several major innovations:\nThe laws were particularly harsh. For example, any debtor whose status was lower than that of his creditor was forced into slavery. The punishment was more lenient for those owing a debt to a member of a lower class. The death penalty was the punishment for even minor offences, such as stealing a cabbage. Concerning the liberal use of the death penalty in the Draconic code, Plutarch states:\nAll Draco's laws were repealed by Solon in the early 6th century BC, with the exception of the homicide law.\nHomicide law.\nAfter much debate, the Athenians decided to revise the laws, including the homicide law, in 409 BC. The text of the homicide law is partially preserved in a fragmentary inscription. It states that it is up to the victim's relatives to prosecute a killer.\nAccording to the preserved part of the inscription, unintentional homicides received a sentence of exile. It is not clear whether Draco's law specified the punishment for intentional homicide. In 409 BC, intentional homicide was punished by death, but Draco's law begins: \".\" Although ambiguous and difficult to translate, one suggested translation is: \"Even if a man not intentionally kills another, he is exiled.\"\nCouncil of Four Hundred.\nDraco introduced the lot-chosen Council of Four Hundred, distinct from the Areopagus, which evolved in later constitutions to play a large role in Athenian democracy. Aristotle notes that Draco, while having the laws written, merely legislated for an existing unwritten Athenian constitution such as setting exact qualifications for eligibility for office.\nAccording to Aristotle, Draco extended the franchise to all free men who could furnish themselves with a set of military equipment. However, this claim is not based on the authentic tradition, thus untrue as claimed by Welwei in 1998. They elected the Council of Four Hundred from among their number; nine archons and the treasurers were drawn from persons possessing an unencumbered property of not less than ten \"minas\", the generals (\"strategoi\") and commanders of cavalry (\"hipparchoi\") from those who could show an unencumbered property of not less than a hundred \"minas\" and had children born in lawful wedlock over ten years of age. Thus, in the event of their death, their estate could pass to a competent heir. These officers were required to hold to account the \"prytanes\" (councillors), \"strategoi\" (generals) and \"hipparchoi\" (cavalry officers) of the preceding year until their accounts had been audited. \"The Council of Areopagus was guardian of the laws, and kept watch over the magistrates to see that they executed their offices in accordance with the laws. Any person who felt himself wronged might lay an information before the Council of Areopagus, on declaring what law was broken by the wrong done to him. But, as has been said before, loans were secured upon the persons of the debtors, and the land was in the hands of a few.\""}
{"id": "8468", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8468", "title": "Determinant", "text": "In mathematics, the determinant is a scalar-valued function of the entries of a square matrix. The determinant of a matrix is commonly denoted , , or . Its value characterizes some properties of the matrix and the linear map represented, on a given basis, by the matrix. In particular, the determinant is nonzero if and only if the matrix is invertible and the corresponding linear map is an isomorphism. \nThe determinant is completely determined by the two following properties: the determinant of a product of matrices is the product of their determinants, and the determinant of a triangular matrix is the product of its diagonal entries.\nThe determinant of a matrix is\nand the determinant of a matrix is\nThe determinant of an matrix can be defined in several equivalent ways, the most common being Leibniz formula, which expresses the determinant as a sum of formula_3 (the factorial of ) signed products of matrix entries. It can be computed by the Laplace expansion, which expresses the determinant as a linear combination of determinants of submatrices, or with Gaussian elimination, which allows computing a row echelon form with the same determinant, equal to the product of the diagonal entries of the row echelon form.\nDeterminants can also be defined by some of their properties. Namely, the determinant is the unique function defined on the matrices that has the four following properties: \nThe above properties relating to rows (properties 2\u20134) may be replaced by the corresponding statements with respect to columns.\nThe determinant is invariant under matrix similarity. This implies that, given a linear endomorphism of a finite-dimensional vector space, the determinant of the matrix that represents it on a basis does not depend on the chosen basis. This allows defining the \"determinant\" of a linear endomorphism, which does not depend on the choice of a coordinate system.\nDeterminants occur throughout mathematics. For example, a matrix is often used to represent the coefficients in a system of linear equations, and determinants can be used to solve these equations (Cramer's rule), although other methods of solution are computationally much more efficient. Determinants are used for defining the characteristic polynomial of a square matrix, whose roots are the eigenvalues. In geometry, the signed -dimensional volume of a -dimensional parallelepiped is expressed by a determinant, and the determinant of a linear endomorphism determines how the orientation and the -dimensional volume are transformed under the endomorphism. This is used in calculus with exterior differential forms and the Jacobian determinant, in particular for changes of variables in multiple integrals.\nTwo by two matrices.\nThe determinant of a matrix formula_4 is denoted either by \"\" or by vertical bars around the matrix, and is defined as\nFor example,\nFirst properties.\nThe determinant has several key properties that can be proved by direct evaluation of the definition for formula_7-matrices, and that continue to hold for determinants of larger matrices. They are as follows: first, the determinant of the identity matrix formula_8 is 1.\nSecond, the determinant is zero if two rows are the same:\nThis holds similarly if the two columns are the same. Moreover,\nFinally, if any column is multiplied by some number formula_11 (i.e., all entries in that column are multiplied by that number), the determinant is also multiplied by that number:\nGeometric meaning.\nIf the matrix entries are real numbers, the matrix represents the linear map that maps the basis vectors to the columns of . The images of the basis vectors form a parallelogram that represents the image of the unit square under the mapping. The parallelogram defined by the columns of the above matrix is the one with vertices at , , , and , as shown in the accompanying diagram.\nThe absolute value of is the area of the parallelogram, and thus represents the scale factor by which areas are transformed by .\nThe absolute value of the determinant together with the sign becomes the signed area of the parallelogram. The signed area is the same as the usual area, except that it is negative when the angle from the first to the second vector defining the parallelogram turns in a clockwise direction (which is opposite to the direction one would get for the identity matrix).\nTo show that is the signed area, one may consider a matrix containing two vectors and representing the parallelogram's sides. The signed area can be expressed as for the angle \"\u03b8\" between the vectors, which is simply base times height, the length of one vector times the perpendicular component of the other. Due to the sine this already is the signed area, yet it may be expressed more conveniently using the cosine of the complementary angle to a perpendicular vector, e.g. , so that becomes the signed area in question, which can be determined by the pattern of the scalar product to be equal to according to the following equations:\nThus the determinant gives the scaling factor and the orientation induced by the mapping represented by \"A\". When the determinant is equal to one, the linear mapping defined by the matrix is equi-areal and orientation-preserving.\nThe object known as the \"bivector\" is related to these ideas. In 2D, it can be interpreted as an \"oriented plane segment\" formed by imagining two vectors each with origin , and coordinates and . The bivector magnitude (denoted by ) is the \"signed area\", which is also the determinant .\nIf an real matrix \"A\" is written in terms of its column vectors formula_14, then\nThis means that formula_16 maps the unit \"n\"-cube to the \"n\"-dimensional parallelotope defined by the vectors formula_17 the region formula_18\nThe determinant gives the signed \"n\"-dimensional volume of this parallelotope, formula_19 and hence describes more generally the \"n\"-dimensional volume scaling factor of the linear transformation produced by \"A\". (The sign shows whether the transformation preserves or reverses orientation.) In particular, if the determinant is zero, then this parallelotope has volume zero and is not fully \"n\"-dimensional, which indicates that the dimension of the image of \"A\" is less than \"n\". This means that \"A\" produces a linear transformation which is neither onto nor one-to-one, and so is not invertible.\nDefinition.\nLet \"A\" be a square matrix with \"n\" rows and \"n\" columns, so that it can be written as\nThe entries formula_21 etc. are, for many purposes, real or complex numbers. As discussed below, the determinant is also defined for matrices whose entries are in a commutative ring.\nThe determinant of \"A\" is denoted by det(\"A\"), or it can be denoted directly in terms of the matrix entries by writing enclosing bars instead of brackets:\nThere are various equivalent ways to define the determinant of a square matrix \"A\", i.e. one with the same number of rows and columns: the determinant can be defined via the Leibniz formula, an explicit formula involving sums of products of certain entries of the matrix. The determinant can also be characterized as the unique function depending on the entries of the matrix satisfying certain properties. This approach can also be used to compute determinants by simplifying the matrices in question.\nLeibniz formula.\n3 \u00d7 3 matrices.\nThe \"Leibniz formula\" for the determinant of a matrix is the following:\nIn this expression, each term has one factor from each row, all in different columns, arranged in increasing row order. For example, \"bdi\" has \"b\" from the first row second column, \"d\" from the second row first column, and \"i\" from the third row third column. The signs are determined by how many transpositions of factors are necessary to arrange the factors in increasing order of their columns (given that the terms are arranged left-to-right in increasing row order): positive for an even number of transpositions and negative for an odd number. For the example of \"bdi\", the single transposition of \"bd\" to \"db\" gives \"dbi,\" whose three factors are from the first, second and third columns respectively; this is an odd number of transpositions, so the term appears with negative sign.\nThe rule of Sarrus is a mnemonic for the expanded form of this determinant: the sum of the products of three diagonal north-west to south-east lines of matrix elements, minus the sum of the products of three diagonal south-west to north-east lines of elements, when the copies of the first two columns of the matrix are written beside it as in the illustration. This scheme for calculating the determinant of a matrix does not carry over into higher dimensions.\n\"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrices.\nGeneralizing the above to higher dimensions, the determinant of an formula_24 matrix is an expression involving permutations and their signatures. A permutation of the set formula_25 is a bijective function formula_26 from this set to itself, with values formula_27 exhausting the entire set. The set of all such permutations, called the symmetric group, is commonly denoted formula_28. The signature formula_29 of a permutation formula_26 is formula_31 if the permutation can be obtained with an even number of transpositions (exchanges of two entries); otherwise, it is formula_32\nGiven a matrix\nthe Leibniz formula for its determinant is, using sigma notation for the sum,\nUsing pi notation for the product, this can be shortened into\nThe Levi-Civita symbol formula_36 is defined on the -tuples of integers in formula_37 as if two of the integers are equal, and otherwise as the signature of the permutation defined by the \"n-\"tuple of integers. With the Levi-Civita symbol, the Leibniz formula becomes \nwhere the sum is taken over all -tuples of integers in formula_39\nProperties.\nCharacterization of the determinant.\nThe determinant can be characterized by the following three key properties. To state these, it is convenient to regard an formula_24-matrix \"A\" as being composed of its formula_41 columns, so denoted as\nwhere the column vector formula_43 (for each \"i\") is composed of the entries of the matrix in the \"i\"-th column.\nIf the determinant is defined using the Leibniz formula as above, these three properties can be proved by direct inspection of that formula. Some authors also approach the determinant directly using these three properties: it can be shown that there is exactly one function that assigns to any formula_24-matrix \"A\" a number that satisfies these three properties. This also shows that this more abstract approach to the determinant yields the same definition as the one using the Leibniz formula.\nTo see this it suffices to expand the determinant by multi-linearity in the columns into a (huge) linear combination of determinants of matrices in which each column is a standard basis vector. These determinants are either 0 (by property\u00a09) or else \u00b11 (by properties 1 and\u00a012 below), so the linear combination gives the expression above in terms of the Levi-Civita symbol. While less technical in appearance, this characterization cannot entirely replace the Leibniz formula in defining the determinant, since without it the existence of an appropriate function is not clear.\nImmediate consequences.\nThese rules have several further consequences:\nExample.\nThese characterizing properties and their consequences listed above are both theoretically significant, but can also be used to compute determinants for concrete matrices. In fact, Gaussian elimination can be applied to bring any matrix into upper triangular form, and the steps in this algorithm affect the determinant in a controlled way. The following concrete example illustrates the computation of the determinant of the matrix formula_16 using that method:\nCombining these equalities gives formula_64\nTranspose.\nThe determinant of the transpose of formula_16 equals the determinant of \"A\":\nThis can be proven by inspecting the Leibniz formula. This implies that in all the properties mentioned above, the word \"column\" can be replaced by \"row\" throughout. For example, viewing an matrix as being composed of \"n\" rows, the determinant is an \"n\"-linear function.\nMultiplicativity and matrix groups.\nThe determinant is a \"multiplicative map\", i.e., for square matrices formula_16 and formula_68 of equal size, the determinant of a matrix product equals the product of their determinants:\nThis key fact can be proven by observing that, for a fixed matrix formula_68, both sides of the equation are alternating and multilinear as a function depending on the columns of formula_16. Moreover, they both take the value formula_72 when formula_16 is the identity matrix. The above-mentioned unique characterization of alternating multilinear maps therefore shows this claim.\nA matrix formula_16 with entries in a field is invertible precisely if its determinant is nonzero. This follows from the multiplicativity of the determinant and the formula for the inverse involving the adjugate matrix mentioned below. In this event, the determinant of the inverse matrix is given by\nIn particular, products and inverses of matrices with non-zero determinant (respectively, determinant one) still have this property. Thus, the set of such matrices (of fixed size formula_41 over a field formula_77) forms a group known as the general linear group formula_78 (respectively, a subgroup called the special linear group formula_79. More generally, the word \"special\" indicates the subgroup of another matrix group of matrices of determinant one. Examples include the special orthogonal group (which if \"n\" is 2 or 3 consists of all rotation matrices), and the special unitary group.\nBecause the determinant respects multiplication and inverses, it is in fact a group homomorphism from formula_78 into the multiplicative group formula_81 of nonzero elements of formula_77. This homomorphism is surjective and its kernel is formula_83 (the matrices with determinant one). Hence, by the first isomorphism theorem, this shows that formula_83 is a normal subgroup of formula_78, and that the quotient group formula_86 is isomorphic to formula_81.\nThe Cauchy\u2013Binet formula is a generalization of that product formula for \"rectangular\" matrices. This formula can also be recast as a multiplicative formula for compound matrices whose entries are the determinants of all quadratic submatrices of a given matrix.\nLaplace expansion.\nLaplace expansion expresses the determinant of a matrix formula_16 recursively in terms of determinants of smaller matrices, known as its minors. The minor formula_89 is defined to be the determinant of the formula_90-matrix that results from formula_16 by removing the formula_92-th row and the formula_93-th column. The expression formula_94 is known as a cofactor. For every formula_92, one has the equality\nwhich is called the \"Laplace expansion along the th row\". For example, the Laplace expansion along the first row (formula_97) gives the following formula:\nUnwinding the determinants of these formula_7-matrices gives back the Leibniz formula mentioned above. Similarly, the \"Laplace expansion along the formula_93-th column\" is the equality\nLaplace expansion can be used iteratively for computing determinants, but this approach is inefficient for large matrices. However, it is useful for computing the determinants of highly symmetric matrix such as the Vandermonde matrix\nformula_102The \"n\"-term Laplace expansion along a row or column can be generalized to write an \"n\" x \"n\" determinant as a sum of formula_103 terms, each the product of the determinant of a \"k\" x \"k\" submatrix and the determinant of the complementary (\"n\u2212k\") x (\"n\u2212k\") submatrix.\nAdjugate matrix.\nThe adjugate matrix formula_104 is the transpose of the matrix of the cofactors, that is,\nFor every matrix, one has\nThus the adjugate matrix can be used for expressing the inverse of a nonsingular matrix:\nBlock matrices.\nThe formula for the determinant of a formula_7-matrix above continues to hold, under appropriate further assumptions, for a block matrix, i.e., a matrix composed of four submatrices formula_109 of dimension formula_110, formula_111, formula_112 and formula_24, respectively. The easiest such formula, which can be proven using either the Leibniz formula or a factorization involving the Schur complement, is\nIf formula_16 is invertible, then it follows with results from the section on multiplicativity that\nwhich simplifies to formula_117 when formula_118 is a formula_119-matrix.\nA similar result holds when formula_118 is invertible, namely\nBoth results can be combined to derive Sylvester's determinant theorem, which is also stated below.\nIf the blocks are square matrices of the \"same\" size further formulas hold. For example, if formula_122 and formula_118 commute (i.e., formula_124), then\nThis formula has been generalized to matrices composed of more than formula_7 blocks, again under appropriate commutativity conditions among the individual blocks.\nFor formula_127 and formula_128, the following formula holds (even if formula_16 and formula_68 do not commute)\nSylvester's determinant theorem.\nSylvester's determinant theorem states that for \"A\", an matrix, and \"B\", an matrix (so that \"A\" and \"B\" have dimensions allowing them to be multiplied in either order forming a square matrix):\nwhere \"I\"\"m\" and \"I\"\"n\" are the and identity matrices, respectively.\nFrom this general result several consequences follow.\nA generalization is formula_133(see Matrix_determinant_lemma), where \"Z\" is an invertible matrix and \"W\" is an invertible matrix.\nSum.\nThe determinant of the sum formula_134 of two square matrices of the same size is not in general expressible in terms of the determinants of \"A\" and of \"B\". \nHowever, for positive semidefinite matrices formula_16, formula_68 and formula_122 of equal size,\nformula_138\nwith the corollary\nformula_139 \nBrunn\u2013Minkowski theorem implies that the th root of determinant is a concave function, when restricted to Hermitian positive-definite formula_140 matrices. Therefore, if and are Hermitian positive-definite formula_140 matrices, one has\nformula_142 since the th root of the determinant is a homogeneous function.\nSum identity for 2\u00d72 matrices.\nFor the special case of formula_143 matrices with complex entries, the determinant of the sum can be written in terms of determinants and traces in the following identity:\nProperties of the determinant in relation to other notions.\nEigenvalues and characteristic polynomial.\nThe determinant is closely related to two other central concepts in linear algebra, the eigenvalues and the characteristic polynomial of a matrix. Let formula_16 be an formula_24-matrix with complex entries. Then, by the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, formula_16 must have exactly \"n\" eigenvalues formula_148. (Here it is understood that an eigenvalue with algebraic multiplicity occurs times in this list.) Then, it turns out the determinant of is equal to the \"product\" of these eigenvalues,\nThe product of all non-zero eigenvalues is referred to as pseudo-determinant.\nFrom this, one immediately sees that the determinant of a matrix formula_16 is zero if and only if formula_151 is an eigenvalue of formula_16. In other words, formula_16 is invertible if and only if formula_151 is not an eigenvalue of formula_16.\nThe characteristic polynomial is defined as\nHere, formula_157 is the indeterminate of the polynomial and formula_45 is the identity matrix of the same size as formula_16. By means of this polynomial, determinants can be used to find the eigenvalues of the matrix formula_16: they are precisely the roots of this polynomial, i.e., those complex numbers formula_161 such that\nA Hermitian matrix is positive definite if all its eigenvalues are positive. Sylvester's criterion asserts that this is equivalent to the determinants of the submatrices\nbeing positive, for all formula_164 between formula_165 and formula_41.\nTrace.\nThe trace tr(\"A\") is by definition the sum of the diagonal entries of and also equals the sum of the eigenvalues. Thus, for complex matrices ,\nor, for real matrices ,\nHere exp() denotes the matrix exponential of , because every eigenvalue of corresponds to the eigenvalue exp() of exp(). In particular, given any logarithm of , that is, any matrix satisfying\nthe determinant of is given by\nFor example, for , , and , respectively,\ncf. Cayley-Hamilton theorem. Such expressions are deducible from combinatorial arguments, Newton's identities, or the Faddeev\u2013LeVerrier algorithm. That is, for generic , the signed constant term of the characteristic polynomial, determined recursively from\nIn the general case, this may also be obtained from\nwhere the sum is taken over the set of all integers satisfying the equation\nThe formula can be expressed in terms of the complete exponential Bell polynomial of \"n\" arguments \"s\"\"l\" = \u2212(\"l\" \u2013 1)! tr(\"A\"\"l\") as\nThis formula can also be used to find the determinant of a matrix with multidimensional indices and . The product and trace of such matrices are defined in a natural way as\nAn important arbitrary dimension identity can be obtained from the Mercator series expansion of the logarithm when the expansion converges. If every eigenvalue of \"A\" is less than 1 in absolute value,\nwhere is the identity matrix. More generally, if\nis expanded as a formal power series in then all coefficients of for are zero and the remaining polynomial is .\nUpper and lower bounds.\nFor a positive definite matrix , the trace operator gives the following tight lower and upper bounds on the log determinant\nwith equality if and only if . This relationship can be derived via the formula for the Kullback-Leibler divergence between two multivariate normal distributions.\nAlso,\nThese inequalities can be proved by expressing the traces and the determinant in terms of the eigenvalues. As such, they represent the well-known fact that the harmonic mean is less than the geometric mean, which is less than the arithmetic mean, which is, in turn, less than the root mean square.\nDerivative.\nThe Leibniz formula shows that the determinant of real (or analogously for complex) square matrices is a polynomial function from formula_181 to formula_182. In particular, it is everywhere differentiable. Its derivative can be expressed using Jacobi's formula:\nwhere formula_104 denotes the adjugate of formula_16. In particular, if formula_16 is invertible, we have\nExpressed in terms of the entries of formula_16, these are\nYet another equivalent formulation is\nusing big O notation. The special case where formula_191, the identity matrix, yields\nThis identity is used in describing Lie algebras associated to certain matrix Lie groups. For example, the special linear group formula_193 is defined by the equation formula_194. The above formula shows that its Lie algebra is the special linear Lie algebra formula_195 consisting of those matrices having trace zero.\nWriting a formula_196-matrix as formula_197 where formula_198 are column vectors of length 3, then the gradient over one of the three vectors may be written as the cross product of the other two:\nHistory.\nHistorically, determinants were used long before matrices: A determinant was originally defined as a property of a system of linear equations.\nThe determinant \"determines\" whether the system has a unique solution (which occurs precisely if the determinant is non-zero).\nIn this sense, determinants were first used in the Chinese mathematics textbook \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" (\u4e5d\u7ae0\u7b97\u8853, Chinese scholars, around the 3rd century BCE). In Europe, solutions of linear systems of two equations were expressed by Cardano in 1545 by a determinant-like entity.\nDeterminants proper originated separately from the work of Seki Takakazu in 1683 in Japan and parallelly of Leibniz in 1693. stated, without proof, Cramer's rule. Both Cramer and also were led to determinants by the question of plane curves passing through a given set of points.\nVandermonde (1771) first recognized determinants as independent functions. gave the general method of expanding a determinant in terms of its complementary minors: Vandermonde had already given a special case. Immediately following, Lagrange (1773) treated determinants of the second and third order and applied it to questions of elimination theory; he proved many special cases of general identities.\nGauss (1801) made the next advance. Like Lagrange, he made much use of determinants in the theory of numbers. He introduced the word \"determinant\" (Laplace had used \"resultant\"), though not in the present signification, but rather as applied to the discriminant of a quantic. Gauss also arrived at the notion of reciprocal (inverse) determinants, and came very near the multiplication theorem.\nThe next contributor of importance is Binet (1811, 1812), who formally stated the theorem relating to the product of two matrices of \"m\" columns and \"n\" rows, which for the special case of reduces to the multiplication theorem. On the same day (November 30, 1812) that Binet presented his paper to the Academy, Cauchy also presented one on the subject. (See Cauchy\u2013Binet formula.) In this he used the word \"determinant\" in its present sense, summarized and simplified what was then known on the subject, improved the notation, and gave the multiplication theorem with a proof more satisfactory than Binet's. With him begins the theory in its generality.\n used the functional determinant which Sylvester later called the Jacobian. In his memoirs in \"Crelle's Journal\" for 1841 he specially treats this subject, as well as the class of alternating functions which Sylvester has called \"alternants\". About the time of Jacobi's last memoirs, Sylvester (1839) and Cayley began their work. introduced the modern notation for the determinant using vertical bars.\nThe study of special forms of determinants has been the natural result of the completion of the general theory. Axisymmetric determinants have been studied by Lebesgue, Hesse, and Sylvester; persymmetric determinants by Sylvester and Hankel; circulants by Catalan, Spottiswoode, Glaisher, and Scott; skew determinants and Pfaffians, in connection with the theory of orthogonal transformation, by Cayley; continuants by Sylvester; Wronskians (so called by Muir) by Christoffel and Frobenius; compound determinants by Sylvester, Reiss, and Picquet; Jacobians and Hessians by Sylvester; and symmetric gauche determinants by Trudi. Of the textbooks on the subject Spottiswoode's was the first. In America, Hanus (1886), Weld (1893), and Muir/Metzler (1933) published treatises.\nApplications.\nCramer's rule.\nDeterminants can be used to describe the solutions of a linear system of equations, written in matrix form as formula_200. This equation has a unique solution formula_201 if and only if formula_202 is nonzero. In this case, the solution is given by Cramer's rule:\nwhere formula_204 is the matrix formed by replacing the formula_92-th column of formula_16 by the column vector formula_207. This follows immediately by column expansion of the determinant, i.e.\nwhere the vectors formula_209 are the columns of \"A\". The rule is also implied by the identity\nCramer's rule can be implemented in formula_211 time, which is comparable to more common methods of solving systems of linear equations, such as LU, QR, or singular value decomposition.\nLinear independence.\nDeterminants can be used to characterize linearly dependent vectors: formula_212 is zero if and only if the column vectors (or, equivalently, the row vectors) of the matrix formula_16 are linearly dependent. For example, given two linearly independent vectors formula_214, a third vector formula_215 lies in the plane spanned by the former two vectors exactly if the determinant of the formula_196-matrix consisting of the three vectors is zero. The same idea is also used in the theory of differential equations: given functions formula_217 (supposed to be formula_218 times differentiable), the Wronskian is defined to be\nIt is non-zero (for some formula_201) in a specified interval if and only if the given functions and all their derivatives up to order formula_218 are linearly independent. If it can be shown that the Wronskian is zero everywhere on an interval then, in the case of analytic functions, this implies the given functions are linearly dependent. See the Wronskian and linear independence. Another such use of the determinant is the resultant, which gives a criterion when two polynomials have a common root.\nOrientation of a basis.\nThe determinant can be thought of as assigning a number to every sequence of \"n\" vectors in R\"n\", by using the square matrix whose columns are the given vectors. The determinant will be nonzero if and only if the sequence of vectors is a \"basis\" for R\"n\". In that case, the sign of the determinant determines whether the orientation of the basis is consistent with or opposite to the orientation of the standard basis. In the case of an orthogonal basis, the magnitude of the determinant is equal to the \"product\" of the lengths of the basis vectors. For instance, an orthogonal matrix with entries in R\"n\" represents an orthonormal basis in Euclidean space, and hence has determinant of \u00b11 (since all the vectors have length 1). The determinant is +1 if and only if the basis has the same orientation. It is \u22121 if and only if the basis has the opposite orientation.\nMore generally, if the determinant of \"A\" is positive, \"A\" represents an orientation-preserving linear transformation (if \"A\" is an orthogonal or matrix, this is a rotation), while if it is negative, \"A\" switches the orientation of the basis.\nVolume and Jacobian determinant.\nAs pointed out above, the absolute value of the determinant of real vectors is equal to the volume of the parallelepiped spanned by those vectors. As a consequence, if formula_222 is the linear map given by multiplication with a matrix formula_16, and formula_224 is any measurable subset, then the volume of formula_225 is given by formula_226 times the volume of formula_227. More generally, if the linear map formula_228 is represented by the formula_111-matrix formula_16, then the formula_41-dimensional volume of formula_225 is given by:\nBy calculating the volume of the tetrahedron bounded by four points, they can be used to identify skew lines. The volume of any tetrahedron, given its vertices formula_234, formula_235, or any other combination of pairs of vertices that form a spanning tree over the vertices.\nFor a general differentiable function, much of the above carries over by considering the Jacobian matrix of \"f\". For\nthe Jacobian matrix is the matrix whose entries are given by the partial derivatives\nIts determinant, the Jacobian determinant, appears in the higher-dimensional version of integration by substitution: for suitable functions \"f\" and an open subset \"U\" of R\"n\" (the domain of \"f\"), the integral over \"f\"(\"U\") of some other function is given by\nThe Jacobian also occurs in the inverse function theorem.\nWhen applied to the field of Cartography, the determinant can be used to measure the rate of expansion of a map near the poles.\nAbstract algebraic aspects.\nDeterminant of an endomorphism.\nThe above identities concerning the determinant of products and inverses of matrices imply that similar matrices have the same determinant: two matrices \"A\" and \"B\" are similar, if there exists an invertible matrix \"X\" such that . Indeed, repeatedly applying the above identities yields\nThe determinant is therefore also called a similarity invariant. The determinant of a linear transformation\nfor some finite-dimensional vector space \"V\" is defined to be the determinant of the matrix describing it, with respect to an arbitrary choice of basis in \"V\". By the similarity invariance, this determinant is independent of the choice of the basis for \"V\" and therefore only depends on the endomorphism \"T\".\nSquare matrices over commutative rings.\nThe above definition of the determinant using the Leibniz rule holds works more generally when the entries of the matrix are elements of a commutative ring formula_241, such as the integers formula_242, as opposed to the field of real or complex numbers. Moreover, the characterization of the determinant as the unique alternating multilinear map that satisfies formula_243 still holds, as do all the properties that result from that characterization.\nA matrix formula_244 is invertible (in the sense that there is an inverse matrix whose entries are in formula_241) if and only if its determinant is an invertible element in formula_241. For formula_247, this means that the determinant is +1 or \u22121. Such a matrix is called unimodular.\nThe determinant being multiplicative, it defines a group homomorphism\nbetween the general linear group (the group of invertible formula_24-matrices with entries in formula_241) and the multiplicative group of units in formula_241. Since it respects the multiplication in both groups, this map is a group homomorphism.\nGiven a ring homomorphism formula_252, there is a map formula_253 given by replacing all entries in formula_241 by their images under formula_255. The determinant respects these maps, i.e., the identity\nholds. In other words, the displayed commutative diagram commutes.\nFor example, the determinant of the complex conjugate of a complex matrix (which is also the determinant of its conjugate transpose) is the complex conjugate of its determinant, and for integer matrices: the reduction modulo formula_257 of the determinant of such a matrix is equal to the determinant of the matrix reduced modulo formula_257 (the latter determinant being computed using modular arithmetic). In the language of category theory, the determinant is a natural transformation between the two functors formula_259 and formula_260. Adding yet another layer of abstraction, this is captured by saying that the determinant is a morphism of algebraic groups, from the general linear group to the multiplicative group,\nExterior algebra.\nThe determinant of a linear transformation formula_240 of an formula_41-dimensional vector space formula_264 or, more generally a free module of (finite) rank formula_41 over a commutative ring formula_241 can be formulated in a coordinate-free manner by considering the formula_41-th exterior power formula_268 of formula_264. The map formula_270 induces a linear map\nAs formula_268 is one-dimensional, the map formula_273 is given by multiplying with some scalar, i.e., an element in formula_241. Some authors such as use this fact to \"define\" the determinant to be the element in formula_241 satisfying the following identity (for all formula_276):\nThis definition agrees with the more concrete coordinate-dependent definition. This can be shown using the uniqueness of a multilinear alternating form on formula_41-tuples of vectors in formula_279.\nFor this reason, the highest non-zero exterior power formula_268 (as opposed to the determinant associated to an endomorphism) is sometimes also called the determinant of formula_264 and similarly for more involved objects such as vector bundles or chain complexes of vector spaces. Minors of a matrix can also be cast in this setting, by considering lower alternating forms formula_282 with formula_283.\nGeneralizations and related notions.\nDeterminants as treated above admit several variants: the permanent of a matrix is defined as the determinant, except that the factors formula_29 occurring in Leibniz's rule are omitted. The immanant generalizes both by introducing a character of the symmetric group formula_28 in Leibniz's rule.\nDeterminants for finite-dimensional algebras.\nFor any associative algebra formula_16 that is finite-dimensional as a vector space over a field formula_287, there is a determinant map\nThis definition proceeds by establishing the characteristic polynomial independently of the determinant, and defining the determinant as the lowest order term of this polynomial. This general definition recovers the determinant for the matrix algebra formula_289, but also includes several further cases including the determinant of a quaternion,\nthe norm formula_291 of a field extension, as well as the Pfaffian of a skew-symmetric matrix and the reduced norm of a central simple algebra, also arise as special cases of this construction.\nInfinite matrices.\nFor matrices with an infinite number of rows and columns, the above definitions of the determinant do not carry over directly. For example, in the Leibniz formula, an infinite sum (all of whose terms are infinite products) would have to be calculated. Functional analysis provides different extensions of the determinant for such infinite-dimensional situations, which however only work for particular kinds of operators.\nThe Fredholm determinant defines the determinant for operators known as trace class operators by an appropriate generalization of the formula\nAnother infinite-dimensional notion of determinant is the functional determinant.\nOperators in von Neumann algebras.\nFor operators in a finite factor, one may define a positive real-valued determinant called the Fuglede\u2212Kadison determinant using the canonical trace. In fact, corresponding to every tracial state on a von Neumann algebra there is a notion of Fuglede\u2212Kadison determinant.\nRelated notions for non-commutative rings.\nFor matrices over non-commutative rings, multilinearity and alternating properties are incompatible for , so there is no good definition of the determinant in this setting.\nFor square matrices with entries in a non-commutative ring, there are various difficulties in defining determinants analogously to that for commutative rings. A meaning can be given to the Leibniz formula provided that the order for the product is specified, and similarly for other definitions of the determinant, but non-commutativity then leads to the loss of many fundamental properties of the determinant, such as the multiplicative property or that the determinant is unchanged under transposition of the matrix. Over non-commutative rings, there is no reasonable notion of a multilinear form (existence of a nonzero with a regular element of \"R\" as value on some pair of arguments implies that \"R\" is commutative). Nevertheless, various notions of non-commutative determinant have been formulated that preserve some of the properties of determinants, notably quasideterminants and the Dieudonn\u00e9 determinant. For some classes of matrices with non-commutative elements, one can define the determinant and prove linear algebra theorems that are very similar to their commutative analogs. Examples include the \"q\"-determinant on quantum groups, the Capelli determinant on Capelli matrices, and the Berezinian on supermatrices (i.e., matrices whose entries are elements of formula_293-graded rings). Manin matrices form the class closest to matrices with commutative elements.\nCalculation.\nDeterminants are mainly used as a theoretical tool. They are rarely calculated explicitly in numerical linear algebra, where for applications such as checking invertibility and finding eigenvalues the determinant has largely been supplanted by other techniques. Computational geometry, however, does frequently use calculations related to determinants.\nWhile the determinant can be computed directly using the Leibniz rule this approach is extremely inefficient for large matrices, since that formula requires calculating formula_3 (formula_41 factorial) products for an formula_24-matrix. Thus, the number of required operations grows very quickly: it is of order formula_3. The Laplace expansion is similarly inefficient. Therefore, more involved techniques have been developed for calculating determinants.\nGaussian elimination.\nGaussian elimination consists of left multiplying a matrix by elementary matrices for getting a matrix in a row echelon form. One can restrict the computation to elementary matrices of determinant . In this case, the determinant of the resulting row echelon form equals the determinant of the initial matrix. As a row echelon form is a triangular matrix, its determinant is the product of the entries of its diagonal.\nSo, the determinant can be computed for almost free from the result of a Gaussian elimination.\nDecomposition methods.\nSome methods compute formula_298 by writing the matrix as a product of matrices whose determinants can be more easily computed. Such techniques are referred to as decomposition methods. Examples include the LU decomposition, the QR decomposition or the Cholesky decomposition (for positive definite matrices). These methods are of order formula_211, which is a significant improvement over formula_300.\nFor example, LU decomposition expresses formula_16 as a product\nof a permutation matrix formula_303 (which has exactly a single formula_165 in each column, and otherwise zeros), a lower triangular matrix formula_305 and an upper triangular matrix formula_306.\nThe determinants of the two triangular matrices formula_305 and formula_306 can be quickly calculated, since they are the products of the respective diagonal entries. The determinant of formula_303 is just the sign formula_310 of the corresponding permutation (which is formula_311 for an even number of permutations and is formula_312 for an odd number of permutations). Once such a LU decomposition is known for formula_16, its determinant is readily computed as\nFurther methods.\nThe order formula_211 reached by decomposition methods has been improved by different methods. If two matrices of order formula_41 can be multiplied in time formula_317, where formula_318 for some formula_319, then there is an algorithm computing the determinant in time formula_320. This means, for example, that an formula_321 algorithm for computing the determinant exists based on the Coppersmith\u2013Winograd algorithm. This exponent has been further lowered, as of 2016, to 2.373.\nIn addition to the complexity of the algorithm, further criteria can be used to compare algorithms.\nEspecially for applications concerning matrices over rings, algorithms that compute the determinant without any divisions exist. (By contrast, Gauss elimination requires divisions.) One such algorithm, having complexity formula_322 is based on the following idea: one replaces permutations (as in the Leibniz rule) by so-called closed ordered walks, in which several items can be repeated. The resulting sum has more terms than in the Leibniz rule, but in the process several of these products can be reused, making it more efficient than naively computing with the Leibniz rule. Algorithms can also be assessed according to their bit complexity, i.e., how many bits of accuracy are needed to store intermediate values occurring in the computation. For example, the Gaussian elimination (or LU decomposition) method is of order formula_211, but the bit length of intermediate values can become exponentially long. By comparison, the Bareiss Algorithm, is an exact-division method (so it does use division, but only in cases where these divisions can be performed without remainder) is of the same order, but the bit complexity is roughly the bit size of the original entries in the matrix times formula_41.\nIf the determinant of \"A\" and the inverse of \"A\" have already been computed, the matrix determinant lemma allows rapid calculation of the determinant of , where \"u\" and \"v\" are column vectors.\nCharles Dodgson (i.e. Lewis Carroll of \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" fame) invented a method for computing determinants called Dodgson condensation. Unfortunately this interesting method does not always work in its original form."}
{"id": "8470", "revid": "48937337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8470", "title": "David Ricardo", "text": "David Ricardo (18 April 1772 \u2013 11 September 1823) was a British political economist, politician, and member of Parliament. He is recognized as one of the most influential classical economists, alongside figures such as Thomas Malthus, Adam Smith and James Mill.\nRicardo was born in London as the third surviving child of a successful stockbroker and his wife. He came from a Sephardic Jewish family of Portuguese origin. At 21, he eloped with a Quaker and converted to Unitarianism, causing estrangement from his family. He made his fortune financing government borrowing and later retired to an estate in Gloucestershire. Ricardo served as High Sheriff of Gloucestershire and bought a seat in Parliament as an earnest reformer. He was friends with prominent figures like James Mill, Jeremy Bentham, and Thomas Malthus, engaging in debates over various topics. Ricardo was also a member of The Geological Society, and his youngest sister was an author.\nAs MP for Portarlington, Ricardo advocated for liberal political movements and reforms, including free trade, parliamentary reform, and criminal law reform. He believed free trade increased the well-being of people by making goods more affordable. Ricardo notably opposed the Corn Laws, which he saw as barriers to economic growth. His friend John Louis Mallett described Ricardo's conviction in his beliefs, though he expressed doubts about Ricardo's disregard for experience and practice. Ricardo died at 51 from an ear infection that led to septicaemia (sepsis). He left behind a considerable fortune and a lasting legacy, with his free trade views eventually becoming public policy in Britain.\nRicardo wrote his first economics article at age 37, advocating for a reduction in the note-issuing of the Bank of England. He was also an abolitionist and believed in the autonomy of a central bank as the issuer of money. Ricardo worked on fixing issues in Adam Smith's Labour Theory of Value, stating that the value of a commodity depends on the labour necessary for its production. He contributed to the development of theories of rent, wages, and profits, defining rent as the difference between the produce obtained by employing equal quantities of capital and labour. Ricardo's Theory of Profit posited that as real wages increase, real profits decrease due to the revenue split between profits and wages.\nRicardian theory of international trade challenges the mercantilism concept of accumulating gold or silver by promoting industry specialization and free trade. Ricardo introduced the concept of \"comparative advantage,\" suggesting that nations should concentrate resources only in industries where they have the greatest efficiency of production relative to their own alternative uses of resources. He argued that international trade is always beneficial, even if one country is more competitive in every area than its trading counterpart. Ricardo opposed protectionism for national economies and was concerned about the short-term impact of technological change on labour.\nPersonal life.\nBorn in London, England, Ricardo was the third surviving of the 17 children of successful stockbroker Abraham Israel Ricardo (1733?\u20131812) and Abigail (1753\u20131801), daughter of Abraham Delvalle (also \"del Valle\"), of a respectable Sephardic Jewish family that had been settled in England for three generations as \"small but prosperous\" tobacco and snuff merchants, and had obtained British citizenship. Abigail's sister, Rebecca, was wife of the engraver Wilson Lowry, and mother of the engraver Joseph Wilson Lowry and the geologist, mineralogist, and author Delvalle Lowry. The Ricardo family were Sephardic Jews of Portuguese origin who had recently relocated from the Dutch Republic. Ricardo began working with his father at the age of 14. At the age of 21, Ricardo eloped with a Quaker, Priscilla Anne Wilkinson, and against his father's wishes, converted to Unitarianism. This religious difference resulted in estrangement from his family, and he was led to adopt a position of independence. His father disowned him and his mother apparently never spoke to him again.\nFollowing this estrangement he went into business for himself with the support of Lubbocks and Forster, an eminent banking house. He made the bulk of his fortune by profitably financing Government borrowing. There is a story that he made his fortune as a result of speculation on the outcome of the Battle of Waterloo: \"The Sunday Times\" reported in Ricardo's obituary, published on 14 September 1823, that during the battle Ricardo \"netted upwards of a million sterling\", a huge sum at the time, and this was later popularised by the economist Paul Samuelson; in reality Ricardo was already very rich and in June 1815 sold his latest government stock before the result of the battle was known in London, so missing half of the rise.\nHe subsequently purchased Gatcombe Park, an estate in Gloucestershire and retired to the country. He was appointed High Sheriff of Gloucestershire for 1818\u201319. In August 1818 he bought Lord Portarlingtons' seat in Parliament for \u00a34,000, as part of the terms of a loan of \u00a325,000. His record in Parliament was that of an earnest reformer. He held the seat until his death five years later.\nRicardo was a close friend of James Mill. Other notable friends included Jeremy Bentham and Thomas Malthus, with whom Ricardo had a considerable debate (in correspondence) over such things as the role of landowners in a society. He also was a member of Malthus' Political Economy Club, and a member of the King of Clubs. He was one of the original members of The Geological Society. His youngest sister was author Sarah Ricardo-Porter (e.g., \"Conversations in Arithmetic\").\nParliamentary record.\nAs MP for Portarlington, Ricardo voted with the opposition in support of liberal political movements in Naples and Sicily, and for inquiry into the administration of justice in Tobago. He divided for (voted for) repeal of the Blasphemous and Seditious Libels Act; then for inquiry into the Peterloo massacre; and, in 1821, for abolition of the death penalty for forgery.\nHe adamantly supported free trade. In 1821 he voted against renewal of the sugar duties, and objected to the higher duty on \"East\" Indian as opposed to \"West\" Indian produce. He opposed the timber duties. He voted silently for parliamentary reform and in 1822 spoke in its favour at the Westminster anniversary reform dinner; and again voted for criminal law reform.\nRicardo believed that increasing imports by free trade boosted the wellbeing of mankind by increasing the amount of goods cheaply available for subsistence and consumption. He was said to have \"possessed an extraordinary quickness in perceiving in the turns of the market any accidental difference which might arise between the relative price of different stocks\". And he grew his wealth dealing in securities during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars.\nAs the Napoleonic Wars waged on, Ricardo developed a disdain for the Corn Laws imposed by the British to encourage exports. Notably, government intervention in the grain trade can be traced as far back as the 1400s; and thereafter trade was controlled, regulated, and taxed. Meanwhile, England developed a capitalist economy involving workers and landlords generating and consuming incomes and capital accumulations that depended entirely on capitalists\u2019 profits, and these key economic elements were under perpetual pressure during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.\nPolitical reform was needed as agricultural output was struggling to keep pace with population growth. The Corn Laws imposed barriers to imports that increased subsistence/consumption costs and triggered demand for higher wages. Higher wages reduced profits for agricultural producers, and had the immediate effects of reducing capital investments and slowing the growth of a nation's economy. Rising rents, attributed by Ricardo to the Corn Laws, came at the expense of the economic profits of nations. For David Ricardo, free trade was ever the answer; he envisioned Britain as importing agriculture products in exchange for exporting manufactured goods. Eventually, after his death, the interventionist laws were repealed, and his free trade views became public policy in Britain.\nOf David Ricardo, his friend John Louis Mallett commented: \" \u2026 he meets you upon every subject that he has studied with a mind made up, and opinions in the nature of mathematical truths. He spoke of parliamentary reform and ballot as a man who would bring such things about, and destroy the existing system tomorrow, if it were in his power, and without the slightest doubt on the result \u2026 It is this very quality of the man\u2019s mind, his entire disregard of experience and practice, which makes me doubtful of his opinions on political economy.\"\nDeath and legacy.\nTen years after retiring and four years after entering Parliament, Ricardo died from an infection of the middle ear that spread into his brain and induced septicaemia. He was 51.\nHe and his wife Priscilla had eight children together including Osman Ricardo (1795\u20131881; MP for Worcester 1847\u20131865), David Ricardo (1803\u20131864, MP for Stroud 1832\u20131833) and Mortimer Ricardo, who served as an officer in the Life Guards and was a deputy lieutenant for Oxfordshire.\nRicardo is buried in an ornate grave in the churchyard of Saint Nicholas in Hardenhuish, now a suburb of Chippenham, Wiltshire. At the time of his death his assets were estimated at \u00a3675,000\u2013\u00a3775,000.\nIdeas.\nRicardo wrote his first economics article at 37, firstly in \"The Morning Chronicle\" advocating reduction in the note-issuing of the Bank of England and then publishing \"The High Price of Bullion, a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes\" in 1810.\nHe was also an abolitionist, speaking at a meeting of the Court of the East India Company in March 1823, where he said he regarded slavery as a stain on the character of the nation.\nBanking.\nAdam Smith argued that free commercial banking, such as the banking system in Scotland which had no central bank when \"Wealth of Nations\" was written in 1776, was favourable to economic growth. Writing just a few decades later, Ricardo argued for a central bank, a cause that was taken up by his students, including John Stuart Mill, who was known to favour the \"laissez-faire\" policies in every place but banking.\nRicardo wrote the \"Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank\" (published posthumously in 1824), which argued for the autonomy of the central bank as the issuer of money.\nRicardo proposed that a ratio of gold and Treasury bills, and a fixed claim (asset) against the government, would secure the central bank's liquidity:\nThe public, or the Government on behalf of the public, is indebted to the Bank in a sum of money larger than the whole amount of Bank notes in circulation; for the Government not only owes the Bank fifteen million, its original capital, which is lent at 3 per cent. interest, but also many more millions which are advanced on Exchequer bills, on half-pay and pension annuities, and on other securities. It is evident, therefore, that if the Government itself were to be the sole issuer of paper money instead of borrowing it of the Bank, the only difference would be with respect to the interest: the Bank would no longer receive interest and the Government would no longer pay it; but all other classes in the community would be exactly in the same position in which they now stand.\nRicardo was a man of many trades, economically and financially speaking. Ricardo was able to recognize and identify the problem presented through banking within regulations and debauched standards of approval at certain times. Ricardo knew that banks in rural areas as well as the Bank of England had increased note lending and overall lending in 1810. Through this, Ricardo proved subsequent changes in price level through the market was also affected and thus new regulations needed to be made available. Furthermore, Ricardo was able to understand and distinguish the socioeconomic makeup that created and established parameters around different classes within the economy. Ricardo advocated for the productive powers of labour to be held in high concern as the most influential of devices that played a role in the progression of the American Economy along with others. In addition, Ricardo made notable advancements in the concept build involving reactions in the open market when considering banking altercations, stock investments, or other considerable impacting events. Ricardo wanted to establish a firm ground between the bank and the control over monetary policy because there was power within the banking system that Ricardo believed needed to be considered carefully. In 1816, Ricardo said \u201cIn the present state of the law, they have the power, without any control whatever, of increasing or reducing the circulation in any degree they may think proper: a power which should neither be entrusted to the State itself, nor to anybody in it; as there can be no security for the uniformity in the value of the currency, when its augmentation or diminution depends solely on the will of the issuers.\u201d Ricardo felt the circulation of money and the decision behind how much is available at any time should not be entrusted to either the State, or any individual. Ricardo argued for the most even distribution possible with the highest control readily available.\nValue theory.\nDavid Ricardo worked to fix the issues he felt were most concerning with Adam Smith\u2019s Labour Theory of Value. Both men worked with the assumption that land, labour, and capital were the three basic factors of production. However, Smith narrowed in on labour as the determinant of value. Ricardo believes that with production having three factors it is impossible for only one of them to determine value on its own. Ricardo illustrates his point by adapting Smith's deer-beaver analogy to show that even when labour is the only factor of production the hardship and tools of the labour will drive a wedge in the relative value of the good. Due to his criticisms of the Labour Theory of Value George Stigler called his theory a \"93% labor theory of value\".\nRicardo's most famous work is his \"Principles of Political Economy and Taxation\" (1817). He advanced a labour theory of value:\nThe value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour.\nRicardo's note to Section VI:\nMr. Malthus appears to think that it is a part of my doctrine, that the cost and value of a thing be the same;\u2014it is, if he means by cost, \"cost of production\" including profit.\nRent.\nRicardo contributed to the development of theories of rent, wages, and profits. He defined rent as \"the difference between the produce obtained by the employment of two equal quantities of capital and labour.\" Ricardo believed that the process of economic development, which increased land use and eventually led to the cultivation of poorer land, principally benefited landowners. According to Ricardo, such premium over \"real social value\" that is reaped due to ownership constitutes value to an individual but is at best a paper monetary return to \"society\". The portion of such purely individual benefit that accrues to scarce resources Ricardo labels \"rent\".\nIn particular, Ricardo postulates that rent is a result of increased populations which results in assets growing scarce and in some cases diminished returns of which were once abundant. Ricardo breaks down this premise by first supposing there are three fields of land - No. 1, 2, 3, - to yield corn, with an equal employment of capital and labour. Initially land No.1 is cultivated and is very productive as measured through the abundant surplus. Over time this abundant surplus becomes diminished as the result of an increase in population, which subsequently creates an increased demand for food. The less desired land, No.2, must now be cultivated and eventually so must land No.3 and so on and so forth. For Ricardo each new cultivated results in diminished surplus as the quality of land fails to yield the equal of that before it. In light of such diminishing surplus landowners see opportunities to charge rent as a means to compensate for the loss of returns on output.\nModel-making.\nAccording to sociologist of quantification Mary S. Morgan David Ricardo can be considered \"one of the pioneers in economic modelling\". In studying rents, for example, Ricardo experiments numerically to determine the relative share of profit accruing to land owner, capital holder and laborers through what Morgan calls 'numerical model farming'. In his numerical and verbal accounts Ricardo tests different improvements in capital, technology or labour to increase the yield of a farm, paralleling actual experiments run by his contemporaries such as \"Turnip\" Townshend.\nRicardo's theories of wages and profits.\nIn his \"Theory of Profit\", Ricardo stated that as real wages increase, real profits decrease because the revenue from the sale of manufactured goods is split between profits and wages. He said in his \"Essay on Profits\", \"Profits depend on high or low wages, wages on the price of necessaries, and the price of necessaries chiefly on the price of food.\"\nRicardian theory of international trade.\nBetween 1500 and 1750 most economists advocated mercantilism, which promoted the idea of international trade for the purpose of earning bullion by running a trade surplus with other countries. Ricardo challenged the idea that the purpose of trade was merely to accumulate gold or silver. With \"comparative advantage\" Ricardo argued in favour of industry specialisation and free trade. He suggested that industry specialization combined with free international trade always produces positive results. This theory expanded on the concept of absolute advantage.\nRicardo suggested that there is mutual national benefit from trade even if one country is more competitive in every area than its trading counterpart and that a nation should concentrate resources only in industries where it has a comparative advantage, that is in those industries in which it has the greatest efficiency of production relative to its own alternative uses of resources, rather than industries where it holds a competitive edge compared to rival nations. Ricardo suggested that national industries which were, in fact, mildly profitable and marginally internationally competitive should be jettisoned in favour of the industries that made the best use of limited resources\u2014the assumption being that subsequent economic growth due to better resource use would more than offset any short-run economic dislocation which would result from closing mildly profitable and marginally competitive national industries.\nRicardo attempted to prove theoretically that international trade is always beneficial. Paul Samuelson called the numbers used in Ricardo's example dealing with trade between England and Portugal the \"four magic numbers\". \"In spite of the fact that the Portuguese could produce both cloth and wine with less amount of labour, Ricardo suggested that both countries would benefit from trade with each other\".\nAs for recent extensions of Ricardian models, see Ricardian trade theory extensions.\nComparative advantage.\nRicardo's theory of international trade was reformulated by John Stuart Mill in 1844. The term \"comparative advantage\" was introduced by J. S. Mill and his contemporaries.\nJohn Stuart Mill started a neoclassical turn of international trade theory, i.e. his formulation was inherited by Alfred Marshall and others, and has both contributed to the resurrection of the anti-Ricardian concept of law of supply and demand, and induced the arrival of neoclassical theory of value.\nNew interpretation.\nRicardo's four magic numbers have long been interpreted as comparison of two ratios of labour (or other input in fixed supply) coefficients. This interpretation is now considered as overly simplistic by modern economists. The point was rediscovered by Roy J. Ruffin in 2002 and re-examined and explained in detail in Andrea Maneschi in 2004. The more flexible approach is now known as the \"new interpretation\", despite having been previously mentioned by Piero Sraffa in 1930 and by Kenzo Yukizawa in 1974. The new interpretation affords a totally new reading of Ricardo's \"Principles of Political Economy and Taxation\" with regards to trade theory, although it does not change the mathematics of optimal resource allocation.\nProtectionism.\nLike Adam Smith, Ricardo was an opponent of protectionism for national economies, especially for agriculture. He believed that the British \"Corn Laws\"\u2014imposing tariffs on agricultural products\u2014ensured that less-productive domestic land would be cultivated and rents would be driven up . Thus, profits would be directed toward landlords and away from the emerging industrial capitalists. Ricardo believed landlords tended to squander their wealth on luxuries, rather than invest. He believed the Corn Laws were leading to the stagnation of the British economy. In 1846, his nephew John Lewis Ricardo, MP for Stoke-upon-Trent, advocated free trade and the repeal of the Corn Laws.\nModern empirical analysis of the Corn Laws yields mixed results. Parliament repealed the Corn Laws in 1846.\nTechnological change.\nRicardo was concerned about the impact of technological change on labour in the short-term. In 1821, he wrote that he had become \"convinced that the substitution of machinery for human labour, is often very injurious to the interests of the class of labourers,\" and that \"the opinion entertained by the labouring class, that the employment of machinery is frequently detrimental to their interests, is not founded on prejudice and error, but is conformable to the correct principles of political economy.\" Ricardo's idea of technological change is now formulated in a modern form.\nCriticism of the Ricardian theory of trade.\nRicardo himself was the first to recognize that comparative advantage is a domain-specific theory, meaning that it applies only when certain conditions are met. Ricardo noted that the theory applies only in situations where capital is immobile. Regarding his famous example, he wrote:\nit would undoubtedly be advantageous to the capitalists [and consumers] of England... [that] the wine and cloth should both be made in Portugal [and that] the capital and labour of England employed in making cloth should be removed to Portugal for that purpose.\nRicardo recognized that applying his theory in situations where capital was mobile would result in offshoring, and thereby economic decline and job loss. To correct for this, he argued that (i) \"most men of property [will be] satisfied with a low rate of profits in their own country, rather than seek[ing] a more advantageous employment for their wealth in foreign nations\", and (ii) capital was functionally immobile.\nRicardo's argument in favour of free trade has also been attacked by those who believe trade restriction can be necessary for the economic development of a nation. Utsa Patnaik claims that Ricardian theory of international trade contains a logical fallacy. Ricardo assumed that in both countries two goods are producible and actually are produced, but developed and underdeveloped countries often trade those goods which are not producible in their own country. In these cases, one cannot define which country has comparative advantage.\nCritics also argue that Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage is flawed in that it assumes production is continuous and absolute. In the real world, events outside the realm of human control (e.g. natural disasters) can disrupt production. In this case, specialisation could cripple a country that depends on imports from foreign, naturally disrupted countries. For example, if an industrially based country trades its manufactured goods with an agrarian country in exchange for agricultural products, a natural disaster in the agricultural country (e.g. drought) may cause the industrially based country to starve.\nAs Joan Robinson pointed out, following the opening of free trade with England, Portugal endured centuries of economic underdevelopment: \"the imposition of free trade on Portugal killed off a promising textile industry and left her with a slow-growing export market for wine, while for England, exports of cotton cloth led to accumulation, mechanisation and the whole spiralling growth of the industrial revolution\". Robinson argued that Ricardo's example required that economies be in static equilibrium positions with full employment and that there could not be a trade deficit or a trade surplus. These conditions, she wrote, were not relevant to the real world. She also argued that Ricardo's math did not take into account that some countries may be at different levels of development and that this raised the prospect of 'unequal exchange' which might hamper a country's development, as we saw in the case of Portugal.\nThe development economist Ha-Joon Chang challenges the argument that free trade benefits every country:\nRicardo\u2019s theory is absolutely right\u2014within its narrow confines. His theory correctly says that, \"accepting their current levels of technology as given\", it is better for countries to specialize in things that they are relatively better at. One cannot argue with that. His theory fails when a country wants to acquire more advanced technologies\u2014that is, when it wants to develop its economy. It takes time and experience to absorb new technologies, so technologically backward producers need a period of protection from international competition during this period of learning. Such protection is costly, because the country is giving up the chance to import better and cheaper products. However, it is a price that has to be paid if it wants to develop advanced industries. Ricardo\u2019s theory is, thus seen, for those who accept the \"status quo\" but not for those who want to change it.\nRicardian equivalence.\nAnother idea associated with Ricardo is Ricardian equivalence, an argument suggesting that in some circumstances a government's choice of how to pay for its spending (\"i.e.,\" whether to use tax revenue or issue debt and run a deficit) might have no effect on the economy. This is due to the fact the public saves its excess money to pay for expected future tax increases that will be used to pay off the debt. Ricardo notes that the proposition is theoretically implied in the presence of intertemporal optimisation by rational taxpayers: but that since taxpayers do not act so rationally, the proposition fails to be true in practice. Thus, while the proposition bears his name, he does not seem to have believed it. Economist Robert Barro is responsible for its modern prominence.\nInfluence and intellectual legacy.\nDavid Ricardo's ideas had a tremendous influence on later developments in economics. US economists rank Ricardo as the second most influential economic thinker, behind Adam Smith, prior to the twentieth century.\nRicardian socialists.\nDespite his laissez-faire capitalist views, Ricardo's writings fascinated a number of early socialists in the 1820s, who thought his value theory had radical implications. They argued that, in view of labour theory of value, labour produces the entire product, and the profits capitalists get are a result of exploitations of workers. These include Thomas Hodgskin, William Thompson, John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone.\nGeorgists.\nGeorgists believe that rent, in the sense that Ricardo used, belongs to the community as a whole. Henry George was greatly influenced by Ricardo, and often cited him, including in his most famous work, \"Progress and Poverty\" from 1879. In the preface to the fourth edition he wrote: \"What I have done in this book, if I have correctly solved the great problem I have sought to investigate, is, to unite the truth perceived by the school of Smith and Ricardo to the truth perceived by the school of Proudhon and Lasalle; to show that laissez faire (in its full true meaning) opens the way to a realization of the noble dreams of socialism; to identify social law with moral law, and to disprove ideas which in the minds of many cloud grand and elevating perceptions.\"\nNeo-Ricardians.\nAfter the rise of the 'neoclassical' school, Ricardo's influence declined temporarily. It was Piero Sraffa, the editor of the Collected Works of David Ricardo and the author of seminal \"Production of Commodities by Means of Commodities\", who resurrected Ricardo as the originator of another strand of economic thought, which was effaced with the arrival of the neoclassical school. The new interpretation of Ricardo and Sraffa's criticism against the marginal theory of value gave rise to a new school, now named neo-Ricardian or Sraffian school. Major contributors to this school include Luigi Pasinetti (1930\u20132023), Pierangelo Garegnani (1930\u20132011), Ian Steedman (1941\u2013), Geoffrey Harcourt (1931\u20132021), Heinz Kurz (1946\u2013), Neri Salvadori (1951\u2013), Pier Paolo Saviotti (\u2013) among others. See also Neo-Ricardianism. The Neo-Ricardian school is sometimes seen to be a component of Post-Keynesian economics.\nNeo-Ricardian trade theory.\nInspired by Piero Sraffa, a new strand of trade theory emerged and was named neo-Ricardian trade theory. The main contributors include Ian Steedman and Stanley Metcalfe. They have criticised neoclassical international trade theory, namely the Heckscher\u2013Ohlin model on the basis that the notion of capital as primary factor has no method of measuring it before the determination of profit rate (thus trapped in a logical vicious circle). This was a second round of the Cambridge capital controversy, this time in the field of international trade. Depoort\u00e8re and Ravix judge that neo-Ricardian contribution failed without giving effective impact on neoclassical trade theory, because it could not offer \"a genuine alternative approach from a classical point of view.\"\nEvolutionary growth theory.\nSeveral distinctive groups have sprung out of the neo-Ricardian school. One is the evolutionary growth theory, developed notably by Luigi Pasinetti, J.S. Metcalfe, Pier Paolo Saviotti, and Koen Frenken and others.\nPasinetti argued that the demand for any commodity came to stagnate and frequently decline, demand saturation occurs. Introduction of new commodities (goods and services) is necessary to avoid economic stagnation.\nContemporary theories.\nRicardo's idea was even expanded to the case of continuum of goods by Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson This formulation is employed for example by Matsuyama and others.\nRicardian trade theory ordinarily assumes that the labour is the unique input. This is a deficiency as intermediate goods occupies now a great part of international trade. The situation changed after the appearance of 's work of 2007. He has succeeded to incorporate traded input goods in his model. His theory became more useful by the discovery of new definition of regular international values (a couple of wage rates for countries and prices for products), because it is not defined as the normal vector at a facet of world production possibility set, which is the set where all countries enjoy full employment. The new definition is given in Shiozawa and Fujimoto (2018) and in Shiozawa (2020). Shiozawa's theory of international values is now the unique theory of international trade that can treat unemployment and input trade in a general form.\nYeats found that 30% of world trade in manufacturing is intermediate inputs. Bardhan and Jafee found that intermediate inputs occupy 37 to 38% in the imports to the US for the years from 1992 to 1997, whereas the percentage of intrafirm trade grew from 43% in 1992 to 52% in 1997.\nUnequal exchange.\nChris Edward includes Emmanuel's unequal exchange theory among variations of neo-Ricardian trade theory. Arghiri Emmanuel argued that the Third World is poor because of the international exploitation of labour.\nThe unequal exchange theory of trade has been influential to the (new) dependency theory.\nPublications.\nRicardo's publications included:\nHis works and writings were collected in (11 volumes)"}
{"id": "8471", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8471", "title": "Delphinus", "text": "Delphinus is a small constellation in the Northern Celestial Hemisphere, close to the celestial equator. Its name is the Latin version for the Greek word for dolphin (). It is one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and remains one of the 88 modern constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union. It is one of the smaller constellations, ranked 69th in size. Delphinus' five brightest stars form a distinctive asterism symbolizing a dolphin with four stars representing the body and one the tail. It is bordered (clockwise from north) by Vulpecula, Sagitta, Aquila, Aquarius, Equuleus and Pegasus.\nDelphinus is a faint constellation with only two stars brighter than an apparent magnitude of 4, Beta Delphini (Rotanev) at magnitude 3.6 and Alpha Delphini (Sualocin) at magnitude 3.8.\nMythology.\nDelphinus is associated with two stories from Greek mythology.\nAccording to myth, the first Greek god Poseidon wanted to marry Amphitrite, a beautiful nereid. However, wanting to protect her virginity, she fled to the Atlas mountains. Her suitor then sent out several searchers, among them a certain Delphinus. Delphinus accidentally stumbled upon her and was able to persuade Amphitrite to accept Poseidon's wooing. Out of gratitude the god placed the image of a dolphin among the stars.\nThe second story tells of the Greek poet Arion of Lesbos (7th century BC), who was saved by a dolphin. He was a court musician at the palace of Periander, ruler of Corinth. Arion had amassed a fortune during his travels to Sicily and Italy. On his way home from Tarentum his wealth caused the crew of his ship to conspire against him. Threatened with death, Arion asked to be granted a last wish which the crew granted: he wanted to sing a dirge. This he did, and while doing so, flung himself into the sea. There, he was rescued by a dolphin which had been charmed by Arion's music. The dolphin carried Arion to the coast of Greece and left.\nIn non-Western astronomy.\nIn Chinese astronomy, the stars of Delphinus are located within \"the Black Tortoise of the North\" (\u5317\u65b9\u7384\u6b66, \"B\u011bi F\u0101ng Xu\u00e1n W\u01d4\").\nIn Polynesia, two cultures recognized Delphinus as a constellation. In Pukapuka, it was called \"Te Toloa\" and in the Tuamotus, it was called \"Te Uru-o-tiki\".\nIn Hindu astrology, the Delphinus corresponds to the Nakshatra, or lunar mansion, of Dhanishta.\nCharacteristics.\nDelphinus is bordered by Vulpecula to the north, Sagitta to the northwest, Aquila to the west and southwest, Aquarius to the southeast, Equuleus to the east and Pegasus to the east. Covering 188.5\u00a0square degrees, corresponding to 0.457% of the sky, it ranks 69th of the 88 constellations in size. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the IAU in 1922, is \"Del\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 14 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between and , while the declination coordinates are between and . The whole constellation is visible to observers north of latitude 69\u00b0S.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nDelphinus has two stars above fourth (apparent) magnitude; its brightest star is of magnitude 3.6. The main asterism in Delphinus is Job's Coffin, nearly a 45\u00b0-apex lozenge or diamond of the four brightest stars: Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta Delphini. Delphinus is in a rich Milky Way star field. Alpha and Beta Delphini have 19th century names Sualocin and Rotanev, read backwards: Nicolaus Venator, the Latinized name of a Palermo Observatory director, Niccol\u00f2 Cacciatore (d. 1841).\nAlpha Delphini is a blue-white hued main sequence star of magnitude 3.8, 241 light-years from Earth. It is a spectroscopic binary. It is officially named Sualocin. The star has an absolute magnitude of -0.4.\nBeta Delphini is officially called Rotanev. It was found to be a binary star in 1873. The gap between its close binary stars is visible from large amateur telescopes. To the unaided eye, it appears to be a white star of magnitude 3.6. It has a period of 27 years and is 97 light-years from Earth.\nGamma Delphini is a celebrated binary star among amateur astronomers. The primary is orange-gold of magnitude 4.3; the secondary is a light yellow star of magnitude 5.1. The pair form a true binary with an estimated orbital period of over 3,000 years. 125 light-years away, the two components are visible in a small amateur telescope. The secondary, also described as green, is 10 arcseconds from the primary. Struve 2725, called the \"Ghost Double\", is a pair that appears similar but dimmer. Its components of magnitudes 7.6 and 8.4 are separated by 6 arcseconds and are 15 arcminutes from Gamma Delphini itself. An unconfirmed exoplanet with a minimum mass of 0.7 Jupiter masses may orbit one of the stars.\nDelta Delphini is a type A-type star of magnitude 4.43. It is a spectroscopic binary, and both stars are Delta Scuti variables.\nEpsilon Delphini, Deneb Dulfim (lit. \"tail [of the] Dolphin\"), or Aldulfin, is a star of stellar class B6\u00a0III. Its magnitude is variable at around 4.03.\nZeta Delphini, an A3Va main-sequence star of magnitude 4.6, was in 2014 discovered to have a brown dwarf orbiting around it. Zeta Delphini B has a mass of 50\u00b115 .\nRho Aquilae at magnitude 4.94 is at about 150 light-years away. Due to its proper motion it has been in the (round-figure parameter) bounds of the constellation since 1992. It is an A-type main sequence star with a lower metallicity than the Sun.\nHR Delphini was a nova that brightened to magnitude 3.5 in December 1967. It took an unusually long time for the nova to reach peak brightness which indicate that it barely satisfied the conditions for a thermonuclear runaway. Another nova by the name V339 Delphini was detected in 2013; it peaked at magnitude 4.3 and was the first nova observed to produce lithium.\nMusica, also known by its Flamsteed designation 18 Delphini, is one of the five stars with known planets located in Delphinus. It has a spectral type of G6 III. Arion, the planet, is a very dense and massive planet with a mass at least 10.3 times greater than Jupiter. Arion was part of the first NameExoWorlds contest where the public got the opportunity to suggest names for exoplanets and their host stars.\nExoplanets.\nIn 2024 the planet TOI-6883 b was discovered in the constellation Delphinus. It has a 16.249 day orbital period around its host star, a radius 1.08 times Jupiter's, and a mass 4.34 times Jupiter's. It was discovered from a single transit in TESS data and it was confirmed by a network of citizen scientists. \nIn 2024, the planet TOI-6883 c was discovered in the constellation Delphinus. It has an orbital period of 7.8458 days, a radius of 0.7 times Jupiter's, and a third of Jupiter's mass. The Neptunian-size planet was discovered from an abnormality from data retrieved from TOI-6883 c.\nDeep-sky objects.\nIts rich Milky Way star field means many modestly deep-sky objects. NGC 6891 is a planetary nebula of magnitude 10.5; another is NGC 6905 or the Blue Flash Nebula. The Blue Flash Nebula shows broad emission lines. The central star in NGC 6905 has a spectral of WO2, meaning it is rich in oxygen. \nNGC 6934 is a globular cluster of magnitude 9.75. It is about 52,000 light-years away from the Solar System. It is in the Shapley-Sawyer Concentration Class VIII and is thought to share a common origin with another globular cluster in Bo\u00f6tes. It has an intermediate metallicity for a globular cluster, but as of 2018 it has been poorly studied. At a distance of about 137,000 light-years, the globular cluster NGC 7006 is at the outer reaches of the galaxy. It is also fairly dim at magnitude 11.5 and is in Class I."}
{"id": "8472", "revid": "1256358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8472", "title": "Disk storage", "text": "Disk storage (also sometimes called drive storage) is a data storage mechanism based on a rotating disk. The recording employs various electronic, magnetic, optical, or mechanical changes to the disk's surface layer. A disk drive is a device implementing such a storage mechanism. Notable types are hard disk drives (HDD), containing one or more non-removable rigid platters; the floppy disk drive (FDD) and its removable floppy disk; and various optical disc drives (ODD) and associated optical disc media.\nBackground.\nAudio information was originally recorded by analog methods (see Sound recording and reproduction). Similarly the first video disc used an analog recording method. In the music industry, analog recording has been mostly replaced by digital optical technology where the data is recorded in a digital format with optical information.\nThe first commercial digital disk storage device was the IBM 350 which shipped in 1956 as a part of the IBM 305 RAMAC computing system. The random-access, low-density storage of disks was developed to complement the already used sequential-access, high-density storage provided by tape drives using magnetic tape. Vigorous innovation in disk storage technology, coupled with less vigorous innovation in tape storage, has reduced the difference in acquisition cost per terabyte between disk storage and tape storage; however, the total cost of ownership of data on disk including power and management remains larger than that of tape.\nDisk storage is now used in both computer storage and consumer electronic storage, e.g., audio CDs and video discs (VCD, DVD and Blu-ray).\nData on modern disks is stored in fixed length blocks, usually called sectors and varying in length from a few hundred to many thousands of bytes. Gross disk drive capacity is simply the number of disk surfaces times the number of blocks/surface times the number of bytes/block. In certain legacy IBM CKD drives the data was stored on magnetic disks with variable length blocks, called records; record length could vary on and between disks. Capacity decreased as record length decreased due to the necessary gaps between blocks.\nAccess methods.\nDigital disk drives are block storage devices. Each disk is divided into logical blocks (collection of sectors). Blocks are addressed using their logical block addresses (LBA). Read from or write to disk happens at the granularity of blocks.\nOriginally the disk capacity was quite low and has been improved in one of several ways. Improvements in mechanical design and manufacture allowed smaller and more precise heads, meaning that more tracks could be stored on each of the disks. Advancements in data compression methods permitted more information to be stored in each of the individual sectors.\nThe drive stores data onto cylinders, heads, and sectors. The sector unit is the smallest size of data to be stored in a hard disk drive, and each file will have many sector units assigned to it. The smallest entity in a CD is called a frame, which consists of 33 bytes and contains six complete 16-bit stereo samples (two bytes \u00d7 two channels \u00d7 six samples = 24 bytes). The other nine bytes consist of eight CIRC error-correction bytes and one subcode byte used for control and display.\nThe information is sent from the computer processor to the BIOS into a chip controlling the data transfer. This is then sent out to the hard drive via a multi-wire connector. Once the data is received onto the circuit board of the drive, they are translated and compressed into a format that the individual drive can use to store onto the disk itself. The data is then passed to a chip on the circuit board that controls the access to the drive. The drive is divided into sectors of data stored onto one of the sides of one of the internal disks. An HDD with two disks internally will typically store data on all four surfaces.\nThe hardware on the drive tells the actuator arm where it is to go for the relevant track, and the compressed information is then sent down to the head, which changes the physical properties, optically or magnetically, for example, of each byte on the drive, thus storing the information. A file is not stored in a linear manner; rather, it is held in the best way for quickest retrieval.\nRotation speed and track layout.\nMechanically there are two different motions occurring inside the drive. One is the rotation of the disks inside the device. The other is the side-to-side motion of the head across the disk as it moves between tracks.\nThere are two types of disk rotation methods:\nTrack positioning also follows two different methods across disk storage devices. Storage devices focused on holding computer data, e.g., HDDs, FDDs, and Iomega zip drives, use concentric tracks to store data. During a sequential read or write operation, after the drive accesses all the sectors in a track, it repositions the head(s) to the next track. This will cause a momentary delay in the flow of data between the device and the computer. In contrast, optical audio and video discs use a single spiral track that starts at the innermost point on the disc and flows continuously to the outer edge. When reading or writing data, there is no need to stop the flow of data to switch tracks. This is similar to vinyl records, except vinyl records started at the outer edge and spiraled in toward the center.\nInterfaces.\nThe disk drive interface is the mechanism/protocol of communication between the rest of the system and the disk drive itself. Storage devices intended for desktop and mobile computers typically use ATA (PATA) and SATA interfaces. Enterprise systems and high-end storage devices will typically use SCSI, SAS, and FC interfaces in addition to some use of SATA."}
{"id": "8473", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8473", "title": "Demisesquicentennial", "text": ""}
{"id": "8474", "revid": "36520827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8474", "title": "Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington", "text": "Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington (; 1 May 1769 \u2013 14 September 1852) was an Anglo-Irish army officer and statesman who was one of the leading military and political figures in Britain during the late 18th and early 19th centuries, twice serving as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. He is among the commanders who ended the Anglo-Mysore Wars when Tipu Sultan was killed in the fourth war in 1799 and among those who ended the Napoleonic Wars in a victory when the Seventh Coalition defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.\nWellesley was born into a Protestant Ascendancy family in Ireland. He was commissioned as an ensign in the British Army in 1787, serving in Ireland as aide-de-camp to two successive lords lieutenant of Ireland. He was also elected as a member of Parliament in the Irish House of Commons. Rising to the rank of colonel by 1796, Wellesley saw service in the Low Countries and India, where he fought in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War at the Siege of Seringapatam. He was appointed governor of Seringapatam and Mysore in 1799 and, as a newly appointed major-general, won a decisive victory over the Maratha Confederacy at the Battle of Assaye in 1803.\nRising to prominence as a general officer during the Peninsular War, Wellesley was promoted to the rank of field marshal after leading British-led forces to victory against the French at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813. Following Napoleon's first exile in 1814, he served as the British ambassador to France and was made Duke of Wellington. During the Hundred Days campaign in 1815, Wellington commanded another British-led army which, together with the Prussian Army under Field Marshal Gebhard von Bl\u00fccher, defeated Napoleon at Waterloo. Wellington's battle record is exemplary; he ultimately participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career, and although not undefeated, he \"never lost\" a major engagement.\nWellington is famous for his adaptive defensive style of warfare, resulting in several victories against numerically superior forces while minimising his own losses. He is regarded as one of the greatest commanders in the modern era, and many of his tactics and battle plans are still studied in military academies around the world. After the end of his active military career, Wellington returned to politics. He was twice British prime minister as a member of the Tory party from 1828 to 1830 and for a little less than a month in 1834. Wellington oversaw the passage of the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, while he opposed the Reform Act 1832. He continued to be one of the leading figures in the House of Lords until his retirement and remained Commander-in-Chief of the Forces until his death.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nWellesley was born into an aristocratic Anglo-Irish family, belonging to the Protestant Ascendancy, beginning life as The Hon. Arthur Wesley. Wellesley was born the son of Anne, Countess of Mornington, and Garret Wesley, 1st Earl of Mornington. His father was himself the son of Richard Wesley, 1st Baron Mornington, and had a short career in politics representing the constituency of Trim in the Irish House of Commons before succeeding his father as Baron Mornington in 1758. Garret Mornington was also an accomplished composer, and in recognition of his musical and philanthropic achievements was elevated to the rank of Earl of Mornington in 1760. Wellesley's mother was the eldest daughter of Arthur Hill-Trevor, 1st Viscount Dungannon, after whom Wellesley was named. Through Elizabeth of Rhuddlan, Wellesley was a descendant of Edward I.\nWellesley was the sixth of nine children born to the Earl and Countess of Mornington. His siblings included Richard, Viscount Wellesley, later 1st Marquess Wellesley, 2nd Earl of Mornington, and Baron Maryborough.\nBirth date and place.\nThe exact date and location of Wellesley's birth is not known, but biographers mostly follow the same contemporary newspaper evidence, which states that he was born on 1 May 1769, the day before he was baptised in St. Peter's Church on Aungier Street in Dublin. However, Ernest Lloyd states \"registry of St. Peter's Church, Dublin, shows that he was christened there on 30 April 1769\". His baptismal font was donated to St. Nahi's Church in Dundrum, Dublin, in 1914.\nWellesley may have been born at his parents' townhouse, Mornington House at 6 Merrion Street (the address later became known as 24 Upper Merrion Street), Dublin, which now forms part of the Merrion Hotel. His mother, Anne, Countess of Mornington, recalled in 1815 that he had been born at 6 Merrion Street.\nHis family's home at Dangan Castle, Dangan near Summerhill, County Meath has also been purported to have been his birthplace. In his obituary, published in \"The Times\" in 1852, it was reported that Dangan was unanimously believed to have been the place of his birth, though suggested it was unlikely, but not impossible, that the family had travelled to Dublin for his baptism. A pillar was erected in his honour near Dangan in 1817.\nThe place of his birth has been much disputed following his death, with Sir J.B. Burke writing the following in 1873:\n\"Isn't it remarkable that until recently all the old memoirs of the Duke of Wellington seemed to infer that County Meath was the place of birth. Nowadays the theory that he was born in Dublin is generally accepted but by no means proved\".\nOther places that have been put forward as the location of his birth include a coach between Meath and Dublin, the Dublin packet boat and the Wellesley townhouse in Trim, County Meath.\nChildhood.\nWellesley spent most of his childhood at his family's two homes, the first a large house in Dublin, Mornington House, and the second Dangan Castle, north of Summerhill in County Meath. In 1781, Arthur's father died and his eldest brother Richard inherited his father's earldom.\nHe went to the diocesan school in Trim when at Dangan, Mr Whyte's Academy when in Dublin, and Brown's School in Chelsea when in London. He then enrolled at Eton College, where he studied from 1781 to 1784. His loneliness there caused him to hate it, and makes it highly unlikely that he actually said \"The Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton\", a quotation which is often attributed to him. Moreover, Eton had no playing fields at the time. In 1785, a lack of success at Eton, combined with a shortage of family funds due to his father's death, forced the young Wellesley and his mother to move to Brussels. Until his early twenties, Arthur showed little sign of distinction and his mother grew increasingly concerned at his idleness, stating, \"I don't know what I shall do with my awkward son Arthur.\"\nIn 1786, Arthur enrolled in the French Royal Academy of Equitation in Angers, where he progressed significantly, becoming a good horseman and learning French, which later proved very useful. Upon returning to England later the same year, he astonished his mother with his improvement.\nEarly military career.\nIreland.\nDespite his new promise, Wellesley had yet to find a job and his family was still short of money, so upon the advice of his mother, his brother Richard asked his friend the Duke of Rutland (then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) to consider Arthur for a commission in the Army. Soon afterward, on 7 March 1787, he was gazetted ensign in the 73rd Regiment of Foot. In October, with the assistance of his brother, he was assigned as \"aide-de-camp\", on ten shillings a day (twice his pay as an ensign), to the new Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Buckingham. He was also transferred to the new 76th Regiment forming in Ireland and on Christmas Day, 1787, was promoted lieutenant. During his time in Dublin his duties were mainly social; attending balls, entertaining guests and providing advice to Buckingham. While in Ireland, he overextended himself in borrowing due to his occasional gambling, but in his defence stated that \"I have often known what it was to be in want of money, but I have never got helplessly into debt\".\nOn 23 January 1788, he transferred into the 41st Regiment of Foot, then again on 25 June 1789 he transferred to the 12th (Prince of Wales's) Regiment of (Light) Dragoons and, according to military historian Richard Holmes, he also reluctantly entered politics. Shortly before the general election of 1789, he went to the rotten borough of Trim to speak against the granting of the title \"Freeman\" of Dublin to the parliamentary leader of the Irish Patriot Party, Henry Grattan. Succeeding, he was later nominated and duly elected as a Member of Parliament (MP) for Trim in the Irish House of Commons. Because of the limited suffrage at the time, he sat in a parliament where at least two-thirds of the members owed their election to the landowners of fewer than a hundred boroughs. Wellesley continued to serve at Dublin Castle, voting with the government in the Irish parliament over the next two years. He became a captain on 30 January 1791, and was transferred to the 58th Regiment of Foot.\nOn 31 October, he transferred to the 18th Light Dragoons and it was during this period that he grew increasingly attracted to Kitty Pakenham, the daughter of Edward Pakenham, 2nd Baron Longford. She was described as being full of 'gaiety and charm'. In 1793, he proposed, but was turned down by her brother Thomas, 2nd Earl of Longford, who considered Wellesley to be a young man, in debt, with very poor prospects. An aspiring amateur musician, Wellesley, devastated by the rejection, burnt his violins in anger, and resolved to pursue a military career in earnest. He became a major by purchase in the 33rd Regiment in 1793. A few months later, in September, his brother lent him more money and with it he purchased a lieutenant-colonelcy in the 33rd.\nNetherlands.\nIn 1793, the Duke of York was sent to Flanders in command of the British contingent of an allied force destined for the invasion of France. In June 1794, Wellesley with the 33rd regiment set sail from Cork bound for Ostend as part of an expedition bringing reinforcements for the army in Flanders. They arrived too late to participate, and joined the Duke of York as he was pulling back towards the Netherlands. On 15 September 1794, at the Battle of Boxtel, east of Breda, Wellesley, in temporary command of his brigade, had his first experience of battle. During General Abercromby's withdrawal in the face of superior French forces, the 33rd held off enemy cavalry, allowing neighbouring units to retreat safely. During the extremely harsh winter that followed, Wellesley and his regiment formed part of an allied force holding the defence line along the Waal River. The 33rd, along with the rest of the army, suffered heavy losses from attrition and illness. Wellesley's health was also affected by the damp environment.\nThough the campaign was to end disastrously, with the British army driven out of the United Provinces into the German states, Wellesley became more aware of battle tactics, including the use of lines of infantry against advancing columns, and the merits of supporting sea-power. He understood that the failure of the campaign was due in part to the faults of the leaders and the poor organisation at headquarters. He remarked later of his time in the Netherlands that \"At least I learned what not to do, and that is always a valuable lesson\".\nReturning to England in March 1795, he was reinstated as a member of parliament for Trim. He hoped to be given the position of secretary of war in the new Irish government but the new lord-lieutenant, Lord Camden, was only able to offer him the post of Surveyor-General of the Ordnance. Declining the post, he returned to his regiment, now at Southampton preparing to set sail for the West Indies. After seven weeks at sea, a storm forced the fleet back to Poole. The 33rd was given time to recuperate and a few months later, Whitehall decided to send the regiment to India. Wellesley was promoted full colonel by seniority on 3 May 1796 and a few weeks later set sail for Calcutta with his regiment.\nIndia.\nArriving in Calcutta in February 1797 he spent 5 months there, before being sent in August to a brief expedition to the Philippines, where he established a list of new hygiene precautions for his men to deal with the unfamiliar climate. Returning in November to India, he learnt that his elder brother Richard, now known as Lord Mornington, had been appointed as the new Governor-General of India.\nIn 1798, he changed the spelling of his surname to \"Wellesley\"; up to this time he was still known as Wesley, which his eldest brother considered the ancient and proper spelling.\nFourth Anglo-Mysore War.\nAs part of the campaign to extend the rule of the British East India Company, the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War broke out in 1798 against the Sultan of Mysore, Tipu Sultan. Arthur's brother Richard ordered that an armed force be sent to capture Seringapatam and defeat Tipu. During the war, rockets were used on several occasions. Wellesley was almost defeated by Tipu's Diwan, Purnaiah, at the Battle of Sultanpet Tope. Quoting Forrest,\nAt this point (near the village of Sultanpet, Figure 5) there was a large tope, or grove, which gave shelter to Tipu's rocketmen and had obviously to be cleaned out before the siege could be pressed closer to Srirangapattana island. The commander chosen for this operation was Col. Wellesley, but advancing towards the tope after dark on the 5th April 1799, he was set upon with rockets and musket-fires, lost his way and, as Beatson politely puts it, had to \"postpone the attack\" until a more favourable opportunity should offer.\nThe following day, Wellesley launched a fresh attack with a larger force, and took the whole position without any killed in action. On 22 April 1799, twelve days before the main battle, rocketeers maneuvered to the rear of the British encampment, then 'threw a great number of rockets at the same instant' to signal the beginning of an assault by 6,000 Indian infantry and a corps of Frenchmen, all ordered by Mir Golam Hussain and Mohomed Hulleen Mir Miran. The rockets had a range of about 1,000 yards. Some burst in the air like shells. Others, called ground rockets, would rise again on striking the ground and bound along in a serpentine motion until their force was spent. According to one British observer, a young English officer named Bayly: \"So pestered were we with the rocket boys that there was no moving without danger from the destructive missiles ...\". He continued:\nThe rockets and musketry from 20,000 of the enemy were incessant. No hail could be thicker. Every illumination of blue lights was accompanied by a shower of rockets, some of which entered the head of the column, passing through to the rear, causing death, wounds, and dreadful lacerations from the long bamboos of twenty or thirty feet, which are invariably attached to them.\nUnder the command of General Harris, some 24,000 troops were dispatched to Madras (to join an equal force being sent from Bombay in the west). Arthur and the 33rd sailed to join them in August.\nAfter extensive and careful logistic preparation (which would become one of Wellesley's main attributes) the 33rd left with the main force in December and travelled across of jungle from Madras to Mysore. On account of his brother, during the journey, Wellesley was given an additional command, that of chief advisor to the Nizam of Hyderabad's army (sent to accompany the British force). This position was to cause friction among many of the senior officers (some of whom were senior to Wellesley). Much of this friction was put to rest after the Battle of Mallavelly, some from Seringapatam, in which Harris' army attacked a large part of the sultan's army. During the battle, Wellesley led his men, in a line of battle of two ranks, against the enemy to a gentle ridge and gave the order to fire. After an extensive repetition of volleys, followed by a bayonet charge, the 33rd, in conjunction with the rest of Harris's force, forced Tipu's infantry to retreat.\nSeringapatam.\nImmediately after their arrival at Seringapatam on 5 April 1799, the Battle of Seringapatam began and Wellesley was ordered to lead a night attack on the village of Sultanpettah, adjacent to the fortress to clear the way for the artillery. Because of a variety of factors including the Mysorean army's strong defensive preparations and the darkness the attack failed with 25 casualties due to confusion among the British. Wellesley suffered a minor injury to his knee from a spent musket-ball. Although they would re-attack successfully the next day, after time to scout ahead the enemy's positions, the affair affected Wellesley. He resolved \"never to attack an enemy who is preparing and strongly posted, and whose posts have not been reconnoitred by daylight\".\nLewin Bentham Bowring gives this alternative account:\nOne of these groves, called the Sultanpet Tope, was intersected by deep ditches, watered from a channel running in an easterly direction about a mile from the fort. General Baird was directed to scour this grove and dislodge the enemy, but on his advancing with this object on the night of the 5th, he found the tope unoccupied. The next day, however, the Mysore troops again took possession of the ground, and as it was absolutely necessary to expel them, two columns were detached at sunset for the purpose. The first of these, under Colonel Shawe, got possession of a ruined village, which it successfully held. The second column, under Colonel Wellesley, on advancing into the tope, was at once attacked in the darkness of night by a tremendous fire of musketry and rockets. The men, floundering about amidst the trees and the water-courses, at last broke, and fell back in disorder, some being killed and a few taken prisoners. In the confusion Colonel Wellesley was himself struck on the knee by a spent ball, and narrowly escaped falling into the hands of the enemy.\nA few weeks later, after extensive artillery bombardment, a breach was opened in the main walls of the fortress of Seringapatam. An attack led by Major-General Baird secured the fortress. Wellesley secured the rear of the advance, posting guards at the breach and then stationed his regiment at the main palace. After hearing news of the death of the Tipu Sultan, Wellesley was the first at the scene to confirm his death, checking his pulse. Over the coming day, Wellesley grew increasingly concerned over the lack of discipline among his men, who drank and pillaged the fortress and city. To restore order, several soldiers were flogged and four hanged.\nAfter battle and the resulting end of the war, the main force under General Harris left Seringapatam and Wellesley, aged 30, stayed behind to command the area as the new Governor of Seringapatam and Mysore. While in India, Wellesley was ill for a considerable time, first with severe diarrhoea from the water and then with fever, followed by a serious skin infection caused by trichophyton.\nWellesley was in charge of raising an Anglo-Indian expeditionary force in Trincomali in early 1801 for the capture of Batavia and Mauritius from the French. However, on the eve of its departure, orders arrived from England that it was to be sent to Egypt to co-operate with Sir Ralph Abercromby in the expulsion of the French from Egypt. Wellesley had been appointed second in command to Baird, but owing to ill health did not accompany the expedition on 9 April 1801. This was fortunate for Wellesley, since the vessel on which he was to have sailed sank in the Red Sea.\nHe was promoted to brigadier-general on 17 July 1801. He took residence within the Sultan's summer palace and reformed the tax and justice systems in his province to maintain order and prevent bribery.\nDhoondiah Waugh insurgency.\nIn 1800, whilst serving as Governor of Mysore, Wellesley was tasked with putting down an insurgency led by Dhoondiah Waugh, formerly a Patan trooper for Tipu Sultan. Having escaped after the fall of Seringapatam he became a powerful brigand, raiding villages along the Maratha\u2013Mysore border region.\nDespite initial setbacks, the East India Company having pursued and destroyed his forces once already, forcing him into retreat in August 1799, he raised a sizeable force composed of disbanded Mysore soldiers, captured small outposts and forts in Mysore, and was receiving the support of several Maratha \"killedars\" opposed to British occupation. This drew the attention of the British administration, who were beginning to recognise him as more than just a bandit, as his raids, expansion and threats to destabilise British authority suddenly increased in 1800. The death of Tipu Sultan had created a power vacuum and Waugh was seeking to fill it.\nGiven independent command of a combined East India Company and British Army force, Wellesley ventured north to confront Waugh in June 1800, with an army of 8,000 infantry and cavalry, having learnt that Waugh's forces numbered over 50,000, although the majority (around 30,000) were irregular light cavalry and unlikely to pose a serious threat to British infantry and artillery.\nThroughout June\u2013August 1800, Wellesley advanced through Waugh's territory, his troops escalading forts in turn and capturing each one with \"trifling loss\". The forts generally offered little resistance due to their poor construction and design. Wellesley did not have sufficient troops to garrison each fort and had to clear the surrounding area of insurgents before advancing to the next fort. On 31 July, he had \"taken and destroyed Dhoondiah's baggage and six guns, and driven into the Malpoorba (where they were drowned) about five thousand people\". Dhoondiah continued to retreat, but his forces were rapidly deserting, he had no infantry and due to the monsoon weather flooding river crossings he could no longer outpace the British advance. On 10 September, at the Battle of Conaghul, Wellesley personally led a charge of 1,400 British dragoons and Indian cavalry, in single line with no reserve, against Dhoondiah and his remaining 5,000 cavalry. Dhoondiah was killed during the clash; his body was discovered and taken to the British camp tied to a cannon. With this victory, Wellesley's campaign was concluded, and British authority had been restored. Wellesley then paid for the future upkeep of Dhoondiah's orphaned son.\nSecond Anglo-Maratha War.\nIn September 1802, Wellesley learnt that he had been promoted to the rank of major-general. He had been gazetted on 29 April 1802, but the news took several months to reach him by sea. He remained at Mysore until November when he was sent to command an army in the Second Anglo-Maratha War.\nWhen he determined that a long defensive war would ruin his army, Wellesley decided to act boldly to defeat the numerically larger force of the Maratha Empire. With the logistic assembly of his army complete (24,000 men in total) he gave the order to break camp and attack the nearest Maratha fort on 8 August 1803. The fort surrendered on 12 August after an infantry attack had exploited an artillery-made breach in the wall. With the fort now in British control Wellesley was able to extend control southwards to the river Godavari.\nAssaye, Argaum and Gawilghur.\nSplitting his army into two forces to pursue and locate the main Marathas army (the second force, commanded by Colonel Stevenson was far smaller), Wellesley was preparing to rejoin his forces on 24 September. His intelligence, however, reported the location of the Marathas' main army, between two rivers near Assaye. If he waited for the arrival of his second force, the Marathas would be able to mount a retreat, so Wellesley decided to launch an attack immediately.\nOn 23 September, Wellesley led his forces over a ford in the river Kaitna and the Battle of Assaye commenced. After crossing the ford the infantry was reorganised into several lines and advanced against the Maratha infantry. Wellesley ordered his cavalry to exploit the flank of the Maratha army just near the village. During the battle Wellesley himself came under fire; two of his horses were shot from under him and he had to mount a third. At a crucial moment, Wellesley regrouped his forces and ordered Colonel Maxwell (later killed in the attack) to attack the eastern end of the Maratha position while Wellesley himself directed a renewed infantry attack against the centre.\nAn officer in the attack wrote of the importance of Wellesley's personal leadership: \"The General was in the thick of the action the whole time\u00a0... I never saw a man so cool and collected as he was\u00a0... though I can assure you, till our troops got the order to advance the fate of the day seemed doubtful\u00a0...\" With some 6,000 Marathas killed or wounded, the enemy was routed, though Wellesley's force was in no condition to pursue. British casualties were heavy: the British losses amounted to 428 killed, 1,138 wounded and 18 missing (the British casualty figures were taken from Wellesley's own despatch). Wellesley was troubled by the loss of men and remarked that he hoped \"I should not like to see again such loss as I sustained on 23 September, even if attended by such gain\". Years later, however, he remarked that Assaye and not Waterloo was the best battle he ever fought.\nDespite the damage done to the Maratha army, the battle did not end the war. A few months later in November, Wellesley attacked a larger force near Argaum, leading his army to victory again, with an astonishing 5,000 enemy dead at the cost of only 361 British casualties. A further successful attack at the fortress at Gawilghur, combined with the victory of General Lake at Delhi, forced the Maratha to sign a peace settlement at Anjangaon (not concluded until a year later) called the Treaty of Surji-Anjangaon.\nMilitary historian Richard Holmes remarked that Wellesley's experiences in India had an important influence on his personality and military tactics, teaching him much about military matters that would prove vital to his success in the Peninsular War. These included a strong sense of discipline through drill and order, the use of diplomacy to gain allies, and the vital necessity of a secure supply line. He also established high regard for the acquisition of intelligence through scouts and spies. His personal tastes also developed, including dressing himself in white trousers, a dark tunic, with Hessian boots and black cocked hat (that later became synonymous as his style).\nLeaving India.\nWellesley had grown tired of his time in India, remarking \"I have served as long in India as any man ought who can serve anywhere else\". In June 1804 he applied for permission to return home and as a reward for his service in India he was made a Knight of the Bath in September. While in India, Wellesley had amassed a fortune of \u00a342,000 (considerable at the time, equivalent to \u00a3 in ), consisting mainly of prize money from his campaign. When his brother's term as Governor-General of India ended in March 1805, the brothers returned together to England on . Wellesley, coincidentally, stopped on his voyage at the island of Saint Helena and stayed in the same building in which Napoleon I would live during his later exile.\nReturn to Britain.\nMeeting Nelson.\nIn September 1805, Major-General Wellesley was newly returned from his campaigns in India and was not yet particularly well known to the public. He reported to the office of the Secretary of State for War and the Colonies to request a new assignment. In the waiting room, he met Vice-Admiral Horatio Nelson, already a known figure after his victories at the Nile and Copenhagen, who was briefly in England after months pursuing the French Toulon fleet to the West Indies and back. Some 30 years later, Wellington recalled a conversation that Nelson began with him which Wellesley found \"almost all on his side in a style so vain and silly as to surprise and almost disgust me\". Nelson left the room to inquire who the young general was and, on his return, switched to a very different tone, discussing the war, the state of the colonies, and the geopolitical situation as between equals. On this second discussion, Wellington recalled, \"I don't know that I ever had a conversation that interested me more\". This was the only time that the two men met; Nelson was killed at his victory at Trafalgar seven weeks later.\nWellesley then served in the abortive Anglo-Russian expedition to north Germany in 1805, taking a brigade to Elbe.\nHe then took a period of extended leave from the army and was elected as a Tory member of the British parliament for Rye in January 1806. A year later, he was elected MP for Newport on the Isle of Wight, and was then appointed to serve as Chief Secretary for Ireland under the Duke of Richmond. At the same time, he was made a privy counsellor. While in Ireland, he gave a verbal promise that the remaining Penal Laws would be enforced with great moderation, perhaps an indication of his later willingness to support Catholic emancipation. Wellesley was described as having been \"handsome, very brown, quite bald and a hooked nose\".\nWar against Denmark-Norway.\nWellesley was in Ireland in May 1807 when he heard of the British expedition to Denmark-Norway. He decided to go, while maintaining his political appointments, and was appointed to command an infantry brigade in the Second Battle of Copenhagen, which took place in August. He fought at K\u00f8ge, during which the men under his command took 1,500 prisoners, with Wellesley later present during the surrender.\nBy 30 September, he had returned to England and was raised to the rank of lieutenant general on 25 April 1808. In June 1808 he accepted the command of an expedition of 9,000 men. Preparing to sail for an attack on the Spanish colonies in South America (to assist the Latin American patriot Francisco de Miranda) his force was instead ordered to sail for Portugal, to take part in the Peninsular Campaign and rendezvous with 5,000 troops from Gibraltar.\nPeninsular War.\n1808\u20131809.\nReady for battle, Wellesley left Cork on 12 July 1808 to participate in the war against French forces in the Iberian Peninsula, with his skills as a commander tested and developed.According to the historian Robin Neillands:\nWellesley defeated the French at the Battle of Roli\u00e7a and the Battle of Vimeiro in 1808 but was superseded in command immediately after the latter battle. General Dalrymple then signed the controversial Convention of Sintra, which stipulated that the Royal Navy transport the French army out of Lisbon with all their loot, and insisted on the association of the only available government minister, Wellesley.\nDalrymple and Wellesley were recalled to Britain to face a Court of Enquiry. Wellesley had agreed to sign the preliminary armistice, but had not signed the convention, and was cleared.\nSimultaneously, Napoleon entered Spain with his veteran troops to put down the revolt; the new commander of the British forces in the Peninsula, Sir John Moore, died during the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.\nAlthough overall the land war with France was not going well from a British perspective, the Peninsula was the one theatre where they, with the Portuguese, had provided strong resistance against France and her allies. This contrasted with the disastrous Walcheren expedition, which was typical of the mismanaged British operations of the time. Wellesley submitted a memorandum to Lord Castlereagh on the defence of Portugal. He stressed its mountainous frontiers and advocated Lisbon as the main base because the Royal Navy could help to defend it. Castlereagh and the cabinet approved the memo and appointed him head of all British forces in Portugal.\nWellesley arrived in Lisbon on 22 April 1809 on board HMS \"Surveillante\", after narrowly escaping shipwreck. Reinforced, he took to the offensive. In the Second Battle of Porto he crossed the Douro river in a daylight \"coup de main\", and routed Marshal Soult's French troops in Porto.\nWith Portugal secured, Wellesley advanced into Spain to unite with General Cuesta's forces. The combined allied force prepared for an assault on Marshal Victor's I\u00a0Corps at Talavera, 23 July. Cuesta, however, was reluctant to agree, and was only persuaded to advance on the following day. The delay allowed the French to withdraw, but Cuesta sent his army headlong after Victor, and found himself faced by almost the entire French army in New Castile\u2014Victor had been reinforced by the Toledo and Madrid garrisons. The Spanish retreated precipitously, necessitating the advance of two British divisions to cover their retreat.\nThe next day, 27 July, at the Battle of Talavera the French advanced in three columns and were repulsed several times throughout the day by Wellesley, but at a heavy cost to the British force. In the aftermath Marshal Soult's army was discovered to be advancing south, threatening to cut Wellesley off from Portugal. Wellesley moved east on 3 August to block it, leaving 1,500 wounded in the care of the Spanish, intending to confront Soult before finding out that the French were in fact 30,000 strong. The British commander sent the Light Brigade on a dash to hold the bridge over the Tagus at Almaraz. With communications and supply from Lisbon secured for now, Wellesley considered joining with Cuesta again but found out that his Spanish ally had abandoned the British wounded to the French and was thoroughly uncooperative, promising and then refusing to supply the British forces, aggravating Wellesley and causing considerable friction between the British and their Spanish allies. The lack of supplies, coupled with the threat of French reinforcement (including the possible inclusion of Napoleon himself) in the spring, led to the British deciding to retreat into Portugal.\nFollowing his victory at Talavera, Wellesley was elevated to the Peerage of the United Kingdom on 26 August 1809 as Viscount Wellington of Talavera and of Wellington, in the County of Somerset, with the subsidiary title of Baron Douro of Wellesley.\n1810\u20131812.\nIn 1810, a newly enlarged French army under Marshal Andr\u00e9 Mass\u00e9na invaded Portugal. British opinion was negative and there were suggestions to evacuate Portugal. Instead, Lord Wellington first slowed the French at Bu\u00e7aco; he then prevented them from taking the Lisbon Peninsula by the construction of massive earthworks, known as the Lines of Torres Vedras, which had been assembled in complete secrecy with their flanks guarded by the Royal Navy. The baffled and starving French invasion forces retreated after six months. Wellington's pursuit was hindered by a series of reverses inflicted by Marshal Ney in a much-lauded rear guard campaign.\nIn 1811, Mass\u00e9na returned toward Portugal to relieve Almeida; Wellington narrowly checked the French at the Battle of Fuentes de O\u00f1oro. Simultaneously, his subordinate, Viscount Beresford, fought Soult's 'Army of the South' to a bloody stalemate at the Battle of Albuera in May. Wellington was promoted to full general on 31 July for his services. The French abandoned Almeida, avoiding British pursuit, but retained the twin Spanish fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, the 'Keys' guarding the roads through the mountain passes into Portugal.\nIn 1812, Wellington finally captured Ciudad Rodrigo via a rapid movement as the French went into winter quarters, storming it before they could react. He then moved south quickly, besieged the fortress of Badajoz for a month and captured it during the night on 6 April 1812. On viewing the aftermath of the Storming of Badajoz, Wellington lost his composure and cried at the sight of the British dead in the breaches.\nHis army now was a veteran British force reinforced by units of the retrained Portuguese army. Campaigning in Spain, he was made Earl of Wellington in the county of Somerset on 22 February 1812. He routed the French at the Battle of Salamanca, taking advantage of a minor French mispositioning. The victory liberated the Spanish capital of Madrid. He was later made Marquess of Wellington, in the said county on 18 August 1812.\nWellington attempted to take the vital fortress of Burgos, which linked Madrid to France. He failed, due in part to a lack of siege guns, forcing him into a headlong retreat with the loss of over 2,000 casualties.\nThe French abandoned Andalusia, and combined the troops of Soult and Marmont. Thus combined, the French outnumbered the British, putting the British forces in a precarious position. Wellington withdrew his army and, joined by the smaller corps under the command of Rowland Hill, which had been moved to Madrid, began to retreat to Portugal. Marshal Soult declined to attack.\n1813\u20131814.\nIn 1813, Wellington led a new offensive, this time against the French line of communications. He struck through the hills north of Burgos, the Tras os Montes, and switched his supply line from Portugal to Santander on Spain's north coast; this led to the French abandoning Madrid and Burgos. Continuing to outflank the French lines, Wellington caught up with and routed the army of King Joseph Bonaparte in the Battle of Vitoria, for which he was promoted to field marshal on 21 June. He personally led a column against the French centre, while other columns commanded by Sir Thomas Graham, Rowland Hill and the Earl of Dalhousie looped around the French right and left (this battle became the subject of Beethoven's orchestral piece, the \"Wellington's Victory\" (Opus 91). The British troops broke ranks to loot the abandoned French wagons instead of pursuing the beaten foe. When troops failed to return to their units and began harassing the locals, an enraged Wellington wrote in a now famous despatch to Earl Bathurst, \"We have in the service the scum of the earth as common soldiers\".\nAlthough later, when his temper had cooled, he extended his comment to praise the men under his command saying that though many of the men were, \"the scum of the earth; it is really wonderful that we should have made them to the fine fellows they are\".\nAfter taking the small fortresses of Pamplona, Wellington invested San Sebasti\u00e1n but was frustrated by the obstinate French garrison, losing 693 dead and 316 captured in a failed assault and suspending the siege at the end of July. Soult's relief attempt was blocked by the Spanish Army of Galicia at San Marcial, allowing the Allies to consolidate their position and tighten the ring around the city, which fell in September after a second spirited defence. Wellington then forced Soult's demoralised and battered army into a fighting retreat into France, punctuated by battles at the Pyrenees, Bidassoa and Nivelle. Wellington invaded southern France, winning at the Nive and Orthez. Wellington's final battle against his rival Soult occurred at Toulouse, where the Allied divisions were badly mauled storming the French redoubts, losing some 4,600 men. Despite this momentary victory, news arrived of Napoleon's defeat and abdication and Soult, seeing no reason to continue the fighting, agreed on a ceasefire with Wellington, allowing Soult to evacuate the city.\nHailed as the conquering hero by the British, on 3 May 1814 Wellington was made Duke of Wellington, in the county of Somerset, together with the subsidiary title of Marquess Douro, in said County.\nHe received some recognition during his lifetime (the title of \"Duque de Ciudad Rodrigo\" and \"Grandee of Spain\") and the Spanish King Ferdinand VII allowed him to keep part of the works of art from the Royal Collection which he had recovered from the French. His equestrian portrait features prominently in the Monument to the Battle of Vitoria, in present-day Vitoria-Gasteiz.\n His popularity in Britain was due to his image and his appearance as well as to his military triumphs. His victory fitted well with the passion and intensity of the Romantic movement, with its emphasis on individuality. His personal style influenced the fashions in Britain at the time: his tall, lean figure and his plumed black hat and grand yet classic uniform and white trousers became very popular.\nIn late 1814, the Prime Minister wanted him to take command in Canada with the assignment of winning the War of 1812 against the United States. Wellesley replied that he would go to America, but he believed that he was needed more in Europe. He stated:\nHe was appointed Ambassador to France, then took Lord Castlereagh's place as first plenipotentiary to the Congress of Vienna.\nOn 2 January 1815, the title of his Knighthood of the Bath was converted to Knight Grand Cross upon the expansion of that order.\nHundred Days.\nFacing Napoleon.\nOn 26 February 1815, Napoleon escaped from Elba and returned to France. He regained control of the country by May and faced a renewed alliance against him. Wellington left Vienna for what became known as the Waterloo Campaign. He arrived in the Netherlands to take command of the British-German army and their allied Dutch, all stationed alongside the Prussian forces of Generalfeldmarschall Gebhard Leberecht von Bl\u00fccher.\nNapoleon's strategy was to isolate the Allied and Prussian armies and annihilate each one separately before the Austrians and Russians arrived. In doing so the vast superiority in numbers of the Coalition would be greatly diminished. He would then seek the possibility of peace with Austria and Russia.\nThe French invaded the Netherlands, with Napoleon defeating the Prussians at Ligny, and Marshal Ney engaging indecisively with Wellington at the Battle of Quatre Bras. The Prussians retreated 18 miles north to Wavre whilst Wellington's Anglo-Allied army withdrew 15 miles north to a site he had noted the previous year as favourable for a battle: the north ridge of a shallow valley on the Brussels road, just south of the small town of Waterloo. On 17 June there was torrential rain, which severely hampered movement. and had a considerable effect the next day, 18 June, when the Battle of Waterloo was fought. This was the first time Wellington had encountered Napoleon; he commanded an Anglo-Dutch-German army that consisted of approximately 73,000 troops, 26,000 of whom were British. Approximately 30 percent of that 26,000 were Irish.\nBattle of Waterloo.\nThe Battle of Waterloo was fought on Sunday 18 June 1815, near Waterloo (at that time in the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, now in Belgium). It commenced with a diversionary attack on Hougoumont by a division of French soldiers. After a barrage of 80 cannons, the first French infantry attack was launched by Comte D'Erlon's I Corps. D'Erlon's troops advanced through the Allied centre, resulting in Allied troops in front of the ridge retreating in disorder through the main position. D'Erlon's corps stormed the most fortified Allied position, La Haye Sainte, but failed to take it. An Allied division under Thomas Picton met the remainder of D'Erlon's corps head to head, engaging them in an infantry duel in which Picton was killed. During this struggle Lord Uxbridge launched two of his cavalry brigades at the enemy, catching the French infantry off guard, driving them to the bottom of the slope, and capturing two French Imperial Eagles. The charge, however, over-reached itself, and the British cavalry, crushed by fresh French horsemen sent at them by Napoleon, were driven back, suffering tremendous losses.\nShortly before 16:00, Marshal Ney noted an apparent withdrawal from Wellington's centre. He mistook the movement of casualties to the rear for the beginnings of a retreat, and sought to exploit it. Ney at this time had few infantry reserves left, as most of the infantry had been committed either to the futile Hougoumont attack or to the defence of the French right. Ney, therefore, tried to break Wellington's centre with a cavalry charge alone.\nAt about 16:30, the first Prussian corps arrived. Commanded by Freiherr von B\u00fclow, IV Corps arrived as the French cavalry attack was in full spate. B\u00fclow sent the 15th Brigade to link up with Wellington's left flank in the Frichermont\u2013La Haie area while the brigade's horse artillery battery and additional brigade artillery deployed to its left in support. Napoleon sent Lobau's corps to intercept the rest of B\u00fclow's IV Corps proceeding to Plancenoit. The 15th Brigade sent Lobau's corps into retreat to the Plancenoit area. Von Hiller's 16th Brigade also pushed forward with six battalions against Plancenoit. Napoleon had dispatched all eight battalions of the Young Guard to reinforce Lobau, who was now seriously pressed by the enemy. Napoleon's Young Guard counter-attacked and, after very hard fighting, secured Plancenoit, but were themselves counter-attacked and driven out. Napoleon then resorted to sending two battalions of the Middle and Old Guard into Plancenoit and after ferocious fighting they recaptured the village.\nThe French cavalry attacked the British infantry squares many times, each at a heavy cost to the French but with few British casualties. Ney himself was displaced from his horse four times. Eventually, it became obvious, even to Ney, that cavalry alone were achieving little. Belatedly, he organised a combined-arms attack, using Bachelu's division and Tissot's regiment of Foy's division from Reille's II Corps plus those French cavalry that remained in a fit state to fight. This assault was directed along much the same route as the previous heavy cavalry attacks.\nMeanwhile, at approximately the same time as Ney's combined-arms assault on the centre-right of Wellington's line, Napoleon ordered Ney to capture La Haye Sainte at whatever the cost. Ney accomplished this with what was left of D'Erlon's corps soon after 18:00. Ney then moved horse artillery up towards Wellington's centre and began to attack the infantry squares at short-range with canister. This all but destroyed the 27th (Inniskilling) Regiment, and the 30th and 73rd Regiments suffered such heavy losses that they had to combine to form a viable square. Wellington's centre was now on the verge of collapse and wide open to an attack from the French. Luckily for Wellington, Pirch I's and Zieten's corps of the Prussian Army were now at hand. Zieten's corps permitted the two fresh cavalry brigades of Vivian and Vandeleur on Wellington's extreme left to be moved and posted behind the depleted centre. Pirch I Corps then proceeded to support B\u00fclow and together they regained possession of Plancenoit, and once more the Charleroi road was swept by Prussian round shot. The value of this reinforcement is held in high regard.\nThe French army now fiercely attacked the Coalition all along the line with the culminating point being reached when Napoleon sent forward the Imperial Guard at 19:30. The attack of the Imperial Guards was mounted by five battalions of the Middle Guard, and not by the Grenadiers or Chasseurs of the Old Guard. Marching through a hail of canister and skirmisher fire and severely outnumbered, the 3,000 or so Middle Guardsmen advanced to the west of La Haye Sainte and proceeded to separate into three distinct attack forces. One, consisting of two battalions of Grenadiers, defeated the Coalition's first line and marched on. Chass\u00e9's relatively fresh Dutch division was sent against them, and Allied artillery fired into the victorious Grenadiers' flank. This still could not stop the Guard's advance, so Chass\u00e9 ordered his first brigade to charge the outnumbered French, who faltered and broke.\nFurther to the west, 1,500 British Foot Guards under Maitland were lying down to protect themselves from the French artillery. As two battalions of Chasseurs approached, the second prong of the Imperial Guard's attack, Maitland's guardsmen rose and devastated them with point-blank volleys. The Chasseurs deployed to counter-attack but began to waver. A bayonet charge by the Foot Guards then broke them. The third prong, a fresh Chasseur battalion, now came up in support. The British guardsmen retreated with these Chasseurs in pursuit, but the latter were halted as the 52nd Light Infantry wheeled in line onto their flank and poured a devastating fire into them and then charged. Under this onslaught, they too broke.\nThe last of the Guard retreated headlong. Mass panic ensued through the French lines as the news spread: \"La Garde recule. Sauve qui peut!\" (\"The Guard is retreating. Every man for himself!\"). Wellington then stood up in Copenhagen's stirrups, and waved his hat in the air to signal an advance of the Allied line just as the Prussians were overrunning the French positions to the east. What remained of the French army then abandoned the field in disorder. Wellington and Bl\u00fccher met at the inn of La Belle Alliance, on the north\u2013south road which bisected the battlefield, and it was agreed that the Prussians should pursue the retreating French army back to France. The Treaty of Paris was signed on 20 November 1815.\nAfter the victory, the Duke supported proposals that a medal be awarded to all British soldiers who participated in the Waterloo campaign, and on 28 June 1815, he wrote to the Duke of York suggesting: ... the expediency of giving to the non-commissioned officers and soldiers engaged in the Battle of Waterloo a medal. I am convinced it would have the best effect in the army, and if the battle should settle our concerns, they will well deserve it.The Waterloo Medal was duly authorised and distributed to all ranks in 1816.\nControversy.\nMuch historical discussion has been made about Napoleon's decision to send 33,000 troops under Marshal Grouchy to intercept the Prussians, but\u2014having defeated Bl\u00fccher at Ligny on 16 June and forced the Allies to retreat in divergent directions\u2014Napoleon may have been strategically astute in a judgement that he would have been unable to beat the combined Allied forces on one battlefield. Wellington's comparable strategic gamble was to leave 17,000 troops and artillery, mostly Dutch, away at Hal, north-west of Mont-Saint-Jean, in case of a French advance up the Mons-Hal-Brussels road.\nThe campaign led to numerous other controversies. Issues concerning Wellington's troop dispositions prior to Napoleon's invasion of the Netherlands, whether Wellington misled or betrayed Bl\u00fccher by promising, then failing, to come directly to Bl\u00fccher's aid at Ligny, and credit for the victory between Wellington and the Prussians. These and other such issues concerning Bl\u00fccher's, Wellington's, and Napoleon's decisions during the campaign were the subject of a strategic-level study by the Prussian political-military theorist Carl von Clausewitz, \"Feldzug von 1815: Strategische Uebersicht des Feldzugs von 1815\", (English title: \"The Campaign of 1815: Strategic Overview of the Campaign\".) This study was Clausewitz's last such work and is widely considered to be the best example of Clausewitz's mature theories concerning such analyses. It attracted the attention of Wellington's staff, who prompted the Duke to write a published essay on the campaign (other than his immediate, official after-action report, \"The Waterloo Dispatch\".) This was published as the 1842 \"Memorandum on the Battle of Waterloo\". While Wellington disputed Clausewitz on several points, Clausewitz largely absolved Wellington of accusations levelled against him. This exchange with Clausewitz was quite famous in Britain in the 19th century, particularly in Charles Cornwallis Chesney's work the \"Waterloo Lectures,\" but was largely ignored in the 20th century due to hostilities between Britain and Germany.\nArmy of occupation in Paris.\nUnder the terms of the Treaty of Paris, Wellington was appointed commander of the multi-national army of occupation based in Paris. The army consisted of troops from the United Kingdom, Austria, Russia and Prussia, along with contributions from five smaller European states. Although the various contingents were administered by their own commanders, they were all subordinated to Wellington, who was also responsible for liaison with the French administration. The role of the army was to prevent a resurgence of French aggression and to allow the restored King Louis XVIII to consolidate his control over the country. The army of occupation was never required to intervene militarily and was dissolved in 1818, after which Wellington returned to Britain. It was his last active military command.\nPrime Minister.\nFirst term.\nWellington entered politics again when he was appointed Master-General of the Ordnance in the Tory government of Lord Liverpool on 26 December 1818. He also became Governor of Plymouth on 9 October 1819. He was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 22 January 1827 and Constable of the Tower of London on 5 February 1827.\nAlong with Robert Peel, Wellington became an increasingly influential member of the Tory party, and in January 1828 he resigned as Commander-in-Chief and became prime minister. with the additional ceremonial title, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. \nDuring his first seven months as prime minister, he chose not to live in the official residence at 10 Downing Street, finding it too small. He moved in only because his own home, Apsley House, required extensive renovations. During this time he was largely instrumental in the foundation of King's College London. On 20 January 1829 Wellington was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. \nCatholic emancipation.\nIreland presented his first major challenge. In July 1828, \u00a0William Vesey Fitzgerald, President of the Board of Trade, was defeated in a County Clare by-election by the champion of Catholic Emancipation, Daniel O'Connell. The electoral upset dramatised the issue of the Oath of Supremacy \u2013 the sacramental test that effectively barred Roman Catholics from Parliament (denying O'Connell his seat) and from higher offices of the judiciary and state.\nWhile an MP in the Irish Parliament, Wellington had broadly favoured relieving Catholics of their Penal Law disabilities. Following the rebellions of 1798 and 1803, in which France had colluded, he grew more cautious, suggesting that if political distinctions between Protestants and the Catholic were abolished \"all will be Irishmen alike\", equally anxious to secure their country's independence.\u00a0However, in the willingness of Ireland's enfranchised forty-shilling freeholders to defy their landlords and vote for emancipation candidates, Wellington recognised a \"vast demonstration of populist political organisation, and clerical power\" more challenging than a separatist conspiracy. \nWith Peel, who had served as Chief Secretary for Ireland, Wellington was persuaded of the need for a new Oath of Allegiance unexceptional to Catholics. In the face of stiff opposition from the King and in the Lords, he forced the issue by threatening to resign, which would have cleared the way for a new Whig majority with designs not only for emancipation but also for parliamentary reform. The King and his brother, the Duke of Cumberland, did seek to put together a ministry united against Catholic emancipation. But recognising that such a government could not command a majority in the Commons, they soon abandoned the attempt.\nFor Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 (passed with Whig support) O'Connell accorded Wellington little credit. The Duke was no Irish patriot: \"To be sure he was born in Ireland\", the \"Emancipator\" famously remarked, \"but to be born in a stable does not make a man a horse\". This quip was widely reported and frequently attributed, mistakenly, to Wellington himself.\nWellington's government did exact a significant price for emancipation.The Relief Act was accompanied by a restriction of the Irish franchise. The property threshold for the county vote was raised five-fold to the British ten-pound standard, disenfranchising O'Connell's Forty Shilling Freeholders, and with them the greater part of the Irish electorate. \nDuel with Winchilsea.\nThe Earl of Winchilsea accused the Duke of \"an insidious design for the infringement of our liberties and the introduction of Popery into every department of the State\". Wellington responded by immediately challenging Winchilsea to a duel. On 21 March 1829, Wellington and Winchilsea met on Battersea fields. When the time came to fire, the Duke took aim and Winchilsea kept his arm down. The Duke fired wide to the right. Accounts differ as to whether he missed on purpose, an act known in duelling as a \"delope\". Wellington claimed he did. However, he was noted for his poor aim and reports more sympathetic to Winchilsea claimed he had aimed to kill. Winchilsea discharged his pistol into the air, a plan he and his second had almost certainly decided upon before the duel. Honour was saved and Winchilsea wrote Wellington an apology.\nThe nickname \"Iron Duke\" originated from this period, when he experienced a high degree of personal and political unpopularity. Its repeated use in \"Freeman's Journal\" throughout June 1830 appears to bear reference to his resolute political will, with taints of disapproval from its Irish editors. During this time, Wellington was greeted by a hostile reaction from the crowds at the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.\nResignation and aftermath.\nWellington's government fell in 1830. In the summer and autumn of that year, a wave of riots swept the country. The Whigs had been out of power for most years since the 1770s, and saw political reform in response to the unrest as the key to their return. Wellington stuck to the Tory policy of no reform and no expansion of suffrage, and as a result, lost a vote of no confidence on 15 November 1830.\nThe Whigs introduced the first Reform Bill while Wellington and the Tories worked to prevent its passage. The Whigs could not get the bill past its second reading in the British House of Commons, and the attempt failed. An election followed in direct response and the Whigs were returned with a landslide majority. A second Reform Act was introduced and passed in the House of Commons but was defeated in the Tory-controlled House of Lords. Another wave of near-insurrection swept the country. Wellington's residence at Apsley House was targeted by a mob of demonstrators on 27 April 1831 and again on 12 October, leaving his windows smashed. Iron shutters were installed in June 1832 to prevent further damage by crowds angry over rejection of the Reform Bill, which he strongly opposed. The Whig Government fell in 1832 and Wellington was unable to form a Tory Government partly because of a run on the Bank of England. This left King William IV no choice but to restore Earl Grey to the premiership. Eventually, the bill passed the House of Lords after the King threatened to fill that House with newly created Whig peers if it were not. Wellington was never reconciled to the change; when Parliament first met after the first election under the widened franchise, Wellington is reported to have said \"I never saw so many shocking bad hats in my life\".\nWellington opposed the Jewish Civil Disabilities Repeal Bill, and he stated in Parliament on 1 August 1833 that England \"is a Christian country and a Christian legislature, and that the effect of this measure would be to remove that peculiar character.\" The Bill was defeated by 104 votes to 54.\nGovernment.\nWellington was gradually superseded as leader of the Tories by Robert Peel, while the party evolved into the Conservatives. When the Tories were returned to power in 1834, Wellington declined to become prime minister because he thought membership in the House of Commons had become essential. The king reluctantly approved Peel, who was in Italy. Hence, Wellington acted as interim leader for three weeks in November and December 1834, taking the responsibilities of prime minister and most of the other ministries. In Peel's first cabinet (1834\u20131835), Wellington became foreign secretary, while in the second (1841\u20131846) he was a minister without portfolio and Leader of the House of Lords. Wellington was also re-appointed Commander-in-Chief of the British Army on 15 August 1842 following the resignation of Lord Hill.\nWellington served as the leader of the Conservative party in the House of Lords from 1828 to 1846. Some historians have belittled him as a befuddled reactionary, but a consensus in the late 20th century depicts him as a shrewd operator who hid his cleverness behind the fa\u00e7ade of a poorly informed old soldier. Wellington worked to transform the Lords from unstinting support of the Crown to an active player in political manoeuvering, with a commitment to the landed aristocracy. He used his London residence as a venue for intimate dinners and private consultations, together with extensive correspondence that kept him in close touch with party leaders in the Commons, and the main persona in the Lords. He gave public rhetorical support to Ultra-Tory anti-reform positions, but then deftly changed positions toward the party's centre, especially when Peel needed support from the upper house. Wellington's success was based on the 44 elected peers from Scotland and Ireland, whose elections he controlled.\nLater life.\nFamily.\nWellesley was married by his brother Gerald, a clergyman, to Kitty Pakenham in St George's Church, Dublin, on 10 April 1806. They had two children: Arthur was born in 1807 and Charles was born in 1808. The marriage proved unsatisfactory and the two spent years apart, while Wellesley was campaigning and afterwards. Kitty grew depressed, and Wellesley pursued other sexual and romantic partners. The couple largely lived apart, with Kitty spending most of her time at their country home, Stratfield Saye House, and Wellesley at their London home, Apsley House. Kitty's brother Edward Pakenham served under Wellesley throughout the Peninsular War, and Wellesley's regard for him helped to smooth his relations with Kitty, until Pakenham's death at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815.\nRetirement.\nWellington retired from political life in 1846, although he remained Commander-in-Chief, and returned briefly to the public eye in 1848 when he helped organise a military force to protect London during the year of European revolution. The Conservative Party had split over the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, with Wellington and most of the former Cabinet still supporting Peel, but most of the MPs led by Lord Derby supporting a protectionist stance. Early in 1852 Wellington, by then very deaf, gave Derby's first government its nickname by shouting \"Who? Who?\" as the list of inexperienced Cabinet ministers was read out in the House of Lords. He became Chief Ranger and Keeper of Hyde Park and St James's Park on 31 August 1850. He remained colonel of the 33rd Regiment of Foot from 1 February 1806 and colonel of the Grenadier Guards from 22 January 1827. Kitty died of cancer in 1831; despite their generally unhappy relations, which had led to an effective separation, Wellington was said to have been greatly saddened by her death, his one comfort being that after \"half a lifetime together, they had come to understand each other at the end\". He had found consolation for his unhappy marriage in his warm friendship with the diarist Harriet Arbuthnot, wife of his colleague Charles Arbuthnot. Harriet's death in the cholera epidemic of 1834 was almost as great a blow to Wellington as it was to her husband. The two widowers spent their last years together at Apsley House.\nFrom 1834 until his death in 1852, Wellington served as Chancellor of the University of Oxford.\nDeath and funeral.\nWellington died at Walmer Castle in Kent, his residence as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports and reputedly his favourite home, on 14 September 1852. He was found to be unwell on that morning and was helped from his campaign bed, which he had used throughout his military career, and seated in his chair where he died. His death was recorded as being due to the after-effects of a stroke culminating in a series of seizures. He was aged 83.\nAlthough in life he hated travelling by rail, having witnessed the death of William Huskisson, one of the first railway accident casualties, his body was taken by train to London, where he was given a state funeral \u2013 one of a small number of British subjects to be so honoured (other examples include Lord Nelson and Sir Winston Churchill). The funeral took place on 18 November 1852. Before the funeral, the Duke's body lay in state at the Royal Hospital Chelsea. Members of the royal family, including Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, the Prince of Wales, and the Princess Royal, visited to pay their respects. When viewing opened to the public, crowds thronged to visit and several people were killed in the crush. Queen Victoria wrote: \"He was the pride and the bon g\u00e9nie, as it were, of this country! He was the GREATEST man this country ever produced, and the most devoted and loyal subject, and the staunchest supporter the Crown ever had.\"\nHe was buried in St Paul's Cathedral, and during his funeral, there was little space to stand due to the number of attendees. A bronze memorial was sculpted by Alfred Stevens, and features two intricate supports: \"Truth tearing the tongue out of the mouth of False-hood\", and \"Valour trampling Cowardice underfoot\". Stevens did not live to see it placed in its home under one of the arches of the cathedral.\nWellington's casket was decorated with banners which were made for his funeral procession. Originally, there was one from Prussia, which was removed during World War I and never reinstated. In the procession, the \"Great Banner\" was carried by General Sir James Charles Chatterton of the 4th Dragoon Guards on the orders of Queen Victoria.\nMost of the book \"A Biographical Sketch of the Military and Political Career of the Late Duke of Wellington\" by Weymouth newspaper proprietor Joseph Drew is a detailed contemporary account of his death, lying in state and funeral.\nAfter his death, Irish and English newspapers disputed whether Wellington had been born an Irishman or an Englishman. In 2002, he was number 15 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.\nOwing to its links with Wellington, as the former commanding officer and colonel of the regiment, the title \"33rd (The Duke of Wellington's) Regiment\" was granted to the 33rd Regiment of Foot, on 18 June 1853 (the 38th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo) by Queen Victoria. Wellington's battle record is exemplary; he participated in some 60 battles during the course of his military career.\nPersonality.\nWellington always rose early; he \"couldn't bear to lie awake in bed\", even if the army was not on the march. Even when he returned to civilian life after 1815, he slept in a camp bed, reflecting his lack of regard for creature comforts. General Miguel de \u00c1lava complained that Wellington said so often that the army would march \"at daybreak\" and dine on \"cold meat\" that he began to dread those two phrases. While on campaign, he seldom ate anything between breakfast and dinner. During the retreat to Portugal in 1811, he subsisted on \"cold meat and bread\", to the despair of his staff who dined with him. He was, however, renowned for the quality of the wine that he drank and served, often drinking a bottle with his dinner (not a great quantity by the standards of his day).\n\u00c1lava was a witness to an incident just before the Battle of Salamanca. Wellington was eating a chicken leg while observing the manoeuvres of the French army through a spyglass. He spotted an overextension in the French left flank, and realised that he could launch a successful attack there. He exclaimed \"By God, that will do!\" and threw the drumstick in the air. After the Battle of Toulouse, Colonel Frederick Ponsonby brought him the news of Napoleon's abdication, and Wellington broke into an impromptu flamenco dance, spinning around on his heels and clicking his fingers.\nMilitary historian Charles Dalton recorded that, after a hard-fought battle in Spain, a young officer made the comment, \"I am going to dine with Wellington tonight\", which was overheard by the Duke as he rode by. \"Give me at least the prefix of Mr. before my name,\" Wellington said. \"My Lord,\" replied the officer, \"we do not speak of Mr. Caesar or Mr. Alexander, so why should I speak of Mr. Wellington?\"\nWhile known for his stern countenance and iron-handed discipline, Wellington was by no means unfeeling. While he is said to have disapproved of soldiers cheering as \"too nearly an expression of opinion\", Wellington nevertheless cared for his men: he refused to pursue the French after the battles of Porto and Salamanca, foreseeing an inevitable cost to his army in chasing a diminished enemy through rough terrain. The only time that he ever showed grief in public was after the storming of Badajoz: he cried at the sight of the British dead in the breaches. In this context, his famous despatch after the Battle of Vitoria, calling them the \"scum of the earth\", can be seen to be fuelled as much by disappointment at their breaking ranks as by anger. He shed tears after Waterloo on the presentation of the list of British fallen by John Hume. Later with his family, unwilling to be congratulated for his victory, he broke down in tears, his fighting spirit diminished by the high cost of the battle and great personal loss.\nWellington's soldier servant, a gruff German called Beckerman, and his long-serving valet, James Kendall, who served him for 25 years and was with him when he died, were both devoted to him. (A story that he never spoke to his servants and preferred instead to write his orders on a notepad on his dressing table in fact probably refers to his son, the 2nd Duke. It was recorded by the 3rd Duke's niece, Viva Seton Montgomerie (1879\u20131959), as being an anecdote she heard from an old retainer, Charles Holman, who was said greatly to resemble Napoleon.)\nFollowing an incident when, as Master-General of the Ordnance, he had been close to a large explosion, Wellington began to experience deafness and other ear-related problems. In 1822, a botched operation on his left ear led to permanent deafness on that side and some contemporaries suggested that he never fully recovered his health.\nWellington came to enjoy the company of a variety of intellectual and attractive women and had many amorous liaisons, particularly after the Battle of Waterloo and his subsequent ambassadorial position in Paris. In the days following Waterloo he had an affair with the notorious Lady Caroline Lamb, sister of one of his severely wounded officers and favourites, Col Frederick Ponsonby. He corresponded for many years with Lady Georgiana Lennox, later Lady de Ros, 26 years his junior and daughter of the Duchess of Richmond (who held the famous ball on the eve of Waterloo) and, though there are hints, it has not been clearly determined if the relationship was ever sexual. The British press lampooned the amorous side of the national hero. In 1824, one liaison came back to haunt him, when Wellington received a letter from a publisher, John Joseph Stockdale, offering to refrain from issuing an edition of the rather racy memoirs of one of his mistresses, Harriette Wilson, in exchange for money. It is said that the Duke promptly returned the letter, after scrawling across it, \"Publish and be damned\". However, Hibbert notes in his biography that the letter can be found among the Duke's papers, with nothing written on it. It is certain that Wellington reply, and the tone of a further letter from the publisher, quoted by Longford, suggests that he had refused in the strongest language to submit to blackmail.\nHe was also a remarkably practical man who spoke concisely. In 1851, it was discovered that there were a great many sparrows flying about in the Crystal Palace just before the Great Exhibition was to open. His advice to Queen Victoria was \"Sparrowhawks, ma'am\".\nWellington has often been portrayed as a defensive general, even though many, perhaps most, of his battles were offensive (Argaum, Assaye, Oporto, Salamanca, Vitoria, Toulouse). However, for most of the Peninsular War, where he earned his fame, his army lacked the numbers for a strategically offensive posture.\nTitles and tributes.\nNicknames.\nThe \"Iron Duke\" related to Wellington's political, rather than to his military, career. Its use is often disparaging. It is possible the term became more commonly used after 1832 when Wellington had metal shutters installed at Apsley House to prevent rioters breaking the windows. The term may have been made increasingly popular by \"Punch\" cartoons published in 1844\u201345.\nIn popular ballads of the day Wellington was called \"Nosey\" or \"Old Nosey\". More complimentary sobriquets, including \"The Beau\" and \"Beau Douro\", referenced his noted dress sense. Spanish troops called him \"The Eagle\", while Portuguese troops called him \"Douro Douro\" after his river crossing at Oporto in 1809.\nNapoleon dismissed his opponent as a \"Sepoy General\", a reference to Wellington's service in India. The name was used in the French newspaper \"Le Moniteur Universel\", as a means of propaganda. His allies were more enthusiastic; Tsar Alexander I of Russia calling him \"Le vainqueur du vainqueur du monde\", the conqueror of the world's conqueror, the phrase \"the world's conqueror\" referring to Napoleon. Lord Tennyson uses a similar reference in his \"Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington\", referring to him as \"the great World-victor's victor\". Similar tags included \"Europe's Liberator\" and \"Saviour of the Nations\".\nReferences.\nSources.\nJournals and magazines"}
{"id": "8476", "revid": "1232875545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8476", "title": "Disk operating system", "text": "A disk operating system (DOS) is a computer operating system that resides on and can use a disk storage device, such as a floppy disk, hard disk drive, or optical disc. A disk operating system provides a file system for organizing, reading, and writing files on the storage disk, and a means for loading and running programs stored on that disk. Strictly speaking, this definition does not include any other functionality, so it does not apply to more complex OSes, such as Microsoft Windows, and is more appropriately used only for older generations of operating systems.\nDisk operating systems for mainframes, minicomputers, microprocessors, and home computers are usually loaded from the disks as part of the boot process.\nHistory.\nEarly computers predate disk drives, floppy disks, or modern flash storage. Early storage devices such as delay lines, core memories, punched cards, punched tape, magnetic tape, and magnetic drums were used instead. Early microcomputers and home computers used paper tape, audio cassette tape (such as Kansas City standard), or no permanent storage at all. Without permanent storage, program and data entry is done at front panel switches directly into memory or through a computer terminal or keyboard, sometimes controlled by a BASIC interpreter in ROM. When power is turned off, any information is lost.\nIn the early 1960s, as disk drives became larger and more affordable, various mainframe and minicomputer vendors introduced disk operating systems and modified existing operating systems to use disks.\nHard disks and floppy disk drives require software to manage rapid access to block storage of sequential and other data. For most microcomputers, a disk drive of any kind was an optional peripheral. Systems could be used with a tape drive or booted without a storage device at all. The disk operating system component of the operating system was only needed when a disk drive was used.\nBy the time IBM announced the System/360 mainframes, the concept of a disk operating system was well established. Although IBM did offer Basic Programming Support (BPS/360) and TOS/360 for small systems, they were out of the mainstream and most customers used either DOS/360 or OS/360.\nMost home and personal computers of the late 1970s and 1980s used a disk operating system, most often with \"DOS\" in the name and simply referred to as \"DOS\" within their respective communities: CBM DOS for Commodore 8-bit systems, Atari DOS for the Atari 8-bit computers, TRS-DOS for the TRS-80, Apple DOS and ProDOS for the Apple II, and MS-DOS for IBM PC compatibles. CP/M is also a disk operating system, despite not having the \"DOS\" acronym in the name.\nA disk operating system is usually loaded from a disk, but there are exceptions, such as Commodore's disk drives for the Commodore 64 and VIC-20 which contain the DOS in ROM. AmigaDOS also mostly resides in ROM, as a part of a Kickstart firmware (a few select versions are also loaded from disk).\nMain OSes.\nSome disk operating systems are the operating systems for the entire computer system."}
{"id": "8477", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8477", "title": "Dual", "text": "Dual or Duals may refer to:"}
{"id": "8478", "revid": "31910160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8478", "title": "Doublespeak", "text": "Doublespeak is language that deliberately obscures, disguises, distorts, or reverses the meaning of words. Doublespeak may take the form of euphemisms (e.g., \"downsizing\" for layoffs and \"servicing the target\" for bombing), in which case it is primarily meant to make the truth sound more palatable. It may also refer to intentional ambiguity in language or to actual inversions of meaning. In such cases, doublespeak disguises the nature of the truth.\nDoublespeak is most closely associated with political language.\nOrigins and concepts.\nThe term \"doublespeak\" derives from two concepts in George Orwell's novel, \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", \"doublethink\" and \"Newspeak\", despite the term itself not being used in the novel. Another version of the term, \"doubletalk\", also referring to intentionally ambiguous speech, did exist at the time Orwell wrote his book, but the usage of \"doublespeak\", as well as of \"doubletalk\", in the sense of emphasizing ambiguity, clearly predates the publication of the novel. Parallels have also been drawn between doublespeak and Orwell's classic essay, \"Politics and the English Language\", which discusses linguistic distortion for purposes related to politics. In the essay, he observes that political language often serves to distort and obscure reality. Orwell's description of political speech is extremely similar to the popular definition of the term, doublespeak:\nThe writer Edward S. Herman cited what he saw as examples of doublespeak and doublethink in modern society. Herman describes in his book, \"Beyond Hypocrisy,\" the principal characteristics of doublespeak:\nExamples.\nIn politics.\nEdward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky comment in their book \"Manufacturing Consent: the Political Economy of the Mass Media\" that Orwellian doublespeak is an important component of the manipulation of the English language in American media, through a process called \"dichotomization,\" a component of media propaganda involving \"deeply embedded double standards in the reporting of news.\" For example, the use of state funds by the poor and financially needy is commonly referred to as \"social welfare\" or \"handouts,\" which the \"coddled\" poor \"take advantage of\". These terms, however, are not as often applied to other beneficiaries of government spending such as military spending. The bellicose language used interchangeably with calls for peace towards Armenia by Azerbaijani president Aliyev after the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War were described as doublespeak in media.\nIn advertising.\nAdvertisers can use doublespeak to mask their commercial intent from users, as users' defenses against advertising become more entrenched. Some are attempting to counter this technique with a number of systems offering diverse views and information to highlight the manipulative and dishonest methods that advertisers employ.\nAccording to Jacques Ellul, \"the aim is not to even modify people\u2019s ideas on a given subject, rather, it is to achieve conformity in the way that people act.\" He demonstrates this view by offering an example from drug advertising. Use of doublespeak in advertisements resulted in aspirin production rates rising by almost 50 percent from over 23 million pounds in 1960 to over 35 million pounds in 1970.\nIn comedy.\nDoublespeak, particularly when exaggerated, can be used as a device in satirical comedy and social commentary to ironically parody political or bureaucratic establishments' intent on obfuscation or prevarication. The television series \"Yes Minister\" is notable for its use of this device. Oscar Wilde was an early proponent of this device and a significant influence on Orwell.\nIntensify/downplay pattern.\nThis pattern was formulated by Hugh Rank and is a simple tool designed to teach some basic patterns of persuasion used in political propaganda and commercial advertising. The function of the intensify/downplay pattern is not to dictate what should be discussed but to encourage coherent thought and systematic organization. The pattern works in two ways: intensifying and downplaying. All people intensify, and this is done via repetition, association and composition. Downplaying is commonly done via omission, diversion and confusion as they communicate in words, gestures, numbers, et cetera. Individuals can better cope with organized persuasion by recognizing the common ways whereby communication is intensified or downplayed, so as to counter doublespeak.\nIn social media.\nIn 2022 and 2023, it was widely reported that social media users were using a form of doublespeak \u2013 sometimes called \"algospeak\" \u2013 to subvert content moderation on platforms such as TikTok. Examples include using the word \"unalive\" instead of \"dead\" or \"kill\", or using \"leg booty\" instead of LGBT, which users believed would prevent moderation algorithms from banning or shadow banning their accounts.\nDoublespeak Award.\nDoublespeak is often used by politicians to advance their agenda. The Doublespeak Award is an \"ironic tribute to public speakers who have perpetuated language that is grossly deceptive, evasive, euphemistic, confusing, or self-centered.\" It has been issued by the US National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) since 1974. The recipients of the Doublespeak Award are usually politicians, national administration or departments. An example of this is the United States Department of Defense, which won the award three times, in 1991, 1993, and 2001. For the 1991 award, the United States Department of Defense \"swept the first six places in the Doublespeak top ten\" for using euphemisms like \"servicing the target\" (bombing) and \"force packages\" (warplanes). Among the other phrases in contention were \"difficult exercise in labor relations\", meaning a strike, and \"meaningful downturn in aggregate output\", an attempt to avoid saying the word \"recession\".\nNCTE Committee on Public Doublespeak.\nThe US National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) Committee on Public Doublespeak was formed in 1971, in the midst of the Watergate scandal. It was at a point when there was widespread skepticism about the degree of truth which characterized relationships between the public and the worlds of politics, the military, and business.\nNCTE passed two resolutions. One called for the council to find means to study dishonest and inhumane uses of language and literature by advertisers, to bring offenses to public attention, and to propose classroom techniques for preparing children to cope with commercial propaganda. The other called for the council to find means to study the relationships between language and public policy and to track, publicize, and combat semantic distortion by public officials, candidates for office, political commentators, and all others whose language is transmitted through the mass media.\nThe two resolutions were accomplished by forming NCTE's Committee on Public Doublespeak, a body which has made significant contributions in describing the need for reform where clarity in communication has been deliberately distorted.\nHugh Rank.\nHugh Rank helped form the Doublespeak committee in 1971 and was its first chairman. Under his editorship, the committee produced a book called \"Language and Public Policy\" (1974), with the aim of informing readers of the extensive scope of doublespeak being used to deliberately mislead and deceive the audience. He highlighted the deliberate public misuses of language and provided strategies for countering doublespeak by focusing on educating people in the English language so as to help them identify when doublespeak is being put into play. He was also the founder of the Intensify/Downplay pattern that has been widely used to identify instances of doublespeak being used.\nDaniel Dieterich.\nDaniel Dieterich, former chair of the National Council of Teachers of English, served as the second chairman of the Doublespeak committee after Hugh Rank in 1975. He served as editor of its second publication, \"Teaching about Doublespeak\" (1976), which carried forward the committee's charge to inform teachers of ways of teaching students how to recognize and combat language designed to mislead and misinform.\nWilliam D. Lutz.\nWilliam D. Lutz, professor emeritus at Rutgers University-Camden has served as the third chairman of the Doublespeak Committee since 1975. In 1989, both his own book \"Doublespeak\" and, under his editorship, the committee's third book, \"Beyond Nineteen Eighty-Four\", were published. \"Beyond Nineteen Eighty-Four\" consists of 220 pages and eighteen articles contributed by long-time Committee members and others whose bodies of work have contributed to public understanding about language, as well as a bibliography of 103 sources on doublespeak. Lutz was also the former editor of the now defunct \"Quarterly Review of Doublespeak\", which examined the use of vocabulary by public officials to obscure the underlying meaning of what they tell the public. Lutz is one of the main contributors to the committee as well as promoting the term \"doublespeak\" to a mass audience to inform them of its deceptive qualities. He mentions:\nEducation against doublespeak.\nCharles Weingartner, one of the founding members of the NCTE committee on Public Doublespeak mentioned: \"people do not know enough about the subject (the reality) to recognize that the language being used conceals, distorts, misleads. Teachers of English should teach our students that words are not things, but verbal tokens or signs of things that should finally be carried back to the things that they stand for to be verified.\""}
{"id": "8481", "revid": "1272440962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8481", "title": "Dressed to Kill (1980 film)", "text": "Dressed to Kill is a 1980 American erotic psychological thriller film written and directed by Brian De Palma, and starring Michael Caine, Angie Dickinson and Nancy Allen. It depicts the events leading up to the brutal murder of a New York City housewife (Dickinson) before following a prostitute (Allen) who witnesses the crime, and her attempts to solve it with the help of the victim's son (Keith Gordon). It contains several direct references to Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 film \"Psycho\".\nReleased in July 1980, \"Dressed to Kill\" was a box office success in the United States, grossing over $30 million. It received largely favorable reviews, and critic David Denby of \"New York\" magazine proclaimed it \"the first great American movie of the '80s\". Dickinson won the Saturn Award for Best Actress for her performance. Allen received both a Golden Globe Award nomination for New Star of the Year, as well as an inaugural first-year Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress.\nPlot.\nSexually frustrated housewife Kate Miller is attending therapy sessions with New York City psychiatrist Dr. Robert Elliott. During an appointment, Kate attempts to seduce him, but Elliott rejects her advances, stating his unwillingness to jeopardize his happy marriage. Kate has planned to spend the day with her teenage son Peter, an inventor, but he has to cancel as he has reached a critical point in his research for his entry to the city's science fair. Thus, Kate goes alone to the Metropolitan Museum of Art where she unexpectedly flirts with a mysterious stranger. Kate and the stranger stalk each other through the museum until they finally wind up outside, where Kate joins him in a taxi, where he pleasures her. They go to his apartment and have sex.\nHours later, Kate awakens and decides to discreetly leave while the man, Warren Lockman, is asleep. Kate sits at his desk to leave him a note and finds a document indicating that Warren has contracted both syphilis and gonorrhea. Shocked, she leaves the apartment, but having hastily forgotten her wedding ring on the nightstand, she returns to retrieve it. The elevator doors open on the figure of a tall, blonde woman in dark sunglasses wielding a straight razor, who violently slashes Kate to death in the elevator. Upon discovering the body, Liz Blake, a high-priced call girl, notices the killer in the elevator's convex mirror, and subsequently becomes both the prime suspect and the killer's next target.\nDr. Elliott receives a bizarre message on his answering machine from \"Bobbi\", a transgender patient. Bobbi taunts the psychiatrist for ending their therapy sessions, apparently because Elliott refuses to sign the necessary papers for Bobbi to undergo sex reassignment surgery. Elliott tries to convince Dr. Levy, the patient's new doctor, that Bobbi is endangering herself and others.\nPolice Detective Marino doubts Liz's story, partly because of her profession, so Liz partners with a revenge-minded Peter to find the killer, using a series of his homemade listening devices and time-lapse cameras to track patients leaving Elliott's office. They catch Bobbi on camera, and soon a tall blonde in sunglasses starts stalking Liz, subsequently making several attempts on her life. Peter thwarts one of them in the New York City Subway by spraying Bobbi with homemade Mace.\nThe pair scheme to learn Bobbi's birth name by infiltrating Dr. Elliott's office. Liz baits the therapist by stripping to lingerie and flirting with him, distracting him long enough to briefly exit and look through his appointment book. Peter is watching through the window when a blonde pulls him away. When Liz returns, a razor-wielding blonde confronts her; the blonde outside shoots and wounds the blonde inside, knocking the wig off and revealing the razor-wielding blonde as Dr. Elliott/Bobbi. The blonde who shot Bobbi is actually a female police officer, revealing herself to be the blonde who has been trailing Liz.\nElliott is arrested and committed to a mental institution. Dr. Levy later explains to Liz that Elliott wanted to be a woman, but his male side would not allow him to proceed with the operation. Whenever a woman sexually aroused Elliott, Bobbi, representing the unstable, female side of the doctor's personality, became threatened to the point that she finally became murderous. When Dr. Levy realized this through his last conversation with Elliott, he called the police, who went to work and eventually apprehended Elliott.\nElliott escapes from the asylum after strangling a nurse, stalks Liz to Peter's house, and slashes her throat. She wakes up screaming and Peter rushes to her side, letting her realize it was merely a nightmare.\nProduction.\nCasting.\nDe Palma originally wanted Norwegian actress Liv Ullmann to play Kate Miller, but she declined because of the violence. He also approached Jill Clayburgh, who was unavailable, and the role then went to Angie Dickinson. Sean Connery was offered the role of Robert Elliott and was enthusiastic about it, but declined because of previous commitments. Connery later worked with De Palma on the 1987 Oscar-winning adaptation of \"The Untouchables\".\nFilming.\n\"Dressed to Kill\" was shot primarily in New York City, though the art gallery scene was filmed at the Philadelphia Museum of Art. The film was shot between October 1979 and January 1980.\nThe naked body in the opening scene, taking place in a shower, was not that of Angie Dickinson, but of 1977 \"Penthouse\" Pet of the Year model Victoria Lynn Johnson. De Palma has referred to the elevator killing as the best murder scene he has ever done.\nCensorship.\nTwo versions of the film exist in North America, an R-rated version and an unrated version. The unrated version is around 30 seconds longer and shows more pubic hair in the shower scene, more blood in the elevator scene (including a close-up shot of the killer slitting Kate's throat), and more explicit dialogue from Liz during the scene in Elliott's office. These scenes were trimmed when the MPAA originally gave the film an X rating.\nRelease.\nBox office.\n\"Dressed to Kill\" premiered in Los Angeles and New York City on July 25, 1980. The film grossed $3,416,000 in its opening weekend from 591 theatres and improved its gross the following weekend with $3,640,000 from 596 theatres. It grossed a total of $31.9 million at the U.S. box office, and was the 21st highest-grossing film of the year.\nHome media.\n, the film is owned by Amazon MGM Studios via Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer label (successor to Orion Pictures, who bought Filmways and American International Pictures in 1982). The film saw a 1984 VHS release by Warner Home Video, and later another VHS release by Goodtimes under licence from Orion. In 2001, MGM released the film in a special edition DVD. In September 2011, MGM released both R-rated and unrated versions on DVD and Blu-ray.\nThe Criterion Collection released separate deluxe Blu-ray and DVD editions of the film on September 8, 2015. On October 25, 2022, Kino Lorber issued the film for the first time in 4K UHD Blu-ray format.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Dressed to Kill\" holds a 83% \"fresh\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 55 reviews, with an average rating of 6.70/10. The consensus states, \"With arresting visuals and an engrossingly lurid mystery, \"Dressed to Kill\" stylishly encapsulates writer-director Brian De Palma's signature strengths.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 74 out of 100 based on 16 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" awarded the film three stars out of four, stating \"the museum sequence is brilliant\" and adding: \"\"Dressed to Kill\" is an exercise in style, not narrative; it would rather look and feel like a thriller than make sense, but DePalma has so much fun with the conventions of the thriller that we forgive him and go along.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" also gave it three stars out of four, writing that there were scenes \"that are as exciting and as stylish as any ever put on film. Unfortunately, a good chunk of the film is a whodunit, and its mystery is so easy to solve that we merely end up watching the film's visual pyrotechnics at a distance, never getting all that involved.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"witty, romantic,\" and \"very funny, which helps to defuse the effect of the graphically photographed violence. In addition, the film is, in its own inside-out way, peculiarly moral.\" His review added that \"The performers are excellent, especially Miss Dickinson.\" \"Variety\" declared \"Despite some major structural weaknesses, the cannily manipulated combination of mystery, gore and kinky sex adds up to a slick commercial package that stands to draw some rich blood money.\" David Denby of \"New York\" magazine proclaimed the film \"the first great American movie of the '80s.\"\nSheila Benson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote \"The brilliance of \"Dressed to Kill\" is apparent within seconds of its opening gliding shot; it is a sustained work of terror\u2014elegant, sensual, erotic, bloody, a directorial tour de force.\" Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" stated of De Palma that \"his timing is so great that when he wants you to feel something he gets you every time. His thriller technique, constantly refined, has become insidious, jewelled. It's hardly possible to find a point at which you could tear yourself away from this picture.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"This elegant new murder thriller promises to revive the lagging summer box office and enhance De Palma's reputation as the most exciting and distinctive manipulator of suspense since Alfred Hitchcock.\" In his movie guide, Leonard Maltin gave the film stars out of four, calling it a \"High-tension melodrama\", and stating \"De Palma works on viewers' emotions, not logic, and maintains a fever pitch from start to finish.\" He also praised Pino Donaggio's \"chilling music score.\"\nJohn Simon, of the \"National Review\", after taking note of the two-page advertisements full of superlatives in \"The New York Times\", wrote \"What \"Dressed to Kill\" dispenses liberally, however, is sophomoric soft-core pornography, vulgar manipulation of the emotions for mere sensation, salacious but inept dialogue that is a cross between comic-strip Freudianism and sniggering double entendres, and a plot line so full of holes to be at best a dotted line\".\nControversy.\nThe film led to controversy and protests upon its release. When the film was screened, Iowa City National Organization for Women and members of other feminist organizations picketed the film as it was shown on the University of Iowa campus, distributing leaflets against the film, condemning what they saw as a depiction of violence against women as entertainment. During the film's initial release, the activist group Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media distributed a leaflet, arguing that \"The distorted image of a psychotic male transvestite makes all sexual minorities appear sick and dangerous.\" Numerous critics have since placed \"Dressed to Kill\" in a lineage of slasher movies that perpetuate the transphobic myth that trans people are mentally ill sexual predators. \"Dressed to Kill\" was featured in the 2020 documentary \"\"; in a 2020 reappraisal of the film for \"The Guardian\", the critic Scott Tobias referred to De Palma's understanding of trans issues as \"disconcertingly retrograde...There's no getting around the ugly association of gender transition with violence, other than to say that it feels thoroughly aestheticized\".\nIn a 2016 interview, De Palma said, \"I don't know what the transgender community would think [of the film now]... Obviously I realize that it's not good for their image to be transgender and also be a psychopathic murderer. But I think that [perception] passes with time. We're in a different time.\" He added that he was \"glad\" that the film had become \"a favorite of the gay community,\" which he attributed to its \"flamboyance\"."}
{"id": "8483", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8483", "title": "Diesel cycle", "text": "The Diesel cycle is a combustion process of a reciprocating internal combustion engine. In it, fuel is ignited by heat generated during the compression of air in the combustion chamber, into which fuel is then injected. This is in contrast to igniting the fuel-air mixture with a spark plug as in the Otto cycle (four-stroke/petrol) engine. Diesel engines are used in aircraft, automobiles, power generation, diesel\u2013electric locomotives, and both surface ships and submarines.\nThe Diesel cycle is assumed to have constant pressure during the initial part of the combustion phase (formula_1 to formula_2 in the diagram, below). This is an idealized mathematical model: real physical diesels do have an increase in pressure during this period, but it is less pronounced than in the Otto cycle. In contrast, the idealized Otto cycle of a gasoline engine approximates a constant volume process during that phase.\nIdealized Diesel cycle.\nThe image shows a p\u2013V diagram for the ideal Diesel cycle; where formula_3 is pressure and V the volume or formula_4 the specific volume if the process is placed on a unit mass basis. The \"idealized\" Diesel cycle assumes an ideal gas and ignores combustion chemistry, exhaust- and recharge procedures and simply follows four distinct processes:\nThe Diesel engine is a heat engine: it converts heat into work. During the bottom isentropic processes (blue), energy is transferred into the system in the form of work formula_5, but by definition (isentropic) no energy is transferred into or out of the system in the form of heat. During the constant pressure (red, isobaric) process, energy enters the system as heat formula_6. During the top isentropic processes (yellow), energy is transferred out of the system in the form of formula_7, but by definition (isentropic) no energy is transferred into or out of the system in the form of heat. During the constant volume (green, isochoric) process, some of the energy flows out of the system as heat through the right depressurizing process formula_8. The work that leaves the system is equal to the work that enters the system plus the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system; in other words, net gain of work is equal to the difference between the heat added to the system and the heat that leaves the system.\nThe net work produced is also represented by the area enclosed by the cycle on the p\u2013V diagram. The net work is produced per cycle and is also called the useful work, as it can be turned to other useful types of energy and propel a vehicle (kinetic energy) or produce electrical energy. The summation of many such cycles per unit of time is called the developed power. The formula_7 is also called the gross work, some of which is used in the next cycle of the engine to compress the next charge of air.\nMaximum thermal efficiency.\nThe maximum thermal efficiency of a Diesel cycle is dependent on the compression ratio and the cut-off ratio. It has the following formula under cold air standard analysis: \nformula_16\nwhere\nThe cut-off ratio can be expressed in terms of temperature as shown below:\nformula_26 can be approximated to the flame temperature of the fuel used. The flame temperature can be approximated to the adiabatic flame temperature of the fuel with corresponding air-to-fuel ratio and compression pressure, formula_27.\nformula_28 can be approximated to the inlet air temperature.\nThis formula only gives the ideal thermal efficiency. The actual thermal efficiency will be significantly lower due to heat and friction losses. The formula is more complex than the Otto cycle (petrol/gasoline engine) relation that has the following formula:\nformula_29\nThe additional complexity for the Diesel formula comes around since the heat addition is at constant pressure and the heat rejection is at constant volume. The Otto cycle by comparison has both the heat addition and rejection at constant volume.\nComparing efficiency to Otto cycle.\nComparing the two formulae it can be seen that for a given compression ratio (), the \"ideal\" Otto cycle will be more efficient. However, a \"real\" diesel engine will be more efficient overall since it will have the ability to operate at higher compression ratios. If a petrol engine were to have the same compression ratio, then knocking (self-ignition) would occur and this would severely reduce the efficiency, whereas in a diesel engine, the self ignition is the desired behavior. Additionally, both of these cycles are only idealizations, and the actual behavior does not divide as clearly or sharply. Furthermore, the ideal Otto cycle formula stated above does not include throttling losses, which do not apply to diesel engines.\nApplications.\nDiesel engines.\nDiesel engines have the lowest specific fuel consumption of any large internal combustion engine employing a single cycle, 0.26\u00a0lb/hp\u00b7h (0.16\u00a0kg/kWh) for very large marine engines (combined cycle power plants are more efficient, but employ two engines rather than one). Two-stroke diesels with high pressure forced induction, particularly turbocharging, make up a large percentage of the very largest diesel engines.\nIn North America, diesel engines are primarily used in large trucks, where the low-stress, high-efficiency cycle leads to much longer engine life and lower operational costs. These advantages also make the diesel engine ideal for use in the heavy-haul railroad and earthmoving environments.\nOther internal combustion engines without spark plugs.\nMany model airplanes use very simple \"glow\" and \"diesel\" engines. Glow engines use glow plugs. \"Diesel\" model airplane engines have variable compression ratios. Both types depend on special fuels.\nSome 19th-century or earlier experimental engines used external flames, exposed by valves, for ignition, but this becomes less attractive with increasing compression. (It was the research of Nicolas L\u00e9onard Sadi Carnot that established the thermodynamic value of compression.) A historical implication of this is that the diesel engine could have been invented without the aid of electricity.\n See the development of the hot-bulb engine and indirect injection for historical significance."}
{"id": "8484", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8484", "title": "Deus Ex (video game)", "text": "Deus Ex is a 2000 action role-playing video game developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos Interactive. Set in a cyberpunk-themed dystopian world in the year 2052, the game follows JC Denton, an agent of the fictional agency United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO), who is given superhuman abilities by nanotechnology, as he sets out to combat hostile forces in a world ravaged by inequality and a deadly plague. His missions entangle him in a conspiracy that brings him into conflict with the Triads, Majestic 12, and the Illuminati.\n\"Deus Ex\"s gameplay combines elements of the first-person shooter with stealth elements, adventure, and role-playing genres, allowing for its tasks and missions to be completed in a variety of ways, which in turn lead to differing outcomes. Presented from the first-person perspective, the player can customize JC Denton's various abilities such as weapon skills or lockpicking, increasing his effectiveness in these areas; this opens up different avenues of exploration and methods of interacting with or manipulating other characters. The player can complete side missions away from the primary storyline by moving freely around the available areas, which can reward the player with experience points to upgrade abilities and alternative ways to tackle main missions. Powered by Unreal Engine 1, the game was released for Microsoft Windows in June 2000, with a Mac OS port following the next month. A modified version of the game was released for the PlayStation 2 in 2002 as Deus Ex: The Conspiracy. In the years following its release, \"Deus Ex\" has received additional improvements and content from its fan community.\nThe game received critical acclaim, praised for its ambitious plot, the freedom of its immersive gameplay, world-building and diversity of character customization and choices, while drawing further praise for its pioneering designs in player choice and multiple narrative paths, but its graphics and voice acting polarized critics. It received several Game of the Year awards, and is regarded as one of the best video games of all time, including being named \"Best PC Game of All Time\" in \"PC Gamer\"s \"Top 100 PC Games\" in 2011. It has sold more than 1 million copies, as of April 23, 2009. The game led to a series, which includes the sequel ' (2003), and three prequels: ' (2011), ' (2013), and ' (2016).\nGameplay.\n\"Deus Ex\" incorporates elements from four video game genres: role-playing, first-person shooter, adventure, and \"immersive simulation\", the last of which being a game where \"nothing reminds you that you're just playing a game.\" For example, the game uses a first-person camera during gameplay and includes exploration and character interaction as primary features.\nThe player assumes the role of JC Denton, a nanotech-augmented operative of the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). This nanotechnology is a central gameplay mechanism and allows players to perform superhuman feats.\nRole-playing elements.\nAs the player accomplishes objectives, the player character is rewarded with \"skill points\". Skill points are used to enhance a character's abilities in eleven different areas, and were designed to provide players with a way to customize their characters; a player might create a combat-focused character by increasing proficiency with pistols or rifles, while a more furtive character can be created by focusing on lock picking and computer hacking abilities. There are four different levels of proficiency in each skill, with the skill point cost increasing for each successive level.\nWeapons may be customized through \"weapon modifications\", which can be found or purchased throughout the game. The player might add scopes, silencers, or laser sights; increase the weapon's range, accuracy, or magazine size; or decrease its recoil and reload time; as appropriate to the weapon type.\nPlayers are further encouraged to customize their characters through nano-augmentations\u2014cybernetic devices that grant characters superhuman powers. While the game contains eighteen different nano-augmentations, the player can install a maximum of nine, as each must be used on a certain part of the body: one in the arms, legs, eyes, and head; two underneath the skin; and three in the torso. This forces the player to choose carefully between the benefits offered by each augmentation. For example, the arm augmentation requires the player to decide between boosting their character's skill in hand-to-hand combat or his ability to lift heavy objects.\nInteraction with non-player characters (NPCs) was a significant design focus. When the player interacts with a non-player character, the game will enter a cutscene-like conversation mode where the player advances the conversation by selecting from a list of dialogue options. The player's choices often have a substantial effect on both gameplay and plot, as non-player characters will react in different ways depending on the selected answer (e.g., rudeness makes them less likely to assist the player).\nCombat elements.\n\"Deus Ex\" features combat similar to first-person shooters, with real-time action, a first-person perspective, and reflex-based gameplay. As the player will often encounter enemies in groups, combat often tends toward a tactical approach, including the use of cover, strafing, and \"hit-and-run\". A \"USA Today\" reviewer found, \"At the easiest difficulty setting, your character is pur\u00e9ed again and again by an onslaught of human and robotic terrorists until you learn the value of stealth.\" However, through the game's role-playing systems, it is possible to develop a character's skills and augmentations to create a tank-like combat specialist with the ability to deal and absorb large amounts of damage. Non-player characters will praise or criticize the main character depending on the use of force, incorporating a moral element into the gameplay.\n\"Deus Ex\" features a head-up display crosshair, whose size dynamically shows where shots will fall based on movement, aim, and the weapon in use; the reticle expands while the player is moving or shifting their aim, and slowly shrinks to its original size while at rest. How quickly the reticle shrinks depends on the character's proficiency with the equipped weapon, the number of accuracy modifications added to the weapon, and the level of the \"Targeting\" nano-augmentation.\n\"Deus Ex\" features twenty-four weapons, ranging from crowbars, electroshock weapons, and riot baton, to laser-guided anti-tank rockets and assault rifles; both lethal and non-lethal weapons are available. The player can also make use of several weapons of opportunity, such as fire extinguishers.\nPlayer choice.\nGameplay in \"Deus Ex\" emphasizes player choice. Objectives can be completed in numerous ways, including stealth, sniping, heavy frontal assault, dialogue, or engineering and computer hacking. This level of freedom requires that levels, characters, and puzzles be designed with significant redundancy, as a single play-through of the game will miss large sections of dialogue, areas, and other content. In some missions, the player is encouraged to avoid using deadly force, and specific aspects of the story may change depending on how violent or non-violent the player chooses to be. The game is also unusual in that two of its boss villains can be killed off early in the game, or left alive to be defeated later, and this too affects how other characters interact with the player.\nBecause of its design focus on player choice, \"Deus Ex\" has been compared with \"System Shock\", a game that inspired its design. Together, these factors give the game a high degree of replayability, as the player will have vastly different experiences, depending on which methods they use to accomplish objectives.\nMultiplayer.\n\"Deus Ex\" was designed as a single-player game, and the initial releases of the Windows and Macintosh versions of the game did not include multiplayer functionality. Support for multiplayer modes was later incorporated through patches. The component consists of three game modes: deathmatch, basic team deathmatch, and advanced team deathmatch. Five maps, based on levels from the single-player portion of the game, were included with the original multiplayer patch, but many user-created maps exist, while also many features of the single-player game missing in multiplayer have been re-introduced by various user RPG modifications. The PlayStation 2 release of \"Deus Ex\" does not offer a multiplayer mode. In April 2014 it was announced that GameSpy would cease their masterserver services, also affecting \"Deus Ex\".\nSynopsis.\nSetting and characters.\n\"Deus Ex\" takes place in 2052, as it exists if real-world conspiracy theories turn out to be true. These include speculations regarding black helicopters, vaccinations, and FEMA, as well as Area 51, the ECHELON network, Men in Black, chupacabras (in the form of \"greasels\" and \"karkians\" which in game are transgenic creatures created by genetic engineering by a corporation), and grey aliens. Mysterious groups such as Majestic 12, the Illuminati, the Knights Templar, the Bilderberg Group, and the Trilateral Commission also either play a central part in the plot or are alluded to during the course of the game.\nThe plot of \"Deus Ex\" depicts a society on a slow spiral into chaos. There is a massive division between the rich and the poor, not only socially, but in some cities physically. A lethal pandemic, known as the \"Gray Death\", ravages the world's population, especially within the United States, and has no cure. A synthetic vaccine, \"Ambrosia\", manufactured by the company VersaLife, nullifies the effects of the virus but is in critically short supply. Because of its scarcity, Ambrosia is available only to those deemed \"vital to the social order\", and finds its way primarily to government officials, military personnel, the rich and influential, scientists, and the intellectual elite. With no hope for the common people of the world, riots occur worldwide, and some terrorist organizations have formed with the professed intent of assisting the downtrodden, among them the National Secessionist Forces (NSF) of the U.S. and a French group known as Silhouette.\nTo combat these threats to the world order, the United Nations has expanded its influence around the globe to form the United Nations Anti-Terrorist Coalition (UNATCO). It is headquartered near New York City in a bunker beneath Liberty Island, placed there after a terrorist strike on the Statue of Liberty.\nThe main character of \"Deus Ex\" is UNATCO agent JC Denton (voiced by Jay Franke), one of the first in a new line of agents physically altered with advanced nanotechnology to gain superhuman abilities, alongside his brother Paul (also voiced by Jay Franke), who joined UNATCO to avenge his parents' deaths at the hands of Majestic 12. His UNATCO colleagues include the mechanically-augmented and ruthlessly efficient field agents Gunther Hermann and Anna Navarre; Quartermaster General Sam Carter, and the bureaucratic UNATCO chief Joseph Manderley. UNATCO communications tech Alex Jacobson's character model and name are based on Warren Spector's nephew, Alec Jacobson.\nJC's missions bring him into contact with various characters, including NSF leader Juan Lebedev, hacker and scientist Tracer Tong, nano-tech expert Gary Savage, Nicolette DuClare (daughter of an Illuminati member), former Illuminati leader Morgan Everett, the Artificial Intelligences (AI) Daedalus and Icarus, and Bob Page, owner of VersaLife and leader of Majestic 12, a clandestine organization that has usurped the infrastructure of the Illuminati, allowing him to control the world for his own ends.\nPlot.\nAfter completing his training, UNATCO agent JC Denton takes several missions given by Director Joseph Manderley to track down members of the National Secessionist Forces (NSF) and their stolen shipments of the Ambrosia vaccine, the treatment for the Gray Death virus. Through these missions, JC is reunited with his brother, Paul, who is also nano-augmented. JC tracks the Ambrosia shipment to a private terminal at LaGuardia Airport. Paul meets JC outside the plane and explains that he has defected from UNATCO and is working with the NSF after learning that the Gray Death is a human-made virus, with UNATCO using its power to make sure only the elite receive the vaccine.\nJC returns to UNATCO headquarters and is told by Manderley that both he and Paul have been outfitted with a 24-hour kill switch and that Paul's has been activated due to his betrayal. Manderley orders JC to fly to Hong Kong to eliminate Tracer Tong, a hacker whom Paul has contact with, and who can disable the kill switches. Instead, JC returns to Paul's apartment to find Paul hiding inside. Paul further explains his defection and encourages JC to also defect by sending out a distress call to alert the NSF's allies. Upon doing so, JC becomes a wanted man by UNATCO, and his kill switch is activated by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Director Walton Simons. JC is unable to escape UNATCO forces, and both he and Paul (provided he survived the raid on the apartment) are taken to a secret prison below UNATCO headquarters. An entity named \"Daedalus\" contacts JC and informs him that the prison is part of Majestic 12, and arranges for him and Paul (if alive) to escape. JC and Paul (if alive) flee to Hong Kong to meet with Tong, who deactivates their kill switches. Tong requests that JC infiltrate the VersaLife building. Doing so, JC discovers that the corporation is the source for the Gray Death, and he can steal the plans for the virus and destroy the universal constructor (UC) that produces it.\nAnalysis of the virus shows that its structure was designed by the Illuminati, prompting Tong to send JC to Paris to obtain their help fighting Majestic 12. JC meets with Illuminati leader Morgan Everett and learns that the technology behind the Gray Death was intended to be used for augmentation, but Majestic 12, led by trillionaire businessman and former Illuminatus Bob Page, stole and repurposed it. Everett recognizes that without VersaLife's UC, Majestic 12 can no longer create the virus, and will likely target Vandenberg Air Force Base (which in real life is now a space force base), where X-51, a group of former Area 51 scientists, have built another one. After aiding the base personnel in repelling a Majestic 12 attack, JC meets X-51 leader Gary Savage, who reveals that Daedalus is an artificial intelligence (AI) borne out of the ECHELON program.\nEverett attempts to gain control over Majestic 12's communications network by releasing Daedalus onto the U.S. military networks, but Page counters by releasing his own AI, Icarus. Icarus merges with Daedalus to form a new AI, Helios, which can control all global communications. Savage enlists JC's help in procuring schematics for reconstructing components for the UC that were damaged during Majestic 12's raid of Vandenberg. JC finds the schematics and transmits them to Savage. Page intercepts the transmission and targets a nuclear missile at Vandenberg to ensure that Area 51, now Majestic 12's headquarters, will be the only location in the world with an operational UC. However, JC can reprogram the missile to strike Area 51.\nJC travels to Area 51 to confront Page. Page reveals that he seeks to merge with Helios and gain full control over nanotechnology. JC is contacted by Tong, Everett, and the Helios AI successively. Each of the three ask for his help in defeating Page while furthering their own objectives. Tong seeks to plunge the world into a Dark Age by destroying the global communications hub and preventing anyone from taking control of the world. Everett offers Denton the chance to return the Illuminati to power by killing Page and using the Area 51 technology to rule the world with an invisible hand. Helios wishes to merge with Denton and rule the world as a benevolent dictator with infinite knowledge and reason. The player's decision determines the future and brings the game to a close.\nDevelopment.\nAfter Looking Glass Technologies and Origin Systems released \"\" in January 1993, producer Warren Spector began to plan \"Troubleshooter\", the game that would become \"Deus Ex\". In his 1994 proposal, he described the concept as \"\"Underworld\"-style first-person action\" in a real-world setting with \"big-budget, nonstop action\". After Spector and his team were laid off from Looking Glass, John Romero of Ion Storm offered him the chance to make his \"dream game\" without any restrictions.\nPreproduction for \"Deus Ex\" began around August 1997 and lasted roughly six months. The project's budget was $5 million to $7 million. The game's working title was \"Shooter: Majestic Revelations\", and it was scheduled for release on Christmas 1998. The team developed the setting before the game mechanics. Noticing his wife's fascination with \"The X-Files\", Spector connected the \"real world, millennial weirdness, [and] conspiracy\" topics on his mind and decided to make a game about them that would appeal to a broad audience. The \"Shooter\" design document cast the player as an augmented agent working against an elite cabal in the \"dangerous and chaotic\" 2050s. It cited \"Half-Life\", \"Fallout\", ', and \"GoldenEye 007\" as game design influences, and used the stories and settings of ', \"The Manchurian Candidate\", \"RoboCop\", \"The X-Files\", and \"Men in Black\" as reference points. The team designed a skill system that featured \"special powers\" derived from nanotechnological augmentation and avoided the inclusion of die rolling and skills that required micromanagement. Spector also cited Konami's 1995 role-playing video game \"Suikoden\" as an inspiration, stating that the limited choices in \"Suikoden\" inspired him to expand on the idea with more meaningful choices in \"Deus Ex\".\nIn early 1998, the \"Deus Ex\" team grew to 20 people, and the game entered a 28-month production phase. The development team consisted of three programmers, six designers, seven artists, a writer, an associate producer, a \"tech\", and Spector. Two writers and four testers were hired as contractors. Chris Norden was the lead programmer and assistant director, Harvey Smith the lead designer, Jay Lee the lead artist, and Sheldon Pacotti the lead writer. Close friends of the team who understood the intentions behind the game were invited to playtest and give feedback. The wide range of input led to debates in the office and changes to the game. Spector later concluded that the team was \"blinded by promises of complete creative freedom\", and by their belief that the game would have no budget, marketing, or time restraints. By mid-1998, the game's title had become \"Deus Ex\", derived from the Latin literary device \"deus ex machina\" (\"god from the machine\"), in which a plot is resolved by an unpredictable intervention.\nSpector felt that the best aspects of \"Deus Ex\"s development were the \"high-level vision\" and length of preproduction, flexibility within the project, testable \"proto-missions\", and the Unreal Engine 1 license. The team's pitfalls included the management structure, unrealistic goals, underestimating risks with artificial intelligence, their handling of proto-missions, and weakened morale from bad press. \"Deus Ex\" was released in North America on June 23, 2000, Australia on July 27, and the United Kingdom on August 4, 2000. and published by Eidos Interactive for Microsoft Windows. The team planned third-party ports for Mac OS 9 and Linux.\nDesign.\nThe original 1997 design document for \"Deus Ex\" privileges character development over all other features. The game was designed to be \"genre-busting\": in parts simulation, role-playing, first-person shooter, and adventure. The team wanted players to consider \"who they wanted to be\" in the game, and for that to alter how they behaved in the game. In this way, the game world was \"deeply simulated\", or realistic and believable enough that the player would solve problems in creative, emergent ways without noticing distinct puzzles. However, the simulation ultimately failed to maintain the desired level of openness, and they had to brute force \"skill\", \"action\", and \"character interaction\" paths through each level. Playtesting also revealed that their idea of a role-playing game based on the real world was more interesting in theory than in reality, as certain aspects of the real world, such as hotels and office buildings, were not compelling in a game.\n The game's story changed considerably during production, but the idea of an augmented counterterrorist protagonist named JC Denton remained throughout. Though Spector originally pictured \"Deus Ex\" as akin to \"The X-Files\", lead writer Sheldon Pacotti felt that it ended up more like James Bond. Spector wrote that the team overextended itself by planning highly elaborate scenes. Designer Harvey Smith removed a mostly complete White House level due to its complexity and production needs. Finished digital assets were repurposed or abandoned by the team. Pete Davison of USgamer referred to the White House and presidential bunker as \"the truly deleted scenes of \"Deus Ex\" lost levels\".\nOne of the things that Spector wanted to achieve in Deus Ex was to make JC Denton a cipher for the player, to create a better immersion and gameplay experience. He did not want the character to force any emotion, so that whatever feelings the player may be experiencing come from themselves rather than from JC Denton. To do this, Spector instructed voice actor Jay Anthony Franke to record his dialogue without any emotion but in a monotone voice, which is unusual for a voice acting role.\nOnce coded, the team's game systems did not work as intended. The early tests of the conversation system and user interface were flawed. The team also found augmentations and skills to be less interesting than they had seemed in the design document. In response, Harvey Smith substantially revised the augmentations and skills. Production milestones served as wake-up calls for the game's direction. A May 1998 milestone that called for a functional demo revealed that the size of the game's maps caused frame rate issues, which was one of the first signs that maps needed to be cut. A year later, the team reached a milestone for finished game systems, which led to better estimates for their future mission work and the reduction of the 500-page design document to 270 pages. Spector recalled Smith's mantra on this point: \"less is more\". \nOne of the team's biggest blind spots was the AI programming for NPCs. Spector wrote that they considered it in preproduction, but that they did not figure out how to handle it until \"relatively late in development\". This led to wasted time when the team had to discard their old AI code. The team built atop their game engine's shooter-based AI instead of writing new code that would allow characters to exhibit convincing emotions. As a result, NPC behavior was variable until the very end of development. Spector felt that the team's \"sin\" was their inconsistent display of a trustable \"human AI\".\nTechnology.\n The game was developed on systems including dual-processor Pentium Pro 200s and Athlon 800s with eight and nine gigabyte hard drives, some using SCSI. The team used \"more than 100 video cards\" throughout development. \"Deus Ex\" was built using Visual Studio, Lightwave, and Lotus Notes. They also made a custom dialogue editor, ConEdit. The team used UnrealEd atop the Unreal game engine for map design, which Spector wrote was \"superior to anything else available\". Their trust in UnrealScript led them to code \"special-cases\" for their immediate mission needs instead of more generalized multi-case code. Even as concerned team members expressed misgivings, the team only addressed this later in the project. To Spector, this was a lesson to always prefer \"general solutions\" over \"special casing\", such that the toolset works predictably.\nThey waited to license a game engine until after preproduction, expecting the benefits of licensing to be more time for the content and gameplay, which Spector reported to be the case. They chose the Unreal engine, as it did 80% of what they needed from an engine and was more economical than building from scratch. Their small programming team allowed for a larger design group. The programmers also found the engine accommodating, though it took about nine months to acclimate to the software. Spector felt that they would have understood the code better had they built it themselves, instead of \"treating the engine as a black box\" and coding conservatively. He acknowledged that this precipitated into the Direct3D issues in their final release, which slipped through their quality assurance testing. Spector also noted that the artificial intelligence, pathfinding, and sound propagation were designed for shooters and should have been rewritten from scratch instead of relying on the engine. He thought the licensed engine worked well enough that he expected to use the same for the game's sequel \"\" and \"Thief 3\". He added that developers should not attempt to force their technology to perform in ways it was not intended, and should find a balance between perfection and pragmatism.\nMusic.\nThe soundtrack of \"Deus Ex\", composed by Alexander Brandon (primary contributor, including main theme), Dan Gardop\u00e9e (\"Naval Base\" and \"Vandenberg\"), Michiel van den Bos (\"UNATCO\", \"Lebedev's Airfield\", \"Airfield Action\", \"DuClare Chateau\", plus minor contribution to some of Brandon's tracks), and Reeves Gabrels (\"NYC Bar\"), was praised by critics for complementing the gritty atmosphere predominant throughout the game with melodious and ambient music incorporated from a number of genres, including techno, jazz, and classical. The music sports a basic dynamic element, similar to the iMUSE system used in early 1990s LucasArts games; during play, the music will change to a different iteration of the currently playing song based on the player's actions, such as when the player starts a conversation, engages in combat, or transitions to the next level. All the music in the game is tracked - Gabrels' contribution, \"NYC Bar\", was converted to a module by Alexander Brandon.\nRelease.\n\"Deus Ex\" has been re-released in several iterations since its original publication and has also been the basis of several mods developed by its fan community.\nThe \"Deus Ex: Game of the Year Edition\", which was released on May 8, 2001, contains the latest game updates and a software development kit, a separate soundtrack CD, and a page from a fictional newspaper featured prominently in \"Deus Ex\" titled \"The Midnight Sun\", which recounts recent events in the game's world. However, later releases of said version do not include the soundtrack CD and contain a PDF version of the newspaper on the game's disc.\nDeveloped by Westlake Interactive, the Mac OS port was released on July 13, shipping with the same capabilities which can also be patched to enable multiplayer support. However, publisher Aspyr Media did not release any subsequent editions of the game or any additional patches. As such, the game is only supported in Mac OS 9 and the \"Classic\" environment in Mac OS X, neither of which are compatible with Intel-based Macs. The Windows version will run on Intel-based Macs using Crossover, Boot Camp, or other software to enable a compatible version of Windows to run on a Mac.\nA PlayStation 2 port of the game, retitled \"Deus Ex: The Conspiracy\" outside of Europe, was released in 2002 in North America on March 26, in the United Kingdom on June 7, and in Australia on December 13. and Along with motion-captured character animations and pre-rendered introductory and ending cinematics that replaced the original versions, it features a simplified interface with optional auto-aim. There are many minor changes in level design, some to balance gameplay, but most to accommodate loading transition areas, due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation 2. The PlayStation 2 version was re-released in Europe on the PlayStation 3 as a PlayStation 2 Classic on May 16, 2012.\nLoki Games worked on a Linux version of the game, but the company went out of business before releasing it. The OpenGL layer they wrote for the port, however, was sent out to Windows gamers through an online patch.\nThough their quality assurance did not see major Direct3D issues, players noted \"dramatic slowdowns\" immediately following the launch, and the team did not understand the \"black box\" of the Unreal engine well enough to make it do exactly what they needed. Spector characterized \"Deus Ex\" reviews into two categories based on how they begin with either how \"Warren Spector makes games all by himself\" or that \"\"Deus Ex\" couldn't possibly have been made by Ion Storm\". He has said that the game won over 30 \"best of\" awards in 2001, and concluded that their final game was not perfect, but that they were much closer for having tried to \"do things right or not at all\".\nMods.\n\"Deus Ex\" was built on Unreal Engine 1, which already had an active community of modders. In September 2000, Eidos Interactive and Ion Storm announced in a press release that they would be releasing the software development kit (SDK), which included all the tools used to create the original game. Several team members, as well as project director Warren Spector, stated that they were \"really looking forward to seeing what [the community] does with our tools\". The kit was released on September 22, 2000, and soon gathered community interest, followed by the release of tutorials, small mods, up to announcements of large mods and conversions. While Ion Storm did not hugely alter the engine's rendering and core functionality, they introduced role-playing elements.\nIn 2009, a fan-made mod called \"The Nameless Mod\" (\"TNM\") was released by Off Topic Productions. The game's protagonist is a user of an Internet forum, with digital places represented as physical locations. The mod offers roughly the same amount of gameplay as \"Deus Ex\" and adds several new features to the game, with a more open world structure than \"Deus Ex\" and new weapons such as the player character's fists. The mod was developed over seven years and has thousands of lines of recorded dialogue and two different parallel story arcs. Upon its release, \"TNM\" earned a 9/10 overall from \"PC PowerPlay\" magazine. In Mod DB's 2009 Mod of the Year awards, \"The Nameless Mod\" won the Editor's Choice award for Best Singleplayer Mod.\nIn 2015, during the 15th anniversary of the game's release, Square Enix (who had acquired Eidos earlier) endorsed a free fan-created mod, \"Deus Ex: Revision\", which was released through Steam. The mod, created by Caustic Creative, is a graphical overhaul of the original game, adding in support for newer versions of DirectX, upgraded textures adapted from previous mods, a remixed soundtrack, and more world-building aesthetics. It also alters aspects of gameplay, including new level design paths and in-game architecture. Another overhaul mod, GMDX, released its final version in mid-2017 with enhanced artificial intelligence, improved physics, and upgraded visual textures.\n\"The Lay D Denton Project\", a mod adding the ability to play as a female JC \u2013 a feature that had been planned for \"Deus Ex\" but ultimately not implemented \u2013 was released in 2021. This included the re-recording of all of JC's voice lines by voice actress Karen Rohan, the addition of 3D models for the character, and editing of all gendered references to JC including other characters' voice clips. The audio editing was the most difficult aspect, as any abnormalities would have been noticed easily; a few characters were too difficult to edit, and had to be recast for the mod.\nReception.\nSales.\nAccording to \"Computer Gaming World\"s Stefan Janicki, \"Deus Ex\" had \"sold well in North America\" by early 2001. In the United States, it debuted at #6 on PC Data's sales chart for the week ending June 24, at an average retail price of $40. It fell to eighth place in its second week but rose again to position 6 in its third. It proceeded to place in the top 10 rankings for August 6\u201312 and the week ending September 2 and to secure 10th place overall for the months of July and August. \"Deus Ex\" achieved sales of 138,840 copies and revenues of $5 million in the United States by the end of 2000, according to PC Data. The firm tracked another 91,013 copies sold in the country during 2001.\nThe game was a larger hit in Europe; Janicki called it a \"blockbuster\" for the region, which broke a trend of weak sales for 3D games. He wrote, \"[I]n Europe\u2014particularly in England\u2014the action/RPG dominated the charts all summer, despite competition from heavyweights like \"Diablo II\" and \"The Sims\".\" In the German-speaking market, \"PC Player\" reported sales over 70,000 units for \"Deus Ex\" by early 2001. It debuted at #3 in the region for July 2000 and held the position in August, before dropping to #10, #12 and #27 over the following three months. In the United Kingdom, \"Deus Ex\" reached #1 on the sales charts during August and spent three months in the top 10. It received a \"Silver\" award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA) in February 2002, indicating lifetime sales of at least 100,000 units in the United Kingdom. The ELSPA later raised it to \"Gold\" status, for 200,000 sales.\nIn April 2009, Square-Enix revealed that \"Deus Ex\" had surpassed 1 million sales globally, but was outsold by \"\".\nCritical response.\n\"Deus Ex\" received critical acclaim, attaining a score of 90 out of 100 from 28 critics on Metacritic. Thierry Nguyen from \"Computer Gaming World\" said that the game \"delivers moments of brilliance, idiocy, ingenuity, and frustration\". \"Computer Games Magazine\" praised the title for its deep gameplay and its use of multiple solutions to situations in the game. Similarly, \"Edge\" highlighted the game's freedom of choice, saying that \"Deus Ex\" \"never tells you what to do. Goals are set, but alter according to your decisions.\" \"Eurogamer\"s Rob Fahey lauded the game, writing, \"Moody and atmospheric, compelling and addictive, this is first person gaming in grown-up form, and it truly is magnificent.\" Jeff Lundrigan reviewed the PC version of the game for \"Next Generation\", rating it five stars out of five, and stated that \"This is hands-down one of the best PC games ever made. Stop reading and go get yours now.\"\nFormer \"GameSpot\" reviewer Greg Kasavin, though awarding the game a score of 8.2 of 10, was disappointed by the security and lockpicking mechanics. \"Such instances are essentially noninteractive\", he wrote. \"You simply stand there and spend a particular quantity of electronic picks or modules until the door opens or the security goes down.\" Kasavin made similar complaints about the hacking interface, noting that \"Even with basic hacking skills, you'll still be able to bypass the encryption and password protection\u00a0... by pressing the 'hack' button and waiting a few seconds\".\nThe game's graphics and voice acting were also met with muted enthusiasm. Kasavin complained of \"Deus Ex\"s relatively sub-par graphics, blaming them on the game's \"incessantly dark industrial environments\". \"GamePro\" reviewer Chris Patterson took the time to note that despite being \"solid acoustically\", \"Deus Ex\" had moments of weakness. He poked fun at JC's \"Joe Friday, 'just the facts', deadpan\", and the \"truly cheesy accents\" of minor characters in Hong Kong and New York City. \"IGN\" called the graphics \"blocky\", adding that \"the animation is stiff, and the dithering is just plain awful in some spots\", referring to the limited capabilities of the Unreal Engine used to design the game. The website, later on, stated that \"overall Deus Ex certainly looks better than your average game\".\nReviewers and players also complained about the size of \"Deus Ex\"s save files. An Adrenaline Vault reviewer noted that \"Playing through the entire adventure, [he] accumulated over 250\u00a0MB of save game data, with the average file coming in at over 15\u00a0MB.\"\nThe game developed a strong cult following, leading to a core modding and playing community that remained active over 15 years after its release. In an interview with IGN in June 2015, game director Warren Spector said he never expected \"Deus Ex\" to sell many copies, but he did expect it to become a cult classic among a smaller, active community, and he continues to receive fan mail from players to date regarding their experiences and thoughts about \"Deus Ex\".\nAwards and accolades.\n\"Deus Ex\" received over 30 \"best of\" awards in 2001, from outlets such as IGN, GameSpy, \"PC Gamer\", \"Computer Gaming World\", and The Adrenaline Vault. It won \"Excellence in Game Design\" and \"Game Innovation Spotlight\" at the 2001 Game Developers Choice Awards, and it was nominated for \"Game of the Year\". At the 4th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, \"Deus Ex\" had won awards in the \"Computer Innovation\" and \"PC Action/Adventure\" categories, as well as received nominations for \"Sound Design\", \"PC Role-Playing\", and \"Game of the Year\" in both the PC and overall categories. The British Academy of Film and Television Arts named it \"PC Game of the Year\". The game also collected several \"Best Story\" accolades, including first prize in Gamasutra's 2006 \"Quantum Leap\" awards for storytelling in a video game.\n\"Deus Ex\" has appeared in several lists of the greatest games. It was included in \"IGN\" \"100 Greatest Games of All Time\" (#40, #21 and #34 in 2003, 2005 and 2007, respectively), \"Top 25 Modern PC Games\" (4th place in 2010) and \"Top 25 PC Games of All Time\" (#20 and #21 in 2007 and 2009 respectively) lists. GameSpy featured the game in its \"Top 50 Games of All Time\" (18th place in 2001) and \"25 Most Memorable Games of the Past 5 Years\" (15th place in 2004) lists, and in the site's \"Hall of Fame\". \"PC Gamer\" placed \"Deus Ex\" on its \"Top 100 PC Games of All Time\" (#2, #2, #1 by staff and #4 by readers in 2007, 2008, 2010 and 2010 respectively) and \"50 Best Games of All Time\" (#10 and #27 in 2001 and 2005) lists, and it was awarded 1st place in \"PC Zone\"s \"101 Best PC Games Ever\" feature. It was also included in Yahoo! UK Video Games' \"100 Greatest Computer Games of All Time\" (28th place) list, and in \"Edge\"s \"The 100 Best Videogames\" (29th place in 2007) and \"100 Best Games to Play Today\" (57th place in 2009) lists. \"Deus Ex\" was named the second-best game of the 2000s by Gamasutra. In 2012, \"Time\" named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time, and G4tv named it the 53rd best game of all time for its \"complex and well-crafted story that was really the start of players making choices that genuinely affect the outcome\". \"1UP.com\" listed it as one of the most important games of all time, calling its influence \"too massive to properly gauge\". In 2019, the \"Guardian\" named it the 29th best game of the 21st century, describing it as a \"cultural event\".\nLegacy.\nSequels.\nA sequel, \"\", was released in the United States on December 2, 2003, and in Europe in early 2004 for Windows and Xbox. A second sequel, titled \"Deus Ex: Clan Wars\", was initially conceived as a multiplayer-focused third game for the series. \"Deus Ex: Clan Wars\" was eventually published under the title \"Project: Snowblind\".\nOn March 29, 2007, Valve announced \"Deus Ex\" and its sequel would be available for purchase from their Steam service. Among the games announced are several other Eidos franchise titles, including \"\" and \"Tomb Raider\".\nEidos Montr\u00e9al produced a prequel to \"Deus Ex\" called \"\". This was confirmed on November 26, 2007, when Eidos Montr\u00e9al posted a teaser trailer for the title on their website. The game was released on August 23, 2011, for the PC, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 platforms and received critical acclaim.\nOn April 7, 2015, Eidos announced a sequel to \"Deus Ex: Human Revolution\" and second prequel to \"Deus Ex\" titled \"\". It was released on August 23, 2016.\nAdaptation.\nA film adaptation based on the game was initially announced in May 2002 by Columbia Pictures. The film was being produced by Laura Ziskin, along with Greg Pruss attached with writing the screenplay. Peter Schlessel, president of the production for Columbia Pictures, and Paul Baldwin, president of marketing for Eidos Interactive, stated that they were confident in that the adaptation would be a successful development for both the studios and the franchise. In March 2003, during an interview with Greg Pruss, he informed IGN that the character of JC Denton would be \"a little bit filthier than he was in the game\". He further stated that the script was shaping up to be darker in tone than the original game. Although a release date was scheduled for 2006, the film did not get past the scripting stage.\nIn 2012, CBS films revived the project, buying the rights and commissioning a film inspired by the \"Deus Ex\" series; its direct inspiration was the 2011 game \"\". C. Robert Cargill and Scott Derrickson were to write the screenplay, and Derrickson was to direct the film."}
