{"id": "1270", "revid": "36946525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1270", "title": "Extreme poverty", "text": "Extreme poverty is the most severe type of poverty, defined by the United Nations (UN) as \"a condition characterized by severe deprivation of basic human needs, including food, safe drinking water, sanitation facilities, health, shelter, education and information. It depends not only on income but also on access to services\". Historically, other definitions have been proposed within the United Nations.\nIn 2018, extreme poverty mainly refers to an income below the international poverty line of $1.90 per day (in 2011 prices, $ in dollars), set by the World Bank. In October 2017, the World Bank updated the international poverty line, a global absolute minimum, to $1.90 a day. This is the equivalent of $1.00 a day in 1996 US prices, hence the widely used expression \"living on less than a dollar a day\". The vast majority of those in extreme poverty reside in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. As of 2018, it is estimated that the country with the most people living in extreme poverty is Nigeria, at 86 million.\nIn the past, the vast majority of the world population lived in conditions of extreme poverty. \nThe percentage of the global population living in absolute poverty fell from over 80% in 1800 to under 20% by 2015. According to UN estimates, roughly 734 million people or 10% remained under those conditions. The number had previously been measured as 1.9 billion in 1990, and 1.2 billion in 2008. Despite the significant number of individuals still below the international poverty line, these figures represent significant progress for the international community, as they reflect a decrease of more than one billion people over 15 years.\nIn public opinion surveys around the globe, people surveyed tend to think that extreme poverty has not decreased.\nThe reduction of extreme poverty and hunger was the first Millennium Development Goal (MDG1), as set by the United Nations in 2000. Specifically, the target was to reduce the extreme poverty rate by half by 2015, a goal that was met five years ahead of schedule. In the Sustainable Development Goals, which succeeded the MDGs, the goal is to end extreme poverty in all its forms everywhere. With this declaration the international community, including the UN and the World Bank have adopted the target of ending extreme poverty by 2030.\nDefinition.\nPrevious definitions.\nIn July 1993, Leandro Despouy, the then UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights made use of a definition he adapted from a 1987 report to the French Economic and Social Council by Fr. Joseph Wresinski, founder of the International Movement ATD Fourth World, distinguishing \"lack of basic security\" (poverty) and \"chronic poverty\" (extreme poverty), linking the eradication of extreme poverty by allowing people currently experiencing it a real opportunity to exercise all their human rights:\nThis definition was mentioned previously, in June 1989, in the preliminary report on the realization of economic, social and cultural rights by the UN Special Rapporteur Danilo T\u00fcrk. It is still in use today, among others, in the current UN Guiding Principles on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights adopted by the UN Human Rights Council in September 2012.\nConsumption-based definition.\nExtreme poverty is defined by the international community as living below $1.90 a day, as measured in 2011 international prices (equivalent to $2.12 in 2018). This number, also known as the international poverty line, is periodically updated to account for inflation and differences in the cost of living; it was originally defined at $1.00 a day in 1996. The updates are made according to new price data to portray the costs of basic food, health services, clothing, and shelter around the world as accurately as possible. The latest revision was made in 2015 when the World Bank increased the line to international-$1.90.\nBecause many of the world's poorest people do not have a monetary income, the poverty measurement is based on the monetary value of a person's \"consumption\". Otherwise the poverty measurement would be missing the home production of subsistence farmers that consume largely their own production.\nAlternative definitions.\nThe $1.90/day extreme poverty line remains the most widely used metric as it highlights the reality of those in the most severe conditions. Although widely used by most international organizations, it has come under scrutiny due to a variety of factors. For example, it does not account for how far below the line people are, referred to as the depth of poverty. For this purpose, the same institutions publish data on the poverty gap.\nThe international poverty line is designed to stay constant over time, to allow comparisons between different years. It is therefore a measure of absolute poverty and is not measuring relative poverty. It is also not designed to capture how people view their own financial situation (known as the socially subjective poverty line). Moreover, the calculation of the poverty line relies on information about consumer prices to calculate purchasing power parity, which are very hard to measure and are necessarily debatable. As with all other metrics, there may also be missing data from the poorest and most fragile countries.\nSeveral alternative instruments for measuring extreme poverty have been suggested which incorporate other factors such as malnutrition and lack of access to a basic education. The Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), based on the Alkire-Foster Method, is published by the Oxford Poverty &amp; Human Development Initiative (OPHI): it measures deprivation in basic needs and can be broken down to reflect both the incidence and the intensity of poverty. For example, under conventional measures, in both Ethiopia and Uzbekistan about 40% of the population is considered extremely poor, but based on the MPI, 90% of Ethiopians but only 2% of Uzbeks are in multidimensional poverty.\nThe MPI is useful for development officials to determine the most likely causes of poverty within a region, using the M0 measure of the method (which is calculated by multiplying the fraction of people in poverty by the fraction of dimensions they are deprived in). For example, in the Gaza Strip of Palestine, using the M0 measure of the Alkire-Foster method reveals that poverty in the region is primarily caused by a lack of access to electricity, lack of access to drinking water, and widespread overcrowding. In contrast, data from the Chhukha District of Bhutan reveals that income is a much larger contributor to poverty as opposed to other dimensions within the region. However, the MPI only presents data from 105 countries, so it cannot be used for global measurements.\nCurrent trends.\nGetting to zero.\nUsing the World Bank definition of $1.90/day, , roughly 710 million people remained in extreme poverty (or roughly 1 in 10 people worldwide). Nearly half of them live in India and China, with more than 85% living in just 20 countries. Since the mid-1990s, there has been a steady decline in both the worldwide poverty rate and the total number of extreme poor. In 1990, the percentage of the global population living in extreme poverty was 43%, but in 2011, that percentage had dropped down to 21%. This halving of the extreme poverty rate falls in line with the first Millennium Development Goal (MDG1) proposed by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who called on the international community at the turn of the century to reduce the percentage of people in extreme poverty by half by 2015.\nThis reduction in extreme poverty took place most notably in China, Indonesia, India, Pakistan and Vietnam. These five countries accounted for the alleviation of 715 million people out of extreme poverty between 1990 and 2010\u00a0\u2013 more than the global net total of roughly 700 million. This statistical oddity can be explained by the fact that the number of people living in extreme poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa rose from 290 million to 414 million over the same period. However, there have been many positive signs for extensive, global poverty reduction as well. Since 1999, the total number of extreme poor has declined by an average of 50 million per year. Moreover, in 2005, for the first time in recorded history, poverty rates began to fall in every region of the world, including Africa.\nAs aforementioned, the number of people living in extreme poverty has reduced from 1.9 billion to 766 million over the span of the last decades. If we remain on our current trajectory, many economists predict we could reach global zero by 2030\u20132035, thus ending extreme poverty. Global zero entails a world in which fewer than 3% of the global population lives in extreme poverty (projected under most optimistic scenarios to be fewer than 200 million people). This zero figure is set at 3% in recognition of the fact that some amount of frictional (temporary) poverty will continue to exist, whether it is caused by political conflict or unexpected economic fluctuations, at least for the foreseeable future. However, the Brookings Institution notes that any projection about poverty more than a few years into the future runs the risk of being highly uncertain. This is because changes in consumption and distribution throughout the developing world over the next two decades could result in monumental shifts in global poverty, for better or worse.\nOthers are more pessimistic about this possibility, predicting a range of 193 million to 660 million people still living in extreme poverty by 2035. Additionally, some believe the rate of poverty reduction will slow down in the developing world, especially in Africa, and as such it will take closer to five decades to reach global zero. Despite these reservations, several prominent international and national organizations, including the UN, the World Bank and the United States Federal Government (via USAID), have set a target of reaching global zero by the end of 2030.\nMore recent analyses in 2022 on real wages have questioned whether extreme poverty was a \"natural\" condition of humanity and decreased with the rise of capitalism.\nExacerbating factors.\nThere are a variety of factors that may reinforce or instigate the existence of extreme poverty, such as weak institutions, cycles of violence and a low level of growth. Recent World Bank research shows that some countries can get caught in a \"fragility trap\", in which self-reinforcing factors prevent the poorest nations from emerging from low-level equilibrium in the long run. Moreover, most of the reduction in extreme poverty over the past twenty years has taken place in countries that have not experienced a civil conflict or have had governing institutions with a strong capacity to actually govern. Thus, to end extreme poverty, it is also important to focus on the interrelated problems of fragility and conflict.\nUSAID defines fragility as a government's lack of both legitimacy (the perception the government is adequate at doing its job) and effectiveness (how good the government is at maintaining law and order, in an equitable manner). As fragile nations are unable to equitably and effectively perform the functions of a state, these countries are much more prone to violent unrest and mass inequality. Additionally, in countries with high levels of inequality (a common problem in countries with inadequate governing institutions), much higher growth rates are needed to reduce the rate of poverty when compared with other nations. Additionally, if China and India are removed from the equation, up to 70% of the world's poor live in fragile states by some definitions of fragility. Some analysts project that extreme poverty will be increasingly concentrated in fragile, low-income states like Haiti, Yemen and the Central African Republic. However, some academics, such as Andy Sumner, say that extreme poverty will be increasingly concentrated in middle-income countries, creating a paradox where the world's poor do not actually live in the poorest countries.\nTo help low-income earners, fragile states make the transition towards peace and prosperity, the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, endorsed by roughly forty countries and multilateral institutions, was created in 2011. This represents an important step towards redressing the problem of fragility as it was originally articulated by self-identified fragile states who called on the international community to not only \"do things differently\", but to also \"do different things\".\nCivil conflict also remains a prime cause for the perpetuation of poverty throughout the developing world. Armed conflict can have severe effects on economic growth for many reasons such as the destruction of assets, destruction of livelihoods, creation of unwanted mass migration, and diversion of public resources towards war. Significantly, a country that experienced major violence during 1981\u20132005 had extreme poverty rates 21 percentage points higher than a country with no violence. On average, each civil conflict will cost a country roughly 30 years of GDP growth. Therefore, a renewed commitment from the international community to address the deteriorating situation in highly fragile states is necessary to both prevent the mass loss of life, but to also prevent the vicious cycle of extreme poverty.\nPopulation trends and dynamics (e.g. population growth) can also have a large impact on prospects for poverty reduction. According to the United Nations, \"in addition to improving general health and well-being, analysis shows that meeting the reproductive health and contraceptive needs of all women in the developing world more than pays for itself\").\nIn 2013, a prominent finding in a report by the World Bank was that extreme poverty is most prevalent in low-income countries. In these countries, the World Bank found that progress in poverty reduction is the slowest, the poor live under the worst conditions, and the most affected persons are children age 12 and under.\nInternational initiatives.\nMillennium Summit and Millennium Development Goals.\nIn September 2000, world leaders gathered at the Millennium Summit held in New York, launching the United Nations Millennium Project suggested by then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Prior to the launch of the conference, the office of Secretary-General Annan released a report entitled \"We The Peoples: The Role of the United Nations in the 21st Century\". In this document, now widely known as the Millennium Report, Kofi Annan called on the international community to reduce the proportion of people in extreme poverty by half by 2015, a target that would affect over 1 billion people. Citing the close correlation between economic growth and the reduction of poverty in poor countries, Annan urged international leaders to indiscriminately target the problem of extreme poverty across every region. In charge of managing the project was Jeffrey Sachs, a noted development economist, who in 2005 released a plan for action called \"Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals\". Thomas Pogge criticized the 2000 Millennium Declaration for being less ambitious than a previous declaration from the World Food Summit due to using 1990 as the benchmark rather than 1996.\nOverall, there has been significant progress towards reducing extreme poverty, with the MDG1 target of reducing extreme poverty rates by half being met five years early, representing 700 million people being lifted out of extreme poverty from 1990 to 2010, with 1.2 billion people still remaining under those conditions. The notable exception to this trend was in Sub-Saharan Africa, the only region where the number of people living in extreme poverty rose from 290 million in 1990 to 414 million in 2010, comprising more than a third of those living in extreme poverty worldwide.\n2005 World Summit.\nThe 2005 World Summit, held in September which was organized to measure international progress towards fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Notably, the conference brought together more than 170 Heads of State. While world leaders at the summit were encouraged by the reduction of poverty in some nations, they were concerned by the uneven decline of poverty within and among different regions of the globe. However, at the end of the summit, the conference attendees reaffirmed the UN's commitment to achieve the MDGs by 2015 and urged all supranational, national and non-governmental organizations to follow suit.\nSustainable Development Goals.\nAs the expiration of the Millennium Development Goals approached in 2015, the UN convened a panel to advise on a Post-2015 Development Agenda, which led to a new set of 17 goals for 2030 titled the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The first goal (SDG 1) is to \"End poverty in all its forms everywhere.\"\nThe HLP report, entitled A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies Through Sustainable Development, was published in May 2013. In the report, the HLP wrote that:\n Ending extreme poverty is just the beginning, not the end. It is vital, but our vision must be broader: to start countries on the path of sustainable development\u00a0\u2013 building on the foundations established by the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, and meeting a challenge that no country, developed or developing, has met so far. We recommend to the Secretary-General that deliberations on a new development agenda must be guided by the vision of eradicating extreme poverty once and for all, in the context of sustainable development.\nTherefore, the report determined that a central goal of the Post-Millennium Development agenda is to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. However, the report also emphasized that the MDGs were not enough on their own, as they did not \"focus on the devastating effects of conflict and violence on development\u00a0... the importance to development of good governance and institution\u00a0... nor the need for inclusive growth...\" Consequently, there now exists synergy between the policy position papers put forward by the United States (through USAID), the World Bank and the UN itself in terms of viewing fragility and a lack of good governance as exacerbating extreme poverty. However, in a departure from the views of other organizations, the commission also proposed that the UN focus not only on extreme poverty (a line drawn at $1.25), but also on a higher target, such as $2. The report notes this change could be made to reflect the fact that escaping extreme poverty is only a first step.\nIn addition to the UN, a host of other supranational and national actors such as the European Union and the African Union have published their own positions or recommendations on what should be incorporated in the Post-2015 agenda. The European Commission's communication, published in A decent Life for all: from vision to collective action, affirmed the UN's commitment to \"eradicate extreme poverty in our lifetime and put the world on a sustainable path to ensure a decent life for all by 2030\". A unique vision of the report was the commission's environmental focus (in addition to a plethora of other goals such as combating hunger and gender inequality). Specifically, the Commission argued, \"long-term poverty reduction\u00a0... requires inclusive and sustainable growth. Growth should create decent jobs, take place with resource efficiency and within planetary boundaries, and should support efforts to mitigate climate change.\" The African Union's report, entitled Common African Position (CAP) on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, likewise encouraged the international community to focus on eradicating the twin problems of poverty and exclusion in our lifetime. Moreover, the CAP pledged that \"no person\u00a0\u2013 regardless of ethnicity, gender, geography, disability, race or other status\u00a0\u2013 is denied universal human rights and basic economic opportunities\".\nLeast developed country conferences.\nThe UN least developed country (LDC) conferences were a series of summits organized by the UN to promote the substantial and even development of the world's least developed countries.\nOrganizations working to end extreme poverty.\nInternational organizations.\nWorld Bank.\nIn 2013, the Board of Governors of the World Bank Group (WBG) set two overriding goals for the WBG to commit itself to in the future. First, to end extreme poverty by 2030, an objective that echoes the sentiments of the UN and the Obama administration. Additionally, the WBG set an interim target of reducing extreme poverty to below 9% by 2020. Second, to focus on growth among the bottom 40% of people, as opposed to standard GDP growth. This commitment ensures that the growth of the developing world lifts people out of poverty, rather than exacerbating inequality.\nAs the World Bank's primary focus is on delivering economic growth to enable equitable prosperity, its developments programs are primarily commercial-based in nature, as opposed to the UN. Since the World Bank recognizes better jobs will result in higher income, and thus less poverty, the WBG seeks to support employment training initiatives, small business development programs and strong labor protection laws. However, since much of the growth in the developing world has been inequitable, the World Bank has also begun teaming with client states to map out trends in inequality and to propose public policy changes that can level the playing field.\nMoreover, the World Bank engages in a variety of nutritional, transfer payments and transport-based initiatives. Children who experience under-nutrition from conception to two years of age have a much higher risk of physical and mental disability. Thus, they are often trapped in poverty and are unable to make a full contribution to the social and economic development of their communities as adults. The WBG estimates that as much as 3% of GDP can be lost as a result of under-nutrition among the poorest nations. To combat undernutrition, the WBG has partnered with UNICEF and the WHO to ensure all small children are fully fed. The WBG also offers conditional cash transfers to poor households who meet certain requirements such as maintaining children's healthcare or ensuring school attendance. Finally, the WBG understands investment in public transportation and better roads is key to breaking rural isolation, improving access to healthcare and providing better job opportunities for the World's poor.\nUnited Nations.\nThe UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) works to synchronize the disparate international, national and non-governmental efforts to contest poverty. OCHA seeks to prevent \"confusion\" in relief operations and to ensure that the humanitarian response to disaster situations has greater accountability and predictability. To do so, OCHA has begun deploying Humanitarian Coordinators and Country Teams to provide a solid architecture for the international community to work through.\nThe United Nation's Children's Fund (UNICEF) was created by the UN to provide food, clothing and healthcare to European children facing famine and disease in the immediate aftermath of World War II. After the UN General Assembly extended UNICEF's mandate indefinitely in 1953, it actively worked to help children in extreme poverty in more than 190 countries and territories to overcome the obstacles that poverty, violence, disease and discrimination place in a child's path. Its current focus areas are 1) Child survival &amp; development 2) Basic education &amp; gender equality 3) Children and HIV/AIDS and 4) Child protection.\nThe UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) is mandated to lead and coordinate international action to protect refugees worldwide. Its primary purpose is to safeguard the rights of refugees by ensuring anyone can exercise the right to seek asylum in another state, with the option to return home voluntarily, integrate locally or resettle in a third country. The UNHCR operates in over 125 countries, helping approximately 33.9 million persons.\nThe World Food Programme (WFP) is the largest agency dedicated to fighting hunger worldwide. On average, the WFP brings food assistance to more than 90 million people in 75 countries. The WFP not only strives to prevent hunger in the present, but also in the future by developing stronger communities which will make food even more secure on their own. The WFP has a range of expertise from Food Security Analysis, Nutrition, Food Procurement and Logistics.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) is responsible for providing leadership on global health matters, shaping the health research agenda, articulating evidence-based policy decisions and combating diseases that are induced from poverty, such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. Moreover, the WHO deals with pressing issues ranging from managing water safety, to dealing with maternal and newborn health.\nGovernmental agencies.\nUSAID.\nThe US Agency for International Development (USAID) is the lead US government agency dedicated to ending extreme poverty. Currently the largest bilateral donor in the world, the United States channels the majority of its development assistance through USAID and the US Department of State. In President Obama's 2013 State of the Union address, he declared, \"So the United States will join with our allies to eradicate such extreme poverty in the next two decades\u00a0... which is within our reach.\" In response to Obama's call to action, USAID has made ending extreme poverty central to its mission statement. Under its New Model of Development, USAID seeks to eradicate extreme poverty through the use of innovation in science and technology, by putting a greater emphasis on evidence based decision-making, and through leveraging the ingenuity of the private sector and global citizens.\nA major initiative of the Obama administration is Power Africa, which aims to bring energy to 20 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa. By reaching out to its international partners, whether commercial or public, the US has leveraged over $14 billion in outside commitments after investing only US$7 billion of its own. To ensure that Power Africa reaches the region's poorest, the initiative engages in a transaction based approach to create systematic change. This includes expanding access to electricity to more than 20,000 additional households which already live without power.\nIn terms of specific programming, USAID works in a variety of fields from preventing hunger, reducing HIV/AIDS, providing general health assistance and democracy assistance, as well as dealing with gender issues. To deal with food security, which affects roughly 842 million people (who go to bed hungry each night), USAID coordinates the Feed the Future Initiative (FtF). FtF aims to reduce poverty and under-nutrition each by 20% over five years. Because of the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and a variety of congruent actors, the incidence of AIDS and HIV, which used to ravage Africa, reduced in scope and intensity. Through PEPFAR, the United States has ensured over five million people have received life-saving antiviral drugs, a significant proportion of the eight million people receiving treatment in relatively poor nations.\nIn terms of general health assistance, USAID has worked to reduce maternal mortality by 30%, under-five child mortality by 35%, and has accomplished a host of other goals. USAID also supports the gamut of democratic initiatives, from promoting human rights and accountable, fair governance, to supporting free and fair elections and the rule of law. In pursuit of these goals, USAID has increased global political participation by training more than 9,800 domestic election observers and providing civic education to more than 6.5 million people. Since 2012, the Agency has begun integrating critical gender perspectives across all aspects of its programming to ensure all USAID initiatives work to eliminate gender disparities. To do so, USAID seeks to increase the capability of women and girls to realize their rights and determine their own life outcomes. Moreover, USAID supports additional programs to improve women's access to capital and markets, builds theirs skills in agriculture, and supports women's desire to own businesses.\nOthers.\nOther major government development agencies with annual aid programmes of more than $10 billion include: GIZ (Germany), FCDO (United Kingdom), JICA (Japan), European Union and AFD (France).\nNon-Governmental Organizations.\nA multitude of non-governmental organizations operate in the field of extreme poverty, actively working to alleviate the poorest of the poor of their deprivation. To name but a few notable organizations: Save the Children, the Overseas Development Institute, Concern Worldwide, ONE, Trickle Up and Oxfam have all done a considerable amount of work in extreme poverty.\nSave the Children is the leading international organization dedicated to helping the world's indigent children. In 2013, Save the Children reached over 143 million children through their work, including over 52 million children directly. Save the Children also recently released their own report titled \"Getting to Zero\", in which they argued the international community could feasibly do more than lift the world's poor above $1.25/day.\nThe Overseas Development Institute (ODI) is a UK based think tank on international development and humanitarian issues. ODI is dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the world's poor by providing high-quality research and practical policy advice to the World's development officials. ODI also recently released a paper entitled, \"The Chronic Poverty Report 2014\u20132015: The road to zero extreme poverty\", in which its authors assert that though the international communities' goal of ending extreme poverty by 2030 is laudable, much more targeted resources will be necessary to reach said target. The report states that \"To eradicate extreme poverty, massive global investment is required in social assistance, education and pro-poorest economic growth\".\nConcern Worldwide is an international humanitarian organization whose mission is to end extreme poverty by influencing decision makers at all levels of government (from local to international). Concern has also produced a report on extreme poverty in which they explain their own conception of extreme poverty from a NGO's standpoint. In this paper, named \"How Concern Understands Extreme Poverty\", the report's creators write that extreme poverty entails more than just living under $1.25/day, it also includes having a small number of assets and being vulnerable to severe negative shocks (whether natural or man made).\nONE, the organization co-founded by Bono, is a non-profit organization funded almost entirely by foundations, individual philanthropists and corporations. ONE's goals include raising public awareness and working with political leaders to fight preventable diseases, increase government accountability and increase investment in nutrition. Finally, Trickle Up is a micro-enterprise development program targeted at those living on under $1.25/day, which provides the indigent with resources to build a sustainable livelihood through both direct financing and considerable training efforts.\nOxfam is a non-governmental organization that works prominently in Africa; their mission is to improve local community organizations and it works to reduce impediments to the development of the country. Oxfam helps families suffering from poverty receive food and healthcare to survive. There are many children in Africa experiencing growth stunting, and this is one example of an issue that Oxfam targets and aims to resolve.\nCash transfers appear to be an effective intervention for reducing extreme poverty, while at the same time improving health and education outcomes.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1002/14651858.CD011135.pub2\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; &lt;ref name=\"doi10.1002/14651858.CD011135.pub3\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;"}
{"id": "1271", "revid": "1272929089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1271", "title": "Analytical engine", "text": "The analytical engine was a proposed digital mechanical general-purpose computer designed by English mathematician and computer pioneer Charles Babbage. It was first described in 1837 as the successor to Babbage's Difference Engine, which was a design for a simpler mechanical calculator.\nThe analytical engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit, control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory, making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as Turing-Complete. In other words, the structure of the analytical engine was essentially the same as that which has dominated computer design in the electronic era. The analytical engine is one of the most successful achievements of Charles Babbage.\nBabbage was never able to complete construction of any of his machines due to conflicts with his chief engineer and inadequate funding. It was not until 1941 that Konrad Zuse built the first general-purpose computer, Z3, more than a century after Babbage had proposed the pioneering analytical engine in 1837.\nDesign.\nBabbage's first attempt at a mechanical computing device, the Difference Engine, was a special-purpose machine designed to tabulate logarithms and trigonometric functions by evaluating finite differences to create approximating polynomials. Construction of this machine was never completed; Babbage had conflicts with his chief engineer, Joseph Clement, and ultimately the British government withdrew its funding for the project.\nDuring this project, Babbage realised that a much more general design, the analytical engine, was possible. The work on the design of the analytical engine started around 1833.\nThe input, consisting of programs (\"formulae\") and data, was to be provided to the machine via punched cards, a method being used at the time to direct mechanical looms such as the Jacquard loom. For output, the machine would have a printer, a curve plotter, and a bell. The machine would also be able to punch numbers onto cards to be read in later. It employed ordinary base-10 fixed-point arithmetic.\nThere was to be a store (that is, a memory) capable of holding 1,000 numbers of 40 decimal digits each (ca. 16.6\u00a0kB). An arithmetic unit (the \"mill\") would be able to perform all four arithmetic operations, plus comparisons and optionally square roots. Initially (1838) it was conceived as a difference engine curved back upon itself, in a generally circular layout, with the long store exiting off to one side. Later drawings (1858) depict a regularised grid layout. Like the central processing unit (CPU) in a modern computer, the mill would rely upon its own internal procedures, roughly equivalent to microcode in modern CPUs, to be stored in the form of pegs inserted into rotating drums called \"barrels\", to carry out some of the more complex instructions the user's program might specify.\nThe programming language to be employed by users was akin to modern day assembly languages. Loops and conditional branching were possible, and so the language as conceived would have been Turing-complete as later defined by Alan Turing. Three different types of punch cards were used: one for arithmetical operations, one for numerical constants, and one for load and store operations, transferring numbers from the store to the arithmetical unit or back. There were three separate readers for the three types of cards. Babbage developed some two dozen programs for the analytical engine between 1837 and 1840, and one program later. These programs treat polynomials, iterative formulas, Gaussian elimination, and Bernoulli numbers.\nIn 1842, the Italian mathematician Luigi Federico Menabrea published a description of the engine in French, based on lectures Babbage gave when he visited Turin in 1840. In 1843, the description was translated into English and extensively annotated by Ada Lovelace, who had become interested in the engine eight years earlier. In recognition of her additions to Menabrea's paper, which included a way to calculate Bernoulli numbers using the machine (widely considered to be the first complete computer program), she has been described by many as the first computer programmer, although others have challenged this view.\nConstruction.\nLate in his life, Babbage sought ways to build a simplified version of the machine, and assembled a small part of it before his death in 1871.\nIn 1878, a committee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science described the analytical engine as \"a marvel of mechanical ingenuity\", but recommended against constructing it. The committee acknowledged the usefulness and value of the machine, but could not estimate the cost of building it, and were unsure whether the machine would function correctly after being built.\nIntermittently from 1880 to 1910, Babbage's son Henry Prevost Babbage was constructing a part of the mill and the printing apparatus. In 1910, it was able to calculate a (faulty) list of multiples of pi. This constituted only a small part of the whole engine; it was not programmable and had no storage. (Popular images of this section have sometimes been mislabelled, implying that it was the entire mill or even the entire engine.) Henry Babbage's \"analytical engine mill\" is on display at the Science Museum in London. Henry also proposed building a demonstration version of the full engine, with a smaller storage capacity: \"perhaps for a first machine ten (columns) would do, with fifteen wheels in each\". Such a version could manipulate 20\u00a0numbers of 25\u00a0digits each, and what it could be told to do with those numbers could still be impressive. \"It is only a question of cards and time\", wrote Henry Babbage in 1888, \"... and there is no reason why (twenty thousand) cards should not be used if necessary, in an analytical engine for the purposes of the mathematician\".\nIn 1991, the London Science Museum built a complete and working specimen of Babbage's Difference Engine No. 2, a design that incorporated refinements Babbage discovered during the development of the analytical engine. This machine was built using materials and engineering tolerances that would have been available to Babbage, quelling the suggestion that Babbage's designs could not have been produced using the manufacturing technology of his time.\nIn October 2010, John Graham-Cumming started a \"Plan 28\" campaign to raise funds by \"public subscription\" to enable serious historical and academic study of Babbage's plans, with a view to then build and test a fully working virtual design which will then in turn enable construction of the physical analytical engine. As of May 2016, actual construction had not been attempted, since no consistent understanding could yet be obtained from Babbage's original design drawings. In particular it was unclear whether it could handle the indexed variables which were required for Lovelace's Bernoulli program. By 2017, the \"Plan 28\" effort reported that a searchable database of all catalogued material was available, and an initial review of Babbage's voluminous Scribbling Books had been completed.\nMany of Babbage's original drawings have been digitised and are publicly available online.\nInstruction set.\nBabbage is not known to have written down an explicit set of instructions for the engine in the manner of a modern processor manual. Instead he showed his programs as lists of states during their execution, showing what operator was run at each step with little indication of how the control flow would be guided.\nAllan G. Bromley has assumed that the card deck could be read in forwards and backwards directions as a function of conditional branching after testing for conditions, which would make the engine Turing-complete:\n...the cards could be ordered to move forward and reverse (and hence to loop)...\nThe introduction for the first time, in 1845, of user operations for a variety of service functions including, most importantly, an effective system for user control of looping in user programs.\nThere is no indication how the direction of turning of the operation and variable cards is specified. In the absence of other evidence I have had to adopt the minimal default assumption that both the operation and variable cards can only be turned backward as is necessary to implement the loops used in Babbage's sample programs. There would be no mechanical or microprogramming difficulty in placing the direction of motion under the control of the user.\nIn their emulator of the engine, Fourmilab say:\nThe Engine's Card Reader is not constrained to simply process the cards in a chain one after another from start to finish. It can, in addition, directed by the very cards it reads and advised by whether the Mill's run-up lever is activated, either advance the card chain forward, skipping the intervening cards, or backward, causing previously-read cards to be processed once again.\nThis emulator does provide a written symbolic instruction set, though this has been constructed by its authors rather than based on Babbage's original works. For example, a factorial program would be written as:\n N0 6\n N1 1\n N2 1\n L1\n L0\n S1\n L0\n L2\n S0\n L2\n L0\n CB?11\nwhere the CB is the conditional branch instruction or \"combination card\" used to make the control flow jump, in this case backward by 11 cards.\nInfluence.\nPredicted influence.\nBabbage understood that the existence of an automatic computer would kindle interest in the field now known as algorithmic efficiency, writing in his \"Passages from the Life of a Philosopher\", \"As soon as an analytical engine exists, it will necessarily guide the future course of the science. Whenever any result is sought by its aid, the question will then arise\u2014By what course of calculation can these results be arrived at by the machine in the \"shortest time\"?\"\nComputer science.\nFrom 1872, Henry continued diligently with his father's work and then intermittently in retirement in 1875.\nPercy Ludgate wrote about the engine in 1914 and published his own design for an analytical engine in 1909. It was drawn up in detail, but never built, and the drawings have never been found. Ludgate's engine would be much smaller (about , which corresponds to cube of side length ) than Babbage's, and hypothetically would be capable of multiplying two 20-decimal-digit numbers in about six seconds.\nIn his work \"Essays on Automatics\" (1914) Leonardo Torres Quevedo, inspired by Babbage, designed a theoretical electromechanical calculating machine which was to be controlled by a read-only program. The paper also contains the idea of floating-point arithmetic. In 1920, to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, Torres presented in Paris the Electromechanical Arithmometer, which consisted of an arithmetic unit connected to a (possibly remote) typewriter, on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically.\nVannevar Bush's paper \"Instrumental Analysis\" (1936) included several references to Babbage's work. In the same year he started the Rapid Arithmetical Machine project to investigate the problems of constructing an electronic digital computer.\nDespite this groundwork, Babbage's work fell into historical obscurity, and the analytical engine was unknown to builders of electromechanical and electronic computing machines in the 1930s and 1940s when they began their work, resulting in the need to re-invent many of the architectural innovations Babbage had proposed. Howard Aiken, who built the quickly-obsoleted electromechanical calculator, the Harvard Mark I, between 1937 and 1945, praised Babbage's work likely as a way of enhancing his own stature, but knew nothing of the analytical engine's architecture during the construction of the Mark I, and considered his visit to the constructed portion of the analytical engine \"the greatest disappointment of my life\". The Mark I showed no influence from the analytical engine and lacked the analytical engine's most prescient architectural feature, conditional branching. J. Presper Eckert and John W. Mauchly similarly were not aware of the details of Babbage's analytical engine work prior to the completion of their design for the first electronic general-purpose computer, the ENIAC.\nComparison to other early computers.\nIf the analytical engine had been built, it would have been digital, programmable and Turing-complete. It would, however, have been very slow. Luigi Federico Menabrea reported in \"Sketch of the Analytical Engine\": \"Mr. Babbage believes he can, by his engine, form the product of two numbers, each containing twenty figures, in three minutes\".\nBy comparison the Harvard Mark I could perform the same task in just six seconds (though it is debatable that computer is Turing complete; the ENIAC, which is, would also have been faster). A modern CPU could do the same thing in under a billionth of a second."}
{"id": "1273", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1273", "title": "Augustus", "text": "Gaius Julius Caesar Augustus (born Gaius Octavius; 23 September 63\u00a0BC \u2013 19 August AD\u00a014), also known as Octavian (), was the founder of the Roman Empire. He reigned as the first Roman emperor from 27\u00a0BC until his death in AD\u00a014. The reign of Augustus initiated an imperial cult, as well as an era of imperial peace (the or ) in which the Roman world was largely free of armed conflict. The Principate system of government was established during his reign and lasted until the Crisis of the Third Century.\nOctavian was born into an equestrian branch of the plebeian Octavia. His maternal great-uncle Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44\u00a0BC, and Octavian was named in Caesar's will as his adopted son and heir; as a result, he inherited Caesar's name, estate, and the loyalty of his legions. He, Mark Antony, and Marcus Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate to defeat the assassins of Caesar. Following their victory at the Battle of Philippi (42\u00a0BC), the Triumvirate divided the Roman Republic among themselves and ruled as \"de facto\" dictators. The Triumvirate was eventually torn apart by the competing ambitions of its members; Lepidus was exiled in 36\u00a0BC, and Antony was defeated by Octavian at the Battle of Actium in 31\u00a0BC. Antony and his wife Cleopatra, the Ptolemaic queen of Egypt, killed themselves during Octavian's invasion of Egypt, which then became a Roman province.\nAfter the demise of the Second Triumvirate, Augustus restored the outward facade of the free republic, with governmental power vested in the Roman Senate, the executive magistrates and the legislative assemblies, yet he maintained autocratic authority by having the Senate grant him lifetime tenure as commander-in-chief, tribune and censor. A similar ambiguity is seen in his chosen names, the implied rejection of monarchical titles whereby he called himself 'First Citizen' juxtaposed with his adoption of the title Augustus.\nAugustus dramatically enlarged the empire, annexing Egypt, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Noricum, and Raetia, expanding possessions in Africa, and completing the conquest of Hispania, but he suffered a major setback in Germania. Beyond the frontiers, he secured the empire with a buffer region of client states and made peace with the Parthian Empire through diplomacy. He reformed the Roman system of taxation, developed networks of roads with an official courier system, established a standing army, established the Praetorian Guard as well as official police and fire-fighting services for Rome, and rebuilt much of the city during his reign. Augustus died in AD\u00a014 at age 75, probably from natural causes. Persistent rumors, substantiated somewhat by deaths in the imperial family, have claimed his wife Livia poisoned him. He was succeeded as emperor by his adopted son Tiberius, Livia's son and former husband of Augustus's only biological child, Julia.\nName.\nAs a consequence of Roman customs, society, and personal preference, Augustus ( ) was known by many names throughout his life:\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Rome on 23 September 63\u00a0BC. His paternal family was from the Volscian town of Velletri, approximately south-east of the city. He was born at Ox Head, a small property on the Palatine Hill, very close to the Roman Forum. In his childhood, he received the cognomen \"Thurinus\", possibly commemorating his father's victory at Thurii over a rebellious band of slaves which occurred a few years after his birth. Suetonius wrote: \"There are many indications that the Octavian family was in days of old a distinguished one at Velitrae; for not only was a street in the most frequented part of town long ago called Octavius, but an altar was shown there besides, consecrated by an Octavius. This man was leader in a war with a neighbouring town ...\"\nDue to the crowded nature of Rome at the time, Octavian was taken to his father's home village at Velletri to be raised. Octavian mentions his father's equestrian family only briefly in his memoirs. His paternal great-grandfather Octavius was a military tribune in Sicily during the Second Punic War. His grandfather had served in several local political offices. His father, also named Octavius, had been governor of Macedonia. His mother, Atia, was the niece of Julius Caesar.\nHis father died in 59\u00a0BC when Octavian was four years old. His mother married a former governor of Syria, Lucius Marcius Philippus. Philippus claimed descent from Alexander the Great and was elected consul in 56\u00a0BC. Philippus never had much of an interest in young Octavian. Because of this, Octavian was raised by his grandmother, Julia, the sister of Julius Caesar. Julia died in 52 or 51\u00a0BC, and Octavian delivered the funeral oration for his grandmother. From this point, his mother and stepfather took a more active role in raising him. He donned the 'toga of manhood' four years later and was elected to the College of Pontiffs in 47\u00a0BC. The following year he was put in charge of the Greek games that were staged in honour of the Temple of Venus Genetrix, built by Julius Caesar.\nAccording to Nicolaus of Damascus, Octavian wished to join Caesar's staff for his campaign in Africa but gave way when his mother protested. In 46\u00a0BC, she consented for him to join Caesar in Hispania, where he planned to fight the forces of Pompey, Caesar's late enemy, but Octavian fell ill and was unable to travel. When he had recovered, he sailed to the front but was shipwrecked. After coming ashore with a handful of companions, he crossed hostile territory to Caesar's camp, which impressed Caesar considerably. Velleius Paterculus reports that after that time, Caesar allowed the young man to share his carriage. When back in Rome, Caesar deposited a new will with the Vestal Virgins, naming Octavian as the prime beneficiary.\nRise to power.\nHeir to Caesar.\nOctavian was studying and undergoing military training in Apollonia, Illyria, when Julius Caesar was assassinated on the Ides of March (15 March) 44\u00a0BC. He rejected the advice of some army officers to take refuge with the troops in Macedonia and sailed to Italy to ascertain whether he had any potential political fortunes or security. Caesar had no living legitimate children under Roman law and so had adopted Octavian, his grand-nephew, in his will, making him his primary heir. Mark Antony later charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar through sexual favours, though Suetonius describes Antony's accusation as political slander. This form of slander was popular during this time in the Roman Republic to demean and discredit political opponents by accusing them of having an inappropriate sexual affair. After landing at Lupiae near Brundisium, Octavian learned the contents of Caesar's will, and only then did he decide to become Caesar's political heir as well as heir to two-thirds of his estate.\nUpon his adoption, Octavian assumed his great-uncle's name Gaius Julius Caesar. Roman citizens adopted into a new family usually retained their old nomen in cognomen form (e.g., for one who had been an Octavius, for one who had been an Aemilius. See Roman naming conventions for adoptions). However, though some of his contemporaries did, there is no evidence that Octavian officially used the name , as it would have made his adoptive origins too obvious. Historians usually refer to the new Caesar as \"Octavian\" during the time between his adoption and his assumption of the name Augustus in 27\u00a0BC in order to avoid confusing the dead dictator with his heir.\nOctavian could not rely on his limited funds to make a successful entry into the upper echelons of the Roman political hierarchy. After a warm welcome by Caesar's soldiers at Brundisium, Octavian demanded a portion of the funds that were allotted by Caesar for the intended war against the Parthian Empire in the Middle East. This amounted to 700\u00a0million sesterces stored at Brundisium, the staging ground in Italy for military operations in the east. A later senatorial investigation into the disappearance of the public funds took no action against Octavian since he subsequently used that money to raise troops against the Senate's archenemy Mark Antony. Octavian made another bold move in 44\u00a0BC when, without official permission, he appropriated the annual tribute that had been sent from Rome's Near Eastern province to Italy.\nOctavian began to bolster his personal forces with Caesar's veteran legionaries and with troops designated for the Parthian war, gathering support by emphasizing his status as heir to Caesar. On his march to Rome through Italy, Octavian's presence and newly acquired funds attracted many, winning over Caesar's former veterans stationed in Campania. By June, he had gathered an army of 3,000 loyal veterans, paying each a bonus of 500 .\nGrowing tensions.\nArriving in Rome on 6 May 44\u00a0BC, Octavian found consul Mark Antony, Caesar's former colleague, in an uneasy truce with the dictator's assassins. They had been granted a general amnesty on 17 March, yet Antony had succeeded in driving most of them out of Rome with an inflammatory eulogy at Caesar's funeral, mounting public opinion against the assassins.\nMark Antony was amassing political support, but Octavian still had the opportunity to rival him as the leading member of the faction supporting Caesar. Antony had lost the support of many Romans and supporters of Caesar when he initially opposed the motion to elevate Caesar to divine status. It is alleged that Antony refused to hand over the money due Octavian as Caesar's adopted heir, possibly on grounds that it would take time to disentangle it from state funds. During the summer, Octavian won the support of Caesarian veterans and also made common cause with those senators\u2014many of whom were themselves former Caesarians\u2014who perceived Antony as a threat to the state. After an abortive attempt by the veterans to reconcile Octavian and Antony, Antony's bellicose edicts against Brutus and Cassius alienated him from the moderate Caesarians in the Senate, who feared a renewed civil war. In September, Marcus Tullius Cicero began to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the republican order.\nFirst conflict with Antony.\nWith opinion in Rome turning against him and his year of consular power nearing its end, Antony attempted to pass laws that would assign him the province of Cisalpine Gaul. Octavian meanwhile built up a private army in Italy by recruiting Caesarian veterans, and on 28 November he won over two of Antony's legions with the enticing offer of monetary gain.\nIn the face of Octavian's large and capable force, Antony saw the danger of staying in Rome and, to the relief of the Senate, he left Rome for Cisalpine Gaul, which was to be handed to him on 1 January. However, the province had earlier been assigned to Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, one of Caesar's assassins, who now refused to yield to Antony. Antony besieged him at Mutina and rejected the resolutions passed by the Senate to stop the fighting. The Senate had no army to enforce their resolutions. This provided an opportunity for Octavian, who already was known to have armed forces. Cicero also defended Octavian against Antony's taunts about Octavian's lack of noble lineage and aping of Julius Caesar's name, stating \"we have no more brilliant example of traditional piety among our youth.\"\nAt the urging of Cicero, the Senate inducted Octavian as senator on 1 January 43\u00a0BC, yet he also was given the power to vote alongside the former consuls. In addition, Octavian was granted 'commanding power' which legalized his command of troops, sending him to relieve the siege along with Hirtius and Pansa (the consuls for 43\u00a0BC). He assumed the fasces on 7 January, a date that he would later commemorate as the beginning of his public career. Antony's forces were defeated at the battles of Forum Gallorum (14 April) and Mutina (21 April), forcing Antony to retreat to Transalpine Gaul. Both consuls were killed, however, leaving Octavian in sole command of their armies. These victories earned him his first acclamation as , a title reserved for victorious commanders.\nThe Senate heaped many more rewards on Decimus Brutus than on Octavian for defeating Antony, then attempted to give command of the consular legions to Decimus Brutus. In response, Octavian stayed in the Po Valley and refused to aid any further offensive against Antony. In July, an embassy of centurions sent by Octavian entered Rome and demanded the consulship left vacant by Hirtius and Pansa and also that the decree should be rescinded which declared Antony a public enemy. When this was refused, he marched on the city with eight legions. He encountered no military opposition in Rome and on 19 August 43\u00a0BC was elected consul with his relative Quintus Pedius as co-consul. Meanwhile, Antony formed an alliance with Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, another leading Caesarian.\nSecond Triumvirate.\nProscriptions.\nIn a meeting near Bononia in October 43\u00a0BC, Octavian, Antony, and Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate. Their powers were made official by the Senate on 27 November. This explicit arrogation of special powers lasting five years was then legalised by law passed by the plebs, unlike the unofficial First Triumvirate formed by Pompey, Julius Caesar, and Marcus Licinius Crassus. The triumvirs then set in motion proscriptions, in which between 130 and 300 senators and 2,000 were branded as outlaws and deprived of their property and, for those who failed to escape, their lives. This decree issued by the triumvirate was motivated in part by a need to raise money to pay the salaries of their troops for the upcoming conflict against Caesar's assassins, Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus. Rewards for their arrest gave incentive for Romans to capture those proscribed, while the assets and properties of those arrested were seized by the triumvirs.\nContemporary Roman historians provide conflicting reports as to which triumvir was most responsible for the proscriptions and killing. However, the sources agree that enacting the proscriptions was a means by all three factions to eliminate political enemies. Marcus Velleius Paterculus asserted that Octavian tried to avoid proscribing officials whereas Lepidus and Antony were to blame for initiating them. Cassius Dio defended Octavian as trying to spare as many as possible, whereas Antony and Lepidus, being older and involved in politics longer, had many more enemies to deal with. This claim was rejected by Appian, who maintained that Octavian shared an equal interest with Lepidus and Antony in eradicating his enemies. Suetonius said that Octavian was reluctant to proscribe officials but did pursue his enemies with more vigor than the other triumvirs. Plutarch described the proscriptions as a ruthless and cutthroat swapping of friends and family among Antony, Lepidus, and Octavian. For example, Octavian allowed the proscription of his ally Cicero, Antony the proscription of his maternal uncle Lucius Julius Caesar (the consul for 64\u00a0BC), and Lepidus his brother Paullus.\nBattle of Philippi and division of territory.\nOn 1 January 42\u00a0BC, the Senate posthumously recognised Julius Caesar as a divinity of the Roman state, . Octavian was able to further his cause by emphasizing the fact that he was 'Son of the Divine'. Antony and Octavian then sent twenty-eight legions by sea to face the armies of Brutus and Cassius, who had built their base of power in Greece. After two battles at Philippi in Macedonia in October 42, the Caesarian army was victorious and Brutus and Cassius committed suicide. Mark Antony later used the examples of these battles as a means to belittle Octavian, as both battles were decisively won with the use of Antony's forces. In addition to claiming responsibility for both victories, Antony branded Octavian as a coward for handing over his direct military control to Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa instead.\nAfter Philippi, a new territorial arrangement was made among the members of the Second Triumvirate. Gaul and the province of Hispania were placed in the hands of Octavian. Antony travelled east to Egypt where he allied himself with Queen Cleopatra, the former lover of Julius Caesar and mother of Caesar's son Caesarion. Lepidus was left with the province of Africa, stymied by Antony, who conceded Hispania to Octavian instead.\nOctavian was left to decide where in Italy to settle the tens of thousands of veterans of the Macedonian campaign, whom the triumvirs had promised to discharge. The tens of thousands who had fought on the republican side with Brutus and Cassius could easily ally with a political opponent of Octavian if not appeased, and they also required land. There was no more government-controlled land to allot as settlements for their soldiers, so Octavian had to choose one of two options: alienating many Roman citizens by confiscating their land, or alienating many Roman soldiers who could mount a considerable opposition against him in the Roman heartland. Octavian chose the former. There were as many as eighteen Roman towns affected by the new settlements, with entire populations driven out or at least given partial evictions.\nRebellion and marriage alliances.\nThere was widespread dissatisfaction with Octavian over these settlements of his soldiers, and this encouraged many to rally at the side of Lucius Antonius, who was brother of Mark Antony and supported by a majority in the Senate. Meanwhile, Octavian asked for a divorce from Claudia, the daughter of Fulvia (Antony's wife) and her first husband Publius Clodius Pulcher. He returned Claudia to her mother, claiming that their marriage had never been consummated. Fulvia decided to take action. Together with Lucius Antonius, she raised an army in Italy to fight for Antony's rights against Octavian. Lucius and Fulvia took a political and martial gamble in opposing Octavian however, since the Roman army still depended on the triumvirs for their salaries. Lucius and his allies ended up in a defensive siege at Perusia, where Octavian forced them into surrender in early 40\u00a0BC.\nLucius and his army were spared because of his kinship with Antony, the strongman of the East, while Fulvia was exiled to Sicyon. Octavian showed no mercy, however, for the mass of allies loyal to Lucius. On 15 March, the anniversary of Julius Caesar's assassination, he had 300 Roman senators and equestrians executed for allying with Lucius. Perusia also was pillaged and burned as a warning for others. This bloody event sullied Octavian's reputation and was criticised by many, such as Augustan poet Sextus Propertius.\nSextus Pompeius, the son of Pompey and still a renegade general, following Julius Caesar's victory over his father, had established himself in Sicily and Sardinia as part of an agreement reached with the Second Triumvirate in 39\u00a0BC. Both Antony and Octavian were vying for an alliance with Pompeius. Octavian succeeded in a temporary alliance in 40\u00a0BC when he married Scribonia, a sister (or daughter) of Pompeius's father-in-law Lucius Scribonius Libo. Scribonia gave birth to Octavian's only natural child, Julia, the same day that he divorced her to marry Livia Drusilla, little more than a year after their marriage.\nWhile in Egypt, Antony had been engaged in an affair with Cleopatra and had fathered three children with her. Aware of his deteriorating relationship with Octavian, Antony left Cleopatra; he sailed to Italy in 40\u00a0BC with a large force to oppose Octavian, laying siege to Brundisium. This new conflict proved untenable for both Octavian and Antony, however. Their centurions, who had become important figures politically, refused to fight because of their Caesarian cause, while the legions under their command followed suit. Meanwhile, in Sicyon, Antony's wife Fulvia died of a sudden illness while Antony was en route to meet her. Fulvia's death and the mutiny of their centurions allowed the two remaining triumvirs to effect a reconciliation.\nIn the autumn of 40, Octavian and Antony approved the Treaty of Brundisium, by which Lepidus would remain in Africa, Antony in the East, Octavian in the West. The Italian Peninsula was left open to all for the recruitment of soldiers, but in reality this provision was useless for Antony in the East. To further cement relations of alliance with Antony, Octavian gave his sister, Octavia Minor, in marriage to Antony in late 40\u00a0BC.\nWar with Sextus Pompeius.\nSextus Pompeius threatened Octavian in Italy by denying shipments of grain through the Mediterranean Sea to the peninsula. Pompeius's own son was put in charge as naval commander in the effort to cause widespread famine in Italy. Pompeius's control over the sea prompted him to take on the name 'son of Neptune'. A temporary peace agreement was reached in 39\u00a0BC with the Pact of Misenum; the blockade on Italy was lifted once Octavian granted Pompeius Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, and the Peloponnese, and ensured him a future position as consul for 35\u00a0BC.\nThe territorial agreement between the triumvirate and Sextus Pompeius began to crumble once Octavian divorced Scribonia and married Livia on 17 January 38\u00a0BC. One of Pompeius's naval commanders betrayed him and handed over Corsica and Sardinia to Octavian. Octavian lacked the resources to confront Pompeius alone, so an agreement was reached with the Second Triumvirate's extension for another five-year period beginning in 37\u00a0BC.\nIn supporting Octavian, Antony expected to gain support for his own campaign against the Parthian Empire, desiring to avenge Rome's defeat at Carrhae in 53\u00a0BC. In an agreement reached at Tarentum, Antony provided 120 ships for Octavian to use against Pompeius, while Octavian was to send 20,000 legionaries to Antony for use against Parthia. Octavian sent only a tenth of those promised, which Antony viewed as an intentional provocation.\nOctavian and Lepidus launched a joint operation against Sextus in Sicily in 36\u00a0BC. Despite setbacks for Octavian, the naval fleet of Sextus Pompeius was almost entirely destroyed on 3 September by General Agrippa at the naval battle of Naulochus. Sextus fled to the east with his remaining forces, where he was captured and executed in Miletus by one of Antony's generals the following year. As Lepidus and Octavian accepted the surrender of Pompeius's troops, Lepidus attempted to claim Sicily for himself, ordering Octavian to leave. Lepidus's troops deserted him, however, and defected to Octavian since they were weary of fighting and were enticed by Octavian's promises of money.\nLepidus surrendered to Octavian and was permitted to retain the office of , the head of the college of priests, but was ejected from the Triumvirate. His public career at an end, he effectively was exiled to a villa at Cape Circei in Italy. The Roman dominions were divided between Octavian in the West and Antony in the East. Octavian ensured Rome's citizens of their rights to property in order to maintain peace and stability in his portion of the empire. This time, he settled his discharged soldiers outside of Italy, while also returning 30,000 slaves to their former Roman owners\u2014slaves who had fled to join Pompeius's army and navy. Octavian had the Senate grant him, his wife, and his sister tribunal immunity, or , in order to ensure his own safety and that of Livia and Octavia once he returned to Rome.\nWar with Antony and Cleopatra.\nMeanwhile, Antony's campaign turned disastrous against Parthia, tarnishing his image as a leader, and the mere 2,000 legionaries sent by Octavian to Antony were hardly enough to replenish his forces. On the other hand, Cleopatra could restore his army to full strength; he already was engaged in a romantic affair with her, so he decided to send Octavia back to Rome. Octavian used this to spread propaganda implying that Antony was becoming less than Roman because he rejected a legitimate Roman spouse for an \"Oriental paramour\". In 36\u00a0BC, Octavian used a political ploy to make himself look less autocratic and Antony more the villain by proclaiming that the civil wars were coming to an end and that he would step down as triumvir\u2014if only Antony would do the same. Antony refused.\nRoman troops captured the Kingdom of Armenia in 34\u00a0BC, and Antony made his son Alexander Helios the ruler of Armenia. He also awarded the title \"Queen of Kings\" to Cleopatra, acts that Octavian used to convince the Roman Senate that Antony had ambitions to diminish the preeminence of Rome. Octavian became consul once again on 1 January 33\u00a0BC, and he opened the following session in the Senate with a vehement attack on Antony's grants of titles and territories to his relatives and to his queen.\nThe breach between Antony and Octavian prompted a large portion of the senators, as well as both of that year's consuls, to leave Rome and defect to Antony. However, Octavian received two key deserters from Antony in the autumn of 32\u00a0BC: Munatius Plancus and Marcus Titius. These defectors gave Octavian the information that he needed to confirm with the Senate all the accusations that he made against Antony. Octavian forcibly entered the temple of the Vestal Virgins and seized Antony's secret will, which he promptly publicized. The will would have given away Roman-conquered territories as kingdoms for his sons to rule and designated Alexandria as the site for a tomb for him and his queen. In late 32\u00a0BC, the Senate officially revoked Antony's powers as consul and declared war on Cleopatra's regime in Egypt.\nIn early 31\u00a0BC, Antony and Cleopatra were temporarily stationed in Greece when Octavian gained a preliminary victory: the navy successfully ferried troops across the Adriatic Sea under the command of Agrippa. Agrippa cut off Antony and Cleopatra's main force from their supply routes at sea, while Octavian landed on the mainland opposite the island of Corcyra (modern Corfu) and marched south. Trapped on land and sea, deserters of Antony's army fled to Octavian's side daily while Octavian's forces were comfortable enough to make preparations.\nAntony's fleet sailed through the bay of Actium on the western coast of Greece in a desperate attempt to break free of the naval blockade. It was there that Antony's fleet faced the much larger fleet of smaller, more maneuverable ships under commanders Agrippa and Gaius Sosius in the Battle of Actium on 2 September 31\u00a0BC. Antony and his remaining forces were spared by a last-ditch effort from Cleopatra's fleet that had been waiting nearby.\nA year later, Octavian defeated their forces in Alexandria on 1 August 30\u00a0BC\u2014after which Antony and Cleopatra committed suicide. Antony fell on his own sword and was taken by his soldiers back to Alexandria where he died in Cleopatra's arms. Cleopatra died soon after by poisoning, contrary to the popular belief that she was bitten by an asp. Octavian had exploited his position as Caesar's heir to further his own political career, and he was well aware of the dangers in allowing another person to do the same. He therefore followed the advice of the Greek philosopher Arius Didymus that \"two Caesars are one too many\", ordering Caesarion killed while sparing Cleopatra's children by Antony, with the exception of Antony's older son. Octavian had previously shown little mercy to surrendered enemies and acted in ways that had proven unpopular with the Roman people, yet he was given credit for pardoning many of his opponents after the Battle of Actium.\nSole ruler of Rome.\nAfter Actium and the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra, Octavian was in a position to rule the entire republic under an unofficial principate\u2014but he had to achieve this through incremental power gains. He did so by courting the Senate and the people while upholding the republican traditions of Rome, appearing that he was not aspiring to dictatorship or monarchy. Marching into Rome, Octavian and Agrippa were elected as consuls by the Senate.\nYears of civil war had left Rome in a state of near lawlessness, but the republic was not prepared to accept the control of Octavian as a despot. At the same time, Octavian could not give up his authority without risking further civil wars among the Roman generals, and even if he desired no position of authority his position demanded that he look to the well-being of the city of Rome and the Roman provinces. Octavian's aims from this point forward were to return Rome to a state of stability, traditional legality, and civility by lifting the overt political pressure imposed on the courts of law and ensuring free elections\u2014in name at least.\nFirst settlement.\nOn 13 January 27\u00a0BC, Octavian made a show of returning full power to the Roman Senate and relinquishing his control of the Roman provinces and their armies. Under his consulship, however, the Senate had little power in initiating legislation by introducing bills for senatorial debate. Octavian was no longer in direct control of the provinces and their armies, but he retained the loyalty of active duty soldiers and veterans alike. The careers of many clients and adherents depended on his patronage, as his financial power was unrivaled in the Roman Republic. Historian Werner Eck states:\nTo a large extent, the public was aware of the vast financial resources that Octavian commanded. He failed to encourage enough senators to finance the building and maintenance of networks of roads in Italy in 20\u00a0BC, but he undertook direct responsibility for them. This was publicized on the Roman currency issued in 16 BC, after he donated vast amounts of money to the , the public treasury.\nAccording to historian H. H. Scullard, however, Octavian's power was based on the exercise of \"a predominant military power and\u00a0... the ultimate sanction of his authority was force, however much the fact was disguised.\" The Senate proposed to Octavian, the victor of Rome's civil wars, that he once again assume command of the provinces. The Senate's proposal was a ratification of Octavian's extra-constitutional power. Through the Senate, Octavian was able to continue the appearance of a still-functional constitution. Feigning reluctance, he accepted a ten-year responsibility of overseeing provinces that were considered chaotic. The provinces ceded to Augustus for that ten-year period comprised much of the conquered Roman world, including all of Hispania and Gaul, Syria, Cilicia, Cyprus, and Egypt. Moreover, command of these provinces provided Octavian with control over the majority of Rome's legions.\nWhile Octavian acted as consul in Rome, he dispatched senators to the provinces under his command as his representatives to manage provincial affairs and ensure that his orders were carried out. The provinces not under Octavian's control were overseen by governors chosen by the Roman Senate. Octavian became the most powerful political figure in the city of Rome and in most of its provinces, but he did not have a monopoly on political and martial power. The Senate still controlled North Africa, an important regional producer of grain, as well as Illyria and Macedonia, two strategic regions with several legions. However, the Senate had control of only five or six legions distributed among three senatorial proconsuls, compared to the twenty legions under the control of Octavian, and their control of these regions did not amount to any political or military challenge to Octavian. The Senate's control over some of the Roman provinces helped maintain a republican facade for the autocratic principate. Also, Octavian's control of entire provinces followed republican-era precedents for the objective of securing peace and creating stability, in which such prominent Romans as Pompey had been granted similar military powers in times of crisis and instability.\nChange to Augustus.\nOn 16 January 27\u00a0BC the Senate gave Octavian the new title of . , from the Latin 'to increase', can be translated as 'illustrious one' or 'sublime'. It was a title of religious authority rather than political one, and it indicated that Octavian now approached divinity. His name of Augustus was also more favourable than , the previous one which he styled for himself in reference to the story of the legendary founder of Rome, which symbolised a second founding of Rome. The title of was associated too strongly with notions of monarchy and kingship, an image that Octavian tried to avoid. The Senate also confirmed his position as , which originally meant the member of the Senate with the highest precedence, but in this case it became an almost regnal title for a leader who was first in charge. The honorific was inherited by all future emperors and became the \"de facto\" main title of the emperor. As a result, modern historians usually regard this event as the beginning of his reign as \"emperor\". Augustus himself appears to have reckoned his \"reign\" from 27\u00a0BC.\nAugustus styled himself as 'Commander Caesar son of the deified one'. With this title, he boasted his familial link to deified Julius Caesar, and the use of signified a permanent link to the Roman tradition of victory. He transformed , a cognomen for one branch of the Julian family, into a new family line that began with him.\nAugustus was granted the right to hang the (civic crown) above his door and to have laurels drape his doorposts. However, he renounced flaunting insignia of power such as holding a scepter, wearing a diadem, or wearing the golden crown and purple toga of his predecessor Julius Caesar. If he refused to symbolize his power by donning and bearing these items on his person, the Senate nonetheless awarded him with a golden shield displayed in the meeting hall of the Curia, bearing the inscription \u2013 'valor, piety, clemency, and justice'.\nSecond settlement.\nBy 23\u00a0BC, some of the un-republican implications were becoming apparent concerning the settlement of 27\u00a0BC. Augustus's retention of an annual consulate drew attention to his \"de facto\" dominance over the Roman political system and cut in half the opportunities for others to achieve what was still nominally the preeminent position in the Roman state. Further, he was causing political problems by desiring to have his nephew Marcus Claudius Marcellus follow in his footsteps and eventually assume the principate in his turn, alienating his three greatest supporters: Agrippa, Maecenas, and Livia. He appointed noted republican Calpurnius Piso (who had fought against Julius Caesar and supported Cassius and Brutus) as co-consul in 23\u00a0BC, after his choice Aulus Terentius Varro Murena died unexpectedly.\nIn the late spring Augustus had a severe illness and on his supposed deathbed made arrangements that would ensure the continuation of the principate in some form, while allaying senators' suspicions of his anti-republicanism. Augustus prepared to hand down his signet ring to his favored general Agrippa. However, Augustus handed over to his co-consul Piso all of his official documents, an account of public finances, and authority over listed troops in the provinces while Augustus's supposedly favored nephew Marcellus came away empty-handed. This was a surprise to many who believed Augustus would have named an heir to his position as an unofficial emperor.\nAugustus bestowed only properties and possessions to his designated heirs, as an obvious system of institutionalized imperial inheritance would have provoked resistance and hostility among the republican-minded Romans fearful of monarchy. With regards to the principate, it was obvious to Augustus that Marcellus was not ready to take on his position; nonetheless, by giving his signet ring to Agrippa, Augustus intended to signal to the legions that Agrippa was to be his successor and that they should continue to obey Agrippa, constitutional procedure notwithstanding.\nSoon after his bout of illness subsided, Augustus gave up his consulship. The only other times Augustus would serve as consul would be in the years 5 and 2\u00a0BC, both times to introduce his grandsons into public life. This was a clever ploy by Augustus; ceasing to serve as one of two annually elected consuls allowed aspiring senators a better chance to attain the consular position while allowing Augustus to exercise wider patronage within the senatorial class. Although Augustus had resigned as consul, he desired to retain his consular not just in his provinces but throughout the empire. This desire, as well as the Marcus Primus affair, led to a second compromise between him and the Senate known as the second settlement.\nThe primary reasons for the second settlement were as follows. First, after Augustus relinquished the annual consulship, he was no longer in an official position to rule the state, yet his dominant position remained unchanged over his Roman, 'imperial' provinces where he was still a proconsul. When he annually held the office of consul, he had the power to intervene with the affairs of the other provincial proconsuls appointed by the Senate throughout the empire, when he deemed necessary.\nA second problem later arose showing the need for the second settlement in what became known as the \"Marcus Primus affair\". In late 24 or early 23\u00a0BC, charges were brought against Marcus Primus, the former proconsul (governor) of Macedonia, for waging a war without prior approval of the Senate on the Odrysian kingdom of Thrace, whose king was a Roman ally. He was defended by Lucius Licinius Varro Murena who told the trial that his client had received specific instructions from Augustus ordering him to attack the client state. Later, Primus testified that the orders came from the recently deceased Marcellus. Such orders, had they been given, would have been considered a breach of the Senate's prerogative under the constitutional settlement of 27 BC and its aftermath\u2014i.e., before Augustus was granted \u2014as Macedonia was a senatorial province under the Senate's jurisdiction, not an imperial province under the authority of Augustus. Such an action would have ripped away the veneer of republican restoration as promoted by Augustus, and exposed his fraud of merely being the first citizen, a first among equals. Even worse, the involvement of Marcellus provided some measure of proof that Augustus's policy was to have the youth take his place as princeps, instituting a form of monarchy\u2014accusations that had already played out.\nThe situation was so serious that Augustus appeared at the trial even though he had not been called as a witness. Under oath, Augustus declared that he gave no such order. Murena disbelieved Augustus's testimony and resented his attempt to subvert the trial by using his . He rudely demanded to know why Augustus had turned up to a trial to which he had not been called; Augustus replied that he came in the public interest. Although Primus was found guilty, some jurors voted to acquit, meaning that not everybody believed Augustus's testimony, an insult to the 'August One'.\nThe second settlement was completed in part to allay confusion and formalize Augustus's legal authority to intervene in senatorial provinces. The Senate granted Augustus a form of general , or proconsular imperium (power) that applied throughout the empire, not solely to his provinces. Moreover, the Senate augmented Augustus's proconsular imperium into , or proconsular imperium applicable throughout the empire that was more (maius) or greater than that held by the other proconsuls. This in effect gave Augustus constitutional power superior to all other proconsuls in the empire. Augustus stayed in Rome during the renewal process and provided veterans with lavish donations to gain their support, thereby ensuring that his status of proconsular imperium maius was renewed in 13\u00a0BC.\nAdditional powers.\nDuring the second settlement, Augustus was also granted the power of a tribune () for life, though not the official title of tribune. For some years, Augustus had been awarded , the immunity given to a tribune of the plebs. Now he decided to assume the full powers of the magistracy, renewed annually, in perpetuity. Legally, it was closed to patricians, a status that Augustus had acquired some years earlier when adopted by Julius Caesar. This power allowed him to convene the Senate and people at will and lay business before them, to veto the actions of either the Assembly or the Senate, to preside over elections, and to speak first at any meeting. Also included in Augustus's tribunician authority were powers usually reserved for the Roman censor; these included the right to supervise public morals and scrutinize laws to ensure that they were in the public interest, as well as the ability to hold a census and determine the membership of the Senate.\nWith the powers of a censor, Augustus appealed to virtues of Roman patriotism by banning all attire but the classic toga while entering the Forum. There was no precedent within the Roman system for combining the powers of the tribune and the censor into a single position, nor was Augustus ever elected to the office of censor. Julius Caesar had been granted similar powers, wherein he was charged with supervising the morals of the state. However, this position did not extend to the censor's ability to hold a census and determine the Senate's roster. The office of the began to lose its prestige due to Augustus's amassing of tribunal powers, so he revived its importance by making it a mandatory appointment for any plebeian desiring the praetorship.\nAugustus was granted sole within the city of Rome in addition to being granted proconsular and tribunician authority for life. Traditionally, proconsuls (Roman province governors) lost their proconsular when they crossed the Pomerium\u2014the sacred boundary of Rome\u2014and entered the city. In these situations, Augustus would have power as part of his tribunician authority, but his constitutional imperium within the Pomerium would be less than that of a serving consul, which meant that when he was in the city he might not be the constitutional magistrate with the most authority. Thanks to his prestige or , his wishes would usually be obeyed, but there might be some difficulty. To fill this power vacuum, the Senate voted that Augustus's (superior proconsular power) should not lapse when he was inside the city walls. All armed forces in the city had formerly been under the control of the urban praetors and consuls, but this situation now placed them under the sole authority of Augustus.\nIn addition, the credit was given to Augustus for each subsequent Roman military victory after this time, because the majority of Rome's armies were stationed in imperial provinces commanded by Augustus through the legatus who were deputies of the princeps in the provinces. Moreover, if a battle was fought in a senatorial province, Augustus's proconsular allowed him to take command of (or credit for) any major military victory. This meant that Augustus was the only individual able to receive a triumph, a tradition that began with Romulus, Rome's first king and first triumphant general. Tiberius, Augustus's eldest stepson by Livia, was the only other general to receive a triumph\u2014for victories in Germania in 7\u00a0BC.\nNormally during republican times, the powers Augustus held even after the second settlement would have been split between several people, who would each exercise them with the assistance of a colleague and for a specific period of time. Augustus held them all at once by himself and with no time limits; even those that nominally had time limits were automatically renewed whenever they lapsed.\nConspiracy.\nMany of the political subtleties of the second settlement seem to have evaded the comprehension of the plebeian class, who were Augustus's greatest supporters and clientele. This caused them to insist upon Augustus's participation in imperial affairs from time to time. Augustus failed to stand for election as consul in 22\u00a0BC, and fears arose once again that he was being forced from power by the aristocratic Senate. In 22, 21, and 19\u00a0BC, the people rioted in response and only allowed a single consul to be elected for each of those years, ostensibly to leave the other position open for Augustus.\nLikewise, there was a food shortage in Rome in 22\u00a0BC which sparked panic, while many urban plebs called for Augustus to take on dictatorial powers to personally oversee the crisis. After a theatrical display of refusal before the Senate, Augustus finally accepted authority over Rome's grain supply \"by virtue of his proconsular \", and ended the crisis almost immediately. It was not until AD\u00a08 that a food crisis of this sort prompted Augustus to establish a , a permanent prefect who was in charge of procuring food supplies for Rome.\nThere were some who were concerned by the expansion of powers granted to Augustus by the second settlement, and this came to a head with the apparent conspiracy of Fannius Caepio. Some time prior to 1 September 22\u00a0BC, a certain Castricius provided Augustus with information about a conspiracy led by Fannius Caepio. Murena, the outspoken consul who defended Primus in the Marcus Primus affair, was named among the conspirators. The conspirators were tried in absentia with Tiberius acting as prosecutor; the jury found them guilty, but it was not a unanimous verdict. All the accused were sentenced to death for treason and executed as soon as they were captured\u2014without ever giving testimony in their defence. Augustus ensured that the fa\u00e7ade of Republican government continued with an effective cover-up of the events.\nIn 19\u00a0BC, the Senate granted Augustus a form of \"general consular imperium\", which was probably , like the proconsular powers that he received in 23\u00a0BC. Like his tribune authority, the consular powers were another instance of gaining power from offices that he did not actually hold. In addition, Augustus was allowed to wear the consul's insignia in public and before the Senate, as well as to sit in the symbolic chair between the two consuls and hold the fasces, an emblem of consular authority. This seems to have assuaged the populace; regardless of whether or not Augustus was a consul, the importance was that he both appeared as one before the people and could exercise consular power if necessary. On 6 March 12\u00a0BC, after the death of Lepidus, he additionally took up the position of , the high priest of the college of the pontiffs, the most important position in Roman religion. On 5 February 2\u00a0BC, Augustus was also given the title 'father of the country'.\nStability and staying power.\nA final reason for the second settlement was to give the principate constitutional stability and staying power in case something happened to Princeps Augustus. His illness of early 23\u00a0BC and the Caepio conspiracy showed that the regime's existence hung by the thin thread of the life of one man, Augustus himself, who had several severe and dangerous illnesses throughout his life. If he were to die from natural causes or fall victim to assassination, Rome could be subjected to another round of civil war. The memories of Pharsalus, the Ides of March, the proscriptions, Philippi, and Actium, barely twenty-five years distant, were still vivid in the minds of many citizens. Proconsular imperium was conferred upon Agrippa for five years, similar to Augustus's power, in order to accomplish this constitutional stability. The exact nature of the grant is uncertain but it probably covered Augustus's imperial provinces, east and west, perhaps lacking authority over the provinces of the Senate. That came later, as did the jealously guarded tribunicia potestas. Augustus's accumulation of powers was now complete.\nWar and expansion.\nBy AD\u00a013, Augustus boasted 21 occasions where his troops proclaimed him after a successful battle. Almost the entire fourth chapter in his publicly released memoirs of achievements known as the is devoted to his military victories and honours.\nAugustus also promoted the ideal of a superior Roman civilisation with a task of ruling the world (to the extent to which the Romans knew it), a sentiment embodied in words that the contemporary poet Virgil attributes to a legendary ancestor of Augustus: \u2014\"Roman, remember to rule the Earth's peoples with authority!\" The impulse for expansionism was apparently prominent among all classes at Rome, and it is accorded divine sanction by Virgil's Jupiter in Book 1 of the \"Aeneid\", where Jupiter promises Rome 'sovereignty without end'.\nBy the end of his reign, the armies of Augustus had conquered northern Hispania (modern Spain and Portugal) and the Alpine regions of Raetia and Noricum (modern Switzerland, Bavaria, Austria, Slovenia), Illyricum and Pannonia (modern Albania, Croatia, Hungary, Serbia, etc.), and had extended the borders of Africa Proconsularis to the east and south. Judea was added to the province of Syria when Augustus deposed Herod Archelaus, successor to client king Herod the Great. Syria (like Egypt after Antony) was governed by a high prefect of the equestrian class rather than by a proconsul or legate of Augustus.\nAgain, no military effort was needed in 25\u00a0BC when Galatia (part of modern Turkey) was converted to a Roman province shortly after Amyntas of Galatia was killed by an avenging widow of a slain prince from Homonada. The rebellious tribes of Asturias and Cantabria in modern-day Spain were finally quelled in 19\u00a0BC, and the territory fell under the provinces of Hispania and Lusitania. This region proved to be a major asset in funding Augustus's future military campaigns, as it was rich in mineral deposits that could be fostered in Roman mining projects, especially the very rich gold deposits at Las M\u00e9dulas.\nConquering the peoples of the Alps in 16\u00a0BC was another important victory for Rome, since it provided a large territorial buffer between the Roman citizens of Italy and Rome's enemies in Germania to the north. Horace dedicated an ode to the victory, while the monumental Trophy of Augustus near Monaco was built to honour the occasion. The capture of the Alpine region also served the next offensive in 12\u00a0BC, when Tiberius began the offensive against the Pannonian tribes of Illyricum, and his brother Nero Claudius Drusus moved against the Germanic tribes of the eastern Rhineland. Both campaigns were successful, as Drusus's forces reached the Elbe River by 9\u00a0BC\u2014though he died shortly after by falling off his horse. It was recorded that the pious Tiberius walked in front of his brother's body all the way back to Rome.\nTo protect Rome's eastern territories from the Parthian Empire, Augustus relied on the client states of the east to act as territorial buffers and areas that could raise their own troops for defense. To ensure security of the empire's eastern flank, Augustus stationed a Roman army in Syria, while his skilled stepson Tiberius negotiated with the Parthians as Rome's diplomat to the East. Tiberius was responsible for restoring Tigranes V to the throne of the Kingdom of Armenia.\nArguably his greatest diplomatic achievement was negotiating with Phraates IV of Parthia (37\u20132\u00a0BC) in 20\u00a0BC for the return of the battle standards lost by Crassus in the Battle of Carrhae, a symbolic victory and great boost of morale for Rome. Werner Eck claims that this was a great disappointment for Romans seeking to avenge Crassus's defeat by military means. However, Maria Brosius explains that Augustus used the return of the standards as propaganda symbolizing the submission of Parthia to Rome. The event was celebrated in art such as the breastplate design on the statue Augustus of Prima Porta and in monuments such as the Temple of Mars Ultor ('Mars the Avenger') built to house the standards. Parthia had always posed a threat to Rome in the east, but the real battlefront was along the Rhine and Danube rivers. Before the final fight with Antony, Octavian's campaigns against the tribes in Dalmatia were the first step in expanding Roman dominions to the Danube. Victory in battle was not always a permanent success, as newly conquered territories were constantly retaken by Rome's enemies in Germania.\nA prime example of Roman loss in battle was the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in AD\u00a09, where three entire legions led by Publius Quinctilius Varus were destroyed by Arminius, leader of the Cherusci, an apparent Roman ally. Augustus retaliated by dispatching Tiberius and Drusus to the Rhineland to pacify it, which had some success although the battle brought the end to Roman expansion into Germany. The Roman general Germanicus took advantage of a Cherusci civil war between Arminius and Segestes; at the Battle of Idistaviso in AD\u00a016, he defeated Arminius.\nDeath and succession.\nThe illness of Augustus in 23\u00a0BC brought the problem of succession to the forefront of political issues and the public. To ensure stability, he needed to designate an heir to his unique position in Roman society and government. This was to be achieved in small, undramatic and incremental ways that did not stir senatorial fears of monarchy. If someone was to succeed to Augustus's unofficial position of power, he would have to earn it through his own publicly proven merits.\nSome Augustan historians argue that indications pointed toward his sister's son Marcellus, who had been quickly married to Augustus's daughter Julia the Elder. Other historians dispute this since Augustus's will was read aloud to the Senate while he was seriously ill in 23\u00a0BC, indicating a preference for Marcus Agrippa, who was Augustus's second in charge and arguably the only one of his associates who could have controlled the legions and held the empire together.\nAfter the death of Marcellus in 23\u00a0BC, Augustus married his daughter to Agrippa. This union produced five children, three sons and two daughters: Gaius Caesar, Lucius Caesar, Vipsania Julia, Agrippina, and Agrippa Postumus, so named because he was born after Marcus Agrippa died. Shortly after the second settlement, Agrippa was granted a five-year term of administering the eastern half of the empire with the of a proconsul and the same granted to Augustus (although not trumping Augustus's authority), his seat of governance stationed at Samos in the eastern Aegean. This granting of power showed Augustus's favor for Agrippa, but it was also a measure to please members of his Caesarian party by allowing one of their members to share a considerable amount of power with him.\nAugustus's intent became apparent to make his grandsons Gaius and Lucius his heirs when he adopted them as his own children. He took the consulship in 5 and 2\u00a0BC so that he could personally usher them into their political careers, and they were nominated for the consulships of AD\u00a01 and 4. Augustus also showed favour to his stepsons, Livia's children from her first marriage, Nero Claudius Drusus Germanicus (henceforth referred to as Drusus) and Tiberius Claudius (henceforth Tiberius), granting them military commands and public office, though seeming to favour Drusus. After Agrippa died in 12\u00a0BC, Tiberius was ordered to divorce his own wife, Vipsania Agrippina, and marry Augustus's widowed daughter, Julia, as soon as a period of mourning for Agrippa had ended. Drusus's marriage to Augustus's niece Antonia was considered an unbreakable affair, whereas Vipsania was \"only\" the daughter of the late Agrippa from his first marriage.\nTiberius shared in Augustus's tribune powers as of 6\u00a0BC but shortly thereafter went into retirement, reportedly wanting no further role in politics while he exiled himself to Rhodes. No specific reason is known for his departure, though it could have been a combination of reasons, including a failing marriage with Julia as well as a sense of envy and exclusion over Augustus's apparent favouring of the younger Gaius and Lucius. (Gaius and Lucius joined the college of priests at an early age, were presented to spectators in a more favourable light, and were introduced to the army in Gaul.)\nAfter the deaths of both Lucius and Gaius in AD\u00a02 and 4 respectively, and the earlier death of his brother Drusus (9\u00a0BC), Tiberius was recalled to Rome in June AD\u00a04, where he was adopted by Augustus on the condition that he, in turn, adopt his nephew Germanicus. This continued the tradition of presenting at least two generations of heirs. In that year, Tiberius was also granted the powers of a tribune and proconsul, emissaries from foreign kings had to pay their respects to him and by AD\u00a013 was awarded with his second triumph and equal level of with that of Augustus.\nThe only other possible claimant as heir was Agrippa Postumus, who had been exiled by Augustus in AD\u00a07, his banishment made permanent by senatorial decree, and Augustus officially disowned him. He certainly fell out of Augustus's favour as an heir; the historian Erich S. Gruen notes various contemporary sources that state Agrippa Postumus was a \"vulgar young man, brutal and brutish, and of depraved character\".\nOn 19 August AD\u00a014, Augustus died while visiting Nola where his father had died. Both Tacitus and Cassius Dio wrote that Livia was rumored to have brought about Augustus's death by poisoning fresh figs. This element features in many modern works of historical fiction pertaining to Augustus's life, but some historians view it as likely to have been a salacious fabrication made by those who had favoured Postumus as heir, or other political enemies of Tiberius. Livia had long been the target of similar rumors of poisoning on the behalf of her son, most or all of which are unlikely to have been true. Alternatively, it is possible that Livia did supply a poisoned fig (she did cultivate a variety of fig named for her that Augustus is said to have enjoyed), but did so as a means of assisted suicide rather than murder. Augustus's health had been in decline in the months immediately before his death, and he had made significant preparations for a smooth transition in power, having at last reluctantly settled on Tiberius as his choice of heir. It is likely that Augustus was not expected to return alive from Nola, but it seems that his health improved once there; it has therefore been speculated that Augustus and Livia conspired to end his life at the anticipated time, having committed all political process to accepting Tiberius, in order to not endanger that transition.\nAugustus's famous last words were, \"Have I played the part well? Then applaud as I exit\" ()\u2014referring to the play-acting and regal authority that he had put on as emperor. An enormous funerary procession of mourners travelled with Augustus's body from Nola to Rome, and all public and private businesses closed on the day of his burial. Tiberius and his son Drusus delivered the eulogy while standing atop two . Augustus's body was coffin-bound and cremated on a pyre close to his mausoleum. It was proclaimed that Augustus joined the company of the gods as a member of the Roman pantheon.\nHistorian D. C. A. Shotter states that Augustus's policy of favoring the Julian family line over the Claudian might have afforded Tiberius sufficient cause to show open disdain for Augustus after the latter's death; instead, Tiberius was always quick to rebuke those who criticized Augustus. Shotter suggests that Augustus's deification obliged Tiberius to suppress any open resentment that he might have harbored, coupled with Tiberius's \"extremely conservative\" attitude towards religion. Also, historian R. Shaw-Smith points to letters of Augustus to Tiberius which display affection towards Tiberius and high regard for his military merits. Shotter states that Tiberius focused his anger and criticism on Gaius Asinius Gallus (for marrying Vipsania after Augustus forced Tiberius to divorce her), as well as toward the two young Caesars, Gaius and Lucius\u2014instead of Augustus, the real architect of his divorce and imperial demotion.\nLegacy.\nAugustus created a regime which maintained peace and prosperity in the Roman west and the Greek east for two centuries. Its dominance also laid the foundations of a concept of universal empire in the Byzantine Empire and the Holy Roman Empires down to their dissolutions in 1453 and 1806, respectively. Both his adoptive surname, Caesar, and his title became the permanent titles of the rulers of the Roman Empire for fourteen centuries after his death, in use both at Old Rome and at New Rome. In many languages, became the word for \"emperor\", as in the German and in the Bulgarian and subsequently Russian (sometimes or ). The cult of continued until the state religion of the empire was changed to Christianity in 391 by Theodosius I. Consequently, there are many statues and busts of the first emperor. He had composed an account of his achievements, the \"\", to be inscribed in bronze in front of his mausoleum. Copies of the text were inscribed throughout the empire upon his death. The inscriptions in Latin featured translations in Greek beside it and were inscribed on many public edifices, such as the temple in Ankara dubbed the , called the \"queen of inscriptions\" by historian Theodor Mommsen.\nThe \"\" is the only work to have survived from antiquity, though Augustus is also known to have composed poems entitled , , and , an autobiography of 13 books, a philosophical treatise, and a written rebuttal to Brutus's \"Eulogy of Cato\". Historians are able to analyze excerpts of letters penned by Augustus, preserved in other works, to others for additional facts or clues about his personal life.\nMany consider Augustus to be Rome's greatest emperor; his policies certainly extended the empire's life span and initiated the celebrated or . The Roman Senate wished subsequent emperors to \"be more fortunate than Augustus and better than Trajan\". Augustus was intelligent, decisive, and a shrewd politician, but he was not perhaps as charismatic as Julius Caesar and was influenced on occasion by Livia (sometimes for the worse). Nevertheless, his legacy proved more enduring. The city of Rome was utterly transformed under Augustus, with Rome's first institutionalized police force, firefighting force, and the establishment of the municipal prefect as a permanent office. The police force was divided into cohorts of 500 men each, while the units of firemen ranged from 500 to 1,000 men each, with 7 units assigned to 14 divided city sectors.\nA 'prefect of the watch' was put in charge of the vigiles, Rome's fire brigade and police. With Rome's civil wars at an end, Augustus was also able to create a standing army for the Roman Empire, fixed at a size of 28 legions of about 170,000 soldiers. This was supported by numerous auxiliary units of 500 non-citizen soldiers each, often recruited from recently conquered areas.\nWith his finances securing the maintenance of roads throughout Italy, Augustus installed an official courier system of relay stations overseen by a military officer known as the . Besides the advent of swifter communication among Italian polities, his extensive building of roads throughout Italy also allowed Rome's armies to march swiftly and at an unprecedented pace across the country. In the year 6 Augustus established the , donating 170\u00a0million sesterces to the new military treasury that provided for both active and retired soldiers.\nOne of the most enduring institutions of Augustus was the establishment of the Praetorian Guard in 27\u00a0BC, originally a personal bodyguard unit on the battlefield that evolved into an imperial guard as well as an important political force in Rome. They had the power to intimidate the Senate, install new emperors, and depose ones they disliked; the last emperor they served was Maxentius, as it was Constantine I who disbanded them in the early 4th century and destroyed their barracks, the Castra Praetoria.\nAlthough the most powerful individual in the Roman Empire, Augustus wished to embody the spirit of Republican virtue and norms. He also wanted to relate to and connect with the concerns of the plebs and lay people. He achieved this through various means of generosity and a cutting back of lavish excess. In the year 29\u00a0BC, Augustus gave 400 sesterces (equal to one-tenth of a Roman pound of gold) each to 250,000 citizens, 1,000 sesterces each to 120,000 veterans in the colonies, and spent 700\u00a0million sesterces in purchasing land for his soldiers to settle upon. He also restored 82 different temples to display his care for the Roman pantheon of deities. In 28\u00a0BC, he melted down 80 silver statues erected in his likeness and in honour of him, an attempt of his to appear frugal and modest.\nThe longevity of Augustus's reign and its legacy to the Roman world should not be overlooked as a key factor in its success. As Tacitus wrote, the younger generations alive in AD\u00a014 had never known any form of government other than the principate. Had Augustus died earlier, matters might have turned out differently. The attrition of the civil wars on the old Republican oligarchy and the longevity of Augustus, therefore, must be seen as major contributing factors in the transformation of the Roman state into a \"de facto\" monarchy in these years. Augustus's own experience, his patience, his tact, and his political acumen also played their parts. He directed the future of the empire down many lasting paths, from the existence of a standing professional army stationed at or near the frontiers, to the dynastic principle so often employed in the imperial succession, to the embellishment of the capital at the emperor's expense. Augustus's ultimate legacy was the peace and prosperity the Empire enjoyed for the next two centuries under the system he initiated. His memory was enshrined in the political ethos of the Imperial age as a paradigm of the good emperor. Every emperor of Rome adopted his name, Caesar Augustus, which gradually lost its character as a name and eventually became a title. The Augustan era poets Virgil and Horace praised Augustus as a defender of Rome, an upholder of moral justice, and an individual who bore the brunt of responsibility in maintaining the empire.\nHowever, for his rule of Rome and establishing the principate, Augustus has also been subjected to criticism throughout the ages. The contemporary Roman jurist Marcus Antistius Labeo, fond of the days of pre-Augustan republican liberty in which he had been born, openly criticised the Augustan regime. In the beginning of his \"Annals\", Tacitus wrote that Augustus had cunningly subverted Republican Rome into a position of slavery. He continued to say that, with Augustus's death and swearing of loyalty to Tiberius, the people of Rome traded one slaveholder for another. In a 2006 biography on Augustus, Anthony Everitt asserts that through the centuries, judgments on Augustus's reign have oscillated between these two extremes.\nTacitus was of the belief that Nerva (r.\u00a096\u201398) successfully \"mingled two formerly alien ideas, principate and liberty\". The 3rd-century historian Cassius Dio acknowledged Augustus as a benign, moderate ruler, yet like most other historians after the death of Augustus, Dio viewed Augustus as an autocrat. The poet Marcus Annaeus Lucanus (AD\u00a039\u201365) was of the opinion that Caesar's victory over Pompey and the fall of Cato the Younger (95\u201346\u00a0BC) marked the end of traditional liberty in Rome; historian Chester Starr writes of his avoidance of criticizing Augustus, \"perhaps Augustus was too sacred a figure to accuse directly.\"\nThe Anglo-Irish writer Jonathan Swift (1667\u20131745), in his \"Discourse on the Contests and Dissentions in Athens and Rome\", criticised Augustus for installing tyranny over Rome, and likened what he believed Great Britain's virtuous constitutional monarchy to Rome's moral Republic of the 2nd century\u00a0BC. In his criticism of Augustus, the admiral and historian Thomas Gordon (1658\u20131741) compared Augustus to the puritanical tyrant Oliver Cromwell (1599\u20131658). Thomas Gordon and the French political philosopher Montesquieu (1689\u20131755) both remarked that Augustus was a coward in battle. In his \"Memoirs of the Court of Augustus\", the Scottish scholar Thomas Blackwell (1701\u20131757) deemed Augustus a Machiavellian ruler, \"a bloodthirsty vindicative usurper\", \"wicked and worthless\", \"a mean spirit\", and a \"tyrant\".\nRevenue reforms.\nAugustus's public revenue reforms had a great impact on the subsequent success of the Empire. Augustus brought a far greater portion of the Empire's expanded land base under consistent, direct taxation from Rome, instead of exacting varying, intermittent, and somewhat arbitrary tributes from each local province as Augustus's predecessors had done. This reform greatly increased Rome's net revenue from its territorial acquisitions, stabilized its flow, and regularized the financial relationship between Rome and the provinces, rather than provoking fresh resentments with each new arbitrary exaction of tribute.\nThe measures of taxation in the reign of Augustus were determined by population census, with fixed quotas for each province. Citizens of Rome and Italy paid indirect taxes, while direct taxes were exacted from the provinces. Indirect taxes included a 4% tax on the price of slaves, a 1% tax on goods sold at auction, and a 5% tax on the inheritance of estates valued at over 100,000 sesterces by persons other than the next of kin.\nAn equally important reform was the abolition of private tax farming, which was replaced by salaried civil service tax collectors. Private contractors who collected taxes for the State were the norm in the Republican era. Some of them were powerful enough to influence the number of votes for men running for offices in Rome. These tax farmers called publicans were infamous for their depredations, great private wealth, and the right to tax local areas.\nThe use of Egypt's immense land rents to finance the Empire's operations resulted from Augustus's conquest of Egypt and the shift to a Roman form of government. As it was effectively considered Augustus's private property rather than a province of the Empire, it became part of each succeeding emperor's patrimonium.\nInstead of a legate or proconsul, Augustus installed a prefect from the equestrian class to administer Egypt and maintain its lucrative seaports; this position became the highest political achievement for any equestrian besides becoming Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. The highly productive agricultural land of Egypt yielded enormous revenues that were available to Augustus and his successors to pay for public works and military expeditions.\nMonth of August.\nThe month of August (Latin: ) is named after Augustus; until his time it was called Sextilis (named so because it had been the sixth month of the original Roman calendar, with the Latin word for 'six' being ). Commonly repeated lore has it that August has 31 days because Augustus wanted his month to match the length of Julius Caesar's July, but this is an invention of the 13th-century scholar Johannes de Sacrobosco. Sextilis in fact had 31 days before it was renamed, and it was not chosen for its length (see Julian calendar).\nAccording to a quoted by Macrobius, Sextilis was renamed to honour Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power, culminating in the fall of Alexandria, fell in that month.\nCreation of Italia.\nRoman Italy was established by Augustus in 7\u00a0BC with the Latin name . This was the first time that the Italian peninsula was united administratively and politically under the same name. Due to this act, Augustus was called the \"Father of Italy\" by Italian historians such as G. Giannelli.\nBuilding projects.\nOn his deathbed, Augustus boasted \"I found a Rome of bricks; I leave to you one of marble.\" Although there is some truth in the literal meaning of this, Cassius Dio asserts that it was a metaphor for the Empire's strength. Marble could be found in buildings of Rome before Augustus, but it was not extensively used as a building material until the reign of Augustus.\nAlthough this did not apply to the Subura slums, which were still as rickety and fire-prone as ever, he did leave a mark on the monumental topography of the centre and of the Campus Martius, with the (Altar of Peace) and monumental sundial, whose central gnomon was an obelisk taken from Egypt. The relief sculptures decorating the visually augmented the written record of Augustus's triumphs in the \"\". Its reliefs depicted the imperial pageants of the praetorians, the Vestals, and the citizenry of Rome.\nHe also built the Temple of Caesar, the Temple of Jupiter Tonans, the Temple of Apollo Palatinus and the Baths of Agrippa, and the Forum of Augustus with its Temple of Mars Ultor. Other projects were either encouraged by him, such as the Theatre of Balbus, and Agrippa's construction of the Pantheon, or funded by him in the name of others, often relations (e.g. Portico of Octavia, Theatre of Marcellus). Even his Mausoleum of Augustus was built before his death to house members of his family. To celebrate his victory at the Battle of Actium, the Arch of Augustus was built in 29\u00a0BC near the entrance of the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and widened in 19\u00a0BC to include a triple-arch design.\nAfter the death of Agrippa in 12\u00a0BC, a solution had to be found in maintaining Rome's water supply system. This came about because it was overseen by Agrippa when he served as aedile, and was even funded by him afterwards when he was a private citizen paying at his own expense. In that year, Augustus arranged a system where the Senate designated three of its members as prime commissioners in charge of the water supply and to ensure that Rome's aqueducts did not fall into disrepair.\nIn the late Augustan era, the commission of five senators called the (translated as \"Supervisors of Public Property\") was put in charge of maintaining public buildings and temples of the state cult. Augustus created the senatorial group of the 'supervisors for roads' for the upkeep of roads; this senatorial commission worked with local officials and contractors to organize regular repairs.\nThe Corinthian order of architectural style originating from ancient Greece was the dominant architectural style in the age of Augustus and the imperial phase of Rome. Suetonius once commented that Rome was unworthy of its status as an imperial capital, yet Augustus and Agrippa set out to dismantle this sentiment by transforming the appearance of Rome upon the classical Greek model.\nResidences.\nThe official residence of Augustus was the on the Palatine which he made into a palace after buying it in 41/40\u00a0BC. He had other residences such as the in Rome where Augustus preferred to stay whenever he became ill and which Maecenas left to him in his will in 8\u00a0BC. The great villa of Vedius Pollio at Posilipo near Naples was bequeathed (probably forced) to him in 15\u00a0BC.\nAugustus built the Palazzo a Mare palace on Capri. He also built the immense Villa Giulia on the island of Ventotene as a summer residence early in his reign. The family home of Augustus was probably the villa at Somma Vesuviana, Nola. This was the location where he died and where his father also died.\nPhysical appearance and official images.\nHis biographer Suetonius, writing about a century after Augustus's death, described his appearance as: \"...\u00a0unusually handsome and exceedingly graceful at all periods of his life, though he cared nothing for personal adornment. He was so far from being particular about the dressing of his hair, that he would have several barbers working in a hurry at the same time, and as for his beard he now had it clipped and now shaved, while at the very same time he would either be reading or writing something\u00a0... He had clear, bright eyes\u00a0... His teeth were wide apart, small, and ill-kept; his hair was slightly curly and inclined to golden; his eyebrows met. His ears were of moderate size, and his nose projected a little at the top and then bent ever so slightly inward. His complexion was between dark and fair. He was short of stature, although Julius Marathus, his freedman and keeper of his records, says that he was five feet and nine inches (just under 5 ft. 7 in., or 1.70 meters, in modern height measurements), but this was concealed by the fine proportion and symmetry of his figure, and was noticeable only by comparison with some taller person standing beside him...\", adding that \"his shoes [were] somewhat high-soled, to make him look taller than he really was\". Scientific analysis of traces of paint found in his official statues shows that he most likely had light brown hair.\nHis official images were very tightly controlled and idealised, drawing from a tradition of Hellenistic portraiture rather than the tradition of realism in Roman portraiture. He first appeared on coins at the age of 19, and from about 29 \u00a0BC \"the explosion in the number of Augustan portraits attests a concerted propaganda campaign aimed at dominating all aspects of civil, religious, economic and military life with Augustus's person.\" The early images did indeed depict a young man, but although there were gradual changes his images remained youthful until he died in his seventies, by which time they had \"a distanced air of ageless majesty\", according to the classicist R. R. R. Smith. Among the best known of many surviving portraits are the Augustus of Prima Porta, the image on the Ara Pacis, and the Via Labicana Augustus, which depicts him in his role as . Several cameo portraits include the Blacas Cameo and \"\"."}
{"id": "1274", "revid": "48743866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1274", "title": "Geography of Antarctica", "text": " \nThe geography of Antarctica is dominated by its south polar location and, thus, by ice. The Antarctic continent, located in the Earth's southern hemisphere, is centered asymmetrically around the South Pole and largely south of the Antarctic Circle. It is washed by the Southern (or Antarctic) Ocean or, depending on definition, the southern Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans. It has an area of more than 14.2 million\u00a0km2. Antarctica is the largest ice desert in the world.\nSome 98% of Antarctica is covered by the Antarctic ice sheet, the world's largest ice sheet and also its largest reservoir of fresh water. Averaging at least 1.6\u00a0km thick, the ice is so massive that it has depressed the continental bedrock in some areas more than 2.5\u00a0km below sea level; subglacial lakes of liquid water also occur (e.g., Lake Vostok). Ice shelves and rises populate the ice sheet on the periphery. The present Antarctic ice sheet accounts for 90 percent of Earth's total ice volume and 70 percent of its fresh water. It houses enough water to raise global sea level by 200\u00a0ft.\nIn September 2018, researchers at the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency released a high resolution terrain map (detail down to the size of a car, and less in some areas) of Antarctica, named the \"Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica\" (REMA).\nRegions.\nPhysically, Antarctica is divided in two by the Transantarctic Mountains, close to the neck between the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea. Western Antarctica and Eastern Antarctica correspond roughly to the western and eastern hemispheres relative to the Greenwich meridian.\nWest Antarctica is covered by the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. There has been some concern about this ice sheet, because there is a small chance that it will collapse. If it does, ocean levels would rise by a few metres in a very short period of time.\nVolcanoes.\nVolcanoes that occur underneath glacial ice sheets are known by the term \"Glaciovolcanism\", or subglacial volcanoes. An article published in 2017 claims that researchers from Edinburgh University recently discovered 91 new volcanoes below the Antarctic ice sheet, adding to the 47 volcanoes that were already known. As of today, there have been 138 possible volcanoes identified in West Antarctica. There is limited knowledge about West Antarctic Volcanoes due to the presence of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, which heavily covers the West Antarctic Rift System\u2014a likely hub for volcanic activity. Researchers find it difficult to properly identify volcanic activity due to the comprehensive ice covering.\nEast Antarctica is significantly larger than West Antarctica, and similarly remains widely unexplored in terms of its volcanic potential. While there are some indications that there is volcanic activity under the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, there is not a significant amount of present information on the subject.\nMount Erebus is one of the most notable sites in the study of Antarctic Volcanism, in that it is the southernmost historically active volcanic site on the planet.\nDeception Island is another active Antarctic volcano. It is one of the most protected areas in the Antarctic, given its situation between the South Shetland Islands and the Antarctic Peninsula. As the most active volcano in the Antarctic peninsula, it has been studied closely since its initial discovery in 1820.\nThere are four volcanoes on the mainland of Antarctica that are\nconsidered to be active on the basis of observed fumarolic activity or \n\"recent\" tephra deposits: \nMount Melbourne (2,730 m) (74\u00b021'S., 164\u00b042'E.), a stratovolcano; \nMount Berlin (3,500 m) (76\u00b003'S., 135\u00b052'W.), a stratovolcano; \nMount Kauffman (2,365 m) (75\u00b037'S., 132\u00b025'W.), a stratovolcano; and \nMount Hampton (3,325 m) (76\u00b029'S., 125\u00b048'W.), a volcanic caldera.\nMount Rittmann (2,600 m) (73.45\u00b0S 165.5\u00b0 E), a volcanic caldera is dormant.\nSeveral volcanoes on offshore islands have records of historic activity.\nMount Erebus (3,795 m), a stratovolcano on\nRoss Island with 10 known eruptions and 1 suspected eruption.\nOn the opposite side of the continent, \nDeception Island\n(62\u00b057'S., 60\u00b038'W.), a volcanic caldera with 10 known\nand 4 suspected eruptions, have been the most active.\nBuckle Island in the Balleny Islands (66\u00b050'S., 163\u00b012'E.), \nPenguin Island (62\u00b006'S., 57\u00b054'W.), \nPaulet Island (63\u00b035'S., 55\u00b047'W.), and \nLindenberg Island (64\u00b055'S., 59\u00b040'W.) are also \nconsidered to be active. In 2017, the researchers of Edinburgh University discovered 91 underwater volcanoes under West Antarctica.\nGlaciovolcanism.\nThe definition of Glaciovolcanism is \u201cthe interactions of magma with ice in all its forms, including snow, firn and any meltwater.\u201d It defines a special field of volcanic that is specifically centered around ice and ice melt. This field of science is less than 100 years old, and thus continuously makes new discoveries. Glaciovolcanism is characterized by three kinds of eruptions: sub-glacial eruptions, supraglacial volcanism, and ice-marginal volcanism.\nThe study of glaciovolcanism is vital to the understanding of ice sheet formation. It is also a valuable tool to predict volcanic hazards, such as the ash hazard following the Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull eruption in Iceland.\nMarie Byrd Land.\nThe Marie Byrd Land makes up a large portion of West Antarctica, consisting of the Area below the Antarctic Peninsula. The Marie Byrd land is a large formation of volcanic rock, characterized by 18 exposed and subglacial volcanoes. 16 of the 18 volcanoes are entirely covered by the antarctic ice sheet. There have been no eruptions recorded from any of the volcanoes in this area, however scientists believe that some of the volcanoes may be potentially active.\nActivity.\nScientists and researchers debate whether or not the 138 identified possible volcanoes are active or dormant. It is very hard to definitively say, given that many of these volcanic structures are buried underneath several kilometers of ice. However, ash layers within the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, as well as deformations in the ice surface indicate that the West Antarctic Rift System could be active and contain erupting volcanoes. Additionally, seismic activity in the region hints at magma movement beneath the crust, a sign of volcanic activity. Despite this, however, there is not yet definitive evidence of presently active volcanoes.\nSubglacial volcanism is often characterized by ice melt and subglacial water. Though there are other sources of subglacial water, such as geothermal heat, it almost always is a condition of volcanism. Scientists remain uncertain about the presence of water underneath the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, with some claiming to have found evidence indicating the existence.\nConditions of Formation.\nIn West Antarctica's Marie Byrd Land, volcanoes are typically composed of alkaline and basaltic lava. Sometimes, the volcanoes are entirely basaltic in composition. Due to the geographic similarity of the Marie Byrd Land, it is believed that the volcanoes in the West Antarctic Rift System are also composed of basalt.\nAbove-ice basaltic volcanoes, also known as subaerial basaltic volcanoes, generally form in tall, broad cone shapes. Since they are formed from repeated piling of liquid magma sourced from the center, they spread widely and grow upwards relatively slowly. However, West Antarctic Volcanoes form underneath ice sheets, and are thus categorized as subglacial volcanoes. Subglacial volcanoes that are monogenetic are far more narrow, steeper, flat topped structures. Polygenetic subglacial volcanoes have a wider variety of shapes and sizes due to being made up of many different eruptions. Often, they look more cone shaped, like stratovolcanoes.\nHazards.\nHazardous ash.\nLittle has been studied about the implications of volcanic ash from eruptions within the Antarctic Circle. It is likely that an eruption at lower latitudes would cause global health and aviation hazards due to ash disbursement. The clockwise air circulation around the low pressure system at the South Pole forces air upwards, hypothetically sending ash upwards towards the Stratospheric jet streams, and thus quickly dispersing it throughout the globe.\nMelting ice.\nRecently, in 2017, a study found evidence of subglacial volcanic activity within the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. This activity poses a threat to the stability of the Ice Sheet, as volcanic activity leads to increased melting. This could possibly plunge the West Antarctic Ice Sheet into a positive feedback loop of rising temperatures and increased melting.\nCanyons.\nThere are three vast canyons that run for hundreds of kilometers, cutting through tall mountains. None of the canyons are visible at the snow-covered surface of the continent since they are buried under hundreds of meters of ice. The largest of the canyons is called Foundation Trough and is over 350\u00a0km long and 35\u00a0km wide. The Patuxent Trough is more than 300\u00a0km long and over 15\u00a0km wide, while the Offset Rift Basin is 150\u00a0km long and 30\u00a0km wide. These three troughs all lie under and cross the so-called \"ice divide\" - the high ice ridge that runs all the way from the South Pole out towards the coast of West Antarctica.\nWest Antarctica.\nWest Antarctica is the smaller part of the continent, , divided into:\nIce shelves.\nLarger ice shelves are:\nFor all ice shelves see List of Antarctic ice shelves.\nIslands.\nFor a list of all Antarctic islands see List of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands.\nEast Antarctica.\nEast Antarctica is the larger part of the continent, , both the South Magnetic Pole and geographic South Pole are situated here. Divided into:\nIce shelves.\nLarger ice shelves are:\nFor all ice shelves see List of Antarctic ice shelves.\nIslands.\nFor a list of all Antarctic islands see List of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands.\nTerritorial landclaims.\nSeven nations have made official Territorial claims in Antarctica."}
{"id": "1276", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1276", "title": "Economy of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1277", "revid": "406359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1277", "title": "Government of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1279", "revid": "2002082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1279", "title": "Transport in Antarctica", "text": "Transport in Antarctica has transformed from explorers crossing the isolated remote area of Antarctica by foot to a more open era due to human technologies enabling more convenient and faster transport, predominantly by air and water, but also by land as well. \nTransportation technologies on a remote area like Antarctica need to be able to deal with extremely low temperatures and continuous winds to ensure the travelers' safety. Due to the fragility of the Antarctic environment, only a limited amount of transport movements can take place and sustainable transportation technologies have to be used to reduce the ecological footprint.\nThe infrastructure of land, water and air transport needs to be safe and sustainable. \nCurrently thousands of tourists and hundreds of scientists a year depend on the Antarctic transportation system.\nLand transport.\nRoads.\nWinds continuously blow snow on roads in Antarctica.\nThe South Pole Traverse (McMurdo\u2013South Pole highway) is approximately long and links the United States McMurdo Station on the coast to the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station. It was constructed by leveling snow and in crevasses, but is not paved. There are flags to mark the road.\nAlso, the United States Antarctic Program maintains two ice roads during the austral summer. One provides access to Pegasus Field on the Ross Ice Shelf. The ice road between Pegasus Field and McMurdo Station is about . The other road provides access to the Ice Runway, which is on sea ice. The road between the Ice Runway and McMurdo Station varies in length from year to year depending on many factors, including ice stability. These roads are critical for resupplying McMurdo Station, Scott Base, and Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station.\nVehicles.\nThe scarcity and poor quality of road infrastructure limits land transportation by conventional vehicles.\nA normal car on tires has very limited capability in Antarctic conditions. Scientific bases are often built on snow-free areas (oases) close to the\nocean. Around these stations and on a hard packed snow or ice, tire based vehicles can drive but on deeper and softer snow, a normal tire-based vehicle cannot travel. Due to these limitations, vehicles on belts have been the preferred option in Antarctica. In 1997, two specialized cars with very large tires running tire pressure as low as travelled onto the high Antarctica Plateau, giving strong indication that tire based vehicles could be an option for efficient travelling in Antarctica.\nMawson Station used classic Volkswagen Beetles, the first production cars to be utilized in Antarctica, from 1963-1970. The first of these was named the \"Antarctica 1\".\nIn December 1997 into February 1998 two AT44, 4x4 cars (built in Iceland by Arctic Trucks with tire size of 44-inch tall) joined an expedition by the Swedish Polar Institution (SWEA). The cars got used to transport people and supplies from the Ice shelf to WASA station, to perform scanning of the snow and support a drilling expedition to on the Antarctica Plateau 76\u00b0S 8\u00b003'W. This is the first time tire based vehicles successfully travel on the Antarctica high plateau.\nIn 2005, a team of six people took part in the Ice Challenger Expedition. Travelling in a specially designed six wheel drive vehicle, the team completed the journey from the Antarctic coast at Patriot Hills to the geographic South Pole in 69 hours. In doing so they easily beat the previous record of 24 days. They arrived at the South Pole on December 12, 2005.\nThe team members on that expedition were Andrew Regan, Jason De Carteret, Andrew Moon, Richard Griffiths, Gunnar Egilsson and Andrew Miles. The expedition successfully showed that wheeled transport on the continent is not only possible but also often more practical. The expedition also hoped to raise awareness about global warming and climate change.\nFrom start of December 2008 into February 2009, four AT44, 4x4 cars were used to support a ski race by Amundsen Omega 3, from S82\u00b0 41' E17\u00b0 43' to South Pole. A film was made of this race by BBC called \"On Thin Ice\" with Ben Fogle and James Cracknell. The cars started from Novo airbase at S70\u00b0 49' E11\u00b0 38', establish a route onto the plateau through the crevasse areas in the Shcherbakov Mountain Range driving nearly to the start line of the ski race. For the return journey each car covered between with one fuel depot on the way.\nFrom 2008 to date (Dec 2015) tire based cars, AT44 4x4 and AT44 6x6 have been used every season to support various NGO and scientific expedition/projects, supporting flights, fuel drops, filming, skiers, biker, a tractor, collecting snow samples and more. The combined distance covered on the Antarctica Plateau is over and even though towing capacity is much lower than for most belt based vehicles, the tire based cars multiply the travel speed and use only a fraction of the fuel making this an option for some expeditions/projects.\nA second expedition led by Andrew Regan and Andrew Moon departed in November 2010. The Moon-Regan Trans Antarctic Expedition this time traversed the entire continent twice, using two six-wheel-drive vehicles and a Concept Ice Vehicle designed by Lotus. This time the team used the expedition to raise awareness about the global environmental importance of the Antarctic region and to show that biofuel can be a viable and environmentally friendly option.\nWater transport.\nAntarctica's only harbour is at McMurdo Station. Most coastal stations have offshore anchorages, and supplies are transferred from ship to shore by small boats, barges, and helicopters. A few stations have a basic wharf facility. All ships at port are subject to inspection in accordance with Article 7, Antarctic Treaty. Offshore anchorage is sparse and intermittent, but poses no problem to sailboats designed for the ice, typically with lifting keels and long shorelines.\nMcMurdo Station (), Palmer Station (); government use only except by permit (see Permit Office under \"Legal System\"). A number of tour boats, ranging from large motorized vessels to small sailing yachts, visit the Antarctic Peninsula during the summer months (January\u2013March). Most are based in Ushuaia, Argentina.\nAir transport.\nTransport in Antarctica takes place by air, using fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters.\nRunways and helicopter pads have to be kept snow-free to ensure safe take off and landing conditions.\nAntarctica has 20 airports, but there are no developed public-access airports or landing facilities. Thirty stations, operated by 16 national governments party to the Antarctic Treaty, have landing facilities for either helicopters and/or fixed-wing aircraft; commercial enterprises operate two additional air facilities.\nHelicopter pads are available at 27 stations; runways at 15 locations are gravel, sea-ice, blue-ice, or compacted snow suitable for landing wheeled, fixed-wing aircraft; of these, one is greater than in length, six are between in length, three are between in length, three are less than in length, and two are of unknown length; snow surface skiways, limited to use by ski-equipped, fixed-wing aircraft, are available at another 15 locations; of these, four are greater than 3\u00a0km in length, three are between 2\u00a0km and 3\u00a0km in length, two are between 1\u00a0km and 2\u00a0km in length, two are less than 1\u00a0km in length, and data is unavailable for the remaining four.\nAntarctic airports are subject to severe restrictions and limitations resulting from extreme seasonal and geographic conditions; they do not meet ICAO standards, and advance approval from the respective governmental or nongovernmental operating organization is required for landing (1999 est.) Flights to the continent in the permanent darkness of the winter are normally only undertaken in an emergency, with burning barrels of fuel to outline a runway. On September 11, 2008, a United States Air Force C-17 Globemaster III successfully completed the first landing in Antarctica using night-vision goggles at Pegasus Field.\nIn April 2001 an emergency evacuation of Dr. Ronald Shemenski was needed from Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station when he contracted pancreatitis. Three C-130 Hercules were called back before their final leg because of weather. Organizers then called on Kenn Borek Air based in Calgary, Alberta. Two de Havilland Twin Otters were dispatched out of Calgary with one being back-up. Twin Otters are specifically designed for the Canadian north and Kenn Borek Air's motto is \"Anywhere, Anytime, World-Wide\". The mission was a success but not without difficulties and drawbacks. Ground crews needed to create a runway with tracked equipment not designed to operate in the low temperatures at that time of year, the aircraft controls had to be \"jerry-rigged\" when the flaps were frozen in position after landing, and instruments were not reliable because of the cold. When they saw a \"faint pink line on the horizon\" they knew they were going in the right direction. This was the first rescue from the South Pole during winter. Canada honoured the Otter crew for bravery.\nIn 2021, an Airbus A340 aeroplane operated by Portuguese charter airline Hi Fly landed in Antarctica for the first time."}
{"id": "1280", "revid": "415269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1280", "title": "Military of Antarctica", "text": ""}
{"id": "1285", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1285", "title": "Geography of Alabama", "text": " \nThe geography of Alabama describes a state in the Southeastern United States in North America. It extends from high mountains to low valleys and sandy beaches. \nAlabama is 30th in size and borders four U.S. states: Mississippi, Tennessee, Georgia, and Florida. It also borders the Gulf of Mexico.\nPhysical features.\nExtending entirely across the state of Alabama for about northern boundary, and in the middle stretching farther north, is the Cumberland Plateau, or Tennessee Valley region, broken into broad tablelands by the dissection of rivers. In the northern part of this plateau, west of Jackson county, there are about of level highlands from above sea level. South of these highlands, occupying a narrow strip on each side of the Tennessee River, is a country of gentle rolling lowlands varying in elevation from . To the northeast of these highlands and lowlands is a rugged section with steep mountain-sides, deep narrow coves and valleys, and flat mountain-tops. Its elevations range from . In the remainder of this region, the southern portion, the most prominent feature is \"Little Mountain\", extending about from east to west between two valleys, and rising precipitously on the north side above them or above the sea.\nAdjoining the Cumberland Plateau region on the southeast is the Appalachian Valley (locally known as Coosa Valley) region, which is the southern extremity of the Appalachian Mountains, and occupies an area within the state of about . This is a limestone belt with parallel hard rock ridges left standing by erosion to form mountains. Although the general direction of the mountains, ridges, and valleys is northeast and southwest, irregularity is one of the most prominent characteristics. In the northeast are several flat-topped mountains, of which Raccoon and Lookout are the most prominent, having a maximum elevation near the Georgia line of little more than and gradually decreasing in height toward the southwest, where Sand Mountain is a continuation of Raccoon. South of these the mountains are marked by steep northwest sides, sharp crests and gently sloping southeast sides.\nSoutheast of the Appalachian Valley region, the Piedmont Plateau also crosses the Alabama border from the N.E. and occupies a small triangular-shaped section of which Randolph and Clay counties, together with the northern part of Tallapoosa and Chambers, form the principal portion. Its surface is gently undulating and has an elevation of about above sea level. The Piedmont Plateau is a lowland worn down by erosion on hard crystalline rocks, then uplifted to form a plateau.\nThe remainder of the state is occupied by the \"Coastal Plain\". This is crossed by foothills and rolling prairies in the central part of the state, where it has a mean elevation of about , becomes lower and more level toward the southwest, and in the extreme south is flat and but slightly elevated above the sea.\nThe Cumberland Plateau region is drained to the west-northwest by the Tennessee River and its tributaries; all other parts of the state are drained to the southwest. In the Appalachian Valley region the Coosa River is the principal river; and in the Piedmont Plateau, the Tallapoosa River. In the Coastal Plain are the Tombigbee River in the west, the Alabama River (formed by the Coosa and Tallapoosa) in the western central, and in the east the Chattahoochee River, which forms almost half of the Georgia boundary. The Tombigbee and Alabama rivers unite near the southwest corner of the state, their waters discharging into Mobile Bay by the Mobile and Tensas rivers. The Black Warrior River is a considerable stream which joins the Tombigbee from the east.\nThe valleys in the north and northeast are usually deep and narrow, but in the Coastal Plain they are broad and in most cases rise in three successive terraces above the stream. The harbour of Mobile was formed by the drowning of the lower part of the valley of the Alabama and Tombigbee rivers as a result of the sinking of the land here, such sinking having occurred on other parts of the Gulf coast.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe fauna and flora of Alabama are similar to those of the Gulf states in general and have no distinctive characteristics. However, the Mobile River system has a high incidence of endemism among freshwater mollusks and biodiversity is high.\nIn Alabama, vast forests of pine constitute the largest proportion of the state's forest growth. There is also an abundance of cypress, hickory, oak, populus, and eastern redcedar trees. In other areas, hemlock growths in the north and southern white cedar in the southwest. Other native trees include ash, hackberry, and holly. In the Gulf region of the state grow various species of palmetto and palm. In Alabama there are more than 150 shrubs, including mountain laurel and rhododendron. Among cultivated plants are wisteria and camellia.\nWhile in the past the state enjoyed a variety of mammals such as plains bison, eastern elk, North American cougar, bear, and deer, only the white-tailed deer remains abundant. Still fairly common are the bobcat, American beaver, muskrat, raccoon, Virginia opossum, rabbit, squirrel, red and gray foxes, and long-tailed weasel. Coypu and nine-banded armadillo have been introduced to the state and now also common.\nAlabama's birds include golden and bald eagles, osprey and other hawks, yellow-shafted flickers, and black-and-white warblers. Game birds include bobwhite quail, duck, wild turkey, and goose. Freshwater fish such as bream, shad, bass, and sucker are common. Along the Gulf Coast there are seasonal runs of tarpon, pompano, red drum, and bonito.\nThe U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service lists as endangered 99 animals, fish, and birds, and 18 plant species. The endangered animals include the Alabama beach mouse, gray bat, Alabama red-bellied turtle, fin and humpback whales, bald eagle, and wood stork.\nAmerican black bear, racking horse, yellow-shafted flicker, wild turkey, Atlantic tarpon, largemouth bass, southern longleaf pine, eastern tiger swallowtail, monarch butterfly, Alabama red-bellied turtle, Red Hills salamander, camellia, oak-leaf hydrangea, peach, pecan, and blackberry are Alabama's state symbols.\nClimate and soil.\nThe climate of Alabama is humid subtropical.\nThe heat of summer is tempered in the south by the winds from the Gulf of Mexico, and in the north by the elevation above the sea. The average annual temperature is highest in the southwest along the coast, and lowest in the northeast among the highlands. Thus at Mobile the annual mean is , the mean for the summer , and for the winter ; and at Valley Head, in De Kalb county, the annual mean is , the mean for the summer , and for the winter . At Montgomery, in the central region, the average annual temperature is , with a winter average of , and a summer average of . The average winter minimum for the entire state is , and there is an average of 35 days in each year in which the thermometer falls below the freezing-point. At extremely rare intervals the thermometer has fallen below zero (-18\u00a0\u00b0C), as was the case in the remarkable cold wave of the 12th-13 February 1899, when an absolute minimum of was registered at Valley Head. The highest temperature ever recorded was in Talladega county in 1902.\nThe amount of precipitation is greatest along the coast (62\u00a0inches/1,574\u00a0mm) and evenly distributed through the rest of the state (about 52\u00a0inches/1,320\u00a0mm). During each winter there is usually one fall of snow in the south and two in the north; but the snow quickly disappears, and sometimes, during an entire winter, the ground is not covered with snow. Heavy snowfall can occur, such as during the New Year's Eve 1963 snowstorm and the 1993 Storm of the Century. Hailstorms occur occasionally in the spring and summer, but are seldom destructive. Heavy fogs are rare, and are confined chiefly to the coast. Thunderstorms occur throughout the year - they are most common in the summer, but most severe in the spring and fall, when destructive winds and tornadoes occasionally occur. The prevailing winds are from the news. Hurricanes are quite common in the state, especially in the southern part, and major hurricanes occasionally strike the coast which can be very destructive.\nAs regards its soil, Alabama may be divided into four regions. Extending from the Gulf northward for about is the outer belt of the Coastal Plain, also called the \"Timber Belt,\" whose soil is sandy and poor, but responds well to fertilization. North of this is the inner lowland of the Coastal Plain, or the \"Black Prairie,\" which includes some and seventeen counties. It receives its name from its soil (weathered from the weak underlying limestone), which is black in colour, almost destitute of sand and loam, and rich in limestone and marl formations, especially adapted to the production of cotton; hence the region is also called the \"Cotton Belt.\" Between the \"Cotton Belt\" and the Tennessee Valley is the mineral region, the \"Old Land\" area\u2014a region of resistant rocks\u2014whose soils, also derived from weathering in silu, are of varied fertility, the best coming from the granites, sandstones and limestones, the poorest from the gneisses, schists and slates. North of the mineral region is the \"Cereal Belt,\" embracing the Tennessee Valley and the counties beyond, whose richest soils are the red clays and dark loams of the river valley; north of which are less fertile soils, produced by siliceous and sandstone formations.\nWetumpka Meteor Crater.\nWetumpka is the home of \"Alabama's greatest natural disaster.\" A -wide meteorite hit the area about 80 million years ago. The hills just east of downtown showcase the eroded remains of the wide impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock, with the area labeled the Wetumpka crater or astrobleme (\"star-wound\") for the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock can be found beneath the surface. In 2002, Christian Koeberl with the Institute of Geochemistry University of Vienna published evidence and established the site as an internationally recognized impact crater.\nPublic lands.\nAlabama includes several types of public use lands. These include four national forests and one national preserve within state borders that provide over 25% of the state's public recreation land."}
{"id": "1286", "revid": "51464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1286", "title": "List of governors of Alabama", "text": "The governor of Alabama is the head of government of the U.S. state of Alabama. The governor is the head of the executive branch of Alabama's state government and is charged with enforcing state laws.\nThere have officially been 54 governors of the state of Alabama; this official numbering skips acting and military governors. The first governor, William Wyatt Bibb, served as the only governor of the Alabama Territory. Five people have served as acting governor, bringing the total number of people serving as governor to 59, spread over 63 distinct terms. Four governors have served multiple non-consecutive terms: Bibb Graves, Jim Folsom, and Fob James each served two, and George Wallace served three non-consecutive periods. Officially, these non-consecutive terms are numbered only with the number of their first term. William D. Jelks also served non-consecutive terms, but his first term was in an acting capacity.\nThe longest-serving governor was George Wallace, who served 16 years over four terms. The shortest term for a non-acting governor was that of Hugh McVay, who served four and a half months after replacing the resigning Clement Comer Clay. Lurleen Wallace, the first wife of George Wallace, was the first woman to serve as governor of Alabama, and the third woman to serve as governor of any state. The current governor is Republican Kay Ivey, who took office on April 10, 2017 following Robert J. Bentley's resignation amidst a corruption scandal. She is the second female governor of Alabama.\nList of governors.\nTerritory of Alabama.\nAlabama Territory was formed on March 3, 1817, from Mississippi Territory. It had only one governor appointed by the President of the United States before it became a state; he became the first state governor.\nState of Alabama.\nAlabama was admitted to the Union on December 14, 1819. It seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861, and was a founding member of the Confederate States of America on February 4, 1861. Following the end of the American Civil War, Alabama during Reconstruction was part of the Third Military District, which exerted some control over governor appointments and elections. Alabama was readmitted to the Union on July 14, 1868.\nThe first Alabama Constitution, ratified in 1819, provided that a governor be elected every two years, limited to serve no more than 4 out of every 6 years. This limit remained in place until the constitution of 1868, which simply allowed governors to serve terms of two years. The current constitution of 1901 increased terms to four years, but prohibited governors from succeeding themselves. An amendment in 1968 allowed governors to succeed themselves once; a governor serving two consecutive terms can run again after waiting out the next term. The constitution had no set date for the commencement of a governor's term until 1901, when it was set at the first Monday after the second Tuesday in the January following an election. However, the Alabama Supreme Court ruled in 1911 that a governor's term ends at midnight at the end of Monday, and the next governor's term begins the next day, regardless of if they were sworn in on Monday.\nThe office of lieutenant governor was created in 1868, abolished in 1875, and recreated in 1901. According to the current constitution, should the governor be out of the state for more than 20 days, the lieutenant governor becomes acting governor, and if the office of governor becomes vacant the lieutenant governor ascends to the governorship. The governor and the lieutenant governor are elected at the same time but not on the same ticket.\nAlabama was a strongly Democratic state before the Civil War, electing only candidates from the Democratic-Republican and Democratic parties. It had two Republican governors following Reconstruction, but after the Democratic Party re-established control, 112 years passed before voters chose another Republican."}
{"id": "1288", "revid": "48873475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1288", "title": "Apocrypha", "text": "Apocrypha are biblical or related writings not forming part of the accepted canon of scripture, some of which might be of doubtful authorship or authenticity. In Christianity, the word \"apocryphal\" (\u1f00\u03c0\u03cc\u03ba\u03c1\u03c5\u03c6\u03bf\u03c2) was first applied to writings that were to be read privately rather than in the public context of church services. Apocrypha were edifying Christian works that were not always initially included as canonical scripture. \nThe adjective \"apocryphal\", meaning of doubtful authenticity, mythical, fictional, is recorded from the late 16th century, then taking on the popular meaning of \"false,\" \"spurious,\" \"bad,\" or \"heretical.\" It may be used for any book which might have scriptural claims but which does not appear in the canon accepted by the author. A related term for non-canonical apocryphal texts whose authorship seems incorrect is pseudepigrapha, a term that means \"false attribution\".\nIn Christianity, the name \"the Apocrypha\" is applied to a particular set of books which, when they appear in a Bible, are sometimes placed between the Old and New Testaments in a section called \"Apocrypha.\" The canonicity of such books took longer to determine. Various of these books are accepted by the Catholic Church, Orthodox Churches and the Church of the East, as deuterocanonical. Some Protestant traditions reject them outright; others regard the Apocrypha as non-canonical books that are useful for instruction. \nEtymology.\nThe word's origin is the Medieval Latin adjective (secret, or non-canonical) from the Greek adjective , , (private) from the verb , (to hide away).\nIt comes from Greek and is formed from the combination of (away) and (hide or conceal).\nThe word \"apocrypha\" has undergone a major change in meaning throughout the centuries. The word \"apocrypha\" in its ancient Christian usage originally meant a text read in private, rather than in public church settings. In English, it later came to have a sense of the esoteric, suspicious, or heretical, largely because of the Protestant interpretation of the usefulness of non-canonical texts.\nEsoteric writings and objects.\nThe word \"apocryphal\" () was first applied to writings that were kept secret because they were the vehicles of esoteric knowledge considered too profound or too sacred to be disclosed to anyone other than the initiated. For example, the disciples of the Gnostic Prodicus boasted that they possessed the secret () books of Zoroaster. The term in general enjoyed high consideration among the Gnostics (see Acts of Thomas, pp.\u00a010, 27, 44).\nSinologist Anna Seidel refers to texts and even items produced by ancient Chinese sages as apocryphal and studied their uses during Six Dynasties China (AD 220\u2013589). These artifacts were used as symbols legitimizing and guaranteeing the Emperor's Heavenly Mandate. Examples of these include talismans, charts, writs, tallies, and registers. The first examples were stones, jade pieces, bronze vessels and weapons, but came to include talismans and magic diagrams.\nFrom their roots in Zhou era China (1066\u2013256 BC), these items came to be surpassed in value by texts by the Han dynasty (206 BC \u2013 AD 220). Most of these texts have been destroyed as Emperors, particularly during the Han dynasty, collected these legitimizing objects and proscribed, forbade and burnt nearly all of them to prevent them from falling into the hands of political rivals.\nWritings of questionable value.\n\"Apocrypha\" was also applied to writings that were hidden not because of their divinity but because of their questionable value to the church. The early Christian theologian Origen, in his \"Commentaries on Matthew\", distinguishes between writings that were read by the churches and apocryphal writings: (\"writing not found in the common and published books on one hand [and] actually found in the secret ones on the other\"). The meaning of is here practically equivalent to \"excluded from the public use of the church\" and prepares the way for an even less favourable use of the word.\nSpurious writings.\nIn general use, the word \"apocrypha\" came to mean \"of doubtful authenticity\". This meaning also appears in Origen's prologue to his commentary on the Song of Songs, of which only the Latin translation survives:\nOther.\nThe Gelasian Decree (generally held now as being the work of an anonymous scholar between 519 and 553) refers to religious works by church fathers Eusebius, Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria as apocrypha. Augustine defined the word as meaning simply \"obscurity of origin\", implying that any book of unknown authorship or questionable authenticity would be considered apocryphal. Jerome in \"Prologus Galeatus\" declared that all books outside the Hebrew canon were apocryphal. In practice, Jerome treated some books outside the Hebrew canon as if they were canonical, and the Western Church did not accept Jerome's definition of apocrypha, instead retaining the word's prior meaning. As a result, various church authorities labeled different books as apocrypha, treating them with varying levels of regard.\nOrigen stated that \"the canonical books, as the Hebrews have handed them down, are twenty-two\". Clement and others cited some apocryphal books as \"scripture\", \"divine scripture\", \"inspired\", and the like. Teachers connected with Palestine and familiar with the Hebrew canon (the protocanon) excluded from the canon all of the Old Testament not found there. This view is reflected in the canon of Melito of Sardis, and in the prefaces and letters of Jerome. A third view was that the books were not as valuable as the canonical scriptures of the Hebrew collection, but were of value for moral uses, as introductory texts for new converts from paganism, and to be read in congregations. They were referred to as \"ecclesiastical\" works by Rufinus.\nIn 1546, the Catholic Council of Trent reconfirmed the canon of Augustine, dating to the second and third centuries, declaring \"He is also to be anathema who does not receive these entire books, with all their parts, as they have been accustomed to be read in the Catholic Church, and are found in the ancient editions of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical.\" The whole of the books in question, with the exception of 1 Esdras and 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, were declared canonical at Trent.\nThe Protestants, in comparison, were diverse in their opinion of the deuterocanon early on. Some considered them divinely inspired, others rejected them. Lutherans and Anglicans retained the books as Christian intertestamental readings and a part of the Bible (in a section called \"Apocrypha\"), but no doctrine should be based on them. John Wycliffe, a 14th-century Christian Humanist, had declared in his biblical translation that \"whatever book is in the Old Testament besides these twenty-five shall be set among the apocrypha, that is, without authority or belief.\" Nevertheless, his translation of the Bible included the apocrypha and the Epistle of the Laodiceans.\nMartin Luther did not class apocryphal books as being scripture, but in the German Luther Bible (1534) the apocrypha are published in a separate section from the other books, although the Lutheran and Anglican lists are different. Anabaptists use the Luther Bible, which contains the intertestamental books; Amish wedding ceremonies include \"the retelling of the marriage of Tobias and Sarah in the Apocrypha\". The fathers of Anabaptism, such as Menno Simons, quoted \"them [the Apocrypha] with the same authority and nearly the same frequency as books of the Hebrew Bible\" and the texts regarding the martyrdoms under Antiochus IV in 1 Maccabees and 2 Maccabees are held in high esteem by the Anabaptists, who faced persecution in their history.\nIn Reformed editions (like the Westminster), readers were warned that these books were not \"to be any otherwise approved or made use of than other human writings\". A milder distinction was expressed elsewhere, such as in the \"argument\" introducing them in the Geneva Bible, and in the Sixth Article of the Church of England, where it is said that \"the other books the church doth read for example of life and instruction of manners,\" though not to establish doctrine. Among some Nonconformists, the term \"apocryphal\" began to take on extra or altered connotations: not just of dubious authenticity, but having spurious or false content, Protestants, being diverse in theological views, were not unanimous in adopting those meanings.\nGenerally, Anabaptists and magisterial Protestants recognize the fourteen books of the Apocrypha as being non-canonical, but useful for reading \"for example of life and instruction of manners\": a view that continues today throughout the Lutheran Church, the worldwide Anglican Communion, among many other denominations, such as the Methodist Churches and Quaker Yearly Meetings. Liturgically, the Catholic, Methodist and Anglican churches have a scripture reading from the Book of Tobit in services of Holy Matrimony.\nAccording to the Orthodox Anglican Church:\nThough Protestant Bibles historically include 80 books, 66 of these form the Protestant canon (such as listed in the Westminster Confession of 1646), which has been well established for centuries, with many today supporting the use of the Apocrypha and others contending against the Apocrypha using various arguments.\nMetaphorical usage.\nThe adjective \"apocryphal\" is commonly used in modern English to refer to any text or story considered to be of dubious veracity or authority, although it may contain some moral truth. In this broader metaphorical sense, the word suggests a claim that is in the nature of folklore, factoid or urban legend.\nBuddhism.\nApocryphal Jatakas of the P\u0101li Canon, such as those belonging to the Pa\u00f1\u00f1\u0101saj\u0101taka collection, have been adapted to fit local culture in certain Southeast Asian countries and have been retold with amendments to the plots to better reflect Buddhist morals.\nWithin the Pali tradition, the apocryphal Jatakas of later composition (some dated even to the 19th century) are treated as a separate category of literature from the \"official\" Jataka stories that have been more-or-less formally canonized from at least the 5th century\u2014as attested to in ample epigraphic and archaeological evidence, such as extant illustrations in bas relief from ancient temple walls.\nJudaism.\nThe Jewish apocrypha, known in Hebrew as \u05d4\u05e1\u05e4\u05e8\u05d9\u05dd \u05d4\u05d7\u05d9\u05e6\u05d5\u05e0\u05d9\u05dd (\"Sefarim Hachizonim:\" \"the external books\"), are books written in large part by Jews, especially during the Second Temple period, not accepted as sacred manuscripts when the Hebrew Bible was canonized. Some of these books are considered sacred by some Christians, and are included in their versions of the Old Testament. The Jewish apocrypha is distinctive from the New Testament apocrypha and biblical apocrypha as it is the only one of these collections that works within a Jewish theological framework.\nAlthough Orthodox Jews believe in the exclusive canonization of the current 24 books in the Hebrew Bible, they also consider the Oral Torah, which they believe was handed down from Moses, to be authoritative. Some argue that the Sadducees, unlike the Pharisees but like the Samaritans, seem to have maintained an earlier and smaller number of texts as canonical, preferring to hold to only what was written in the Law of Moses (the Torah), making most of the presently accepted canon, both Jewish and Christian, apocryphal in their eyes. Others believe that it is often mistakenly asserted that the Sadducees only accepted the Pentateuch (Torah). The Essenes in Judea and the Therapeutae in Egypt were said to have a secret literature (see Dead Sea scrolls).\nOther traditions maintained different customs regarding canonicity. The Ethiopian Jews, for instance, seem to have retained a spread of canonical texts similar to the Ethiopian Orthodox Christians.\nChristianity.\nIntertestamental books.\nDuring the Apostolic Age many Jewish texts of Hellenistic origin existed within Judaism and were frequently used by Christians. Patristic authorities frequently recognized these books as important to the emergence of Christianity, but the inspired authority and value of the apocrypha remained widely disputed. Christians included several of these books in the canons of the Christian Bibles, calling them the \"apocrypha\" or the \"hidden books\".\nIn the sixteenth century, during the Protestant Reformation, the canonical validity of the intertestamental books was challenged and fourteen books were classed in 80 book Protestant Bibles as an intertestamental section called the Apocrypha, which straddles the Old Testament and New Testament. Prior to 1629, all English-language Protestant Bibles included the Old Testament, Apocrypha, and New Testament; examples include the \"Matthew's Bible (1537), the Great Bible (1539), the Geneva Bible (1560), the Bishop's Bible (1568), and the King James Bible (1611)\".\nFourteen out of eighty biblical books comprise the Protestant Apocrypha, first published as such in Luther's Bible (1534). Many of these texts are considered canonical Old Testament books by the Catholic Church, affirmed by the Council of Rome (AD 382) and later reaffirmed by the Council of Trent (1545\u201363); all of the books of the Protestant Apocrypha are considered canonical by the Eastern Orthodox Church and are referred to as \"anagignoskomena\" per the Synod of Jerusalem (1672). To this date, scripture readings from the Apocrypha are included in the lectionaries of the Lutheran Churches and the Anglican Churches.\nAnabaptists use the Luther Bible, which contains the intertestamental books; Amish wedding ceremonies include \"the retelling of the marriage of Tobias and Sarah in the Apocrypha\". The Anglican Communion accepts the Protestant Apocrypha \"for instruction in life and manners, but not for the establishment of doctrine (Article VI in the Thirty-Nine Articles)\", and many \"lectionary readings in The Book of Common Prayer are taken from the Apocrypha\", with these lessons being \"read in the same ways as those from the Old Testament\".\nThe first Methodist liturgical book, \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists\", employs verses from the Apocrypha, such as in the Eucharistic liturgy. The Protestant Apocrypha contains three books (1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh) that are accepted by many Eastern Orthodox Churches and Oriental Orthodox Churches as canonical, but are regarded as non-canonical by the Catholic Church and are therefore not included in modern Catholic Bibles.\nIn the 1800s, the British and Foreign Bible Society did not regularly publish the intertestamental section in its Bibles, citing the cost of printing the Apocrypha in addition to the Old Testament and New Testament as a major factor; this legacy came to characterize English-language Bibles in Great Britain and the Americas, unlike in Europe where Protestant Bibles are printed with 80 books in three sections: the Old Testament, Apocrypha, and New Testament.\nIn the present-day, \"English Bibles with the Apocrypha are becoming more popular again\", usually being printed as intertestamental books. The Revised Common Lectionary, in use by most mainline Protestants including Methodists and Moravians, lists readings from the Apocrypha in the liturgical calendar, although alternate Old Testament scripture lessons are provided.\nThe status of the deuterocanonicals remains unchanged in Catholic and Orthodox Christianity, though there is a difference in number of these books between these two branches of Christianity. Some authorities began using term \"deuterocanonical\" to refer to this traditional intertestamental collection as books of \"the second canon\". These books are often seen as helping to explain the theological and cultural transitions that took place between the Old and New Testaments. They are also sometimes called \"intertestamental\" by religious groups who do not recognize Hellenistic Judaism as belonging with either Jewish or Christian testaments.\nSlightly varying collections of apocryphal, deuterocanonical or intertestamental books of the Bible form part of the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox canons. The deuterocanonical or intertestamental books of the Catholic Church include Tobit, Judith, Baruch, Sirach, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, Wisdom and additions to Esther, Daniel, and Baruch.\nThe Book of Enoch is included in the biblical canon of the Oriental Orthodox churches of Ethiopia and Eritrea. The Epistle of Jude alludes to a story in the book of Enoch, and some believe the use of this book also appears in the four gospels and 1 Peter. While Jesus and his disciples sometimes used phrases also featured in some of the Apocryphal books, the Book of Enoch was never referenced by Jesus. The genuineness and inspiration of Enoch were believed in by the writer of the Epistle of Barnabas, Irenaeus, Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria and many others of the early church. The Epistles of Paul and the Gospels also show influences from the Book of Jubilees, which is part of the Ethiopian canon, as well as the Assumption of Moses and the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, which are included in no biblical canon.\nCanonicity.\nThe establishment of a largely settled uniform canon was a process of centuries, and what the term \"canon\" (as well as \"apocrypha\") precisely meant also saw development. The canonical process took place with believers recognizing writings as being inspired by God from known or accepted origins, subsequently being followed by official affirmation of what had become largely established through the study and debate of the writings.\nThe first ecclesiastical decree on the Catholic Church's canonical books of the Sacred Scriptures is attributed to the Council of Rome (382), and is correspondent to that of Trent. Martin Luther, like Jerome, favored the Masoretic canon for the Old Testament, excluding apocryphal books in the Luther Bible as unworthy to be properly called scripture, but included most of them in a separate section. Luther did not include the deuterocanonical books in his Old Testament, terming them \"Apocrypha, that are books which are not considered equal to the Holy Scriptures, but are useful and good to read.\"\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church accepts four other books into its canon than what are contained in the Catholic canon: Psalm 151, the Prayer of Manasseh, 3 Maccabees, and 1 Esdras.\nDisputes.\nThe status of the books that the Catholic Church terms \"Deuterocanonicals\" (second canon) and Protestantism refers to as \"Apocrypha\" has been an issue of disagreement that preceded the Reformation. Many believe that the pre-Christian-era Jewish translation (into Greek) of holy scriptures known as the Septuagint, a Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures originally compiled around 280 BC, originally included the apocryphal writings in dispute, with little distinction made between them and the rest of the Old Testament. Others argue that the Septuagint of the first century did not contain these books but they were added later by Christians.\nThe earliest extant manuscripts of the Septuagint are from the fourth century, and suffer greatly from a lack of uniformity as regards containing apocryphal books, and some also contain books classed as pseudepigrapha, from which texts were cited by some early writers in the second and later centuries as being scripture.\nWhile a few scholars conclude that the Jewish canon was the achievement of the Hasmonean dynasty, it is generally considered not to have been finalized until about 100 AD or somewhat later, at which time considerations of Greek language and beginnings of Christian acceptance of the Septuagint weighed against some of the texts. Some were not accepted by the Jews as part of the Hebrew Bible canon and the Apocrypha is not part of the historical Jewish canon.\nEarly church fathers such as Athanasius, Melito, Origen, and Cyril of Jerusalem, spoke against the canonicity of much or all of the apocrypha, but the most weighty opposition was the fourth century Catholic scholar Jerome who preferred the Hebrew canon, whereas Augustine and others preferred the wider (Greek) canon, with both having followers in the generations that followed. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states as regards the Middle Ages,\nThe prevailing attitude of Western medieval authors is substantially that of the Greek Fathers.\nThe wider Christian canon accepted by Augustine became the more established canon in the western Church after being promulgated for use in the Easter Letter of Athanasius (circa 372 A.D.), the Synod of Rome (382 A.D., but its Decretum Gelasianum is generally considered to be a much later addition) and the local councils of Carthage and Hippo in north Africa (391 and 393 A.D). Athanasius called canonical all books of the Hebrew Bible including Baruch, while excluding Esther. He adds that \"there are certain books which the Fathers had appointed to be read to catechumens for edification and instruction; these are the Wisdom of Solomon, the Wisdom of Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), Esther, Judith, Tobias, the Didache, or Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Shepherd of Hermas. All others are apocrypha and the inventions of heretics (Festal Epistle for 367)\".\nNevertheless, none of these constituted indisputable definitions, and significant scholarly doubts and disagreements about the nature of the Apocrypha continued for centuries and even into Trent, which provided the first infallible definition of the Catholic canon in 1546.\nIn the 16th century, the Protestant reformers challenged the canonicity of the books and partial-books found in the surviving Septuagint but not in the Masoretic Text. In response to this challenge, after the death of Martin Luther (February 8, 1546) the ecumenical Council of Trent officially (\"infallibly\") declared these books (called \"deuterocanonical\" by Catholics) to be part of the canon in April, 1546 A.D. While the Protestant Reformers rejected the parts of the canon that were not part of the Hebrew Bible, they included the four New Testament books Luther considered of doubtful canonicity along with the Apocrypha in his non-binding Luther's canon (although most were separately included in his Bible, as they were in some editions of the KJV bible until 1947).\nProtestantism therefore established a 66 book canon with the 39 books based on the ancient Hebrew canon, along with the traditional 27 books of the New Testament. Protestants also rejected the Catholic term \"deuterocanonical\" for these writings, preferring to apply the term \"apocryphal\", which was already in use for other early and disputed writings. As today (but along with other reasons), various reformers argued that those books contained doctrinal or other errors and thus should not have been added to the canon for that reason. The differences between canons can be seen under Biblical canon and Development of the Christian biblical canon.\nExplaining the Eastern Orthodox Church's canon is made difficult because of differences of perspective with the Roman Catholic church in the interpretation of how it was done. Those differences (in matters of jurisdictional authority) were contributing factors in the separation of the Roman Catholics and Orthodox around 1054, but the formation of the canon that Trent would later officially definitively settle was largely complete by the fifth century, if not settled, six centuries before the separation. In the eastern part of the church, it took much of the fifth century also to come to agreement, but in the end it was accomplished. The canonical books thus established by the undivided church became the predominant canon for what was later to become Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox alike.\nThe East already differed from the West in not considering every question of canon yet settled, and it subsequently adopted a few more books into its Old Testament. It also allowed consideration of yet a few more to continue not fully decided, which led in some cases to adoption in one or more jurisdictions, but not all. Thus, there are today a few remaining differences of canon among Orthodox, and all Orthodox accept a few more books than appear in the Catholic canon. The Psalms of Solomon, 3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, the Epistle of Jeremiah, the Book of Odes, the Prayer of Manasseh and Psalm 151 are included in some copies of the Septuagint, some of which are accepted as canonical by Eastern Orthodox and some other churches. Protestants accept none of these additional books as canon, but see them having roughly the same status as the other Apocrypha.\nEastern Orthodoxy uses a different definition than the Roman Catholic Church does for the books of its canon that it calls deuterocanonical, referring to them as a class of books with less authority than other books of the Old Testament. In contrast, the Catholic Church uses this term to refer to a class of books that were added to its canon later than the other books in its Old Testament canon, considering them all of equal authority.\nNew Testament apocrypha.\nNew Testament apocrypha\u2014books similar to those in the New Testament but almost universally rejected by Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants\u2014include several gospels and lives of apostles. Some were written by early Jewish Christians (see the Gospel according to the Hebrews). Others of these were produced by Gnostic authors or members of other groups later defined as heterodox. Many texts believed lost for centuries were unearthed in the 19th and 20th centuries, producing lively speculation about their importance in early Christianity among religious scholars, while many others survive only in the form of quotations from them in other writings; for some, no more than the title is known. Artists and theologians have drawn upon the New Testament apocrypha for such matters as the names of Dismas and Gestas and details about the Three Wise Men. The first explicit mention of the perpetual virginity of Mary is found in the pseudepigraphical Infancy Gospel of James.\nBefore the fifth century, the Christian writings that were then under discussion for inclusion in the canon but had not yet been accepted were classified in a group known as the ancient antilegomenae. These were all candidates for the New Testament and included several books that were eventually accepted, such as: The Epistle to the Hebrews, 2 Peter, 3 John and the Revelation of John (Apocalypse). None of those accepted books can be considered Apocryphal now, since all Christendom accepts them as canonical. Of the uncanonized ones, the Early Church considered some heretical but viewed others quite positively.\nSome Christians, in an extension of the meaning, might also consider the non-heretical books to be \"apocryphal\" along the manner of Martin Luther: not canon, but useful to read. This category includes books such as the Epistle of Barnabas, the Didache, and The Shepherd of Hermas, which are sometimes referred to as the Apostolic Fathers. The Gnostic tradition was a prolific source of apocryphal gospels.\nWhile these writings borrowed the characteristic poetic features of apocalyptic literature from Judaism, Gnostic sects largely insisted on allegorical interpretations based on a secret apostolic tradition. With them, these apocryphal books were highly esteemed. A well-known Gnostic apocryphal book is the Gospel of Thomas, the only complete text of which was found in the Egyptian town of Nag Hammadi in 1945. The Gospel of Judas, a Gnostic gospel, also received much media attention when it was reconstructed in 2006.\nRoman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, and Protestants all agree on the canon of the New Testament. The Ethiopian Orthodox have in the past also included I &amp; II Clement and Shepherd of Hermas in their New Testament canon.\nList of Sixty.\nThe List of Sixty, dating to around the 7th century, lists sixty books that the author claimed were the complete canonical scriptures. The unknown author also lists many apocryphal books that are not included amongst the sixty. These books are:\nIslam.\nHadith, the supposed reports of the words, actions, and silent approval of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, are accused by some Muslims of being fabrications (pseudepigrapha) created in the 8th and 9th centuries AD, and falsely attributed to Muhammad. Historically, some sects of the Kharijites also rejected the hadiths, while Mu'tazilites rejected the hadiths as the basis for Islamic law, while at the same time accepting the Sunnah and Ijma. The main points of internal Islamic criticism of hadith literature are based on questions regarding its authenticity. However, Muslim criticism of hadith is also based on arguments and criticisms of Islamic theology and philosophy.\nTraditionally, some sects of the Kharijites have rejected Hadith. There are some who even oppose the writing of Hadith for fear that it will compete with or even replace the Quran. Mu'tazilite followers also reject hadith as the basis for Islamic law, while simultaneously accepting the Sunnah and ijma. For Mu'tazilites, the basic argument for rejecting hadith is that \"because of its nature as the transmission of individuals, [it] cannot be a sure path to our understanding of the Prophet's teachings, unlike the Quran whose transmission has a general consensus among Muslims\". Some Muslim critics of hadith have even gone so far as to completely reject them as fundamental texts of Islam and instead adhere to the movement known as Quranism.\nTaoism.\nProphetic texts called the \"Ch'an-wei\" were written by Han dynasty (206 BC \u2013 AD 220) Taoist priests to legitimize as well as curb imperial power. They deal with treasure objects that were part of the Zhou (1066\u2013256 BC) royal treasures. Emerging from the instability of the Warring States period (476\u2013221 BC), ancient Chinese scholars saw the centralized rule of the Zhou as an ideal model for the new Han empire to emulate.\nThe \"Ch'an-wei\" are texts written by Han scholars about the Zhou royal treasures, only they were not written to record history for its own sake, but for legitimizing the current imperial reign. These texts took the form of stories about texts and objects being conferred upon the Emperors by Heaven and comprising these ancient sage-king's (this is how the Zhou emperors were referred to by this time, about 500 years after their peak) royal regalia. The desired effect was to confirm the Han emperor's Heavenly Mandate through the continuity offered by his possession of these same sacred talismans.\nIt is because of this politicized recording of their history that it is difficult to retrace the exact origins of these objects. What is known is that these texts were most likely produced by a class of literati called the \"fangshi\". These were a class of nobles who were not part of the state administration; they were considered specialists or occultists, for example diviners, astrologers, alchemists or healers. It is from this class of nobles that the first Taoist priests are believed to have emerged. Seidel points out, however, that the scarcity of sources relating to the formation of early Taoism make the exact link between the apocryphal texts and the Taoist beliefs unclear."}
{"id": "1290", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1290", "title": "Antartic Treaty", "text": ""}
{"id": "1291", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1291", "title": "Antarctic Treaty System", "text": "The Antarctic Treaty and related agreements, collectively known as the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS), regulate international relations with respect to Antarctica, Earth's only continent without a native human population. It was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War, designating the continent as a scientific preserve, establishing freedom of scientific investigation, and banning military activity; for the purposes of the treaty system, Antarctica is defined as all the land and ice shelves south of 60\u00b0S latitude. Since September 2004, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, which implements the treaty system, is headquartered in Buenos Aires, Argentina.\nThe main treaty was opened for signature on 1 December 1959, and officially entered into force on 23 June 1961. The original signatories were the 12 countries active in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957\u201358: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These countries had established over 55 Antarctic research stations for the IGY, and the subsequent promulgation of the treaty was seen as a diplomatic expression of the operational and scientific cooperation that had been achieved. , the treaty has 58 parties.\nHistory.\n1940s.\nAfter World War II, the U.S. considered establishing a claim in Antarctica. From 26 August 1946, and until the beginning of 1947, it carried out Operation Highjump, the largest military expeditionary force that the United States had ever sent to Antarctica, consisting of 13 ships, 4,700 men, and numerous aerial devices. Its goals were to train military personnel and to test material in conditions of extreme cold for a hypothetical war in the Antarctic.\nOn 2 September 1947, the quadrant of Antarctica in which the United States was interested (between 24\u00b0 W and 90\u00b0 W) was included as part of the security zone of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, committing its members to defend it in case of external aggression.\nIn August 1948, the United States proposed that Antarctica be under the guardianship of the United Nations, as a trust territory administered by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, the United States, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand. This idea was rejected by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, and Norway. Before the rejection, on 28 August 1948, the United States proposed to the claimant countries some form of internationalization of Antarctica, and the United Kingdom supported this. Chile responded by presenting a plan to suspend all Antarctic claims for five to ten years while negotiating a final solution, but this did not find acceptance.\nIn 1950, the interest of the United States to keep the Soviet Union away from Antarctica was frustrated, when the Soviets informed the claimant states that they would not accept any Antarctic agreement in which they were not represented. The fear that the USSR would react by making a territorial claim, bringing the Cold War to Antarctica, led the United States to make none.\nInternational conflicts.\nVarious international conflicts motivated the creation of an agreement for the Antarctic.\nSome incidents had occurred during the Second World War, and a new one occurred in Hope Bay on 1 February 1952, when the Argentine military fired warning shots at a group of Britons. The response of the United Kingdom was to send a warship that landed marines at the scene on 4 February. In 1949, Argentina, Chile, and the United Kingdom signed a Tripartite Naval Declaration committing not to send warships south of the 60th parallel south, which was renewed annually until 1961 when it was deemed unnecessary when the treaty entered into force. This tripartite declaration was signed after the tension generated when Argentina sent a fleet of eight warships to Antarctica in February 1948.\nOn 17 January 1953, Argentina reopened the Lieutenant Lasala refuge on Deception Island, leaving a sergeant and a corporal in the Argentine Navy. On 15 February, in the incident on Deception Island, 32 royal marines landed from the British frigate HMS \"Snipe\" armed with Sten machine guns, rifles, and tear gas capturing the two Argentine sailors. The Argentine refuge and a nearby uninhabited Chilean shelter were destroyed, and the Argentine sailors were delivered to a ship from that country on 18 February near South Georgia. A British detachment remained three months on the island while the frigate patrolled its waters until April.\nOn 4 May 1955, the United Kingdom filed two lawsuits, against Argentina and Chile respectively, before the International Court of Justice to declare the invalidity of the claims of the sovereignty of the two countries over Antarctic and sub-Antarctic areas. On 15 July 1955, the Chilean government rejected the jurisdiction of the court in that case, and on 1 August, the Argentine government also did so, so on 16 March 1956, the claims were closed.\nIn 1956 and 1958, India tried unsuccessfully to bring the Antarctic issue to the United Nations General Assembly.\nInternational Geophysical Year.\nIn 1950, the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) had discussed the possibility of holding a third International Polar Year. At the suggestion of the World Meteorological Organization, the idea of the International Polar Year was extended to the entire planet, thus creating the International Geophysical Year that took place between 1 July 1957, and 31 December 1958. In this event, 66 countries participated. At the ICSU meeting in Stockholm from 9 to 11 September 1957, the creation of a Special Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR) was approved, inviting the twelve countries conducting Antarctic investigations to send delegates to integrate the committee, with the purpose of exchanging scientific information among its members regarding Antarctica. The SCAR was later renamed to the Scientific Committee for Research in Antarctica.\nBoth Argentina and Chile stated that research carried out on the continent during the International Geophysical Year would not give any territorial rights to the participants, and that the facilities that were erected during that year should be dismantled at the end of it. However, in February 1958, the United States proposed that the Antarctic investigations should be extended for another year, and the Soviet Union reported that it would maintain its scientific bases until the studies being carried out had been completed.\nNegotiation of the treaty.\nScientific bases increased international tension concerning Antarctica. The danger of the Cold War spreading to that continent caused the President of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, to convene an Antarctic Conference of the twelve countries active in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year, to sign a treaty. In the first phase, representatives of the twelve nations met in Washington, who met in sixty sessions between June 1958 and October 1959 to define a basic negotiating framework. However, no consensus was reached on a preliminary draft. In the second phase, a conference at the highest diplomatic level was held from 15 October to 1 December 1959, when the Treaty was signed.\nThe Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959 by 12 nations and came into effect in the mid-1960s. The central ideas with full acceptance were the freedom of scientific research in Antarctica and the peaceful use of the continent. There was also a consensus for demilitarization and the maintenance of the status quo. The treaty prohibits nuclear testing, military operations, economic exploitation, and territorial claims in Antarctica. It is monitored through on-site inspections. The only permanent structures allowed are scientific research stations. The original signatory countries hold voting rights on Antarctic governance, with seven of them claiming portions of the continent and the remaining five being non-claimants. Other nations have joined as consultative members by conducting significant research in Antarctica. Non-consultative parties can also adhere to the treaty. In 1991\u20131992, the treaty was renegotiated by 33 nations, with the main change being the Madrid Protocol on Environmental Protection, which prohibited mining and oil exploration for 50 years.\nThe positions of the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand coincided in the establishment of an international administration for Antarctica, proposing that it should be within the framework of the United Nations. Australia and the United Kingdom expressed the need for inspections by observers, and the British also proposed the use of military personnel for logistical functions. Argentina proposed that all atomic explosions be banned in Antarctica, which caused a crisis that lasted until the last day of the conference, since the United States, along with other countries, intended to ban only those that were made without prior notice and without prior consultation. The support of the USSR and Chile for the Argentine proposal finally caused the United States to retract its opposition.\nThe signing of the treaty was the first arms control agreement that occurred in the framework of the Cold War, and the participating countries managed to avoid the internationalization of Antarctic sovereignty.\nStarting from the year 2048, any of the consultative parties to the treaty may request the revision of the treaty and its entire normative system, with the approval of a three-quarters majority of consultative parties needed for the adoption of any changes.\nOther agreements.\nOther agreements\u00a0\u2013 some 200 recommendations adopted at treaty consultative meetings and ratified by governments\u00a0\u2013 include:\nMeetings.\nThe Antarctic Treaty System's yearly \"Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM)\" are the international forum for the administration and management of the region. Only 29 of the 58 parties to the agreements have the right to participate in decision-making at these meetings, though the other 29 are still allowed to attend. The decision-making participants are the \"Consultative Parties\" and, in addition to the 12 original signatories, including 17 countries that have demonstrated their interest in Antarctica by carrying out substantial scientific activity there. The Antarctic Treaty also has \"Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (SATCM)\", which are generally summoned to treat more important topics but are less frequents and Meetings of Experts.\nParties.\nAs of 2024, there are 58 states party to the treaty, 29 of which, including all 12 original signatories to the treaty, have consultative (voting) status. The consultative members include the 7 countries that claim portions of Antarctica as their territory. The 51 non-claimant countries do not recognize the claims of others. 42 parties to the Antarctic Treaty have also ratified the \"Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty\".\nOverview of parties to the Antarctic Treaty System.\n\u2020 Reserved the right to make a claim.\nAntarctic Treaty Secretariat.\nThe \"Antarctic Treaty Secretariat\" was established in Buenos Aires, Argentina in September 2004 by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM). Jan Huber (the Netherlands) served as the first Executive Secretary for five years until 31 August 2009. He was succeeded on 1 September 2009, by Manfred Reinke (Germany). Reinke was succeeded by Albert Lluberas (Uruguay), who was elected in June 2017 at the 40th Antarctic Consultative Treaty Meeting in Beijing, China.\nThe tasks of the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat can be divided into the following areas:\nLegal system.\nAntarctica currently has no permanent population and therefore it has no citizenship nor government. Personnel present on Antarctica at any time are always citizens or nationals of some sovereignty outside Antarctica, as there is no Antarctic sovereignty. The majority of Antarctica is claimed by one or more countries, but most countries do not explicitly recognize those claims. The area on the mainland between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west is the only major land on Earth not claimed by any country. Until 2015 the interior of the Norwegian Sector, the extent of which had never been officially defined, was considered to be unclaimed. That year, Norway formally laid claim to the area between its Queen Maud Land and the South Pole.\nGovernments that are party to the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol on Environmental Protection implement the articles of these agreements, and decisions taken under them, through national laws. These laws generally apply only to their own citizens, wherever they are in Antarctica, and serve to enforce the consensus decisions of the consultative parties: about which activities are acceptable, which areas require permits to enter, what processes of environmental impact assessment must precede activities, and so on. The Antarctic Treaty is often considered to represent an example of the common heritage of mankind principle.\nAustralia.\nSince the designation of the Australian Antarctic Territory pre-dated the signing of the Antarctic Treaty, Australian laws that relate to Antarctica date from more than two decades before the Antarctic Treaty era. In terms of criminal law, the laws that apply to the Jervis Bay Territory (which follows the laws of the Australian Capital Territory) apply to the Australian Antarctic Territory. Key Australian legislation applying Antarctic Treaty System decisions include the \"Antarctic Treaty Act 1960\", the \"Antarctic Treaty (Environment Protection) Act 1980\" and the \"Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981\".\nUnited States.\nThe law of the United States, including certain criminal offences by or against U.S. nationals, such as murder, may apply to areas not under jurisdiction of other countries. To this end, the United States now stations special deputy U.S. Marshals in Antarctica to provide a law enforcement presence.\nSome U.S. laws directly apply to Antarctica. For example, the Antarctic Conservation Act, Public Law 95-541, \"et seq.\", provides civil and criminal penalties for the following activities, unless authorized by regulation or statute:\nViolation of the Antarctic Conservation Act carries penalties of up to US$10,000 in fines and one year in prison. The Departments of the Treasury, Commerce, Transportation, and the Interior share enforcement responsibilities. The Act requires expeditions from the U.S. to Antarctica to notify, in advance, the Office of Oceans and Polar Affairs of the State Department, which reports such plans to other nations as required by the Antarctic Treaty. Further information is provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the National Science Foundation.\nNew Zealand.\nIn 2006, the New Zealand police reported that jurisdictional issues prevented them issuing warrants for potential American witnesses who were reluctant to testify during the Christchurch Coroner's investigation into the death by poisoning of Australian astrophysicist Rodney Marks at the South Pole base in May 2000. Marks died while wintering over at the United States' Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station located at the geographic South Pole. Prior to autopsy, the death was attributed to natural causes by the National Science Foundation and the contractor administering the base. However, an autopsy in New Zealand revealed that Marks died from methanol poisoning. The New Zealand Police launched an investigation. In 2006, frustrated by lack of progress, the Christchurch Coroner said that it was unlikely that Marks ingested the methanol knowingly, although there is no certainty that he died as the direct result of the act of another person. During media interviews, the police detective in charge of the investigation criticized the National Science Foundation and contractor Raytheon for failing to cooperate with the investigation.\nSouth Africa.\nUnder the South African Citizens in Antarctica Act, 1962, South African law applies to all South African citizens in Antarctica, and they are subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate's court in Cape Town. The Antarctic Treaties Act, 1996 incorporates the Antarctic Treaty and related agreements into South African law. In regard to violations of these treaties, South Africa also asserts jurisdiction over South African residents and members of expeditions organised in South Africa."}
{"id": "1292", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1292", "title": "Algernon Swinburne", "text": ""}
{"id": "1293", "revid": "45200258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1293", "title": "Alfred Lawson", "text": "Alfred William Lawson (March 24, 1869 \u2013 November 29, 1954) was an English-born professional baseball player, aviator, and utopian philosopher. He played baseball, managed and promoted leagues from 1887 through 1916, and pioneered the U.S. aircraft industry. He also published two early aviation trade journals.\nLawson is frequently cited as the inventor of the airliner and received several of the first air mail contracts, which he ultimately did not fulfill. He founded the Lawson Aircraft Company in Green Bay, Wisconsin, to build military training aircraft and later the Lawson Airplane Company in South Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to build airliners.\nThe crash of his ambitious Lawson L-4 \"Midnight Liner\" during its trial flight takeoff on May 8, 1921, ended his best chance for commercial aviation success.\nIn 1904, he wrote a utopian novel, \"Born Again\", in which he developed the philosophy which later became Lawsonomy.\nBaseball career (1888\u20131907).\nLawson made one start for the Boston Beaneaters and two for the Pittsburgh Alleghenys during the 1890 season. His minor league playing career lasted through 1895. Lawson later managed in the minors from 1905 to 1907.\nUnion Professional League.\nIn 1908, Lawson started a new professional baseball league called the Union Professional League. The league took the field in April but folded one month later because of financial difficulties.\nAviation career (1908\u20131928).\nAn early aviation advocate, in October 1908, Lawson started the magazine \"Fly\" to stimulate public interest and educate readers on the new aviation science fundamentals. It sold for 10 cents a copy from newsstands across the country. In 1910, moving to New York City, he renamed the magazine \"Aircraft\" and published it until 1914. The magazine chronicled the technical developments of the early aviation pioneers.\nLawson was the first advocate for commercial air travel, coining the term \"airline.\" He also advocated for a strong American flying force, lobbying Congress in 1913 to expand its appropriations for Army aircraft.\nIn early 1913, Lawson learned to fly the Sloan-Deperdussin and the Moisant-Bleriot monoplanes, becoming an accomplished pilot. Later that year, he bought a Thomas flying boat and became the first air commuter to regularly fly from his country house in Seidler's Beach, New Jersey, to the foot of 75th Street in New York City (about 35 miles).\nIn 1917, utilizing the knowledge gained from ten years of advocating aviation, he built his first airplane, the Lawson Military Tractor 1 (MT-1) trainer, and founded the Lawson Aircraft Corporation. The company's plant was in Green Bay, Wisconsin. There, Lawson secured a contract and built the Lawson MT-2. He also designed the steel fuselage Lawson Armored Battler, which never got beyond the drafting board, given doubts within the Army aviation community and the signing of the armistice.\nAfter the war, in 1919, Lawson started a project to build America's first airline. He secured financial backing, and in five months, he had built and demonstrated in flight his biplane airliner, the 18-passenger Lawson L-2. He demonstrated its capabilities in a 2000-mile multi-city tour from Milwaukee to Chicago-Toledo-Cleveland-Buffalo-Syracuse-New York City-Washington, D.C.-Collinsville-Dayton-Chicago and back to Milwaukee, creating a buzz of positive press.\nThe publicity allowed Lawson to secure an additional $1 million to build the 26-passenger Midnight Liner. The aircraft crashed on takeoff on its maiden flight.\nIn late 1920, he secured government contracts for three airmail routes and to deliver ten warplanes. However, because of the fall 1920 recession, he could not secure the necessary $100,000 in cash reserves and had to decline the contracts.\nIn 1926, he started his last airliner, the 56-seat, two-tier Lawson super airliner.\nIn this phase of his life, he was considered one of the leading thinkers in the budding American commercial aviation community; however, his inability to secure financial backing for his ideas led him to turn to economics, philosophy, and organization.\nLawsonomy (1929\u20131954).\nIn the 1920s, Lawson promoted health practices, including vegetarianism, and claimed to have found the secret of living to 200. He also developed his own highly unusual theories of physics, according to which such concepts as \"penetrability\", \"suction and pressure\" and \"zig-zag-and-swirl\" were discoveries on par with Einstein's theory of relativity. He published numerous books on these concepts, all set in a distinctive typography.\nHe later propounded a philosophy, Lawsonomy, and the Lawsonian religion. He also developed, during the Great Depression, the populist economic theory of \"Direct Credits\", according to which banks are the cause of all economic woes, the oppressors of both capital and labor. Lawson believed that the government should replace banks as the provider of loans to business and workers. He predicted the worldwide adoption of Lawsonian principles once \"everybody understands this subject\". His rallies and lectures attracted thousands of listeners in the early 1930s, mainly in the upper Midwest, but by the late 1930s the crowds had dwindled.\nHis claims about his greatness became increasingly hyperbolic. The \"Lawsonomy trilogy\", which Lawson considered his intellectual masterpiece, is replete with such self-referential statements as \"About every two thousand years a new teacher with advanced intellectual equipment appears upon earth to lead the people a step or two nearer the one God of everybody\".\nIn 1943, he founded the Humanity Benefactor Foundation and University of Lawsonomy in Des Moines, on the site of Des Moines University, to spread his teachings and offer the degree of \"Knowledgian\", but after various IRS and other investigations it was closed and finally sold in 1954, the year of Lawson's death. His financial arrangements remain mysterious to this day, and in later years, he seems to have owned little property, moving from city to city as a guest of his far-flung acolytes. In 1952, he testified before a United States Senate investigative committee on allegations that his organization had bought war surplus machines and then sold them for a profit despite claiming non-profit status. His attempt to explain Lawsonomy to the senators ended in mutual frustration and bafflement.\nA farm near Racine, Wisconsin, is the only remaining university facility, although a tiny handful of churches may yet survive in places such as Wichita, Kansas. The large sign, formerly reading \"University of Lawsonomy\", was a familiar landmark for motorists in the region for many years and was visible from Interstate 94 about north of the Illinois state line, on the east side of the highway. A storm in the spring of 2009 destroyed the sign, although the supporting posts are still visible. On the northbound side of Interstate 94, a sign on the roof of the building nearest the freeway said \"Study Natural Law\" until being shingled over in October 2014.\nIn 2018, the Town of Mount Pleasant paid $933,000 to purchase the property on the northbound side of Interstate 94 for the Foxconn project. All remaining buildings were demolished and removed. Lawsonomy maintains a small following to this day."}
{"id": "1295", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1295", "title": "ALCS", "text": ""}
{"id": "1297", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1297", "title": "Apocrypha/Tanakh", "text": ""}
{"id": "1298", "revid": "20319727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1298", "title": "Ames, Iowa", "text": "Ames () is a city in Story County, Iowa, United States, located approximately north of Des Moines in central Iowa. It is the home of Iowa State University (ISU). According to the 2020 census, Ames had a population of 66,427, making it the state's ninth-most populous city. Iowa State University was home to 30,177 students as of fall 2023, which make up approximately one half of the city's population.\nA United States Department of Energy national laboratory, Ames Laboratory, is located on the ISU campus. Ames also hosts United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) sites: the largest federal animal disease center in the United States, the USDA Agricultural Research Service's National Animal Disease Center (NADC), as well as one of two national USDA sites for the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), which comprises the National Veterinary Services Laboratory and the Center for Veterinary Biologics. Ames also hosts the headquarters of the Iowa Department of Transportation.\nHistory.\nThe city was founded in 1864 as a station stop on the Cedar Rapids and Missouri Railroad and was named after 19th century U.S. Congressman Oakes Ames of Massachusetts, who was influential in the building of the transcontinental railroad. Ames was founded by local resident Cynthia Olive Duff (n\u00e9e Kellogg) and railroad magnate John Insley Blair, near a location that was deemed favorable for a railroad crossing of the Skunk River and Ioway Creek. William West (1821-1919) became the first mayor of Ames in 1870. With his wife Harriet, from 1869 to 1892, he ran Ames's first hotel, known as West House, on Douglas Avenue on the site of the present [2004] Octagon Center for the Arts. West was a highly-respected pioneer businessman who also served on the Ames School Board in the 1880s when Central School was built on the site of the present [2004] Ames City Hall on Clark Avenue and Sixth Street. The Wests raised several daughters and sons. William West spent the last of his life living with his son in northwest Iowa.\nGeography.\nAmes is located along the western edge of Story County, roughly north of the state capital, Des Moines, near the intersection of Interstate 35 and U.S. Route 30. A smaller highway, U.S. Route 69, passes through the town from north to south. Also passing through Ames is the cross country line of the Union Pacific Railroad and two small streams (the South Skunk River and Ioway Creek).\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nCampustown.\nCampustown is the neighborhood directly south of Iowa State University Central Campus bordered by Lincoln Way on the north. Campustown is a high-density mixed-use neighborhood that is home to many student apartments, nightlife venues, restaurants, and numerous other establishments, most of which are unique to Ames. \nClimate.\nAmes has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa\"). On average, the warmest month is July and the coldest is January. The highest recorded temperature was on July 24, 1901, and the lowest was January 25, 1894.\nDemographics.\n2020 census.\nAs of the census of 2020, there were 66,427 people, 25,579 households, and 10,641 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,407.5 inhabitants per square mile (929.5/km2). There were 27,806 housing units at an average density of 1,007.8 per square mile (389.1/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 77.5% White, 4.2% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 7.9% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 3.1% from other races and 6.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino persons of any race comprised 5.9% of the population.\nOf the 25,579 households, 17.5% of which had children under the age of 18 living with them, 32.5% were married couples living together, 6.8% were cohabitating couples, 29.5% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present and 31.2% had a male householder with no spouse or partner present. 58.4% of all households were non-families. 35.9% of all households were made up of individuals, 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years old or older.\nThe median age in the city was 23.6 years. 26.3% of the residents were under the age of 20; 27.7% were between the ages of 20 and 24; 22.4% were from 25 and 44; 12.8% were from 45 and 64; and 10.8% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 53.0% male and 47.0% female.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 58,965 people, 22,759 households, and 9,959 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 23,876 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.5% White, 3.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 8.8% Asian, 1.1% from other races, and 2.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.4% of the population.\nThere were 22,759 households, of which 19.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.6% were married couples living together, 5.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 2.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 56.2% were non-families. 30.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.82.\nThe median age in the city was 23.8 years. 13.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 40.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 22.9% were from 25 to 44; 15% were from 45 to 64; and 8.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 53.0% male and 47.0% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 50,731 people, 18,085 households, and 8,970 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 18,757 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 87.34% White, 7.70% Asian, 2.65% African American, 0.04% Native American, 0.76% Pacific Islander and other races, and 1.36% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.98% of the population.\nThere were 18,085 households, out of which 22.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.0% were married couples living together, 5.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.4% were non-families. 28.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.30 and the average family size was 2.85.\nAge spread: 14.6% under the age of 18, 40.0% from 18 to 24, 23.7% from 25 to 44, 13.9% from 45 to 64, and 7.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 24 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 109.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $36,042, and the median income for a family was $56,439. Males had a median income of $37,877 versus $28,198 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,881. About 7.6% of families and 20.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.2% of those under age 18 and 4.1% of those age 65 or over.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe U.S. Census Bureau designates the Ames MSA as encompassing all of Story County. While Ames is the largest city in Story County, the county seat is in the nearby city of Nevada, east of Ames.\nAmes metropolitan statistical area combined with the Boone, Iowa micropolitan statistical area (Boone County, Iowa) make up the larger Ames-Boone combined statistical area. Ames is the larger principal city of the Combined Statistical Area that includes all of Story County, Iowa and Boone County, Iowa. which had a combined population of 106,205 at the 2000 census.\nEconomy.\nAmes is home of Iowa State University of Science and Technology, a public land-grant and space-grant research university. At its founding in 1858, Iowa State was known as the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts. Ames is the home of the closely allied U.S. Department of Agriculture's National Animal Disease Center (See Ames strain), the U.S. Department of Energy's Ames Laboratory (a major materials research and development facility), and the main offices of the Iowa Department of Transportation. State and Federal institutions are the largest employers in Ames.\nOther area employers include a 3M manufacturing plant; Danfoss Power Solutions, a hydraulics manufacturer; Barilla, a pasta manufacturer; Ball, a manufacturer of canning jars and plastic bottles; Workiva, a global cloud computing company; Renewable Energy Group, America's largest producer of biomass-based diesel; and the National Farmers Organization.\nThe Iowa State University Research Park is a not-for-profit business development incubator located in Ames, and affiliated with Iowa State University.\nIn 2015, Ames was ranked in the top 15 \"Cities That Have Done the Best Since the Recession\" by Bloomberg Businessweek.\nThe Bureau of Labor Statistics ranked Ames and Boulder, Colorado as having the lowest unemployment rate (2.5%) of any metropolitan area in the United States in 2016. By June 2018, unemployment in Ames had fallen even further, to 1.5%, though wage increases for workers were not keeping pace with rising rents.\nTop employers.\nAs of 2022, the top employers in the city are:\nSports.\nIowa Sports Foundation.\nThe Iowa State Cyclones play a variety of sports in the Ames area. The Iowa State Cyclones football team plays at Jack Trice Stadium in Ames. The Cyclones' Men's and Women's Basketball teams and Volleyball teams play at Hilton Coliseum across the street from Jack Trice Stadium. The Iowa State Cyclones are a charter member of the Big 12 Conference in all sports and compete in NCAA Division I-A. The Iowa State Women's Tennis is also quite well known and successful.\nThe Ames Figure Skating Club provides recreational to professional level skating opportunities. The club sponsors the Learn to Skate Program in which coaches provide on and off ice lessons or workshops. The club hosts the figure skating portion of the Iowa Games competition every summer. In the fall, the club hosts Cyclone Country Championships.\nThe Ames ISU ice arena also hosts the Iowa State Cyclones hockey team. The arena hosts the Ames Little Cyclones hockey program for high school students and children in elementary or middle school.\nThe city is also home to a youth soccer club, Ames Soccer Club which shares facilities with baseball and softball teams at the Hunziker Youth Sports Complex.\nEducation.\nMuch of the city is served by the Ames Community School District.\nA portion of northern Ames is zoned to the Gilbert Community School District.\nPublic elementary/middle schools in Ames.\nGilbert CSD students are zoned to Gilbert High School.\nIowa State University.\nIowa State University of Science and Technology, more commonly known as Iowa State University (ISU), is a public land-grant and space-grant research university located in Ames. Iowa State University is the birthplace of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry Computer, the world's first electronic digital computer. Iowa State has produced a number of astronauts, scientists, Nobel laureates, and Pulitzer Prize winners. Until 1945 it was known as the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts. The university is a member of the American Association of Universities and the Big 12 Conference.\nISU is the nation's first designated land-grant university. In 1856, the Iowa General Assembly enacted legislation to establish the State Agricultural College and Model Farm. Story County was chosen as the location on June 21, 1859, from proposals by Johnson, Kossuth, Marshall, Polk, and Story counties. When Iowa accepted the provisions of the Morrill Act of 1862, Iowa State became the first institution in nation designated as a land-grant college. The institution was coeducational from the first preparatory class admitted in 1868. The formal admitting of students began the following year, and the first graduating class of 1872 consisted of 24 men and 2 women.\nThe first building on the Iowa State campus was Farm House. Built in the 1860s, it currently serves as a museum and National Historic Landmark. Today, Iowa State has over 60 notable buildings, including Beardshear Hall, Morrill Hall, Memorial Union, Catt Hall, Curtiss Hall, Carver Hall, Parks Library, the Campanile, Hilton Coliseum, C.Y. Stephens Auditorium, Fisher Theater, Jack Trice Stadium, Lied Recreation Center, numerous residence halls, and many buildings specific to ISU's many different majors and colleges.\nThe official mascot for ISU is Cy the Cardinal. The official school colors are cardinal and gold. The Iowa State Cyclones play in the NCAA's Division I-A as a member of the Big 12 Conference.\nMedia.\nRadio stations licensed to Ames.\nAmes is also served by stations in the Des Moines media market, which includes Clear Channel's 50,000-watt talk station WHO, music stations KAZR, KDRB, KGGO, KKDM, KHKI, KIOA, KJJY, KRNT, KSPZ and KSTZ, talk station KWQW, and sports stations KXNO and KXNO-FM.\nTelevision.\nLike radio, Ames is served by the Des Moines media market. WOI-DT, the ABC affiliate in central Iowa, was originally owned and operated by Iowa State University until the 1990s. The station is still licensed to Ames, but studio's are located in West Des Moines. Other stations serving Ames include KCCI, KDIN-TV, WHO-DT, KCWI-TV, KDMI, KDSM-TV and KFPX-TV.\nChannel 12 is owned by the City of Ames and overseen by the City Manager's Office. The channel broadcasts meetings for city council as well as other city government councils and boards. Channel 12 also produces its own original content focused on news and other happenings in Ames. Channel 12 has won various regional and national awards including a NATOA Government Programming Award and a Telly Award. Channel 12's goals are \"To provide quality programming to the citizens of Ames that educates and informs about city government issues\" and \"To provide live coverage and rebroadcasts of council and commission meetings\".\nChannel 16 serves as Ames' public access TV channel. \"The purpose of Ames Public Access TV (Channel 16) is to provide residents the opportunity to broadcast locally produced programs on cable television. APATV provides cablecasting of non-commercial, public access programming independently produced by professionals or non-professionals in either a VHS or DVD format. This service is provided on a first-come-first-served, non-discriminatory, non monopolistic basis. Other services include video messaging to serve as a community calendar\".\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe town is served by U.S. Highways 30 and 69 and Interstate 35. Ames is the only town in Iowa with a population of greater than 50,000 that does not have a state highway serving it. , Ames currently has three roundabouts constructed on University Avenue/530th Avenue. The first is at the intersection of Airport Road (Oakwood Rd.) and University Avenue, the second at the intersection of Cottonwood Road and 530th Avenue and the third at Collaboration Place and 530th Avenue.\nAmes was serviced by the Fort Dodge, Des Moines and Southern Railroad via a branch from Kelley to Iowa State and to downtown Ames. The tracks were removed in the 1960s. The Chicago and North Western Transportation Company twin mainline runs east and west bisecting the town and running just south of the downtown business district. The C&amp;NW used to operate a branch to Des Moines. This line was removed in the 1980s when the Spine Line through the nearby city of Nevada was purchased from the Rock Island Railroad after its bankruptcy. The Union Pacific, successor to the C&amp;NW, still runs 60\u201370 trains a day through Ames on twin mainlines, which leads to some traffic delays. There is also a branch to Eagle Grove that leaves Ames to the north. The Union Pacific maintains a small yard called Ames Yard east of Ames between Ames and Nevada. Ames has been testing automatic train horns at several of its crossings. These directional horns which are focused down the streets are activated when the crossing signals turn on and are shut off after the train crosses the crossing. This system cancels out the need for the trains to blow their horns. Train noise had been a problem in the residential areas to the west and northwest of downtown.\nAmes Municipal Airport is located southeast of the city. The current (and only) fixed-base operator is Central Iowa Air Service. The airport has two runways \u2013 01/19, which is , and 13/31, which is .\nThe City of Ames offers a transit system throughout town, called CyRide, that is funded jointly by Iowa State University, the ISU Government of the Student Body, and the City of Ames. Rider fares are free for children under five, while students pay a set cost as part of their tuition. In addition to local transit, Ames is served by intercity buses from Jefferson Lines, which stop at the Ames Intermodal Facility.\nIn 2009, the Ames metropolitan statistical area (MSA) ranked as the third highest in the United States for percentage of commuters who walked to work (10.4 percent).\nThe City of Ames unveiled a potential bike plan at an open house on November 15, 2023, as part of the city's Walk Bike Roll Bicycle and Pedestrian project. The project has been in development since summer 2022. Particular recommendations from the project include improvements being made to Clark Avenue, Lincoln Highway, Grand Avenue and Duff Street in Ames.\nAmes is home to the headquarters of the Iowa Department of Transportation.\nHealth care.\nAmes is served by Mary Greeley Medical Center, a 220-bed regional referral hospital which is adjacent to McFarland Clinic PC, central Iowa's largest physician-owned multi-specialty clinic, and also Iowa Heart Center.\nParks and recreation.\nOn September 10, 2019, the City of Ames proposed a $29,000,000 bond for building a fitness center called the Healthy Life Center. It failed to pass. Iowa State University owns the land it was to be built on. Ames has multiple parks, with the biggest being Brookside park, the North River Valley park and the Ada Hayden Heritage park, which contains a lake, a series of wetlands and trails. The Story County Conservation center is located to the north east of Ames, along the Skunk River.\nPolitics.\nFrom 1979 through 2011, Ames was the location of the Ames Straw Poll, which was held every August prior to a presidential election year in which the Republican presidential nomination was undecided (meaning there was no Republican president running for re-election\u2014as in 2011, 2007, 1999, 1995, 1987, and 1979). The poll would gauge support for the various Republican candidates amongst attendees of a fundraising dinner benefiting the Iowa Republican Party. The straw poll was frequently seen by national media and party insiders as a first test of organizational strength in Iowa. In 2015, the straw poll was to be moved to nearby Boone before the Iowa Republican Party eventually decided to cancel it altogether."}
{"id": "1299", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1299", "title": "Abbadides", "text": ""}
{"id": "1300", "revid": "44833089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1300", "title": "Abalone", "text": "Abalone ( or ; via Spanish , from Rumsen \"aul\u00f3n\") is a common name for any small to very large marine gastropod mollusc in the family Haliotidae, which once contained six genera but now contains only one genus, \"Haliotis\". Other common names are ear shells, sea ears, and, now rarely, muttonfish or muttonshells in parts of Australia, ormer in the United Kingdom, perlemoen in South Africa, and p\u0101ua in New Zealand. The number of abalone species recognized worldwide ranges between 30 and 130 with over 230 species-level taxa described. The most comprehensive treatment of the family considers 56 species valid, with 18 additional subspecies.\nThe shells of abalone have a low, open spiral structure, and are characterized by several open respiratory pores in a row near the shell's outer edge. The thick inner layer of the shell is composed of nacre, which in many species is highly iridescent, giving rise to a range of strong, changeable colors which make the shells attractive to humans as ornaments, jewelry, and as a source of colorful mother-of-pearl.\nThe flesh of abalone is widely considered to be a delicacy, and is consumed raw or cooked by a variety of cuisines.\nDescription.\nMost abalone vary in size from (\"Haliotis pulcherrima\") to . The largest species, \"Haliotis rufescens\", reaches .\nThe shell of abalone is convex, rounded to oval in shape, and may be highly arched or very flattened. The shell of the majority of species has a small, flat spire and two to three whorls. The last whorl, known as the body whorl, is auriform, meaning that the shell resembles an ear, giving rise to the common name \"ear shell\". \"Haliotis asinina\" has a somewhat different shape, as it is more elongated and distended. The shell of \"Haliotis cracherodii cracherodii\" is also unusual as it has an ovate form, is imperforate, shows an exserted spire, and has prickly ribs.\nA mantle cleft in the shell impresses a groove in the shell, in which are the row of holes characteristic of the genus. These holes are respiratory apertures for venting water from the gills and for releasing sperm and eggs into the water column. They make up what is known as the selenizone, which forms as the shell grows. This series of eight to 38 holes is near the anterior margin. Only a small number is generally open. The older holes are gradually sealed up as the shell grows and new holes form. Each species has a typical number of open holes, between four and 10, in the selenizone. An abalone has no operculum. The aperture of the shell is very wide and nacreous.\nThe exterior of the shell is striated and dull. The color of the shell is very variable from species to species, which may reflect the animal's diet. The iridescent nacre that lines the inside of the shell varies in color from silvery white, to pink, red and green-red to deep blue, green to purple.\nThe animal has fimbriated head lobes and side lobes that are fimbriated and cirrated. The radula has small median teeth, and the lateral teeth are single and beam-like. They have about 70 uncini, with denticulated hooks, the first four very large. The rounded foot is very large in comparison to most molluscs. The soft body is coiled around the columellar muscle, and its insertion, instead of being on the columella, is on the middle of the inner wall of the shell. The gills are symmetrical and both well developed.\nThese snails cling solidly with their broad, muscular foot to rocky surfaces at sublittoral depths, although some species such as \"Haliotis cracherodii\" used to be common in the intertidal zone. Abalone reach maturity at a relatively small size. Their fecundity is high and increases with their size, laying from 10,000 to 11 million eggs at a time. The spermatozoa are filiform and pointed at one end, and the anterior end is a rounded head.\nDistribution.\nThe haliotid family has a worldwide distribution, along the coastal waters of every continent, except the Pacific coast of South America, the Atlantic coast of North America, the Arctic, and Antarctica. The majority of abalone species are found in cold waters, such as off the coasts of New Zealand, South Africa, Australia, Western North America, and Japan.\nStructure and properties of the shell.\nThe shell of the abalone is exceptionally strong and is composed of a tightly packed calcium carbonate matrix. Layered among the matrix is an endogenous protein further strengthening the shell. Due to the unique structure of the shell, a force applied directly to the shell matrix will more likely cause the shedding of layers as opposed to cracking or shattering. Material scientists are currently studying this structure for insight into stronger ablative protective tools such as body armor. \nThe dust created by grinding and cutting abalone shell is dangerous; appropriate safeguards must be taken to protect people from inhaling these particles.\nDiseases and pests.\nAbalone are subject to various infectious diseases. The Victorian Department of Primary Industries said in 2007 that ganglioneuritis killed up to 90% of stock in affected regions. Abalone possess very little clotting factor, meaning even a mild to moderate skin-piercing injury can result in death from fluid loss. Members of the Spionidae of the polychaetes are known as pests of abalone.\nHuman use.\nAbalone have been harvested as a source of food and esthetics since prehistory. Abalone shells and associated materials, like their claw-like pearls and nacre, have been used as jewelry and for buttons, buckles, and inlay. These shells have been found in archaeological sites around the world, ranging from 100,000-year-old deposits at Blombos Cave in South Africa to historic Chinese abalone middens on California's Northern Channel Islands. For at least 12,000 years, abalone were harvested to such an extent around the Channel Islands that shells in the area decreased in size four thousand years ago.\nFarming.\nFarming of abalone began in the late 1950s and early 1960s in Japan and China. Since the mid-1990s, there have been many increasingly successful endeavors to commercially farm abalone for the purpose of consumption. Overfishing and poaching have reduced wild populations to such an extent that farmed abalone now supplies most of the abalone meat consumed. The principal abalone farming regions are China, Taiwan, Japan, and Korea. Abalone is also farmed in Australia, Canada, Chile, France, Iceland, Ireland, Mexico, Namibia, New Zealand, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, and the United States.\nAfter trials in 2012, a commercial \"sea ranch\" was set up in Flinders Bay, Western Australia to raise abalone. The ranch is based on an artificial reef made up of 5,000 separate concrete abalone habitat units, which can host 400 abalone each. The reef is seeded with young abalone from an onshore hatchery.\nThe abalone feed on seaweed that grows naturally on the habitats; the ecosystem enrichment of the bay also results in growing numbers of dhufish, pink snapper, wrasse, and Samson fish among other species.\nConsumption.\nAbalone have long been a valuable food source for humans in every area of the world where a species is abundant. The meat of this mollusc is considered a delicacy in certain parts of Latin America (particularly Chile), France, New Zealand, East Asia and Southeast Asia. In the Greater China region and among Overseas Chinese communities, abalone is commonly known as \"bao yu\", and sometimes forms part of a Chinese banquet. In the same way as shark fin soup or bird's nest soup, abalone is considered a luxury item, and is traditionally reserved for celebrations.\nAs abalone became more popular and less common, the prices adjusted accordingly. In the 1920s, a restaurant-served portion of abalone, about 4 ounces, would cost (in inflation adjusted dollars) about US$7; by 2004, the price had risen to US$75. In the United States, prior to this time, abalone was predominantly eaten, gathered, and prepared by Chinese immigrants. Before that, abalone were collected to be eaten, and used for other purposes by Native American tribes. By 1900, laws were passed in California to outlaw the taking of abalone above the intertidal zone. This forced the Chinese out of the market and the Japanese perfected diving, with or without gear, to enter the market. Abalone started to become popular in the US after the Panama\u2013Pacific International Exposition in 1915, which exhibited 365 varieties of fish with cooking demonstrations, and a 1,300-seat dining hall.\nIn Japan, live and raw abalone are used in awabi sushi, or served steamed, salted, boiled, chopped, or simmered in soy sauce. Salted, fermented abalone entrails are the main component of \"tottsuru\", a local dish from Honsh\u016b. \"Tottsuru\" is mainly enjoyed with sake.\nIn South Korea, abalone is called \"Jeonbok\" (/juhn-bok/) and used in various recipes. \"Jeonbok\" porridge and pan-fried abalone steak with butter are popular but also commonly used in soups or ramyeon.\nIn California, abalone meat can be found on pizza, saut\u00e9ed with caramelized mango, or in steak form dusted with cracker meal and flour.\nSport harvesting.\nAustralia.\nTasmania supplies about 25% of the yearly world abalone harvest. Around 12,500 Tasmanians recreationally fish for blacklip and greenlip abalone. For blacklip abalone, the size limit varies between for the southern end of the state and for the northern end of the state. Greenlip abalone have a minimum size of , except for an area around Perkins Bay in the north of the state where the minimum size is . With a recreational abalone licence, the bag limit is 10 per day, with a total possession limit of 20. Scuba diving for abalone is allowed, and has a rich history in Australia. (Scuba diving for abalone in the states of New South Wales and Western Australia is illegal; a free-diving catch limit of two is allowed).\nVictoria has had an active abalone fishery since the late 1950s. The state is sectioned into three fishing zones, Eastern, Central and Western, with each fisher required a zone-allocated licence. Harvesting is performed by divers using surface-supplied air \"hookah\" systems operating from runabout-style, outboard-powered boats. While the diver seeks out colonies of abalone amongst the reef beds, the deckhand operates the boat, known as working \"live\" and stays above where the diver is working. Bags of abalone pried from the rocks are brought to the surface by the diver or by way of \"shot line\", where the deckhand drops a weighted rope for the catch bag to be connected then retrieved. Divers measure each abalone before removing from the reef and the deckhand remeasures each abalone and removes excess weed growth from the shell. Since 2002, the Victorian industry has seen a significant decline in catches, with the total allowable catch reduced from 1440 to 787 tonnes for the 2011/12 fishing year, due to dwindling stocks and most notably the abalone virus ganglioneuritis, which is fast-spreading and lethal to abalone stocks.\nUnited States.\nSport harvesting of red abalone is permitted with a California fishing license and an abalone stamp card. In 2008, the abalone card also came with a set of 24 tags. This was reduced to 18 abalone per year in 2014, and as of 2017 the limit has been reduced to 12, only nine of which may be taken south of Mendocino County. Legal-size abalone must be tagged immediately. Abalone may only be taken using breath-hold techniques or shorepicking; scuba diving for abalone is strictly prohibited. Taking of abalone is not permitted south of the mouth of San Francisco Bay. A size minimum of measured across the shell is in place. A person may be in possession of only three abalone at any given time.\nAs of 2017, abalone season is May to October, excluding July. Transportation of abalone may only legally occur while the abalone is still attached in the shell. Sale of sport-obtained abalone is illegal, including the shell. Only red abalone may be taken, as black, white, pink, flat, green, and pinto abalone are protected by law. In 2018, the California Fish and Game Commission closed recreational abalone season due to dramatically declining populations. That year, they extended the moratorium to last through April 2021. Afterwards, they extended the ban for another 5 years until April 2026. \nAn abalone diver is normally equipped with a thick wetsuit, including a hood, bootees, and gloves, and usually also a mask, snorkel, weight belt, abalone iron, and abalone gauge. Alternatively, the rock picker can feel underneath rocks at low tides for abalone. Abalone are mostly taken in depths from a few inches up to ; less common are freedivers who can work deeper than . Abalone are normally found on rocks near food sources such as kelp. An abalone iron is used to pry the abalone from the rock before it has time to fully clamp down. Divers dive from boats, kayaks, tube floats, or directly off the shore.\nThe largest abalone recorded in California is , caught by John Pepper somewhere off the coast of San Mateo County in September 1993.\nThe mollusc \"Concholepas concholepas\" is often sold in the United States under the name \"Chilean abalone\", though it is not an abalone, but a muricid.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, abalone is called \"p\u0101ua\" (, from the M\u0101ori language). \"Haliotis iris\" (or blackfoot p\u0101ua) is the ubiquitous New Zealand p\u0101ua, the highly polished nacre of which is extremely popular as souvenirs with its striking blue, green, and purple iridescence. \"Haliotis australis\" and \"Haliotis virginea\" are also found in New Zealand waters, but are less popular than \"H. iris\". \"Haliotis pirimoana\" is a small species endemic to Manawat\u0101whi / the Three Kings Islands that superficially resembles \"H. virginea\".\nLike all New Zealand shellfish, recreational harvesting of \"p\u0101ua\" does not require a permit provided catch limits, size restrictions, and seasonal and local restrictions set by the Ministry for Primary Industries (MPI) are followed. The legal recreational daily limit is 10 per diver, with a minimum shell length of for \"H. iris\" and for \"H. australis\". In addition, no person may be in possession, even on land, of more than 20 p\u0101ua or more than of p\u0101ua meat at any one time. P\u0101ua can only be caught by free-diving; it is illegal to catch them using scuba gear.\nAn extensive global black market exists in collecting and exporting abalone meat. This can be a particularly awkward problem where the right to harvest p\u0101ua can be granted legally under M\u0101ori customary rights. When such permits to harvest are abused, it is frequently difficult to police. The limit is strictly enforced by roving Ministry for Primary Industries fishery officers with the backing of the New Zealand Police. Poaching is a major industry in New Zealand with many thousands being taken illegally, often undersized. Convictions have resulted in seizure of diving gear, boats, and motor vehicles and fines and in rare cases, imprisonment.\nSouth Africa.\nThere are five species endemic to South Africa, namely \"H. parva\", \"H. spadicea\", \"H. queketti\" and \"H. speciosa\".\nThe largest abalone in South Africa, \"Haliotis midae\", occurs along roughly two-thirds of the country's coastline. Abalone-diving has been a recreational activity for many years, but stocks are currently being threatened by illegal commercial harvesting. In South Africa, all persons harvesting this shellfish need permits that are issued annually, and no abalone may be harvested using scuba gear.\nFor the last few years, however, no permits have been issued for collecting abalone, but commercial harvesting still continues as does illegal collection by syndicates.\nIn 2007, because of widespread poaching of abalone, the South African government listed abalone as an endangered species according to the CITES section III appendix, which requests member governments to monitor the trade in this species. This listing was removed from CITES in June 2010 by the South African government and South African abalone is no longer subject to CITES trade controls. Export permits are still required, however.\nThe abalone meat from South Africa is prohibited for sale in the country to help reduce poaching; however, much of the illegally harvested meat is sold in Asian countries. As of early 2008, the wholesale price for abalone meat was approximately US$40.00 per kilogram. There is an active trade in the shells, which sell for more than US$1,400 per tonne.\nChannel Islands, Brittany and Normandy.\nOrmers (\"Haliotis tuberculata\") are considered a delicacy in the British Channel Islands as well as in adjacent areas of France, and are pursued with great alacrity by the locals. This, and a recent lethal bacterial disease, has led to a dramatic depletion in numbers since the latter half of the 19th century, and \"ormering\" is now strictly regulated to preserve stocks. The gathering of ormers is now restricted to a number of 'ormering tides', from 1 January to 30 April, which occur on the full or new moon and two days following. No ormers may be taken from the beach that are under in shell length. Gatherers are not allowed to wear wetsuits or even put their heads underwater. Any breach of these laws is a criminal offence and can lead to a fine of up to \u00a35,000 or six months in prison. The demand for ormers is such that they led to the world's first underwater arrest, when Mr. Kempthorne-Leigh of Guernsey was arrested by a police officer in full diving gear when illegally diving for ormers.\nDecorative items.\nThe highly iridescent inner nacre layer of the shell of abalone has traditionally been used as a decorative item, in jewelry, buttons, and as inlay in furniture and musical instruments, such as on fret boards and binding of guitars. See article Najeonchilgi regarding Korean handicraft. \nIndigenous use.\nAbalone has been an important staple in a number of Indigenous cultures around the world, specifically in Africa and on the Northwest American coast. The meat is a traditional food, and the shell is used to make ornaments; historically, the shells were also used as currency in some communities.\nThreat of extinction.\nAbalone are critically threatened due to overfishing and the acidification of oceans as lower pH erodes the calcium carbonate in their shells. In the 21st century, white, pink, and green abalone are on the United States federal endangered species list. Possible restoration sites have been proposed for the San Clemente Island and Santa Barbara Island areas. Reintroduction of farming abalone to the wild has been proposed, with these abalone having special tags to help track the population.\nSpecies.\nThe number of species that are recognized within the genus \"Haliotis\" has fluctuated over time, and depends on the source that is consulted. The number of recognized species range from 30 to 130. This list finds a compromise using the WoRMS database, plus some species that have been added, for a total of 57. The majority of abalone have not been rated for conservation status. Those that have been reviewed tend to show that the abalone in general is an animal that is declining in numbers, and will need protection throughout the globe."}
{"id": "1301", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1301", "title": "Abbess", "text": "An abbess (Latin: \"abbatissa\") is the female superior of a community of nuns in an abbey.\nDescription.\nIn the Catholic Church (both the Latin Church and Eastern Catholic), Eastern Orthodox, Coptic and Anglican abbeys, the mode of election, position, rights, and authority of an abbess correspond generally with those of an abbot. She must be at least 40 years old and have been a nun for 10 years. The age requirement in the Catholic Church has evolved over time, ranging from 30 to 60. The requirement of 10 years as a nun is only eight in Catholicism. In the rare case of there not being a nun with the qualifications, the requirements may be lowered to 30 years of age and five of those in an \"upright manner\", as determined by the superior. A woman who is of illegitimate birth, is not a virgin, has undergone non-salutory public penance, is a widow, or is blind or deaf, is typically disqualified for the position, saving by permission of the Holy See. The office is elective, the choice being by the secret votes of the nuns belonging to the community. Like an abbot, after being confirmed in her office by the Holy See, an abbess is solemnly admitted to her office by a formal blessing, conferred by the bishop in whose territory the monastery is located, or by an abbot or another bishop with appropriate permission. Unlike the abbot, the abbess receives only the ring, the crosier, and a copy of the rule of the order. She does not receive a mitre as part of the ceremony. The abbess also traditionally adds a pectoral cross to the outside of her habit as a symbol of office, though she continues to wear a modified form of her religious habit or dress, as she is unordained\u2014females cannot be ordained\u2014and so does not vest or use choir dress in the liturgy. An abbess serves for life, except in Italy and some adjacent islands.\nRoles and responsibilities.\nAbbesses are, like abbots, major superiors according to canon law, the equivalents of abbots or bishops (the ordained male members of the church hierarchy who have, by right of their own office, executive jurisdiction over a building, diocesan territory, or a communal or non-communal group of persons\u2014juridical entities under church law). They receive the vows of the nuns of the abbey; they may admit candidates to their order's novitiate; they may send them to study; and they may send them to do pastoral or missionary, or to work or assist\u2014to the extent allowed by canon and civil law\u2014in the administration and ministry of a parish or diocese (these activities could be inside or outside the community's territory). They have full authority in its administration.\nHowever, there are significant limitations.\nThere are exigent circumstances, where due to Apostolical privilege, certain Abbesses have been granted rights and responsibilities above the normal, such as the Abbess of the Cistercian Monastery of the Abbey of Santa Mar\u00eda la Real de Las Huelgas near Burgos, Spain. Also granted exceptional rights was the Abbess of the Cistercian order in Conversano Italy. She was granted the ability to appoint her own vicar-general, select and approve the confessors, along with the practice of receiving the public homage of her clergy. This practice continued until some of the duties were modified due to an appeal by the clergy to Rome. Finally in 1750, the public homage was abolished.\nDuring the Middle Ages (7th\u201310th centuries) in the Catholic Church, greater restrictions on abbesses' spiritual independence gained pace. Instruments of church authority, from papal bulls down to local sanctions, were increasingly used to restrict their freedom to dispense blessings, administer sacraments, including the veiling of nuns, and publicly read the gospels or preach. Such spiritual\u2014and even temporal\u2014authority had in earlier church history, largely been unremarkable. As Thomas Oestereich, contributor to the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1913), makes clear, abbesses' past spiritual authority was increasingly seen as the \"usurpation\" of corresponding priestly power, and a solely male privilege. He gives an example of the attitude toward such practice, from the 9th century, which persists in church administrative control into the modern era:\nSimilarly, in 1210, Innocent III (died 1216) expressed his view of the Cistercian Abbesses of Burgos and Palencia in Spain, who preached and heard confessions of their own religious, characterizing these acts as \"unheard of, most indecorous, and highly preposterous.\"\nHistory.\nHistorically, in some Celtic monasteries, abbesses presided over joint-houses of monks and nuns, the most famous example being Saint Brigid of Kildare's leadership in the founding of the monastery at Kildare in Ireland. This custom accompanied Celtic monastic missions to France, Spain, and even to Rome itself. In 1115, Robert, the founder of Fontevraud Abbey near Chinon and Saumur, France, committed the government of the whole order, men as well as women, to a female superior.\nIn Lutheran churches, the title of abbess () has in some cases survived (for example, in the ) to designate the heads of abbeys which since the Protestant Reformation have continued as monasteries or convents (). These positions continued, merely changing from Catholic to Lutheran. The first to make this change was the Abbey of Quedlinburg, whose last Catholic Abbess died in 1514. These are collegiate foundations, which provide a home and an income for unmarried ladies, generally of noble birth, called canonesses (), or more usually, or . The office of abbess is of considerable social dignity, and in the past, was sometimes filled by princesses of the reigning houses. Until the dissolution of Holy Roman Empire and mediatisation of smaller imperial fiefs by Napoleon, the evangelical Abbess of Quedlinburg was also per officio the head of that state. The last such ruling abbess was Sofia Albertina, Princess of Sweden. The abess Hildegard of Fraunm\u00fcnster Abbey sat in the Imperial Diet among other princes of the Holy Roman Empire. The oldest women's abbey in Germany is St. Marienthal Abbey of Cistercian nuns, near Ostritz, established during the early 13th century.\nIn the Hrad\u010dany of Prague is a Catholic institute whose mistress is titled an Abbess. It was founded in 1755 by the Empress Maria Theresa, and traditionally was responsible for the coronation of the Queen of Bohemia. The Abbess is required to be an Austrian Archduchess.\n it was estimated the Catholic Church had around 200 presiding abbesses.\nAbbas placename.\nThe word 'Abbas' is used as part of a place name (for example, the English villages of Compton Abbas and Milton Abbas). The name usually relates to land previously owned by an abbess."}
{"id": "1302", "revid": "20842734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1302", "title": "Human abdomen", "text": ""}
{"id": "1303", "revid": "575347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1303", "title": "Abdominal surgery", "text": "The term abdominal surgery broadly covers surgical procedures that involve opening the abdomen (laparotomy). Surgery of each abdominal organ is dealt with separately in connection with the description of that organ (see stomach, kidney, liver, etc.) Diseases affecting the abdominal cavity are dealt with generally under their own names.\nTypes.\nThe most common abdominal surgeries are described below.\nComplications.\nComplications of abdominal surgery include, but are not limited to:\nSterile technique, aseptic post-operative care, antibiotics, use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist, and vigilant post-operative monitoring greatly reduce the risk of these complications. Planned surgery performed under sterile conditions is much less risky than that performed under emergency or unsterile conditions. The contents of the bowel are unsterile, and thus leakage of bowel contents, as from trauma, substantially increases the risk of infection.\nGlobally, there are few studies comparing perioperative mortality following abdominal surgery across different health systems. One major prospective study of 10,745 adult patients undergoing emergency laparotomy from 357 centres in 58 high-, middle-, and low-income countries found that mortality is three times higher in low- compared with high-HDI countries even when adjusted for prognostic factors. In this study the overall global mortality rate was 1.6 percent at 24\u2009hours (high 1.1 percent, middle 1.9 percent, low 3.4 percent), increasing to 5.4 percent by 30 days (high 4.5 percent, middle 6.0 percent, low 8.6 percent). Of the 578 patients who died, 404 (69.9 percent) did so between 24\u2009hours and 30 days following surgery (high 74.2 percent, middle 68.8 percent, low 60.5 percent). Patient safety factors were suggested to play an important role, with use of the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist associated with reduced mortality at 30 days.\nTaking a similar approach, a unique global study of 1,409 children undergoing emergency laparotomy from 253 centres in 43 countries showed that adjusted mortality in children following surgery may be as high as 7 times greater in low-HDI and middle-HDI countries compared with high-HDI countries, translating to 40 excess deaths per 1,000 procedures performed in these settings. Internationally, the most common operations performed were appendectomy, small bowel resection, pyloromyotomy and correction of intussusception. After adjustment for patient and hospital risk factors, child mortality at 30 days was significantly higher in low-HDI (adjusted OR 7.14 (95% CI 2.52 to 20.23)) and middle-HDI (4.42 (1.44 to 13.56)) countries compared with high-HDI countries.\nAbsorption of drugs administered orally was shown to be significantly affected following abdominal surgery.\nThere is low-certainty evidence that there is no difference between using scalpel and electrosurgery in infection rates during major abdominal surgeries."}
{"id": "1304", "revid": "4904587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1304", "title": "Abduction", "text": "Abduction may refer to:"}
{"id": "1305", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1305", "title": "Abensberg", "text": "Abensberg () is a town in the Lower Bavarian district of Kelheim, in Bavaria, Germany, lying around southwest of Regensburg, east of Ingolstadt, northwest of Landshut and north of Munich. It is situated on the river Abens, a tributary of the Danube.\nGeography.\nThe town lies on the Abens river, a tributary of the Danube, around eight kilometres from the river's source. The area around Abensberg is characterized by the narrow valley of the Danube, where the Weltenburg Abbey stands, the valley of the Altm\u00fchl in the north, a left tributary of the Danube, and the famous Hallertau hops-planting region in the south. The town is divided into the municipalities of Abensberg, Arnhofen, Holzharlanden, H\u00f6rlbach, Offenstetten, Pullach and Sandharland.\nDivisions.\nSince the administrative reforms in Bavaria in the 1970s, the town also encompasses the following \"Ortsteile\":\nHistory.\nThere had been settlement on this part of the Abens river since long before the High Middle Ages, dating back to Neolithic times. Of particular interest and national importance are the Neolithic flint mines at Arnhofen, where, around 7,000 years ago, Stone Age people made flint, which was fashioned into drills, blades and arrowheads, and was regarded as the steel of the Stone Age. Traces of over 20,000 individuals were found on this site. The modern history of Abensberg, which is often incorrectly compared with that of the third century Roman castra (military outpost) of Abusina, begins with Gebhard, who was the first to mention Abensberg as a town, in the middle of the 12th century. The earliest written reference to the town, under the name of \"Habensperch\", came from this time, in around 1138. Gebhard was from the Babonen clan.\nIn 1256, the castrum of \"Abensprech\" was first mentioned, and on 12 June 1348, Margrave Ludwig of Brandenburg, and his brother, Duke Stephen of Bavaria, raised Abensberg to the status of a city, giving it the right to operate lower courts, enclose itself with a wall and hold markets. The wall was built by Count Ulrich III of Abensberg. Some of the thirty-two round towers and eight turrets are still preserved to this day.\nIn the Middle Ages, the people of Abensberg enjoyed a level of autonomy above their lord. They elected a city council, although only a small number of rich families were eligible for election.\nIn around 1390, the Carmelite Monastery of Our Lady of Abensberg was founded by Count John II and his wife, Agnes. Although Abensberg was an autonomous city, it remained dependent on the powerful Dukes of Bavaria. The last Lord of Abensberg, Niclas, Graf von Abensberg, supposedly named after his godfather, Nicholas of Kues, a Catholic cardinal, was murdered in 1485 by Christopher, a Duke of Bavaria-Munich. The year before, Niclas had unchivalrously taken Christopher captive as he bathed before a tournament in Munich. Although Christopher renounced his claim for revenge, he lay in wait for Niclas in Freising. When the latter arrived, he was killed by Seitz von Frauenberg. He is buried in the former convent of Abensberg.\nAbensberg then lost its independence and became a part of the Duchy of Bavaria, and from then on was administered by a ducal official, the so-called caretaker. The castle of Abensberg was destroyed during the Thirty Years' War, although the city had bought a guarantee of protection from the Swedish general, Carl Gustaf Wrangel. During the War of the Spanish Succession emperor Leopold I, who had occupied Bavaria, granted the fief of Abensberg to count Ernst von Abensperg und Traun (1608\u20131668) from an Austrian noble family named Traun that now received the name of the former counts of Abensberg (who were believed to be distant relatives). After the occupation ended, he was however dispossessed.\nJohannes Aventinus (1477\u20131534) is the city's most famous son, the founder of the study of history in Bavaria. Aventinus, whose name was real name is Johann or Johannes Turmair (\"Aventinus\" being the Latin name of his birthplace) wrote the \"Annals of Bavaria\", a valuable record of the early history of Germany and the first major written work on the subject. He is commemorated in the Walhalla temple, a monument near Regensburg to the distinguished figures of German history. Until 1800, Abensberg was a municipality belonging to the Straubing district of the Electorate of Bavaria. Abensberg also contained a magistrates' court. In the Battle of Abensberg on 19\u201320 April 1809, Napoleon gained a significant victory over the Austrians under Archduke Ludwig of Austria and General Johann von Hiller.\nCoat of arms.\nThe arms of the city are divided into two halves. On the left are the blue and white rhombuses of Bavaria, while the right half is split into two silver and black triangles. Two diagonally-crossed silver swords with golden handles rest on top.\nThe town has had a coat of arms since 1338, that of the Counts of Abensberg. With the death of the last Count, Nicholas of Abensberg, in 1485, the estates fell to the Duchy of Bavaria-Munich, meaning that henceforth only the Bavarian coat of arms was ever used.\nOn 31 December 1809, a decree of King Maximilian of Bavaria granted the city a new coat of arms, as a recognition of their (mainly humanitarian and logistic) services in the Battle of Abensberg the same year. The diagonally divided field in silver and black came from the old crest of the Counts of Abensberg, while the white and blue diamonds came from that of the House of Wittelsbach, the rulers of Bavaria. The swords recall the Battle of Abensberg.\nThe district of Offenstetten previously possessed its own coat of arms.\nEconomy and Infrastructure.\nThe area around Abensberg, the so-called sand belt between Siegburg, Neustadt an der Donau, Abensberg and Langquaid, is used for the intensive farming of asparagus, due to the optimal soil condition and climate. 212 hectares of land can produce ninety-four asparagus plants. Abensberg asparagus enjoys a reputation among connoisseurs as a particular delicacy. In addition to asparagus, the production of hops plays a major role locally, the region having its own label, and there are still three independent breweries in the area. The town of Abensberg marks the start of the \"Deutsche Hopfenstra\u00dfe\" (\"German Hops Road\"), a nickname given to the Bundesstra\u00dfe 301, a German federal highway which runs through the heartland of Germany's hops-growing industry, ending in Freising.\nTransport.\nThe Abensberg railway station is located on the Regensburg\u2013Ingolstadt railway from Regensburg to Ingolstadt. The city can be reached via the A-93 Holledau-Regensburg road (exit Abensberg). Three Bundesstra\u00dfe (German federal highways) cross south of Abensberg: B 16, B 299 and B 301.\nPublic facilities.\nSchools.\nAbensberg has two Grundschulen (primary school) and Mittelschule (open admission secondary school), and the Johann-Turmair-Realschule (secondary modern school). There is also a College of Agriculture and Home Economics. Since 2007, the Kelheim Berufsschule has had a campus in Abensberg, and outside the state sector is the St. Francis Vocational Training Centre, run by a Catholic youth organisation. In addition, there are two special schools, one near Abensberg, the other in the civil parish of Offenstetten.\nCulture and sightseeing.\nTheatre.\nIn 2008, a former goods shed by the main railway station of Abensberg was converted into a theatre by local volunteers. The \"Theater am Bahnhof\" (\"Theatre at the Railway Station\") is mostly used by the \"Theatergruppe Lampenfieber\" and was opened on 19 October 2008.\nMuseums.\nAbensberg has a long tradition of museums. In the nineteenth century, Nicholas Stark und Peter Paul Dollinger began a collection based on local history. This collection and the collection of the \"Heimatverein\" (local history society) were united in 1963 into the Aventinus Museum, in the cloister of the former Carmelite monastery. On 7 July 2006, the new Town Museum of Abensberg was opened in the former duke's castle in the town.\nKuchlbauer Brewery.\nTwo blocks west of the Old Town is the Kuchlbauer Brewery and beer garden featuring the Kuchlbauer Tower, a colorful and unconventional observation tower designed by Viennese architect Friedensreich Hundertwasser. The brewery and tower are open to the public.\nMissing memorial.\nUp until the 1950s, Abensberg and the surrounding villages contained a number of graves of victims of a Death March in the spring of 1945 from the Hersbruck sub-camp of the Dachau concentration camp, who were either murdered by the SS or died of exhaustion. They were originally buried where they died, but were later moved on the orders of the US military government to the cemeteries of their previous homes. At the cemetery in what is now the district of Pullach stood a memorial stone which was mentioned as recently as 1967, but which is no longer at the site. The suffering of ten unknown victims of the camp was recorded on the stone.\nSport.\nSpeedway and football.\nThe Wack Hofmeister Stadium, formerly the Altes Stadion Abensberg (the Old Stadium) is a motorcycle speedway and association football stadium located slightly east of the centre of Abensberg in Germany. It hosts the speedway team MSC Abensberg and the football team TSV Abensberg 1862."}
{"id": "1306", "revid": "35599429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1306", "title": "Arminianism", "text": "Arminianism is a movement of Protestantism initiated in the early 17th century, based on the theological ideas of the Dutch Reformed theologian Jacobus Arminius and his historic supporters known as Remonstrants. Dutch Arminianism was originally articulated in the \"Remonstrance\" (1610), a theological statement submitted to the States General of the Netherlands. This expressed an attempt to moderate the doctrines of Calvinism related to its interpretation of predestination.\nClassical Arminianism, to which Arminius is the main contributor, and Wesleyan Arminianism, to which John Wesley is the main contributor, are the two main schools of thought. Central Arminian beliefs are that God's prevenient grace, which prepares regeneration, is universal and that His grace, allowing regeneration and ongoing sanctification, is resistible.\nMany Christian denominations have been influenced by Arminian views, notably the Baptists in the 17th century, the Methodists in the 18th century, and the Pentecostals in the 20th century.\nHistory.\nPrecursor movements and theological influences.\nArminius' beliefs, i.e. Arminianism, did not begin with him. Before the Reformation, groups like the Waldensians similarly affirmed individual freedom over any predetermined predestination. Anabaptist theologian Balthasar Hubmaier (1480\u20131528) also promoted much the same view as Arminius nearly a century before him. The soteriological doctrines of Arminianism and Anabaptism are roughly equivalent. In particular, Mennonites have been historically Arminian whether they distinctly espoused the Arminian viewpoint or not, and rejected Calvinist soteriology. Anabaptist theology seems to have influenced Jacobus Arminius. At least, he was \"sympathetic to the Anabaptist point of view, and Anabaptists were commonly in attendance on his preaching.\" Similarly, Arminius mentions Danish Lutheran theologian Niels Hemmingsen (1513\u20131600) as holding the basic view of soteriology he held and he may have been influenced by Hemmingsen. Another key figure, Sebastian Castellio (1515\u20131563), who opposed Calvin's views on predestination and religious intolerance, is known to have influenced both the Mennonites and certain theologians within Arminius\u2019s circle. Early critics of Arminians even cited Castellio as a primary inspiration behind the Arminian movement.\nEmergence of Arminianism.\nJacobus Arminius (1560-1609) was a Dutch pastor and theologian. He was taught by Theodore Beza, Calvin's hand-picked successor, but after examination of the scriptures, he rejected his teacher's theology that it is God who unconditionally elects some for salvation. Instead Arminius proposed that the election of God was \"of believers\", thereby making it conditional on faith. Arminius's views were challenged by the Dutch Calvinists, especially Franciscus Gomarus.\nIn his \"Declaration of Sentiments\" (1608) Arminius presented his theology to magistrates of the States General of the Netherlands in The Hague. After his death, Arminius's followers continued to advance his theological vision, crafting the \"Five articles of Remonstrance\" (1610), in which they express their points of divergence from the stricter Calvinism of the \"Belgic Confession\". This is how Arminius's followers were called Remonstrants, and following a \"Counter Remonstrance\" in 1611, Gomarus' followers were called Counter-Remonstrants.\nAfter some political maneuvering, the Dutch Calvinists were able to convince Prince Maurice of Nassau to deal with the situation. Maurice systematically removed Arminian magistrates from office and called a national synod at Dordrecht. This Synod of Dort was open primarily to Dutch Calvinists (102 people), while the Arminians were excluded (13 people banned from voting), with Calvinist representatives from other countries (28 people), and in 1618 published a condemnation of Arminius and his followers as heretics. The Canons of Dort responded, among other topics, to Arminian doctrines, anticipating their later articulation as the Five points of Calvinism.\nArminians across Holland were removed from office, imprisoned, banished, and sworn to silence. Twelve years later, Holland officially granted Arminianism protection as a religion, although animosity between Arminians and Calvinists continued. Most of the early Remonstrants followed a classical version of Arminianism. However, some of them such as Philipp van Limborch, moved in the direction of semi-Pelagianism and rationalism.\nArminianism in the Church of England.\nIn England, the so-labelled Arminian doctrines were held, in substance, before and in parallel with those of Arminius. The Thirty-nine Articles of Religion (finalised in 1571), were sufficiently ambiguous that they were compatible with either Arminian or Calvinistic interpretations. Arminianism in the Church of England was fundamentally an expression of negation of Calvinism, and only some theologians held to classical Arminianism, but for the rest they were either semi-Pelagian or Pelagian. In this specific context, contemporary historians prefer to use the term \"proto-Arminians\" rather than \"Arminians\" to designate the leanings of those divines who generally didn't follow classical Arminianism. English Arminianism was represented by Arminian Puritans such as John Goodwin or High Anglican Arminians such as Jeremy Taylor and Henry Hammond. Anglican Arminians of the 17th century such as William Laud fought Calvinist Puritans. They actually saw Arminianism in terms of a state church, an idea that was alien to the views of Arminius. This position became particularly evident under the reign (1625\u20131649) of Charles I of England. Following the English Civil War (1642\u20131651) Charles II of England, who tolerated the Presbyterians, re-instituted Arminian thought in the Church of England. It was dominant there after the Restoration (1660) for some fifty years.\nBaptists.\nThe Baptist movement emerged in 17th-century in England. The first Baptists\u2014called \"General Baptists\" because of their confession of a \"general\" or unlimited atonement\u2014were Arminians. The Baptist movement originated with Thomas Helwys, who left his mentor John Smyth (who had moved into shared belief and other distinctives of the Dutch Waterlander Mennonites of Amsterdam) and returned to London to start the first English Baptist Church in 1611. Later General Baptists such as John Griffith, Samuel Loveday, and Thomas Grantham defended a Reformed Arminian theology that reflected the Arminianism of Arminius. The General Baptists encapsulated their Arminian views in numerous confessions, the most influential of which was the Standard Confession of 1660. In the 1640s the Particular Baptists were formed, diverging from Arminian doctrine and embracing the strong Calvinism of the Presbyterians and Independents. Their robust Calvinism was publicized in such confessions as the London Baptist Confession of 1644 and the Second London Confession of 1689. The London Confession of 1689 was later used by Calvinistic Baptists in America (called the Philadelphia Baptist Confession), whereas the Standard Confession of 1660 was used by the American heirs of the English General Baptists, who soon came to be known as Free Will Baptists.\nMethodists.\nIn the Methodist-Calvinist controversy of the early 1770s involving Anglican ministers John Wesley and George Whitefield, Wesley responded to accusations of semi-Pelagianism by embracing an Arminian identity. Wesley had limited familiarity with the beliefs of Arminius and largely formulated his views without direct reliance on Arminius' teachings. Wesley was notably influenced by 17th-century English Arminianism and by some Remonstrant spokesmen. However, he is recognized as a faithful representative of Arminius' beliefs. Wesley defended his soteriology through the publication of a periodical titled \"The Arminian\" (1778) and in articles such as \"Predestination Calmly Considered\". To support his stance, he strongly maintained belief in total depravity while clarifying other doctrines notably prevenient grace. At the same time, Wesley attacked the determinism that he claimed characterized Calvinist doctrines of predestination. He typically preached the notion of Christian perfection (fully mature, not \"sinlessness\"). His system of thought has become known as Wesleyan Arminianism, the foundations of which were laid by him and his fellow preacher John William Fletcher. Methodism also navigated its own theological intricacies concerning salvation and human agency. In the 1830s, during the Second Great Awakening, traces of Pelagian influence surfaced in the American Holiness Movement. Consequently, critics of Wesleyan theology have occasionally unfairly perceived or labeled its broader thought. However, its core is recognized to be Arminianism.\nPentecostals.\nPentecostalism has its background in the activity of Charles Parham (1873\u20131929). Its origin as a movement was in the Azusa Street Revival in Los Angeles in 1906. This revival was led by William J. Seymour (1870\u20131922). Due to the Methodist and Holiness background of many early Pentecostal preachers, the Pentecostal churches usually possessed practices that arose from the Wesleyan Arminianism. During the 20th century, as Pentecostal churches began to settle and incorporate more standard forms, they started to formulate theology that was fully Arminian. Today, Pentecostal denominations such as the Assemblies of God hold to Arminian views such as resistible grace, conditional election, and conditional security of the believer.\nCurrent landscape.\nProtestant denominations.\nAdvocates of Arminianism find a home in many Protestant denominations, and sometimes other beliefs such as Calvinism exist within the same denomination. The Lutheran theological tradition bears certain similarities to Arminianism and there may be some Lutheran churches that are open to it. Newer Evangelical Anglican denominations also show a level of openness to Arminian theology. Anabaptist denominations, such as the Mennonites, Hutterites, Amish and Schwarzenau Brethren, adhere to Anabaptist theology, which espouses a soteriology that is similar to Arminianism \"in some respects\". Arminianism is found within the General Baptists, including the subset of General Baptists known as Free Will Baptists. The majority of Southern Baptists embrace a traditionalist form of Arminianism which includes a belief in eternal security, though many see Calvinism as growing in acceptance. Certain proponents of Arminianism may be found within the Restoration movement in the Christian Churches and Churches of Christ. Additionally, it is found in the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Arminianism (specifically Wesleyan\u2013Arminian theology) is taught in the Methodist churches, inclusive of those denominations aligned with the holiness movement such as the Evangelical Methodist Church, Church of the Nazarene, the Free Methodist Church, the Wesleyan Church, and the Salvation Army. It is also found in a part of the Charismatics, including the Pentecostals.\nScholarly support.\nArminian theology has found support among theologians, Bible scholars, and apologists spanning various historical periods and theological circles. Noteworthy historical figures include Jacobus Arminius, Simon Episcopius, Hugo Grotius, John Goodwin, Thomas Grantham, John Wesley, Richard Watson, Thomas Osmond Summers, John Miley, William Burt Pope and Henry Orton Wiley.\nIn contemporary Baptist traditions, advocates of Arminian theology include Roger E. Olson, F. Leroy Forlines, Robert Picirilli and J. Matthew Pinson. Within the Methodist tradition, prominent supporters encompass Thomas Oden, Ben Witherington III, David Pawson, B. J. Oropeza, Thomas H. McCall and Fred Sanders. The Holiness movement boasts theologians like Carl O. Bangs and J. Kenneth Grider. Furthermore, scholars such as Keith D. Stanglin, Craig S. Keener and Grant R. Osborne also support Arminian perspectives.\nTheology.\nTheological legacy.\nThe Pelagian-Augustinian framework can serve as a key paradigm for understanding the theological and historical legacy of Arminianism. Before Augustine (354\u2013430), the synergistic view of salvation was almost universally endorsed. Pelagius (c. 354\u2013418), however, argued that humans could perfectly obey God by their own will. The Pelagian view is therefore referred to as \"humanistic monergism\". This view was condemned at the Council of Carthage (418) and Ephesus (431). In response, Augustine proposed a view in which God is the ultimate cause of all human actions, a stance that aligns with soft determinism. The Augustinian view is therefore referred to as \"divine monergism\". However, Augustinian soteriology implied double predestination, which was condemned by the Council of Arles (475).\nDuring this period, a moderate form of Pelagianism emerged, later termed Semi-Pelagianism. This view asserted that human will initiates salvation, rather than divine grace. The Semi-Pelagian view is therefore described as \"human-initiated synergism\". In 529, the Second Council of Orange addressed Semi-Pelagianism and declared that even the inception of faith is a result of God\u2019s grace. This highlights the role of prevenient grace enabling human belief. This view, often referred to as \"Semi-Augustinian,\" is therefore described as \"God-initiated synergism\". The Council also rejected predestination to evil. As Arminianism aligns with key aspects of this view, it is seen by some as a return to early church theological consensus. Moreover, Arminianism can also be seen as a soteriological diversification of Calvinism or more specifically, as a theological middle ground between Calvinism and semi-Pelagianism.\nArminian theology generally divides into two main variations: Classical Arminianism, based on the teachings of Jacobus Arminius, and Wesleyan Arminianism, a closely related variation shaped primarily by John Wesley.\nClassical Arminianism.\nDefinition and terminology.\nClassical Arminianism is a protestant theological view, that asserts God's prevenient grace for regeneration is universal and that the grace allowing regeneration and ongoing sanctification is resistible. This theological system was presented by Jacobus Arminius and maintained by some of the Remonstrants, such as Simon Episcopius and Hugo Grotius. \nArminian theology incorporates the language and framework of covenant theology. Its core teachings are summarized in the \"Five Articles of Remonstrance\", reflecting Arminius\u2019s views, with some sections directly from his \"Declaration of Sentiments\". Some theologians have referred to this system as \"classical Arminianism\". Others prefer \"Reformation Arminianism\" or \"Reformed Arminianism\", as Arminius upheld the principles of Reformation such as \"Sola fide\" and \"Sola gratia\".\nGod's providence and human free will.\nArminianism accepts classical theism, which states that God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient. In that view, God's power, knowledge, and presence have no external limitations, that is, outside of his divine nature and character.\nBesides, Arminianism view on God's sovereignty is based on postulates stemming from God's character. On the first hand, divine election must be defined in such a way that God is not in any case, and even in a secondary way, the author of evil. It would not correspond to the character of God, especially as fully revealed in Jesus Christ. On the other hand, man's responsibility for evil must be preserved. Those two postulates require a specific way by which God chooses to manifest his sovereignty when interacting with his creatures.\nOn one hand, it requires for God to operate according to a limited mode of providence. This means that God deliberately exercises sovereignty without determining every event. On the other hand, it requires for God's election to be a \"predestination by foreknowledge\". Therefore, God's foreknowledge is exhaustive and complete, aligning his certainty with human freedom of action.\nPhilosophical view on free will.\nArminianism is aligned with classical free-will theism, adopting an incompatibilist position. It asserts that the free will essential for moral responsibility is inherently incompatible with determinism. In Arminian theology, human beings possess libertarian free will, making them the ultimate source of their choices and granting them the ability to choose otherwise. This philosophical framework upholds the concept of divine providence, allowing God's influence and supervision over creation. However, it permits the idea of God's absolute control over human actions, as long as such control does not involve human responsibility.\nSpiritual view on free will.\nArminianism holds that without the assistance of divine grace, human free will is incapable of choosing the spiritual good. Humans are therefore in a state of total depravity, possessing a corrupted spiritual nature inherited from original sin. Like Augustine, Luther, and Calvin, Arminius agreed that human free will is spiritually captive and enslaved. However, through the action of prevenient grace, human free will can be \"freed\", meaning it can be restored with the ability to choose the spiritual good, particularly the capacity to accept God's call to salvation.\nExtent and nature of the atonement.\nAtonement is intended universally: Jesus's death was for all people, Jesus draws all people to himself, with the opportunity for salvation through faith.\nJesus's death satisfies God's justice: The penalty for the sins of the elect is paid in full through the crucifixion of Christ. Thus Christ's death atones for the sins of all, but requires faith to be effected. Arminius states that \"Justification, when used for the act of a Judge, is either purely the imputation of righteousness through mercy [...] or that man is justified before God [...] according to the rigor of justice without any forgiveness.\" Justification, therefore, is seen through mercy by the imputation of righteousness. While not rigidly defined, this view suggests that the righteousness of Christ is attributed to believers, emphasizing that union with Christ (conditioned on faith) transfers his righteousness to them.\nChrist's atonement has a substitutionary effect which is limited only to the elect. Arminius held that God's justice was satisfied by penal substitution. Hugo Grotius taught that it was satisfied governmentally. Historical and contemporary Arminians have held to one of these views.\nConversion of man.\nIn Arminianism, God initiates the process of salvation by extending his grace, commonly referred to as \"prevenient\" grace, to all people. This grace works within each individual, drawing them toward the Gospel and enabling sincere faith, leading to regeneration. It functions through a dynamic influence-and-response relationship, allowing individuals to freely accept or reject it. Thus, conversion is described as a \"God-initiated synergism.\"\nElection of man.\nElection is conditional: Arminius defined \"election\" as \"the decree of God by which, of Himself, from eternity, He decreed to justify in Christ, believers, and to accept them unto eternal life.\" God alone determines who will be saved and his determination is that all who believe Jesus through faith will be justified. According to Arminius, \"God regards no one in Christ unless they are engrafted in him by faith.\"\nGod predestines the elect to a glorious future: Predestination is not the predetermination of who will believe, but rather the predetermination of the believer's future inheritance. The elect are therefore predestined to sonship through adoption, glorification, and eternal life.\nPreservation of man.\nRelated to eschatological considerations, Jacobus Arminius and the first Remonstrants, including Simon Episcopius believed in everlasting fire where the wicked are thrown by God at judgment day.\nPreservation is conditional: All believers have full assurance of salvation with the condition that they remain in Christ. Salvation is conditioned on faith, therefore perseverance is also conditioned. Arminius believed the Scriptures taught that believers are graciously empowered by Christ and the Holy Spirit \"to fight against Satan, sin, the world and their own flesh, and to gain the victory over these enemies.\" Furthermore, Christ and the Spirit are ever present to aid and assist believers through various temptations. But this security was not unconditional but conditional\u2014\"provided they [believers] stand prepared for the battle, implore his help, and be not wanting to themselves, Christ preserves them from falling.\"\nPossibility of apostasy.\nArminius believed in the possibility of apostasy. However, over the period of time he wrote on this question, he sometimes expressed himself more cautiously out of consideration for the faith of his readers. In 1599, he stated that the question required more scriptural examination. In his \"Declaration of Sentiments\" (1607), Arminius said, \"I never taught that a true believer can, either totally or finally fall away from the faith, and perish; yet I will not conceal, that there are passages of scripture which seem to me to wear this aspect.\"\nHowever, elsewhere Arminius expressed certainty about the possibility of falling away: In c. 1602, he noted that a person integrated into the church might resist God's work and that a believer's security rested solely in their choice not to abandon their faith. He argued that God's covenant did not eliminate the possibility of falling away but provided a gift of fear to keep individuals from defecting, as long as it thrived in their hearts. He then taught that had David died in sin, he would have been lost. In 1602, Arminius also wrote: \"A believing member of Christ may become slothful, give place to sin, and gradually die altogether, ceasing to be a member\".\nFor Arminius, a certain class of sin would cause a believer to fall, especially sin motivated by malice. In 1605 Arminius wrote: \u201cBut it is possible for a believer to fall into a mortal sin, as is seen in David. Therefore, he can fall at that moment in which if he were to die, he would be condemned\". Scholars observe that Arminius clearly identifies two paths to apostasy 1. \"rejection\", or 2. \"malicious sinning\". He suggested that, strictly speaking, believers could not directly lose their faith but could cease to believe and thus fall away.\nAfter the death of Arminius in 1609, his followers wrote a \"Remonstrance\" (1610) based quite literally on his \"Declaration of Sentiments\" (1607) which expressed prudence on the possibility of apostasy. In particular, its fifth article expressed the necessity of further study on the possibility of apostasy. Sometime between 1610 and the official proceeding of the Synod of Dort (1618), the Remonstrants became fully persuaded in their minds that the Scriptures taught that a true believer was capable of falling away from faith and perishing eternally as an unbeliever. They formalized their views in \"The Opinion of the Remonstrants\" (1618) which was their official stand during the Synod of Dort. They later expressed this same view in the \"Remonstrant Confession\" (1621).\nForgivability of apostasy.\nArminius maintained that if the apostasy came from \"malicious\" sin, then it was forgivable. If it came from \"rejection\" it was not. Following Arminius, the Remonstrants believed that, though possible, apostasy was not in general irremediable. However, other classical Arminians, including the Free Will Baptists, have taught that apostasy is irremediable.\nWesleyan Arminianism.\nDistinctive aspect.\nJohn Wesley thoroughly agreed with the vast majority of what Arminius himself taught. Wesleyan Arminianism is a merger of classical Arminianism and Wesleyan perfectionism.\nNature of the atonement.\nWesley\u2019s view of atonement is either understood as a hybrid of penal substitution and the governmental theory, or it is viewed solely as penal substitution. Historically, Wesleyan Arminians adopted either the penal or governmental theory of atonement.\nJustification and sanctification.\nIn Wesleyan theology, justification is understood as the forgiveness of sins rather than being made inherently righteous. Righteousness is achieved through sanctification, which involves the pursuit of holiness in one's life. Wesley taught that imputed righteousness, which refers to the righteousness credited to a believer through faith, must transform into imparted righteousness, where this righteousness becomes evident in the believer\u2019s life. \nChristian perfection.\nWesley taught that through the Holy Spirit, Christians can achieve a state of practical perfection, or \"entire sanctification\", characterized by a lack of voluntary sin. This state involves embodying the love of God and neighbor. It does not mean freedom from all mistakes or temptations, as perfected Christians still need to seek forgiveness and strive for holiness. Ultimately, perfection in this context is about love, not absolute perfection.\nPreservation and apostasy of man.\nWesley believed that genuine Christians could apostatize. He emphasized that sin alone does not lead to this loss; instead, prolonged unconfessed sin and deliberate apostasy can result in a permanent fall from grace. However, he believed that such apostasy was not irremediable.\nCorporate election variation.\nThe majority Arminian view is that election is individual and based on God's foreknowledge of faith. In the corporate election view, God chose the believing church collectively for salvation, rather than selecting individuals. Jesus is seen as the only person elected, and individuals join the elect through faith \"in Christ\". This view is supported by Old Testament and Jewish concepts, where identity is rooted more in group membership than individuality.\nArminianism and other views.\nDivergence with Pelagianism.\nPelagianism is a doctrine denying original sin and total depravity. No system of Arminianism founded on Arminius or Wesley denies original sin or total depravity; both Arminius and Wesley \"strongly\" affirmed that man's basic condition is one in which he cannot be righteous, understand God, or seek God. Arminius referred to Pelagianism as \"the grand falsehood\" and stated that he \"must confess that I detest, from my heart, the consequences [of that theology].\" This association is considered as libelous when attributed to Arminius' or Wesley's doctrine, and Arminians reject all accusations of Pelagianism.\nDivergence with Semi-Pelagianism.\nSemi-Pelagianism holds that faith begins with human will, while its continuation and fulfillment depend on God's grace, giving it the label \"human-initiated synergism\". In contrast, both Classical and Wesleyan Arminianism affirm that prevenient grace from God initiates the process of salvation, a view sometimes referred to as \"Semi-Augustinian\", or \"God-initiated synergism\". Following the Reformation, Reformed theologians often categorized both \"human-initiated synergism\" and \"God-initiated synergism\" as \"Semi-Pelagianism\", often leading to mistaken belief that Arminianism aligned with Semi-Pelagianism.\nDivergence with Calvinism.\nCalvinism and Arminianism, while sharing historical roots and many theological doctrines, diverge notably on the concepts of divine predestination and election. While some perceive these differences as fundamental, others regard them as relatively minor distinctions within the broader spectrum of Christian theology.\nDivergence with open theism.\nThe doctrine of open theism states that God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient, but differs on the nature of the future. Open theists claim that the future is not completely determined (or \"settled\") because people have not made their free decisions yet. God therefore knows the future partially in possibilities (human free actions) rather than solely certainties (divinely determined events). Some Arminians, reject open theism, viewing it as a distortion of traditional Arminianism. They believe it shifts away from classical Arminianism toward process theology. Others view it as a valid alternative perspective within Christianity, despite not aligning it with Arminian doctrine."}
{"id": "1307", "revid": "1272076115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1307", "title": "The Alan Parsons Project", "text": "The Alan Parsons Project were a British rock band formed in London in 1975. Its core membership consisted of producer, audio engineer, musician and composer Alan Parsons, and singer, songwriter and pianist Eric Woolfson. They shared writing credits on almost all of their songs, with Parsons producing or co-producing all of the recordings, while being accompanied by various session musicians, some relatively consistent.\nThe Alan Parsons Project released eleven studio albums over a 15-year career, the most successful ones being \"I Robot\" (1977), \"The Turn of a Friendly Card\" (1980) and \"Eye in the Sky\" (1982). Many of their albums are conceptual in nature and focus on science fiction, supernatural, literary and sociological themes. Among the group's most popular songs are \"I Wouldn't Want to Be Like You\", \"Games People Play\", \"Time\", \"Sirius\", \"Eye in the Sky\", and \"Don't Answer Me\".\nCareer.\n1974\u20131976: Formation and debut.\nAlan Parsons met Eric Woolfson in the canteen of Abbey Road Studios in the summer of 1974. Parsons was assistant engineer on the Beatles' albums \"Abbey Road\" (1969) and \"Let It Be\" (1970), engineered Pink Floyd's \"The Dark Side of the Moon\" (1973), and produced several acts for EMI Records. Woolfson, a songwriter and composer, was working as a session pianist while composing material for a concept album based on the work of Edgar Allan Poe.\nWoolfson's idea was to manage Alan and help his already successful production career. It was the start of a longstanding friendly business relationship. He managed Parsons's career as a producer and engineer through a string of successes, including Pilot, Steve Harley, Cockney Rebel, John Miles, Al Stewart, Ambrosia, and the Hollies. Woolfson came up with the idea of making an album based on developments in the film industry\u2014the focal point of the films' promotion shifted from film stars to directors such as Alfred Hitchcock and Stanley Kubrick. If the film industry was becoming a director's medium, Woolfson felt the music business might well become a producer's medium.\nRecalling his earlier Edgar Allan Poe material, Woolfson saw a way to combine his and Parsons's talents. Parsons produced and engineered songs written and composed by the two, and the first Alan Parsons Project was begun. The Project's first album, \"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976), released by 20th Century Fox Records and including major contributions by all members of Pilot and Ambrosia, was a success, reaching the Top 40 in the US \"Billboard\" 200 chart. The song \"The Raven\" featured lead vocals by the actor Leonard Whiting. According to the 2007 re-mastered album liner notes, this was the first rock song to use a vocoder, with Alan Parsons speaking lyrics through it, although others such as Bruce Haack pioneered this field in the previous decade.\n1977\u20131990: Mainstream success and final releases.\nArista Records then signed the Alan Parsons Project for further albums. Through the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Project's popularity continued to grow. The Project was always more popular in North America, Ibero-America, and Continental Europe than in Parsons' home country, never achieving a UK Top 40 single or Top 20 album. The singles \"I Wouldn't Want to Be Like You\", \"Games People Play\", \"Damned If I Do\", \"Time\" (the first single to feature Woolfson's lead vocal) and \"Eye in the Sky\" had a notable impact on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. \"Don't Answer Me\" became the Project's last successful single in the United States; it reached the top 15 on the American charts in 1984.\nAfter those successes, the Project began to fade from view. There were fewer hit singles, and declining album sales. 1987's \"Gaudi\" was the Project's final release, though it had planned to record an album called \"Freudiana\" (1990) next.\nThe musical \"Freudiana\".\nEven though the studio version of \"Freudiana\" was produced by Parsons (and featured the regular Project session musicians, making it an 'unofficial' Project album), it was primarily Woolfson's idea to turn it into a musical. While Parsons pursued his own solo career and took many session players of the Project on the road for the first time in a successful worldwide tour, Woolfson went on to produce musical plays influenced by the Project's music. \"Freudiana\", \"Gaudi\", and \"Gambler\" were three musicals that included some Project songs like \"Eye in the Sky\", \"Time\", \"Inside Looking Out\", and \"Limelight\". The live music from \"Gambler\" was only distributed at the performance site in M\u00f6nchengladbach, Germany.\n\"The Sicilian Defence\".\nIn 1979, Parsons, Woolfson, and their record label Arista, had been stalled in contract renegotiations when the two submitted an all-instrumental album tentatively titled \"The Sicilian Defence\", named after an aggressive opening move in chess. Arista's refusal to release the album had two known effects: the negotiations led to a renewed contract, and the album was not released at that time.\nIn interviews he gave before his death in 2009, Woolfson said he planned to release one track from the \"Sicilian\" album, which in 2008 appeared as a bonus track on a CD re-issue of the \"Eve\" album. Sometime later, after he had relocated the original tapes, Parsons reluctantly agreed to release the album and announced that it would finally be released on an upcoming Project box set called \"The Complete Albums Collection\" in 2014 for the first time as a bonus disc.\nParsons's and Woolfson's solo careers.\nParsons released titles under his name: \"Try Anything Once\" (1993), \"On Air\" (1996), \"The Time Machine\" (1999), \"A Valid Path\" (2004), \"The Secret\" (2019) and \"From the New World\" (2022). Meanwhile, Woolfson made concept albums titled \"Freudiana\" (1990), about Sigmund Freud's work on psychology, and \"\" (2003), continuing from the Alan Parsons Project's first album about Poe literature.\n\"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976) was re-mixed in 1987 for release on CD, and included narration by Orson Welles recorded in 1975, but delivered too late to be included on the original album. For the 2007 deluxe edition release, parts of this tape were used for the 1976 Griffith Park Planetarium launch of the original album, the 1987 remix, and various radio spots. All were included as bonus material.\nSound.\nThe band's sound is described as progressive rock, art rock, progressive pop, and soft rock. \"Sirius\" is their best-known and most-frequently heard of all Parsons/Woolfson songs. It was used as entrance music by various American sports teams, notably by the Chicago Bulls during their 1990s NBA dynasty. It was also used as the entrance theme for Ricky Steamboat in pro wrestling of the mid-1980s. In addition, \"Sirius\" is played in a variety of TV shows and movies including the BBC series Record Breakers, the episode \"Vanishing Act\" of \"\" and the 2009 film \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\".\nVocal duties were shared by guests to complement each song. In later years, Woolfson sang lead on many of the group's hits, including \"Time\", \"Eye in the Sky\", and \"Don't Answer Me\". The record company pressured Parsons to use Woolfson more, but Parsons preferred to use polished proficient singers; Woolfson admitted he was not in that category. In addition to Woolfson, vocalists Chris Rainbow, Lenny Zakatek, John Miles, David Paton, and Colin Blunstone are regulars. Other singers, such as Arthur Brown, Steve Harley, Gary Brooker, Dave Terry a.k.a. Elmer Gantry, Vitamin Z's Geoff Barradale, and Marmalade's Dean Ford, recorded only once or twice with the Project. Parsons sang lead on one song (\"The Raven\") through a vocoder and backing on a few others, including \"To One in Paradise\". Both of those songs appeared on \"Tales of Mystery and Imagination\" (1976). Parsons also sings a prominent counter melody on \"Time\".\nA variety of session musicians worked with the Alan Parsons Project regularly, contributing to the recognizable style of a song despite the varied singer line-up. With Parsons and Woolfson, the studio band consisted of the group Pilot, with Ian Bairnson (guitar), David Paton (bass) and Stuart Tosh (drums). Pilot's keyboardist Billy Lyall contributed. From \"Pyramid\" (1978) onward, Tosh was replaced by Stuart Elliott of Cockney Rebel. Bairnson played on all albums, and Paton stayed almost until the end. Andrew Powell appeared as arranger of orchestra (and often choirs) on all albums except \"Vulture Culture\" (1985); he was composing the score of Richard Donner's film \"Ladyhawke\" (1985). This score was partly in the APP style, recorded by most of the APP regulars, and produced and engineered by Parsons. Powell composed some material for the first two Project albums. For \"Vulture Culture\" and later, Richard Cottle played as a regular contributor on synthesizers and saxophone.\nThe Alan Parsons Project played live only once under that name during its original incarnation because Woolfson and Parsons held the roles of writing and production, and because of the technical difficulties of re-producing on stage the complex instrumentation used in the studio. In the 1990s, musical production evolved with the technology of digital samplers. The one occasion the band was introduced as 'the Alan Parsons Project' in a live performance was at The Night of the Proms in October 1990. The concerts featured all Project regulars except Woolfson, present behind the scenes, while Parsons stayed at the mixer except for the last song, when he played acoustic guitar.\nSince 1993, Alan Parsons continues to perform live as the Alan Parsons Live Project to be distinct from the Alan Parsons Project. The current line up consists of lead singer P.J. Olsson, guitarist Jeffrey Kollman, drummer Danny Thompson, keyboardist Tom Brooks, bass guitarist Guy Erez, vocalist and saxophonist Todd Cooper, and guitarist and vocalist Dan Tracey. In 2013, Alan Parsons Live Project played in Colombia with a full choir and orchestra (the Medellin Philharmonic) as 'Alan Parsons Symphonic Project'. A 2-CD live set and a DVD version of this concert were released in May 2016.\nIn popular culture.\nIn \"\" (1999), Dr. Evil devised a plan to turn the moon into a \"Death Star\" using a \"laser\" invented by Dr. Alan Parsons. He called this \"The Alan Parsons Project\".\nThe opening theme song for the Chicago Bulls has been the song Sirius since 1984."}
{"id": "1309", "revid": "47719762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1309", "title": "Almost all", "text": "In mathematics, the term \"almost all\" means \"all but a negligible quantity\". More precisely, if formula_1 is a set, \"almost all elements of formula_1\" means \"all elements of formula_1 but those in a negligible subset of formula_1\". The meaning of \"negligible\" depends on the mathematical context; for instance, it can mean finite, countable, or null.\nIn contrast, \"almost no\" means \"a negligible quantity\"; that is, \"almost no elements of formula_1\" means \"a negligible quantity of elements of formula_1\".\nMeanings in different areas of mathematics.\nPrevalent meaning.\nThroughout mathematics, \"almost all\" is sometimes used to mean \"all (elements of an infinite set) except for finitely many\". This use occurs in philosophy as well. Similarly, \"almost all\" can mean \"all (elements of an uncountable set) except for countably many\".\nExamples:\nMeaning in measure theory.\nWhen speaking about the reals, sometimes \"almost all\" can mean \"all reals except for a null set\". Similarly, if S is some set of reals, \"almost all numbers in S\" can mean \"all numbers in S except for those in a null set\". The real line can be thought of as a one-dimensional Euclidean space. In the more general case of an n-dimensional space (where n is a positive integer), these definitions can be generalised to \"all points except for those in a null set\" or \"all points in S except for those in a null set\" (this time, S is a set of points in the space). Even more generally, \"almost all\" is sometimes used in the sense of \"almost everywhere\" in measure theory, or in the closely related sense of \"almost surely\" in probability theory.\nExamples:\nMeaning in number theory.\nIn number theory, \"almost all positive integers\" can mean \"the positive integers in a set whose natural density is 1\". That is, if A is a set of positive integers, and if the proportion of positive integers in \"A\" below n (out of all positive integers below n) tends to 1 as n tends to infinity, then almost all positive integers are in A. \nMore generally, let S be an infinite set of positive integers, such as the set of even positive numbers or the set of primes, if A is a subset of S, and if the proportion of elements of S below n that are in A (out of all elements of S below n) tends to 1 as n tends to infinity, then it can be said that almost all elements of S are in A.\nExamples:\nMeaning in graph theory.\nIn graph theory, if A is a set of (finite labelled) graphs, it can be said to contain almost all graphs, if the proportion of graphs with n vertices that are in A tends to 1 as n tends to infinity. However, it is sometimes easier to work with probabilities, so the definition is reformulated as follows. The proportion of graphs with n vertices that are in A equals the probability that a random graph with n vertices (chosen with the uniform distribution) is in A, and choosing a graph in this way has the same outcome as generating a graph by flipping a coin for each pair of vertices to decide whether to connect them. Therefore, equivalently to the preceding definition, the set \"A\" contains almost all graphs if the probability that a coin-flip\u2013generated graph with n vertices is in A tends to 1 as n tends to infinity. Sometimes, the latter definition is modified so that the graph is chosen randomly in some other way, where not all graphs with n vertices have the same probability, and those modified definitions are not always equivalent to the main one.\nThe use of the term \"almost all\" in graph theory is not standard; the term \"asymptotically almost surely\" is more commonly used for this concept.\nExample:\nMeaning in topology.\nIn topology and especially dynamical systems theory (including applications in economics), \"almost all\" of a topological space's points can mean \"all of the space's points except for those in a meagre set\". Some use a more limited definition, where a subset contains almost all of the space's points only if it contains some open dense set.\nExample:\nMeaning in algebra.\nIn abstract algebra and mathematical logic, if U is an on a set X, \"almost all elements of X\" sometimes means \"the elements of some \"element\" of U\". For any partition of X into two disjoint sets, one of them will necessarily contain almost all elements of X. It is possible to think of the elements of a filter on X as containing almost all elements of X, even if it isn't an ultrafilter."}
{"id": "1311", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1311", "title": "Ada Byron's notes on the analytical engine", "text": ""}
{"id": "1312", "revid": "5655867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1312", "title": "Augustine", "text": ""}
{"id": "1313", "revid": "44310991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1313", "title": "Aromatic compound", "text": "Aromatic compounds or arenes are organic compounds \"with a chemistry typified by benzene\" and \"cyclically conjugated.\"\nThe word \"aromatic\" originates from the past grouping of molecules based on odor, before their general chemical properties were understood. The current definition of aromatic compounds does not have any relation to their odor. Aromatic compounds are now defined as cyclic compounds satisfying H\u00fcckel's Rule.\nAromatic compounds have the following general properties:\nArenes are typically split into two categories - benzoids, that contain a benzene derivative and follow the benzene ring model, and non-benzoids that contain other aromatic cyclic derivatives. Aromatic compounds are commonly used in organic synthesis and are involved in many reaction types, following both additions and removals, as well as saturation and dearomatization.\nHeteroarenes.\nHeteroarenes are aromatic compounds, where at least one methine or vinylene (-C= or -CH=CH-) group is replaced by a heteroatom: oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur. Examples of non-benzene compounds with aromatic properties are furan, a heterocyclic compound with a five-membered ring that includes a single oxygen atom, and pyridine, a heterocyclic compound with a six-membered ring containing one nitrogen atom. Hydrocarbons without an aromatic ring are called aliphatic. Approximately half of compounds known in 2000 are described as aromatic to some extent.\nApplications.\nAromatic compounds are pervasive in nature and industry. Key industrial aromatic hydrocarbons are benzene, toluene, xylene called BTX. Many biomolecules have phenyl groups including the so-called aromatic amino acids.\nBenzene ring model.\nBenzene, C6H6, is the least complex aromatic hydrocarbon, and it was the first one defined as such. Its bonding nature was first recognized independently by Joseph Loschmidt and August Kekul\u00e9 in the 19th century. Each carbon atom in the hexagonal cycle has four electrons to share. One electron forms a sigma bond with the hydrogen atom, and one is used in covalently bonding to each of the two neighboring carbons. This leaves six electrons, shared equally around the ring in delocalized pi molecular orbitals the size of the ring itself. This represents the equivalent nature of the six carbon-carbon bonds all of bond order 1.5. This equivalency can also explained by resonance forms. The electrons are visualized as floating above and below the ring, with the electromagnetic fields they generate acting to keep the ring flat.\nThe circle symbol for aromaticity was introduced by Sir Robert Robinson and his student James Armit in 1925 and popularized starting in 1959 by the Morrison &amp; Boyd textbook on organic chemistry. The proper use of the symbol is debated: some publications use it to \"any\" cyclic \u03c0 system, while others use it only for those \u03c0 systems that obey H\u00fcckel's rule. Some argue that, in order to stay in line with Robinson's originally intended proposal, the use of the circle symbol should be limited to monocyclic 6 \u03c0-electron systems. In this way the circle symbol for a six-center six-electron bond can be compared to the Y symbol for a three-center two-electron bond.\nBenzene and derivatives of benzene.\nBenzene derivatives have from one to six substituents attached to the central benzene core. Examples of benzene compounds with just one substituent are phenol, which carries a hydroxyl group, and toluene with a methyl group. When there is more than one substituent present on the ring, their spatial relationship becomes important for which the arene substitution patterns \"ortho\", \"meta\", and \"para\" are devised. When reacting to form more complex benzene derivatives, the substituents on a benzene ring can be described as either activated or deactivated, which are electron donating and electron withdrawing respectively. Activators are known as ortho-para directors, and deactivators are known as meta directors. Upon reacting, substituents will be added at the ortho, para or meta positions, depending on the directivity of the current substituents to make more complex benzene derivatives, often with several isomers. Electron flow leading to re-aromatization is key in ensuring the stability of such products.\nFor example, three isomers exist for cresol because the methyl group and the hydroxyl group (both ortho para directors) can be placed next to each other (\"ortho\"), one position removed from each other (\"meta\"), or two positions removed from each other (\"para\"). Given that both the methyl and hydroxyl group are ortho-para directors, the ortho and para isomers are typically favoured. Xylenol has two methyl groups in addition to the hydroxyl group, and, for this structure, 6 isomers exist.\nArene rings can stabilize charges, as seen in, for example, phenol (C6H5\u2013OH), which is acidic at the hydroxyl (OH), as charge on the oxygen (alkoxide \u2013O\u2212) is partially delocalized into the benzene ring.\nNon-benzylic arenes.\nAlthough benzylic arenes are common, non-benzylic compounds are also exceedingly important. Any compound containing a cyclic portion that conforms to H\u00fcckel's rule and is not a benzene derivative can be considered a non-benzylic aromatic compound.\nMonocyclic arenes.\nOf annulenes larger than benzene, [12]annulene and [14]annulene are weakly aromatic compounds and [18]annulene, Cyclooctadecanonaene, is aromatic, though strain within the structure causes a slight deviation from the precisely planar structure necessary for aromatic categorization. Another example of a non-benzylic monocyclic arene is the cyclopropenyl (cyclopropenium cation), which satisfies H\u00fcckel's rule with an n equal to 0. Note, only the cationic form of this cyclic propenyl is aromatic, given that neutrality in this compound would violate either the octet rule or H\u00fcckel's rule.\nOther non-benzylic monocyclic arenes include the aforementioned heteroarenes that can replace carbon atoms with other heteroatoms such as N, O or S. Common examples of these are the six-membered pyrrole and five-membered pyridine, both of which have a substituted nitrogen\nPolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.\nPolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, also known as polynuclear aromatic compounds (PAHs) are aromatic hydrocarbons that consist of fused aromatic rings and do not contain heteroatoms or carry substituents. Naphthalene is the simplest example of a PAH. PAHs occur in oil, coal, and tar deposits, and are produced as byproducts of fuel burning (whether fossil fuel or biomass). As pollutants, they are of concern because some compounds have been identified as carcinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic. PAHs are also found in cooked foods. Studies have shown that high levels of PAHs are found, for example, in meat cooked at high temperatures such as grilling or barbecuing, and in smoked fish. They are also a good candidate molecule to act as a basis for the earliest forms of life. In graphene the PAH motif is extended to large 2D sheets.\nReactions.\nAromatic ring systems participate in many organic reactions.\nSubstitution.\nIn aromatic substitution, one substituent on the arene ring, usually hydrogen, is replaced by another reagent. The two main types are electrophilic aromatic substitution, when the active reagent is an electrophile, and nucleophilic aromatic substitution, when the reagent is a nucleophile. In radical-nucleophilic aromatic substitution, the active reagent is a radical.\nAn example of electrophilic aromatic substitution is the nitration of salicylic acid, where a nitro group is added para to the hydroxide substituent:\nNucleophilic aromatic substitution involves displacement of a leaving group, such as a halide, on an aromatic ring. Aromatic rings usually nucleophilic, but in the presence of electron-withdrawing groups aromatic compounds undergo nucleophilic substitution. Mechanistically, this reaction differs from a common SN2 reaction, because it occurs at a trigonal carbon atom (sp2 hybridization).\nHydrogenation.\nHydrogenation of arenes create saturated rings. The compound 1-naphthol is completely reduced to a mixture of decalin-ol isomers.\nThe compound resorcinol, hydrogenated with Raney nickel in presence of aqueous sodium hydroxide forms an enolate which is alkylated with methyl iodide to 2-methyl-1,3-cyclohexandione:\nDearomatization.\nIn dearomatization reactions the aromaticity of the reactant is lost. In this regard, the dearomatization is related to hydrogenation. A classic approach is Birch reduction. The methodology is used in synthesis."}
{"id": "1315", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1315", "title": "Abbey", "text": "An abbey is a type of monastery used by members of a religious order under the governance of an abbot or abbess. Abbeys provide a complex of buildings and land for religious activities, work, and housing of Christian monks and nuns.\nThe concept of the abbey has developed over many centuries from the early monastic ways of religious men and women where they would live isolated from the lay community about them. Religious life in an abbey may be monastic. An abbey may be the home of an enclosed religious order or may be open to visitors. The layout of the church and associated buildings of an abbey often follows a set plan determined by the founding religious order.\nAbbeys are often self-sufficient while using any abundance of produce or skill to provide care to the poor and needy, refuge to the persecuted, or education to the young. Some abbeys offer accommodation to people who are seeking spiritual retreat. There are many famous abbeys across the Mediterranean Basin and Europe.\nMonastic origins of the abbey.\nAscetics and anchorites.\nThe earliest known Christian monasteries were groups of huts built near the residence of a famous ascetic or other holy person. Disciples wished to be close to their holy man or woman in order to study their doctrine or imitate their way of life.\nIn the earliest times of Christian monasticism, ascetics would live in social isolation but near a village church. They would subsist whilst donating any excess produce to the poor. However, increasing religious fervor about the ascetic's ways and or persecution of them would drive them further away from their community and further into solitude. For instance, the cells and huts of anchorites (religious recluses) have been found in the deserts of Egypt.\nIn 312 AD, Anthony the Great retired to the Thebaid region of Egypt to escape the persecution of the Emperor Maximian. Anthony was the best known of the anchorites of his time due to his degree of austerity, sanctity and his powers of exorcism. The deeper he withdrew into the wilderness, the more numerous his disciples became. They refused to be separated from him and built their cells close to him. This became a first true monastic community. According to August Neander, Anthony inadvertently became the founder of a new mode of living in common, Coenobitism.\nLaurae and Coenobia.\nAt Tabennae on the Nile, in Upper Egypt, Saint Pachomius laid the foundations for the coenobitical life by arranging everything in an organized manner. He built several monasteries, each with about 1,600 separate cells laid out in lines. These cells formed an encampment where the monks slept and performed some of their manual tasks. There were nearby large halls such as the church, refectory, kitchen, infirmary, and guest house for the monk's common needs. An enclosure protecting all these buildings gave the settlement the appearance of a walled village. This layout, known as the \"laurae\" (lanes), became popular throughout Israel.\nAs well as the \"laurae\", communities known as \"caenobia\" developed. These were monasteries where monks lived a common life together. The monks were not permitted to retire to the cells of a laurae before they had undergone a lengthy period of training. In time, this form of common life superseded that of the older laurae.\nIn the late 300s AD, Palladius visited the Egyptian monasteries. He described three hundred members of the coenobium of Panopolis. There were fifteen tailors, seven smiths, four carpenters, twelve camel-drivers and fifteen tanners. These people were divided into subgroups, each with its own \"oeconomus\". A chief steward was at the head of the monastery.\nThe produce of the monastery was brought to Alexandria for sale. The moneys raised were used to purchase stores for the monastery or were given away as charity. Twice in the year, the superiors of several coenobia met at the chief monastery, under the presidency of an \"archimandrite\" (the \"chief of the fold\" from the word, \"miandra\" (a sheepfold)) in order to make their reports. Chrysostom recorded the workings of a coenobia in the vicinity of Antioch in Syria. The monks lived in separate huts (\"kalbbia\") which formed a religious hamlet on the mountainside. They were subject to an abbot, and observed a common rule.\nGreat Lavra, Mount Athos.\nThe layout of the monastic coenobium was influenced by a number of factors. These included a need for defence, economy of space, and convenience of access. The layout of buildings became compact and orderly. Larger buildings were erected and defence was provided by strong outside walls. Within the walls, the buildings were arranged around one or more open courts surrounded by cloisters. The usual arrangement for monasteries of the Eastern world is exemplified in the plan of the convent of the Great Lavra at Mount Athos.\nWith reference to the diagram, right, the convent of the Great Lavra is enclosed within a strong and lofty blank stone wall. The area within the wall is between three and four acres (12,000 and 16,000\u00a0m2). The longer side is about in length. There is only one entrance, which is located on the north side (A), defended by three iron doors. Near the entrance is a large tower (M), a constant feature in the monasteries of the Levant (Eastern Mediterranean area). There is a small postern gate at L.\nThe enceinte comprises two large open courts, surrounded with buildings connected with cloister galleries of wood or stone. The outer court, which is the larger by far, contains the granaries and storehouses (K), the kitchen (H) and other offices connected with the refectory (G). Immediately adjacent to the gateway is a two-storied guest-house, entered from a cloister (C). The inner court is surrounded by a cloister (EE) from which one enters the monks' cells (II).\nIn the centre of this court stands the katholikon or conventual church, a square building with an apse of the cruciform domical Byzantine type, approached by a domed narthex. In front of the church stands a marble fountain (F), covered by a dome supported on columns.\nOpening from the western side of the cloister, but actually standing in the outer court, is the refectory (G), a large cruciform (cross shaped) building, about square, decorated within with frescoes of saints. At the upper end is a semicircular recess, similar to the triclinium of the Lateran Palace in Rome, in which is placed the seat of the hegumenos or abbot. This apartment is chiefly used as a meeting place, with the monks usually taking their meals in their separate cells.\nAdoption of the Roman villa plan.\nMonasticism in the West began with the activities of Benedict of Nursia (born 480 AD). Near Nursia, a town in Perugia, Italy, a first abbey was established at Monte Cassino (529 AD). Between 520 and 700 AD, monasteries were built which were spacious and splendid. All the city states of Italy hosted a Benedictine convent as did the cities of England, France and Spain. By 1415 AD, the time of the Council of Constance, 15,070 Benedictine monasteries had been established.\nThe early Benedictine monasteries, including the first at Monte Cassino, were constructed on the plan of the Roman villa. The layout of the Roman villa was quite consistent throughout the Roman Empire and where possible, the monks reused available villas in sound repair. This was done at Monte Cassino.\nHowever, over time, changes to the common villa lay out occurred. The monks required buildings which suited their religious and day-to-day activities. No overriding specification was demanded of the monks but the similarity of their needs resulted in uniformity of design of abbeys across Europe. Eventually, the buildings of a Benedictine abbey were built in a uniform lay out, modified where necessary, to accommodate local circumstances.\nAbbey of St Gall.\nThe plan of the Abbey of Saint Gall (719 AD) in what is now Switzerland indicates the general arrangement of a Benedictine monastery of its day. According to the architect Robert Willis (architect) (1800\u20131875) the Abbey's lay out is that of a town of individual houses with streets running between them. The abbey was planned in compliance with the Benedictine rule that, if possible, a monastery should be self-contained. For instance, there was a mill, a bakehouse, stables, and cattle stalls. In all, there were thirty-three separate structures; mostly one level wooden buildings.\nThe Abbey church occupied the centre of a quadrangular area, about square. On the eastern side of the north transept of the church was the \"scriptorium\" or writing-room, with a library above.\nThe church and nearby buildings ranged about the cloister, a court about which there was a covered arcade which allowed sheltered movement between the buildings. The nave of the church was on the north boundary of the cloister.\nOn the east side of the cloister, on the ground floor, was the \"pisalis\" or \"calefactory\". This was a common room, warmed by flues beneath the floor. Above the common room was the dormitory. The dormitory opened onto the cloister and also onto the south transept of the church. This enabled the monks to attend nocturnal services. A passage at the other end of the dormitory lead to the \"necessarium\" (latrines).\nOn the south side of the cloister was the refectory. The kitchen, at the west end of the refectory was accessed via an anteroom and a long passage. Nearby were the bake house, brew house and the sleeping-rooms of the servants. The upper story of the refectory was called the \"vestiarium\" (a room where the ordinary clothes of the monks were stored).\nOn the western side of the cloister was another two-story building with a cellar on the ground floor and the larder and store-room on the upper floor. Between this building and the church was a parlour for receiving visitors. One door of the parlour led to the cloisters and the other led to the outer part of the Abbey.\nAgainst the outer wall of the church was a school and headmaster's house. The school consisted of a large schoolroom divided in the middle by a screen or partition, and surrounded by fourteen little rooms, the \"dwellings of the scholars\". The abbot's home was near the school.\nTo the north of the church and to the right of the main entrance to the Abbey, was a residence for distinguished guests. To the left of the main entrance was a building to house poor travellers and pilgrims. There was also a building to receive visiting monks. These \"hospitia\" had a large common room or refectory surrounded by bed rooms. Each hospitium had its own brewhouse and bakehouse, and the building for more prestigious travellers had a kitchen and storeroom, with bedrooms for the guests' servants and stables for their horses. The monks of the Abbey lived in a house built against the north wall of the church.\nThe whole of the southern and western areas of the Abbey were devoted to workshops, stables and farm-buildings including stables, ox-sheds, goatstables, piggeries, and sheep-folds, as well as the servants' and labourers' quarters.\nIn the eastern part of the Abbey there was a group of buildings representing in layout, two complete miniature monasteries. That is, each had a covered cloister surrounded by the usual buildings such as the church, the refectory, the dormitory and so on. A detached building belonging to each contained a bathroom and a kitchen.\nOne of the miniature complexes was called the \"oblati\". These were the buildings for the novices. The other complex was a hospital or infirmary for the care of sick monks. This infirmary complex included a physician's residence, a physic garden, a drug store, and a chamber for the critically ill. There was also a room for bloodletting and purging. The physic garden occupied the north east corner of the Abbey.\nIn the southernmost area of the abbey was the workshop containing utilities for shoemakers, saddlers (or shoemakers, sellarii), cutlers and grinders, trencher-makers, tanners, curriers, fullers, smiths and goldsmiths. The tradesmen's living quarters were at the rear of the workshop. Here, there were also farm buildings, a large granary and threshing-floor, mills, and malthouse. At the south-east corner of the Abbey were hen and duck houses, a poultry-yard, and the dwelling of the keeper. Nearby was the kitchen garden which complemented the physic garden and a cemetery orchard.\nEvery large monastery had priories. A priory was a smaller structure or entities which depended on the monastery. Some were small monasteries accommodating five or ten monks. Others were no more than a single building serving as residence or a farm offices. The outlying farming establishments belonging to the monastic foundations were known as \"villae\" or \"granges\". They were usually staffed by lay-brothers, sometimes under the supervision of a monk.\nBenedictine abbeys in England.\nMany of today's cathedrals in England were originally Benedictine monasteries. These included Canterbury, Chester, Durham, Ely, Gloucester, Norwich, Peterborough, Rochester, Winchester, and Worcester. Shrewsbury Abbey in Shropshire was founded as a Benedictine monastery by the Normans in 1083.\nWestminster Abbey.\nWestminster Abbey was founded in the tenth century by Saint Dunstan who established a community of Benedictine monks. The only traces of St Dunstan's monastery remaining are round arches and massive supporting columns of the undercroft and the Pyx Chamber.\nThe cloister and buildings lie directly to the south of the church. Parallel to the nave, on the south side of the cloister, was a refectory, with a lavatory at the door. On the eastern side, there was a dormitory, raised on a vaulted substructure and communicating with the south transept and a chapter house (meeting room). A small cloister lay to the south-east of the large cloister. Beyond that was an infirmary with a table hall and a refectory for those who were able to leave their chambers. At the west entrance to the Abbey, there was a house and a small courtyard for the abbot. \nSt Mary's Abbey, York.\nIn 1055, St Mary's Abbey, York was built in England's north by the Order of Saint Benedict. It followed the common plan. The entrance to the abbey was through a strong gate on the northern side. Close to the entrance was a chapel. This was for visitors arriving at the Abbey to make their devotions. Near the gate was the \"hospitium\" (guest hall). The buildings are completely ruined, but the walls of the nave and the cloisters are still visible on the grounds of the Yorkshire Museum.\nThe Abbey was surrounded by fortified walls on three sides. The River Ouse bordered the fourth side. The stone walls remain as an excellent example of English abbey walls.\nReforms at the Abbey of Cluny.\nThe Abbey of Cluny was founded by William I, Duke of Aquitaine in 910 AD at Cluny, Sa\u00f4ne-et-Loire, France. The Abbey was built in the Romanesque style. The Abbey was noted for its strict observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict. However, reforms resulted in many departures from this precedent. The Cluniac Reforms brought focus to the traditions of monastic life, encouraging art and the caring of the poor. The reforms quickly spread by the founding of new abbey complexes and by adoption of the reforms by existing abbeys. By the twelfth century, the Abbey of Cluny was the head of an order consisting of 314 monasteries.\nThe church at the Abbey was commenced in 1089 AD by Hugh of Cluny, the sixth abbot. It was finished and consecrated by Pope Innocent II around 1132 AD. The church was regarded as one of the wonders of the Middle Ages. At in length, it was the largest church in Christendom until the completion of St Peter's Basilica at Rome. The church consisted of five naves, a narthex (ante-church) which was added in 1220 AD, and several towers. Together with the conventual buildings, it covered an area of twenty-five acres.\nIn the Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution in 1790 AD, the Abbey church was bought by the town and almost entirely destroyed. As of 2025, however, fragments of the original Abbey still stand and archaeological excavations have intermittently been conducted over the past century, yielding a massively important and rich source of information.\nEnglish Cluniac houses.\nThe first English house of the Cluniac order was built at Lewes, Sussex. It was founded by William de Warenne, 1st Earl of Surrey in about 1077 AD. All but one of the Cluniac houses in Britain were known as priories, symbolizing their subordination to the Abbot of Cluny. All the Cluniac houses in England and Scotland were French colonies, governed by French priors who travelled to the Abbey of Cluny to consult or be consulted (unless the abbot of Cluny chose to come to Britain, which happened rarely). The priory at Paisley was an exception. In 1245 AD it was raised to the status of an abbey, answerable only to the Pope.\nAbbeys of the Augustinian Canons.\nThe Augustinian (or \"Austin\") canons were an order of regular clergy within the hierarchy of the Catholic church. They held a position between monks and secular canons. They were known as \"Black canons\" because of the colour of their habits. In 1105 AD, the first house of the order was established at St Botolph's Priory, Colchester, Essex.\nThe canons built very long naves to accommodate large congregations. The choirs were also long. Sometimes, as at Llanthony Priory and Christchurch, Dorset (Twynham), the choir was closed from the aisles. At other abbeys of the order, such as Bolton Abbey or Kirkham Priory, there were no aisles. The nave in the northern houses of the order often had only a north aisle (this is the case at Bolton, Brinkburn Priory and Lanercost Priory). The arrangement of the monastic buildings followed the ordinary plan. The prior's lodge was usually attached to the southwest angle of the nave.\nThe Austin canons' house at Thornton, Lincolnshire had a large and magnificent gatehouse. The upper floors of the gatehouse formed the guest-house. The chapter-house was octagonal in shape.\nAugustinian abbeys.\nPremonstratensians (Norbertians).\nThe Premonstratensian regular canons, or \"White canons\", were of an order founded in 1119 AD by Norbert of Xanten. The order was a reformed branch of the Augustinian canons. From a marshy area in the Forest of Coucy in the diocese of Laon, the order spread widely. Even in Norbert's lifetime, the order had built abbeys in Aleppo, Syria, and in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Of the Abbey of Saint Samuel, Denys Pringle wrote, \"The Premonstatensian abbey of Saint Samuel was a daughter house of Pr\u00e9montr\u00e9 itself. Its abbot had the status of a suffragan of the patriarch of Jerusalem, with the right to a cross, but not to a mitre nor a ring.\" It long maintained its rigid austerity, though in later years the abbey grew wealthier, and its members indulged in more frequent luxuries.\nJust after 1140 AD, the Premonstratensians were brought to England. Their first settlement was at Newhouse Abbey, Lincolnshire, near the Humber tidal estuary. There were as many as thirty-five Premonstratensian abbeys in England. The head abbey in England was at Welbeck Abbey but the best preserved are Easby Abbey in Yorkshire, and Bayham Old Abbey in Kent.\nThe layout of Easby Abbey is irregular due to its position on the edge of a steep river bank. The cloister is duly placed on the south side of the church, and the chief buildings occupy their usual positions around it. However, the cloister garth (quadrangle), as at Chichester, is not rectangular, and thus, all the surrounding buildings are positioned in an awkward fashion. The church follows the plan adopted by the Austin canons in their northern abbeys, and has only one aisle to the north of the nave, while the choir is long, narrow and without an aisle. Each transept has an aisle to the east, forming three chapels.\nThe church at Bayham Old Abbey had no aisles in the nave or the choir. The latter terminated in a three-sided apse. The church is remarkable for its extreme narrowness in proportion to its length. While the building is long, it is not more than wide. Premonstratensian canons did not care to have congregations nor possessions. Therefore, they built their churches in the shape of a long room.\nCistercian abbeys.\nThe Cistercians, a Benedictine reform group, were established at C\u00eeteaux in 1098 AD by Robert of Molesme, Abbot of Molesme, for the purpose of restoring, as far as possible, the literal observance of the Rule of Saint Benedict. La Fert\u00e9, Pontigny, Clairvaux, and Morimond were the first four abbeys to follow C\u00eeteaux's example and others followed. The monks of C\u00eeteaux created the well known vineyards of Clos-Vougeot and Roman\u00e9e in Burgundy.\nThe Cistercian principle of rigid self-abnegation carried over to the design of the order's churches and buildings. The defining architectural characteristic of the Cistercian abbeys was extreme simplicity and plainness. Only a single, central tower was permitted, and that was usually very low. Unnecessary pinnacles and turrets were prohibited. The triforium was omitted. The windows were usually plain and undivided, and it was forbidden to decorate them with stained glass. All needless ornament was proscribed. The crosses were made of wood and the candlesticks of iron.\nThe same principle governed the choice of site for Cistercian abbeys in that a most dismal site might be improved by the building of an abbey. The Cistercian monasteries were founded in deep, well-watered valleys, always standing at a stream's edge. The building might extend over the water as is the case at Fountains Abbey. These valleys, now rich and productive, had a very different appearance when the brethren first chose them as their place of retreat. Wide swamps, deep morasses, tangled thickets, and wild, impassable forests were their prevailing features. Clara Vallis of St Bernard, now the \"bright valley\" was originally, the \"Valley of Wormwood\". It was an infamous den of robbers.\nCopts.\nThe plan of a Coptic Orthodox monastery, from Lenoir, shows a church of three aisles, with cellular apses, and two ranges of cells on either side of an oblong gallery."}
{"id": "1316", "revid": "15996738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1316", "title": "Annales school", "text": "The \"Annales\" school () is a group of historians associated with a style of historiography developed by French historians in the 20th century to stress long-term social history. It is named after its scholarly journal \"Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales\", which remains the main source of scholarship, along with many books and monographs. The school has been influential in setting the agenda for historiography in France and numerous other countries, especially regarding the use of social scientific methods by historians, emphasizing social and economic rather than political or diplomatic themes.\nThe school deals primarily with late medieval and early modern Europe (before the French Revolution), with little interest in later topics. It has dominated French social history and heavily influenced historiography in Europe and Latin America. Prominent leaders include co-founders Lucien Febvre (1878\u20131956), Henri Hauser (1866\u20131946) and Marc Bloch (1886\u20131944). The second generation was led by Fernand Braudel (1902\u20131985) and included Georges Duby (1919\u20131996), Pierre Goubert (1915\u20132012), Robert Mandrou (1921\u20131984), Pierre Chaunu (1923\u20132009), Jacques Le Goff (1924\u20132014), and Ernest Labrousse (1895\u20131988). Institutionally it is based on the \"Annales\" journal, the SEVPEN publishing house, the (FMSH), and especially the 6th Section of the \u00c9cole pratique des hautes \u00e9tudes, all based in Paris. A third generation was led by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (1929\u20132023) and includes Jacques Revel, and Philippe Ari\u00e8s (1914\u20131984), who joined the group in 1978. The third generation stressed history from the point of view of mentalities, or . The fourth generation of \"Annales\" historians, led by Roger Chartier (born 1945), clearly distanced itself from the approach, replaced by the cultural and linguistic turn, which emphasizes the social history of cultural practices.\nThe main scholarly outlet has been the journal (\"Annals of Economic and Social History\"), founded in 1929 by Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch, which broke radically with traditional historiography by insisting on the importance of taking all levels of society into consideration and emphasized the collective nature of mentalities. Its contributors viewed events as less fundamental than the mental frameworks that shaped decisions and practices. However, informal successor as head of the school was Le Roy Ladurie. Multiple responses were attempted by the school. Scholars moved in multiple directions, covering in disconnected fashion the social, economic, and cultural history of different eras and different parts of the globe. By the time of the crisis the school was building a vast publishing and research network reaching across France, Europe, and the rest of the world. Influence spread out from Paris, but few new ideas came in. Much emphasis was given to quantitative data, seen as the key to unlocking all of social history. However, the \"Annales\" ignored the developments in quantitative studies underway in the U.S. and Britain, which reshaped economic, political, and demographic research. An attempt to require an \"Annales\"-written textbook for French schools was rejected by the government. By 1980 postmodern sensibilities undercut confidence in overarching metanarratives. As Jacques Revel notes, the success of the \"Annales\" school, especially its use of social structures as explanatory forces, contained the seeds of its own downfall, for there is \"no longer any implicit consensus on which to base the unity of the social, identified with the real\". The \"Annales\" school kept its infrastructure, but lost its .\nThe journal.\nThe journal began in Strasbourg as ; it moved to Paris and kept the same name from 1929 to 1939. It was successively renamed (1939\u20131942, 1945), (1942\u20131944), (1946\u20131994), and (1994\u2013 ).\nIn 1962, Braudel and Gaston Berger used Ford Foundation money and government funds to create a new independent foundation, the (FMSH), which Braudel directed from 1970 until his death. In 1970, the 6th Section and the \"Annales\" relocated to the FMSH building. FMSH set up elaborate international networks to spread the \"Annales\" gospel across Europe and the world. In 2013, it began publication of an English language edition, with all the articles translated.\nThe scope of topics covered by the journal is vast and experimental\u2014there is a search for total history and new approaches. The emphasis is on social history, and very long-term trends, often using quantification and paying special attention to geography and to the intellectual world view of common people, or \"mentality\" (). Little attention is paid to political, diplomatic, or military history, or to biographies of famous men. Instead the \"Annales\" focused attention on the synthesizing of historical patterns identified from social, economic, and cultural history, statistics, medical reports, family studies, and even psychoanalysis.\nOrigins.\nThe \"Annales\" was founded and edited by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre in 1929, while they were teaching at the University of Strasbourg and later in Paris. These authors, the former a medieval historian and the latter an early modernist, quickly became associated with the distinctive \"Annales\" approach, which combined geography, history, and the sociological approaches of the (many members of which were their colleagues at Strasbourg) to produce an approach which rejected the predominant emphasis on politics, diplomacy and war of many 19th and early 20th-century historians as spearheaded by historians whom Febvre called Les Sorbonnistes. Instead, they pioneered an approach to a study of long-term historical structures () over events and political transformations. Geography, material culture, and what later Annalistes called , or the psychology of the epoch, are also characteristic areas of study. The goal of the Annales was to undo the work of the Sorbonnistes, to turn French historians away from the narrowly political and diplomatic toward the new vistas in social and economic history.\nCo-founder Marc Bloch (1886\u20131944) was a quintessential modernist who studied at the elite \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, and in Germany, serving as a professor at the University of Strasbourg until he was called to the Sorbonne in Paris in 1936 as professor of economic history. Bloch's interests were highly interdisciplinary, influenced by the geography of Paul Vidal de la Blache (1845\u20131918) and the sociology of \u00c9mile Durkheim (1858\u20131917). His own ideas, especially those expressed in his masterworks, \"French Rural History\" (, 1931) and \"Feudal Society\", were incorporated by the second-generation Annalistes, led by Fernand Braudel.\nPrecepts.\nGeorges Duby, a leader of the school, wrote that the history he taught:\nThe Annalistes, especially Lucien Febvre, advocated a , or , a complete study of a historic problem.\nPostwar.\nBloch was shot by the Gestapo during the German occupation of France in World War II for his active membership of the French Resistance, and Febvre carried on the \"Annales\" approach in the 1940s and 1950s. It was during this time that he mentored Braudel, who would become one of the best-known exponents of this school. Braudel's work came to define a \"second\" era of \"Annales\" historiography and was influential throughout the 1960s and 1970s, especially for his work on the Mediterranean region in the era of Philip II of Spain. \nBraudel developed the idea, often associated with Annalistes, of different modes of historical time: (the quasi motionless history) of historical geography, the history of social, political and economic structures (), and the history of men and events, in the context of their structures.\nWhile authors such as Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Marc Ferro and Jacques Le Goff continue to carry the \"Annales\" banner, today the \"Annales\" approach has been less distinctive as more and more historians do work in cultural history, political history and economic history.\nBloch's (1924) looked at the long-standing folk belief that the king could cure scrofula by his thaumaturgic touch. The kings of France and England indeed regularly practiced the ritual. Bloch was not concerned with the effectiveness of the royal touch\u2014he acted instead like an anthropologist in asking why people believed it and how it shaped relations between king and commoner. The book was highly influential in introducing comparative studies (in this case France and England), as well as long durations (\"longue dur\u00e9e\") studies spanning several centuries, even up to a thousand years, downplaying short-term events. Bloch's revolutionary charting of mentalities, or , resonated with scholars who were reading Freud and Proust. In the 1960s, Robert Mandrou and Georges Duby harmonized the concept of history with Fernand Braudel's structures of historical time and linked mentalities with changing social conditions. A flood of studies based on these approaches appeared during the 1970s and 1980s. By the 1990s, however, history had become interdisciplinary to the point of fragmentation, but still lacked a solid theoretical basis. While not explicitly rejecting history, younger historians increasingly turned to other approaches.\nBraudel.\nFernand Braudel became the leader of the second generation after 1945. He obtained funding from the Rockefeller Foundation in New York and founded the 6th Section of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, which was devoted to the study of history and the social sciences. It became an independent degree-granting institution in 1975 under the name \u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes en Sciences Sociales (EHESS). Braudel's followers admired his use of the approach to stress slow, and often imperceptible effects of space, climate and technology on the actions of human beings in the past. The \"Annales\" historians, after living through two world wars and incredible political upheavals in France, were deeply uncomfortable with the notion that multiple ruptures and discontinuities created history. They preferred to stress inertia and the longue dur\u00e9e. Special attention was paid to geography, climate, and demography as long-term factors. They believed the continuities of the deepest structures were central to history, beside which upheavals in institutions or the superstructure of social life were of little significance, for history lies beyond the reach of conscious actors, especially the will of revolutionaries. They rejected the Marxist idea that history should be used as a tool to foment and foster revolutions. In turn the Marxists called them conservatives.\nBraudel's first book, (1949) (\"The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II\") was his most influential. This vast panoramic view used ideas from other social sciences, employed effectively the technique of the longue dur\u00e9e, and downplayed the importance of specific events and individuals. It stressed geography but not . It was widely admired, but most historians did not try to replicate it and instead focused on their specialized monographs. The book dramatically raised the worldwide profile of the Annales School.\nIn 1951, historian Bernard Bailyn published a critique of , which he framed as dichotomizing politics and society.\nRegionalism.\nBefore \"Annales\", French history supposedly happened in Paris. Febvre broke decisively with this paradigm in 1912, with his sweeping doctoral thesis on . The geography and social structure of this region overwhelmed and shaped the king's policies.\nThe \"Annales\" historians did not try to replicate Braudel's vast geographical scope in . Instead they focused on regions in France over long stretches of time. The most important was the study of \"The Peasants of Languedoc\" by Braudel's star pupil and successor Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The regionalist tradition flourished especially in the 1960s and 1970s in the work of Pierre Goubert in 1960 on Beauvais and Ren\u00e9 Baehrel on Basse-Provence. \"Annales\" historians in the 1970s and 1980s turned to urban regions, including Pierre Deyon (Amiens), Maurice Garden (Lyon), Jean-Pierre Bardet (Rouen), Georges Freche (Toulouse), Gregory Hanlon (Agen and Layrac), and Jean-Claude Perrot (Caen). By the 1970s the shift was underway from the earlier economic history to cultural history and the history of mentalities.\nImpact outside France.\nThe \"Annales\" school systematically reached out to create an impact on other countries. Its success varied widely. The \"Annales\" approach was especially well received in Italy and Poland. Franciszek Bujak (1875\u20131953) and Jan Rutkowski (1886\u20131949), the founders of modern economic history in Poland and of the journal (1931\u2013 ), were attracted to the innovations of the Annales school. Rutkowski was in contact with Bloch and others, and published in the \"Annales\". After the Communists took control in the 1940s Polish scholars were safer working on the Middle Ages and the early modern era rather than contemporary history. After the \"Polish October\" of 1956 the Sixth Section in Paris welcomed Polish historians and exchanges between the circle of the \"Annales\" and Polish scholars continued until the early 1980s. The reciprocal influence between the French school and Polish historiography was particularly evident in studies on the Middle Ages and the early modern era studied by Braudel.\nIn South America the \"Annales\" approach became popular. From the 1950s Federico Brito Figueroa was the founder of a new Venezuelan historiography based largely on the ideas of the Annales School. Brito Figueroa carried his conception of the field to all levels of university study, emphasizing a systematic and scientific approach to history and placing it squarely in the social sciences. Spanish historiography was influenced by the \"Annales School\" starting in 1950 with Jaume Vicens Vives (1910\u20131960). In Mexico, exiled Republican intellectuals extended the Annales approach, particularly from the Center for Historical Studies of El Colegio de M\u00e9xico, the leading graduate studies institution of Latin America.\nBritish historians, apart from a few Marxists, were generally hostile. Academic historians decidedly sided with Geoffrey Elton's \"The Practice of History\" against Edward Hallett Carr's \"What Is History?\" One of the few British historians who were sympathetic towards the work of the \"Annales\" school was Hugh Trevor-Roper. Among American academics, founding figure in American history of technology Lynn White Jr. dedicated his seminal and controversial book \"Medieval Technology and Social Change\" to \"Annales\" founder Marc Bloch. Both the American and the \"Annales\" historians picked up important family reconstitution techniques from French demographer Louis Henry.\nThe Wageningen school centered on Bernard Slicher van Bath was viewed internationally as a Dutch counterpart of the Annales school, although Slicher van Bath himself vehemently rejected the idea of a quantitative \"school\" of historiography.\nThe \"Annales\" school has been cited as a key influence in the development of World Systems Theory by sociologist Immanuel Wallerstein.\nCurrent.\nThe current leader is Roger Chartier, who is Directeur d'\u00c9tudes at the \u00c9cole des Hautes \u00c9tudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris, Professeur in the Coll\u00e8ge de France, and Annenberg Visiting professor of history at the University of Pennsylvania. He frequently lectures and teaches in the United States, Spain, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina. His work in Early Modern European History focuses on the history of education, the history of the book and the history of reading. Recently, he has been concerned with the relationship between written culture as a whole and literature (particularly theatrical plays) for France, England and Spain. His work in this specific field (based on the criss-crossing between literary criticism, bibliography, and sociocultural history) is connected to broader historiographical and methodological interests which deal with the relation between history and other disciplines: philosophy, sociology, anthropology.\nChartier's typical undergraduate course focuses upon the making, remaking, dissemination, and reading of texts in early modern Europe and America. Under the heading of \"practices\", his class considers how readers read and marked up their books, forms of note-taking, and the interrelation between reading and writing from copying and translating to composing new texts. Under the heading of \"materials\", his class examines the relations between different kinds of writing surfaces (including stone, wax, parchment, paper, walls, textiles, the body, and the heart), writing implements (including styluses, pens, pencils, needles, and brushes), and material forms (including scrolls, erasable tables, codices, broadsides and printed forms and books). Under the heading of \"places\", his class explores where texts were made, read, and listened to, including monasteries, schools and universities, offices of the state, the shops of merchants and booksellers, printing houses, theaters, libraries, studies, and closets. The texts for his course include the \"Bible\", translations of Ovid, \"Hamlet\", \"Don Quixote\", Montaigne's essays, Pepys's diary, Richardson's \"Pamela\", and Franklin's autobiography."}
{"id": "1317", "revid": "48846972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1317", "title": "Antimatter", "text": "In modern physics, antimatter is defined as matter composed of the antiparticles (or \"partners\") of the corresponding particles in \"ordinary\" matter, and can be thought of as matter with reversed charge, parity, and time, known as CPT reversal. Antimatter occurs in natural processes like cosmic ray collisions and some types of radioactive decay, but only a tiny fraction of these have successfully been bound together in experiments to form antiatoms. Minuscule numbers of antiparticles can be generated at particle accelerators, but total artificial production has been only a few nanograms. No macroscopic amount of antimatter has ever been assembled due to the extreme cost and difficulty of production and handling. Nonetheless, antimatter is an essential component of widely available applications related to beta decay, such as positron emission tomography, radiation therapy, and industrial imaging.\nIn theory, a particle and its antiparticle (for example, a proton and an antiproton) have the same mass, but opposite electric charge, and other differences in quantum numbers.\nA collision between any particle and its anti-particle partner leads to their mutual annihilation, giving rise to various proportions of intense photons (gamma rays), neutrinos, and sometimes less-massive particleantiparticle pairs. The majority of the total energy of annihilation emerges in the form of ionizing radiation. If surrounding matter is present, the energy content of this radiation will be absorbed and converted into other forms of energy, such as heat or light. The amount of energy released is usually proportional to the total mass of the collided matter and antimatter, in accordance with the notable mass\u2013energy equivalence equation, .\nAntiparticles bind with each other to form antimatter, just as ordinary particles bind to form normal matter. For example, a positron (the antiparticle of the electron) and an antiproton (the antiparticle of the proton) can form an antihydrogen atom. The nuclei of antihelium have been artificially produced, albeit with difficulty, and are the most complex anti-nuclei so far observed. Physical principles indicate that complex antimatter atomic nuclei are possible, as well as anti-atoms corresponding to the known chemical elements.\nThere is strong evidence that the observable universe is composed almost entirely of ordinary matter, as opposed to an equal mixture of matter and antimatter. This asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the visible universe is one of the great unsolved problems in physics. The process by which this inequality between matter and antimatter particles is hypothesised to have occurred is called baryogenesis.\nDefinitions.\nAntimatter particles carry the same charge as matter particles, but of opposite sign. That is, an antiproton is negatively charged and an antielectron (positron) is positively charged. Neutrons do not carry a net charge, but their constituent quarks do. Protons and neutrons have a baryon number of +1, while antiprotons and antineutrons have a baryon number of \u20131. Similarly, electrons have a lepton number of +1, while that of positrons is \u20131. When a particle and its corresponding antiparticle collide, they are both converted into energy.\nThe French term for \"made of or pertaining to antimatter\", , led to the initialism \"C.T.\" and the science fiction term , as used in such novels as \"Seetee Ship\".\nConceptual history.\nThe idea of negative matter appears in past theories of matter that have now been abandoned. Using the once popular vortex theory of gravity, the possibility of matter with negative gravity was discussed by William Hicks in the 1880s. Between the 1880s and the 1890s, Karl Pearson proposed the existence of \"squirts\" and sinks of the flow of aether. The squirts represented normal matter and the sinks represented negative matter. Pearson's theory required a fourth dimension for the aether to flow from and into.\nThe term antimatter was first used by Arthur Schuster in two rather whimsical letters to \"Nature\" in 1898, in which he coined the term. He hypothesized antiatoms, as well as whole antimatter solar systems, and discussed the possibility of matter and antimatter annihilating each other. Schuster's ideas were not a serious theoretical proposal, merely speculation, and like the previous ideas, differed from the modern concept of antimatter in that it possessed negative gravity.\nThe modern theory of antimatter began in 1928, with a paper by Paul Dirac. Dirac realised that his relativistic version of the Schr\u00f6dinger wave equation for electrons predicted the possibility of antielectrons. Although Dirac had laid the groundwork for the existence of these \u201cantielectrons\u201d he initially failed to pick up on the implications contained within his own equation. He freely gave the credit for that insight to J. Robert Oppenheimer, whose seminal paper \u201cOn the Theory of Electrons and Protons\u201d (Feb 14th 1930) drew on Dirac's equation and argued for the existence of a positively charged electron (a positron), which as a counterpart to the electron should have the same mass as the electron itself. This meant that it could not be, as Dirac had in fact suggested, a proton. Dirac further postulated the existence of antimatter in a 1931 paper which referred to the positron as an \"anti-electron\". These were discovered by Carl D. Anderson in 1932 and named positrons from \"positive electron\". Although Dirac did not himself use the term antimatter, its use follows on naturally enough from antielectrons, antiprotons, etc. A complete periodic table of antimatter was envisaged by Charles Janet in 1929.\nThe Feynman\u2013Stueckelberg interpretation states that antimatter and antiparticles behave exactly identical to regular particles, but traveling backward in time. This concept is nowadays used in modern particle physics, in Feynman diagrams.\nNotation.\nOne way to denote an antiparticle is by adding a bar over the particle's symbol. For example, the proton and antiproton are denoted as and , respectively. The same rule applies if one were to address a particle by its constituent components. A proton is made up of quarks, so an antiproton must therefore be formed from antiquarks. Another convention is to distinguish particles by positive and negative electric charge. Thus, the electron and positron are denoted simply as and respectively. To prevent confusion, however, the two conventions are never mixed.\nProperties.\nThere is no difference in the gravitational behavior of matter and antimatter. In other words, antimatter falls down when dropped, not up. This was confirmed with the thin, very cold gas of thousands of antihydrogen atoms that were confined in a vertical shaft surrounded by superconducting electromagnetic coils. These can create a magnetic bottle to keep the antimatter from coming into contact with matter and annihilating. The researchers then gradually weakened the magnetic fields and detected the antiatoms using two sensors as they escaped and annihilated. Most of the anti-atoms came out of the bottom opening, and only one-quarter out of the top.\nThere are compelling theoretical reasons to believe that, aside from the fact that antiparticles have different signs on all charges (such as electric and baryon charges), matter and antimatter have exactly the same properties. This means a particle and its corresponding antiparticle must have identical masses and decay lifetimes (if unstable). It also implies that, for example, a star made up of antimatter (an \"antistar\") will shine just like an ordinary star. This idea was tested experimentally in 2016 by the ALPHA experiment, which measured the transition between the two lowest energy states of antihydrogen. The results, which are identical to that of hydrogen, confirmed the validity of quantum mechanics for antimatter.\nOrigin and asymmetry.\nMost things observable from the Earth seem to be made of matter rather than antimatter. If antimatter-dominated regions of space existed, the gamma rays produced in annihilation reactions along the boundary between matter and antimatter regions would be detectable.\nAntiparticles are created everywhere in the universe where high-energy particle collisions take place. High-energy cosmic rays striking Earth's atmosphere (or any other matter in the Solar System) produce minute quantities of antiparticles in the resulting particle jets, which are immediately annihilated by contact with nearby matter. They may similarly be produced in regions like the center of the Milky Way and other galaxies, where very energetic celestial events occur (principally the interaction of relativistic jets with the interstellar medium). The presence of the resulting antimatter is detectable by the two gamma rays produced every time positrons annihilate with nearby matter. The frequency and wavelength of the gamma rays indicate that each carries 511\u00a0keV of energy (that is, the rest mass of an electron multiplied by \"c\"2).\nObservations by the European Space Agency's INTEGRAL satellite may explain the origin of a giant antimatter cloud surrounding the Galactic Center. The observations show that the cloud is asymmetrical and matches the pattern of X-ray binaries (binary star systems containing black holes or neutron stars), mostly on one side of the Galactic Center. While the mechanism is not fully understood, it is likely to involve the production of electron\u2013positron pairs, as ordinary matter gains kinetic energy while falling into a stellar remnant.\nAntimatter may exist in relatively large amounts in far-away galaxies due to cosmic inflation in the primordial time of the universe. Antimatter galaxies, if they exist, are expected to have the same chemistry and absorption and emission spectra as normal-matter galaxies, and their astronomical objects would be observationally identical, making them difficult to distinguish. NASA is trying to determine if such galaxies exist by looking for X-ray and gamma ray signatures of annihilation events in colliding superclusters.\nIn October 2017, scientists working on the BASE experiment at CERN reported a measurement of the antiproton magnetic moment to a precision of 1.5 parts per billion. It is consistent with the most precise measurement of the proton magnetic moment (also made by BASE in 2014), which supports the hypothesis of CPT symmetry. This measurement represents the first time that a property of antimatter is known more precisely than the equivalent property in matter.\nAntimatter quantum interferometry has been first demonstrated in 2018 in the Positron Laboratory (L-NESS) of Rafael Ferragut in Como (Italy), by a group led by Marco Giammarchi.\nNatural production.\nPositrons are produced naturally in \u03b2+ decays of naturally occurring radioactive isotopes (for example, potassium-40) and in interactions of gamma quanta (emitted by radioactive nuclei) with matter. Antineutrinos are another kind of antiparticle created by natural radioactivity (\u03b2\u2212 decay). Many different kinds of antiparticles are also produced by (and contained in) cosmic rays. In January 2011, research by the American Astronomical Society discovered antimatter (positrons) originating above thunderstorm clouds; positrons are produced in terrestrial gamma ray flashes created by electrons accelerated by strong electric fields in the clouds. Antiprotons have also been found to exist in the Van Allen Belts around the Earth by the PAMELA module.\nAntiparticles are also produced in any environment with a sufficiently high temperature (mean particle energy greater than the pair production threshold). It is hypothesized that during the period of baryogenesis, when the universe was extremely hot and dense, matter and antimatter were continually produced and annihilated. The presence of remaining matter, and absence of detectable remaining antimatter, is called baryon asymmetry. The exact mechanism that produced this asymmetry during baryogenesis remains an unsolved problem. One of the necessary conditions for this asymmetry is the violation of CP symmetry, which has been experimentally observed in the weak interaction.\nRecent observations indicate black holes and neutron stars produce vast amounts of positron-electron plasma via the jets.\nObservation in cosmic rays.\nSatellite experiments have found evidence of positrons and a few antiprotons in primary cosmic rays, amounting to less than 1% of the particles in primary cosmic rays. This antimatter cannot all have been created in the Big Bang, but is instead attributed to have been produced by cyclic processes at high energies. For instance, electron-positron pairs may be formed in pulsars, as a magnetized neutron star rotation cycle shears electron-positron pairs from the star surface. Therein the antimatter forms a wind that crashes upon the ejecta of the progenitor supernovae. This weathering takes place as \"the cold, magnetized relativistic wind launched by the star hits the non-relativistically expanding ejecta, a shock wave system forms in the impact: the outer one propagates in the ejecta, while a reverse shock propagates back towards the star.\" The former ejection of matter in the outer shock wave and the latter production of antimatter in the reverse shock wave are steps in a space weather cycle.\nPreliminary results from the presently operating Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (\"AMS-02\") on board the International Space Station show that positrons in the cosmic rays arrive with no directionality, and with energies that range from 10 GeV to 250\u00a0GeV. In September, 2014, new results with almost twice as much data were presented in a talk at CERN and published in Physical Review Letters. A new measurement of positron fraction up to 500\u00a0GeV was reported, showing that positron fraction peaks at a maximum of about 16% of total electron+positron events, around an energy of 275 \u00b1 32 GeV. At higher energies, up to 500\u00a0GeV, the ratio of positrons to electrons begins to fall again. The absolute flux of positrons also begins to fall before 500\u00a0GeV, but peaks at energies far higher than electron energies, which peak about 10 GeV. These results on interpretation have been suggested to be due to positron production in annihilation events of massive dark matter particles.\nCosmic ray antiprotons also have a much higher energy than their normal-matter counterparts (protons). They arrive at Earth with a characteristic energy maximum of 2\u00a0GeV, indicating their production in a fundamentally different process from cosmic ray protons, which on average have only one-sixth of the energy.\nThere is an ongoing search for larger antimatter nuclei, such as antihelium nuclei (that is, anti-alpha particles), in cosmic rays. The detection of natural antihelium could imply the existence of large antimatter structures such as an antistar. A prototype of the \"AMS-02\" designated \"AMS-01\", was flown into space aboard the on STS-91 in June 1998. By not detecting any antihelium at all, the \"AMS-01\" established an upper limit of 1.1\u00d710\u22126 for the antihelium to helium flux ratio. AMS-02 revealed in December 2016 that it had discovered a few signals consistent with antihelium nuclei amidst several billion helium nuclei. The result remains to be verified, and , the team is trying to rule out contamination.\nArtificial production.\nPositrons.\nPositrons were reported in November 2008 to have been generated by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in large numbers. A laser drove electrons through a gold target's nuclei, which caused the incoming electrons to emit energy quanta that decayed into both matter and antimatter. Positrons were detected at a higher rate and in greater density than ever previously detected in a laboratory. Previous experiments made smaller quantities of positrons using lasers and paper-thin targets; newer simulations showed that short bursts of ultra-intense lasers and millimeter-thick gold are a far more effective source.\nIn 2023, the production of the first electron-positron beam-plasma was reported by a collaboration led by researchers at University of Oxford working with the High-Radiation to Materials (HRMT) facility at CERN. The beam demonstrated the highest positron yield achieved so far in a laboratory setting. The experiment employed the 440 GeV proton beam, with formula_1 protons, from the Super Proton Synchrotron, and irradiated a particle converter composed of carbon and tantalum. This yielded a total formula_2 electron-positron pairs via a particle shower process. The produced pair beams have a volume that fills multiple Debye spheres and are thus able to sustain collective plasma oscillations.\nAntiprotons, antineutrons, and antinuclei.\nThe existence of the antiproton was experimentally confirmed in 1955 by University of California, Berkeley physicists Emilio Segr\u00e8 and Owen Chamberlain, for which they were awarded the 1959 Nobel Prize in Physics. An antiproton consists of two up antiquarks and one down antiquark (). The properties of the antiproton that have been measured all match the corresponding properties of the proton, with the exception of the antiproton having opposite electric charge and magnetic moment from the proton. Shortly afterwards, in 1956, the antineutron was discovered in proton\u2013proton collisions at the Bevatron (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) by Bruce Cork and colleagues.\nIn addition to antibaryons, anti-nuclei consisting of multiple bound antiprotons and antineutrons have been created. These are typically produced at energies far too high to form antimatter atoms (with bound positrons in place of electrons). In 1965, a group of researchers led by Antonino Zichichi reported production of nuclei of antideuterium at the Proton Synchrotron at CERN. At roughly the same time, observations of antideuterium nuclei were reported by a group of American physicists at the Alternating Gradient Synchrotron at Brookhaven National Laboratory.\nAntihydrogen atoms.\nIn 1995, CERN announced that it had successfully brought into existence nine hot antihydrogen atoms by implementing the SLAC/Fermilab concept during the PS210 experiment. The experiment was performed using the Low Energy Antiproton Ring (LEAR), and was led by Walter Oelert and Mario Macri. Fermilab soon confirmed the CERN findings by producing approximately 100 antihydrogen atoms at their facilities. The antihydrogen atoms created during PS210 and subsequent experiments (at both CERN and Fermilab) were extremely energetic and were not well suited to study. To resolve this hurdle, and to gain a better understanding of antihydrogen, two collaborations were formed in the late 1990s, namely, ATHENA and ATRAP.\nIn 1999, CERN activated the Antiproton Decelerator, a device capable of decelerating antiprotons from to \u00a0\u2013 still too \"hot\" to produce study-effective antihydrogen, but a huge leap forward. In late 2002 the ATHENA project announced that they had created the world's first \"cold\" antihydrogen. The ATRAP project released similar results very shortly thereafter. The antiprotons used in these experiments were cooled by decelerating them with the Antiproton Decelerator, passing them through a thin sheet of foil, and finally capturing them in a Penning\u2013Malmberg trap. The overall cooling process is workable, but highly inefficient; approximately 25\u00a0million antiprotons leave the Antiproton Decelerator and roughly 25,000 make it to the Penning\u2013Malmberg trap, which is about or 0.1% of the original amount.\nThe antiprotons are still hot when initially trapped. To cool them further, they are mixed into an electron plasma. The electrons in this plasma cool via cyclotron radiation, and then sympathetically cool the antiprotons via Coulomb collisions. Eventually, the electrons are removed by the application of short-duration electric fields, leaving the antiprotons with energies less than . While the antiprotons are being cooled in the first trap, a small cloud of positrons is captured from radioactive sodium in a Surko-style positron accumulator. This cloud is then recaptured in a second trap near the antiprotons. Manipulations of the trap electrodes then tip the antiprotons into the positron plasma, where some combine with antiprotons to form antihydrogen. This neutral antihydrogen is unaffected by the electric and magnetic fields used to trap the charged positrons and antiprotons, and within a few microseconds the antihydrogen hits the trap walls, where it annihilates. Some hundreds of millions of antihydrogen atoms have been made in this fashion.\nIn 2005, ATHENA disbanded and some of the former members (along with others) formed the ALPHA Collaboration, which is also based at CERN. The ultimate goal of this endeavour is to test CPT symmetry through comparison of the atomic spectra of hydrogen and antihydrogen (see hydrogen spectral series).\nMost of the sought-after high-precision tests of the properties of antihydrogen could only be performed if the antihydrogen were trapped, that is, held in place for a relatively long time. While antihydrogen atoms are electrically neutral, the spins of their component particles produce a magnetic moment. These magnetic moments can interact with an inhomogeneous magnetic field; some of the antihydrogen atoms can be attracted to a magnetic minimum. Such a minimum can be created by a combination of mirror and multipole fields. Antihydrogen can be trapped in such a magnetic minimum (minimum-B) trap; in November 2010, the ALPHA collaboration announced that they had so trapped 38 antihydrogen atoms for about a sixth of a second. This was the first time that neutral antimatter had been trapped.\nOn 26 April 2011, ALPHA announced that they had trapped 309 antihydrogen atoms, some for as long as 1,000 seconds (about 17 minutes). This was longer than neutral antimatter had ever been trapped before. ALPHA has used these trapped atoms to initiate research into the spectral properties of antihydrogen.\nIn 2016, a new antiproton decelerator and cooler called ELENA (Extra Low ENergy Antiproton decelerator) was built. It takes the antiprotons from the antiproton decelerator and cools them to 90\u00a0keV, which is \"cold\" enough to study. This machine works by using high energy and accelerating the particles within the chamber. More than one hundred antiprotons can be captured per second, a huge improvement, but it would still take several thousand years to make a nanogram of antimatter.\nThe biggest limiting factor in the large-scale production of antimatter is the availability of antiprotons. Recent data released by CERN states that, when fully operational, their facilities are capable of producing ten million antiprotons per minute. Assuming a 100% conversion of antiprotons to antihydrogen, it would take 100\u00a0billion years to produce 1\u00a0gram or 1 mole of antihydrogen (approximately atoms of anti-hydrogen). However, CERN only produces 1% of the anti-matter Fermilab does, and neither are designed to produce anti-matter. According to Gerald Jackson, using technology already in use today we are capable of producing and capturing 20 grams of anti-matter particles per year at a yearly cost of 670 million dollars per facility.\nAntihelium.\nAntihelium-3 nuclei () were first observed in the 1970s in proton\u2013nucleus collision experiments at the Institute for High Energy Physics by Y. Prockoshkin's group (Protvino near Moscow, USSR) and later created in nucleus\u2013nucleus collision experiments. Nucleus\u2013nucleus collisions produce antinuclei through the coalescence of antiprotons and antineutrons created in these reactions. In 2011, the STAR detector reported the observation of artificially created antihelium-4 nuclei (anti-alpha particles) () from such collisions.\nThe Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer on the International Space Station has, as of 2021, recorded eight events that seem to indicate the detection of antihelium-3.\nPreservation.\nAntimatter cannot be stored in a container made of ordinary matter because antimatter reacts with any matter it touches, annihilating itself and an equal amount of the container. Antimatter in the form of charged particles can be contained by a combination of electric and magnetic fields, in a device called a Penning trap. This device cannot, however, contain antimatter that consists of uncharged particles, for which atomic traps are used. In particular, such a trap may use the dipole moment (electric or magnetic) of the trapped particles. At high vacuum, the matter or antimatter particles can be trapped and cooled with slightly off-resonant laser radiation using a magneto-optical trap or magnetic trap. Small particles can also be suspended with optical tweezers, using a highly focused laser beam.\nIn 2011, CERN scientists were able to preserve antihydrogen for approximately 17 minutes. The record for storing antiparticles is currently held by the TRAP experiment at CERN: antiprotons were kept in a Penning trap for 405 days. A proposal was made in 2018 to develop containment technology advanced enough to contain a billion anti-protons in a portable device to be driven to another lab for further experimentation.\nCost.\nScientists claim that antimatter is the costliest material to make. In 2006, Gerald Smith estimated $250\u00a0million could produce 10 milligrams of positrons (equivalent to $25\u00a0billion per gram); in 1999, NASA gave a figure of $62.5\u00a0trillion per gram of antihydrogen. This is because production is difficult (only very few antiprotons are produced in reactions in particle accelerators) and because there is higher demand for other uses of particle accelerators. According to CERN, it has cost a few hundred million Swiss francs to produce about 1\u00a0billionth of a gram (the amount used so far for particle/antiparticle collisions). In comparison, to produce the first atomic weapon, the cost of the Manhattan Project was estimated at $23\u00a0billion with inflation during 2007.\nSeveral studies funded by NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts are exploring whether it might be possible to use magnetic scoops to collect the antimatter that occurs naturally in the Van Allen belt of the Earth, and ultimately the belts of gas giants like Jupiter, ideally at a lower cost per gram.\nUses.\nMedical.\nMatter\u2013antimatter reactions have practical applications in medical imaging, such as positron emission tomography (PET). In positive beta decay, a nuclide loses surplus positive charge by emitting a positron (in the same event, a proton becomes a neutron, and a neutrino is also emitted). Nuclides with surplus positive charge are easily made in a cyclotron and are widely generated for medical use. Antiprotons have also been shown within laboratory experiments to have the potential to treat certain cancers, in a similar method currently used for ion (proton) therapy.\nFuel.\nIsolated and stored antimatter could be used as a fuel for interplanetary or interstellar travel as part of an antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion or another antimatter rocket. Since the energy density of antimatter is higher than that of conventional fuels, an antimatter-fueled spacecraft would have a higher thrust-to-weight ratio than a conventional spacecraft.\nIf matter\u2013antimatter collisions resulted only in photon emission, the entire rest mass of the particles would be converted to kinetic energy. The energy per unit mass () is about 10 orders of magnitude greater than chemical energies, and about 3 orders of magnitude greater than the nuclear potential energy that can be liberated, today, using nuclear fission (about per fission reaction or ), and about 2 orders of magnitude greater than the best possible results expected from fusion (about for the proton\u2013proton chain). The reaction of of antimatter with of matter would produce (180 petajoules) of energy (by the mass\u2013energy equivalence formula, ), or the rough equivalent of 43 megatons of TNT \u2013 slightly less than the yield of the 27,000\u00a0kg Tsar Bomba, the largest thermonuclear weapon ever detonated.\nNot all of that energy can be utilized by any realistic propulsion technology because of the nature of the annihilation products. While electron\u2013positron reactions result in gamma ray photons, these are difficult to direct and use for thrust. In reactions between protons and antiprotons, their energy is converted largely into relativistic neutral and charged pions. The neutral pions decay almost immediately (with a lifetime of 85 attoseconds) into high-energy photons, but the charged pions decay more slowly (with a lifetime of 26 nanoseconds) and can be deflected magnetically to produce thrust.\nCharged pions ultimately decay into a combination of neutrinos (carrying about 22% of the energy of the charged pions) and unstable charged muons (carrying about 78% of the charged pion energy), with the muons then decaying into a combination of electrons, positrons and neutrinos (cf. muon decay; the neutrinos from this decay carry about 2/3 of the energy of the muons, meaning that from the original charged pions, the total fraction of their energy converted to neutrinos by one route or another would be about ).\nWeapons.\nAntimatter has been considered as a trigger mechanism for nuclear weapons. A major obstacle is the difficulty of producing antimatter in large enough quantities, and there is no evidence that it will ever be feasible. Nonetheless, the U.S. Air Force funded studies of the physics of antimatter in the Cold War, and began considering its possible use in weapons, not just as a trigger, but as the explosive itself."}
{"id": "1321", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1321", "title": "Antonio Gaudi/Sagrada Familia", "text": ""}
{"id": "1322", "revid": "6017150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1322", "title": "Casa Batll\u00f3", "text": " () is a building in the center of Barcelona, Spain. It was designed by Antoni Gaud\u00ed, and is considered one of his masterpieces. A remodel of a previously built house, it was redesigned in 1904 by Gaud\u00ed (but the actual construction works hadn\u2019t begun at this point) and has been refurbished several times since. Gaud\u00ed's assistants Dom\u00e8nec Sugra\u00f1es i Gras, Josep Canaleta and Joan Rubi\u00f3 also contributed to the renovation project.\nThe local name for the building is \"\" (House of Bones), as it has a visceral, skeletal organic quality. It is located on the in the Eixample district, and forms part of a row of houses known as the (or , the \"Block of Discord\"), which consists of four buildings by noted architects of Barcelona.\nLike everything Gaud\u00ed designed, is only identifiable as in the broadest sense. The ground floor, in particular, has unusual tracery, irregular oval windows and flowing sculpted stone work. There are few straight lines, and much of the fa\u00e7ade is decorated with a colorful mosaic made of broken ceramic tiles (). The roof is arched and was likened to the back of a dragon or dinosaur. A common theory about the building is that the rounded feature to the left of centre, terminating at the top in a turret and cross, represents the lance of Saint George (patron saint of Catalonia, Gaud\u00ed's home), which has been plunged into the back of the dragon.\nIn 2005, became an UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nInitial construction (1877).\nThe building that is now was built in 1877, commissioned by Llu\u00eds Sala S\u00e1nchez. It was a classical building without remarkable characteristics within the eclecticism traditional by the end of the 19th century. The building had a basement, a ground floor, four other floors and a garden in the back.\nBatll\u00f3 family.\nThe house was bought by Josep Batll\u00f3 in 1903. The design of the house made the home undesirable to buyers but the Batll\u00f3 family decided to buy the place due to its centralized location. It is located in the middle of , which in the early 20th century was known as a very prestigious and fashionable area. It was an area where the prestigious family could draw attention to themselves.\nIn 1906, Josep Batll\u00f3 still owned the home. The Batll\u00f3 family was very well known in Barcelona for its contribution to the textile industry in the city. Josep Batll\u00f3 i Casanovas was a textile industrialist who owned a few factories in the city. Batll\u00f3 married Am\u00e0lia God\u00f3 Belaunzar\u00e1n, from the family that founded the newspaper \"La Vanguardia\". Josep wanted an architect that would design a house that was like no other and stood out as being audacious and creative. Both Josep and his wife were open to anything and they decided not to limit Gaud\u00ed. Josep did not want his house to resemble any of the houses of the rest of the Batll\u00f3 family, such as Casa P\u00eda, built by the Josep Vilaseca. He chose the architect who had designed Park G\u00fcell because he wanted him to come up with a risky plan. The family lived on the principal floor of until the middle of the 1950s.\nRenovation (1904-1906).\nIn 1904, Josep Batll\u00f3 hired Gaud\u00ed to design his home; at first his plans were to tear down the building and construct a completely new house. Gaud\u00ed convinced Josep that a renovation was sufficient and was also able to submit the planning application the same year. The building was completed and refurbished in 1906. He completely changed the main apartment which became the residence for the Batll\u00f3 family. He expanded the central well in order to supply light to the whole building and also added new floors. In the same year the Barcelona City Council selected the house as a candidate for that year's best building award. The award was given to another architect that year despite Gaud\u00ed's design.\nRefurbishments.\nJosep Batll\u00f3 died in 1934 and the house was kept in order by the wife until her death in 1940. After the death of the two parents, the house was kept and managed by the children until 1954. In 1954, an insurance company named Seguros Iberia acquired Casa Batll\u00f3 and set up offices there. In 1970, the first refurbishment occurred mainly in several of the interior rooms of the house. In 1983, the exterior balconies were restored to their original colour and a year later the exterior fa\u00e7ade was illuminated in the ceremony of La Merc\u00e8.\nMultiple uses.\nIn 1993, the current owners of Casa Batll\u00f3 bought the home and continued refurbishments throughout the whole building. Two years later, in 1995, Casa Batll\u00f3 began to hire out its facilities for different events. More than 2,500 square meters of rooms within the building were rented out for many different functions. Due to the building's location and the beauty of the facilities being rented, the rooms of Casa Batll\u00f3 were in very high demand and hosted many important events for the city.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe local name for the building is \"Casa dels ossos\" (House of Bones), as it has a visceral, skeletal organic quality. The building looks very remarkable \u2014 like everything Gaud\u00ed designed, only identifiable as Modernisme or Art Nouveau in the broadest sense. The ground floor, in particular, is rather astonishing with tracery, irregular oval windows and flowing sculpted stone work.\nIt seems that the goal of the designer was to avoid straight lines completely. Much of the fa\u00e7ade is decorated with a mosaic made of broken ceramic tiles (trencad\u00eds) that starts in shades of golden orange moving into greenish blues. The roof is arched and was likened to the back of a dragon or dinosaur. A common theory about the building is that the rounded feature to the left of centre, terminating at the top in a turret and cross, represents the lance of Saint George (patron saint of Catalonia, Gaud\u00ed's home), which has been plunged into the back of the dragon.\nLoft.\nThe loft is considered to be one of the most unusual spaces. It was formerly a service area for the tenants of the different apartments in the building which contained laundry rooms and storage areas. It is known for its simplicity of shapes and its Mediterranean influence through the use of white on the walls. It contains a series of sixty catenary arches that creates a space which represents the ribcage of an animal. Some people believe that the \u201cribcage\u201d design of the arches is a ribcage for the dragon's spine that is represented in the roof.\nThe Atrium (light well).\nThe Atrium or the light well is in the central part of the house and delivers air and lighting to all corners of the house. Gaud\u00ed had an obsession with light and how it reflected off certain surfaces. The wall of the atrium has different tones of blue as well as a diamond textile pattern all around the walls. The blue tiles allow an equal distribution of light to all the floors. The well has windows with wooden splits to allow them to be open and closed for ventilation. Gaud\u00ed wanted to make the bottom of the well feel like the bottom of the sea. The skylight allows light to come in and reflect off the ceramic tiles into the windows to naturally illuminate the house. The blue tiles are more intensely colored at the top and get opaquer towards the bottom. The diamond textiles match the rest of the house's use of different, functional shapes. \nNoble floor and museum.\nThe noble floor is larger than seven-hundred square meters. It is the main floor of the building. The noble floor is accessed through a private entrance hall that uses skylights resembling tortoise shells and vaulted walls in curving shapes. On the noble floor there is a spacious landing with direct views of the blue tiling of the building well. On the Passeig de Gracia side is Batll\u00f3's study, a dining room, and a secluded spot for courting couples, decorated with a mushroom-shaped fireplace. The elaborate and animal-like d\u00e9cor continues throughout the whole noble floor.\nIn 2002, as part of the celebration of the International Year of Gaud\u00ed, the house opened its doors to the public and people were allowed to visit the noble floor. Casa Batll\u00f3 met with great unanticipated success, and visitors became eager to see the rest of the house. Two years later, in celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of the beginning of work on Casa Batll\u00f3, the fifth floor was restored and the house extended its visit to the loft and the well. In 2005, Casa Batll\u00f3 became a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nRoof.\nThe roof terrace is one of the most popular features of the entire house due to its famous dragon back design. Gaud\u00ed represents an animal's spine by using tiles of different colors on one side. The roof is decorated with four chimney stacks designed to prevent backdraughts.\nExterior fa\u00e7ade.\nThe fa\u00e7ade has three distinct sections which are harmoniously integrated. The lower ground floor with the main floor and two first-floor galleries are contained in a structure of Montju\u00efc sandstone with undulating lines. The central part, which reaches the last floor, is a multicolored section with protruding balconies. The top of the building is a crown, like a huge gable, which is at the same level as the roof and helps to conceal the room where there used to be water tanks. This room is currently empty. The top displays a trim with ceramic pieces that has attracted multiple interpretations.\nRoof tile.\nThe roof's arched profile recalls the spine of a dragon with ceramic tiles for scales, and a small triangular window towards the right of the structure simulates the eye. Legend has it that it was once possible to see the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia through this window, which was being built simultaneously. As of 2022, the partial view of the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia is available from this vantage point, with its spires visible over newer buildings. The tiles were given a metallic sheen to simulate the varying scales of the monster, with the color grading from green on the right side, where the head begins, to deep blue and violet in the center, to red and pink on the left side of the building.\nTower and bulb.\nOne of the highlights of the fa\u00e7ade is a tower topped with a cross of four arms oriented to the cardinal directions. It is a bulbous, root-like structure that evokes plant life. There is a second bulb-shaped structure similarly reminiscent of a thalamus flower, which is represented by a cross with arms that are actually buds announcing the next flowering. The tower is decorated with monograms of Jesus (JHS), Maria (M with the ducal crown) and Joseph (JHP), made of ceramic pieces that stand out golden on the green background that covers the fa\u00e7ade. These symbols show the deep religiosity of Gaud\u00ed, who was inspired by the contemporaneous construction of his basilica to choose the theme of the holy family.\nThe bulb was broken when it was delivered, perhaps during transportation. Although the manufacturer committed to re-do the broken parts, Gaud\u00ed liked the aesthetic of the broken masonry and asked that the pieces be stuck to the main structure with lime mortar and held in with a brass ring.\nCentral section.\nThe central part of the fa\u00e7ade evokes the surface of a lake with water lilies, reminiscent of Monet's \"Nymph\u00e9as\", with gentle ripples and reflections caused by the glass and ceramic mosaic. It is a great undulating surface covered with plaster fragments of colored glass discs combined with 330 rounds of polychrome pottery. The discs were designed by Gaud\u00ed and Jujol between tests during their stay in Majorca, while working on the restoration of the Cathedral of Palma.\nBalcony.\nFinally, above the central part of the fa\u00e7ade is a smaller balcony, also iron, with a different exterior aesthetic, closer to a local type of lily. Two iron arms were installed here to support a pulley to raise and lower furniture.\nMain floor.\nThe fa\u00e7ade of the main floor, made entirely in sandstone, and is supported by two columns. The design is complemented by joinery windows set with multicolored stained glass. In front of the large windows, as if they were pillars that support the complex stone structure, there are six fine columns that seem to simulate the bones of a limb, with an apparent central articulation; in fact, this is a floral decoration. The rounded shapes of the gaps and the lip-like edges carved into the stone surrounding them create a semblance of a fully open mouth, for which the Casa Batll\u00f3 has been nicknamed the \"house of yawns\". The structure repeats on the first floor and in the design of two windows at the ends forming galleries, but on the large central window there are two balconies as described above."}
{"id": "1324", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1324", "title": "Park G\u00fcell", "text": "Park G\u00fcell ( ; ) is a privatized complex of parks, gardens and architectural elements in the Gr\u00e0cia district of Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. The site is located in the La Salut neighborhood on the southern side of a hill known as the Tur\u00f3 del Carmel, part of the Collserola mountain range. The separate Parc del Carmel is located on the northern side of the hill.\nIn the midst of Barcelona's late 19th and early 20th century urban expansion, the Catalan industrialist and art patron Eusebi G\u00fcell sought to commission a new park. G\u00fcell assigned the design of the park to the renowned architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed, widely regarded as a central figure of the aesthetic movement of Catalan modernism.\nPark G\u00fcell was built between 1900 and 1914, before being officially opened to the public in 1926. In 1984, UNESCO declared the park a World Heritage Site as part of the larger \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\" architectural series.\nDescription.\nIn addition to reflecting the distinct aesthetic sensibilities, artistic influences, and visual language present throughout Gaud\u00ed's career, Park G\u00fcell captures a particular moment in his artistic evolution. The park is associated with his naturalist phase, which occurred in the first decade of the 20th century. During this period, Gaud\u00ed's study of nature and organic shapes began to influence him creatively. Reflecting this shift, Gaud\u00ed introduced a series of new structural solutions rooted in the geometric analysis. \nGaud\u00ed expanded upon these geometric forms to create the imaginative, ornamental style most often associated with him today. Rooted in the Baroque, his works are characterized by a structural richness of forms and volumes, free of the rational rigidity of classical conventions. In designing Park G\u00fcell, Gaud\u00ed put these structural innovations into practice. Gaud\u00ed would further elaborate on this characteristic style in the creation of the enormous Sagrada Fam\u00edlia (Basilica and Expiatory Church of the Holy Family).\nG\u00fcell and Gaud\u00ed originally conceived of the space not as a public park, but as an private community of luxurious homes equipped with all the latest modern amenities to fulfill the needs of its residents with both artistically and physically. They envisioned a community strongly influenced by symbolism and Park G\u00fcell's common spaces (stairways, plazas, terraces, gardens) are designed to express physically the political and religious ideals of both patron and architect. For example, there are noticeable concepts originating from political Catalanism, most notably in the entrance stairway where the Catalan countries are represented, and Catholicism, as Monumento al Calvario, originally designed to be a chapel. In addition to Gaud\u00ed's reinterpretation of classical architectural elements such as columns, colonnades, and porticos, Park G\u00fcell also contains numerous references to Greek Mythology. Some have suggested that G\u00fcell and Gaud\u00ed's conception of the park was inspired by the Temple of Apollo of Delphi.\nThe meaning of these symbols continues to be the subject of speculation. To some, Park G\u00fcell represents spatial nexus of complex iconography that Gaud\u00ed intentionally applied to the project. Interpretations range from expressions of political vindication to religious exaltation, laden with mythologic, historical, and philosophical references. Others claim that Park G\u00fcell displays masonic influences in spite of the fact that both G\u00fcell and Gaud\u00ed embraced traditional Catholicism. Although much of this is without scholarly basis, the sense of mystery surrounding Park G\u00fcell's symbolism is not entirely unfounded, given the penchant of Gaud\u00ed and other artists of his generation for enigmas, puzzles, and cryptic references.\nOrigins as a housing development.\nThe park was originally part of a commercially unsuccessful housing development envisioned by Count Eusebi G\u00fcell. It was inspired by the English garden city movement, hence the use of the English word \"Park\" (Catalan: \"Parc G\u00fcell\" Spanish: \"Parque G\u00fcell\") in the original name. The site chosen was a rocky hill with little vegetation and few trees, called \"Muntanya Pelada\" (English: Bare Mountain). Already present on the property was a large country house called Larrard House or Muntaner de Dalt House. The site was adjacent to an upper class neighborhood called \"La Salut\" (The Health). G\u00fcell intended to take advantage of the site's the fresh air (well away from smoky factories) and beautiful vistas. The original development planned to divide the site into sixty triangular lots for luxury houses. To provide publicity for the new development, G\u00fcell would move into Larrard House in 1906. Ultimately, only two houses were built, neither of which were designed by Gaud\u00ed. \nOne of these houses was built as a display home, but upon completion was put up for sale in 1904. However, because no buyers came forward, G\u00fcell suggested that Gaud\u00ed purchase the home with his own savings. Gaud\u00ed agreed and moved in with his family and his father in 1906. This house, in which Gaud\u00ed lived from 1906 until his death in 1926, was built in 1904 by Francesc Berenguer, himself a modernist architect and associate of Gaud\u00ed's. It contains original works by Gaud\u00ed and several of his collaborators. Since 1963, it has been open to the public as the Gaud\u00ed House Museum (Catalan: \"Casa Museu Gaud\u00ed\"). In 1969, it was declared to be a historical artistic monument of national interest.\nMunicipal garden.\nParc G\u00fcell has since been converted into a municipal garden. It is accessible by metro, although the closet metro stations (Vallcarca and Lesseps) are located some distance from the site at the base of Tur\u00f3 de Carmel. It can also be reached by city buses or commercial tourist buses. In October 2013, an entrance fee was introduced for the Monumental Zone (main entrance, terrace, viaducts, and areas featuring mosaics), though citizens of Barcelona may enter free of charge. Limited tickets are available, though these often sell out in advance. La Torre Rosa, Gaud\u00ed's home converted into a museum featuring furniture that he designed, can be visited for another entrance fee. However, there is a reduced rate for those wishing to see both Gaud\u00ed's house and the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia Church.\nThe entrance is flanked by two gatehouses, both of which were designed by Gaud\u00ed. These two buildings make up the Porter's Lodge pavilion. One of these buildings contains a small room with a telephone booth. The other, while once being the porter's house, is now a permanent exhibition of the Barcelona City History Museum (Catalan: \"Museu d'Hist\u00f2ria de Barcelona\")\".\"\nThe focal point of the park is the main terrace enclosed by a long bench in the form of a sea serpent. The curves of the serpent bench form a number of enclaves, designed to foster social interaction. The design of the benches was the work not of Gaud\u00ed, but of his often overlooked collaborator Josep Maria Jujol.\nAnother prominent feature found throughout the park are the series of elevated pathways, originally intended to service the houses, designed by Gaud\u00ed to jut out from the steep hillside or rest on viaducts. These structures often serve as the roofs for lower footpaths in arcades formed underneath. To further minimize the intrusion of these roads, Gaud\u00ed had them constructed using a local stone, rendering them as an extension of landscape. Echoing natural forms, the columns and branching vaults supporting the roadways were carved to resemble tree trunks. Similar to his previous work on the Church of Col\u00f2nia G\u00fcell, Gaud\u00ed used curved vaulting and the alignment of sloping columns to form inverted catenary arch shapes, which function as ideal compression structures.\nAt the park's highpoint, there is a stone hill composed of steps leading up to a platform on which stands three large crosses. The official name of this is El Tur\u00f3 de les Tres Creus, however many prefer to call it Calvary. Two of the crosses point north\u2013south and east\u2013west, while the third and tallest cross points skyward. From this vantage is possible to view the main city in panorama, including the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia, Agbar Tower, and Montju\u00efc area in the distance.\nPark G\u00fcell supports a wide variety of wildlife, notably several of Barcelona's non-native parrots in addition to sightings of the short-toed eagle. The park also supports a population of hummingbird hawk moths."}
{"id": "1325", "revid": "17723088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1325", "title": "Casa Mil\u00e0", "text": "Casa Mil\u00e0 (, ), popularly known as \"La Pedrera\" (, ; \"the stone quarry\") in reference to its unconventional rough-hewn appearance, is a \"Modernista\" building in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. It was the last private residence designed by architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed and was built between 1906 and 1912.\nThe building was commissioned in 1906 by and his wife . At the time, it was controversial because of its undulating stone facade, twisting wrought iron balconies, and design by Josep Maria Jujol. Several structural innovations include a self-supporting stone fa\u00e7ade, and a free-plan floor, underground garage and the spectacular terrace on the roof.\nIn 1984, it was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. Since 2013 it has been the headquarters of the Fundaci\u00f3 Catalunya La Pedrera, which manages visits to the building, exhibitions and other cultural and educational activities at Casa Mil\u00e0.\nBuilding history.\nArchitect.\nAntoni Gaud\u00ed i Cornet was born on June 25, 1852, in Catalonia, Spain. As a child, Gaud\u00ed's health was poor, suffering from rheumatism. Because of this, he was afforded lengthy periods of time resting at his summer house in Riudoms. Here he spent a large portion of his time outdoors, allowing him to deeply study nature. This would become one of the major influences in his architecture to come.\nGaud\u00ed was a very practical man and a craftsman at his core. In his work he followed impulses and turned creative plans into reality. His openness to embrace new styles combined with a vivid imagination helped mold new styles of architecture and consequently helped push the limits of construction. Today he is regarded as a pioneer of the modern architecture style.\nIn 1870, Gaud\u00ed moved to Barcelona to study architecture. He was an inconsistent student who showed flashes of brilliance. It took him eight years to graduate due to a mix of health complications, military service as well as other activities.\nAfter completion of his education he became a prolific architect as well as designing gardens, sculptures and all other decorative arts. Gaud\u00ed's most famous works consisted of several buildings: Parque G\u00fcell; Palacio G\u00fcell; Casa Mila; Casa Vicens. He also is attributed for his work on the Crypt of La Sagrada Familia and the Nativity facade. Gaud\u00ed's work at the time was both admired and criticized for his bold, innovative solutions.\nGaud\u00ed was injured on June 7, 1926, when he was run over by a tram. He later died in the hospital due to his injuries on June 10, 1926, at the age of 73. A few years after his death, his fame became renowned by critics and the general public alike.\nBuilding owners.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 was built for Roser Segim\u00f3n and her husband Pere Mil\u00e0. Roser Segim\u00f3n was the wealthy widow of Josep Guardiola, an \"Indiano\" or \"Americano\", or former colonist returned from the Americas, who had made his fortune with a coffee plantation in Guatemala. Her second husband, Pere Mil\u00e0, was a developer known for his flamboyant lifestyle.\nConstruction process.\nIn 1905, Mil\u00e0 and Segim\u00f3n married and on June 9, Roser Segim\u00f3n bought a house with garden which occupied an area of 1,835 square meters, located on Paseo de Gracia, 92. In September, they commissioned Gaud\u00ed for building them a new house with the idea of living in the main floor and renting out the rest of the apartments. On February 2, 1906, the project was presented to the Barcelona City Council and the works began, demolishing the pre-existing building instead of reforming it, as in the case of the Casa Batll\u00f3.\nThe building was completed in December 1910 and the owner asked Gaud\u00ed to make a certificate to inhabit the main floor, which the City Council authorized in October 1911, and the couple moved in. On October 31, 1912, Gaud\u00ed issued the certificate stating that, in accordance with his plans and his direction, the work had been completed and the whole house was ready to be rented.\nCritics and controversies.\nThe building did not respect any rules of conventional style, for which Gaud\u00ed received much criticism. To begin with, the name \"La Pedrera\" is in fact a nickname assigned by the citizens who disapproved of its unusualness. The unique structure of the building and the relationship between the building's architect and Pere Mil\u00e0 became the object of ridicule for the people of Barcelona and many humorous publications of the time.\nCatholic symbols.\nGaud\u00ed, a Catholic and a devotee of the Virgin Mary, planned for the Casa Mil\u00e0 to be a spiritual symbol. Overt religious elements include an excerpt from the Rosary on the cornice and planned statues of Mary, specifically Our Lady of the Rosary, and two archangels, St. Michael and St. Gabriel.\nHowever, the Casa Mil\u00e0 was not built entirely to Gaud\u00ed's specifications. The local government ordered the demolition of elements that exceeded the height standard for the city, and fined the Mil\u00e0s for many infractions of building codes. After Semana Tr\u00e1gica, an outbreak of anticlericalism in the city, Mil\u00e0 prudently decided to forgo the religious statues. Gaud\u00ed contemplated abandoning the project but a priest persuaded him to continue.\nChange of ownership.\nIn 1940, Mil\u00e0 died. Segimon sold the property in 1946 for 18 million pesetas to Josep Ballv\u00e9 i Pellis\u00e9, known for his department stores on , in partnership with the family of P\u00edo Rubert Laporta. The Compa\u00f1\u00eda Inmobiliaria Provenza, SA (CIPSA) was founded to administer the building. Roser Segimon continued to live on the main floor until her death in 1964.\nThe new owners divided the first floor facing into five apartments instead of the original two. In 1953, they commissioned to convert 13 rubbish-filled attic laundry rooms to street-facing apartments, leaving a communal hallway on the side facing the courtyards. Some of these two or three room apartments had a loft and were designed and furnished in a typical early 1950s style using brick, ceramic and wood. Items of furniture, such as the , were reminiscent of Eero Saarinen's work.\nThe insurance company Northern took over the main floor in 1966. By then, Casa Mil\u00e0 had housed a bingo hall, an academy and the offices of Cementos Molins and Inoxcrom among others. Maintenance costs were high and the owners had allowed the building to become dilapidated, causing stones to loosen in 1971. Josep Anton Comas made some emergency repairs, especially to the paintings in the courtyards, while respecting the original design.\nRestoration.\nGaud\u00ed's work was designated a historic and artistic monument on July 24, 1969. Casa Mil\u00e0 was in poor condition in the early 1980s. It had been painted a dreary brown and many of its interior color schemes had been abandoned or allowed to deteriorate, but it has been restored since including restoring many of the original colors.\nIn 1984, the building became part of a World Heritage Site encompassing some of Gaud\u00ed's works. The Barcelonan city council tried to rent the main floor as an office for the 1992 Olympic bid. Finally, the day before Christmas 1986, Caixa Catalunya bought La Pedrera for 900 million pesetas. On February 19, 1987, urgently needed work began on the restoration and cleaning of the fa\u00e7ade. The work was done by the architects Joseph Emilio Hern\u00e1ndez-Cros and Rafael Vila. The renovated main floor opened in 1990 as part of the Cultural Olympiad of Barcelona. The floor became an exhibition room with an example of modernism in the Eixample.\nDesign.\nThe building is 1,323 m2 per floor on a plot of 1,620 m2. Gaud\u00ed made the first sketches in his workshop in the Sagrada Fam\u00edlia. He designed the house as a constant curve, both outside and inside, incorporating ruled geometry and naturalistic elements.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 consists of two buildings, which are structured around two courtyards that provide light to the nine stories: basement, ground floor, mezzanine, main (or noble) floor, four upper floors, and an attic. The basement was intended to be the garage, the main floor the residence of the Mil\u00e0s (a flat of all 1,323 m2), and the rest distributed over 20 apartments. The resulting layout is shaped like an asymmetrical \"8\" because of the different shapes and sizes of the courtyards. The attic housed the laundry and drying areas, forming an insulating space for the building and simultaneously determining the levels of the roof.\nOne of the most notable elements of the building is the roof, crowned with skylights, staircase exits, fans, and chimneys. All of these elements, constructed out of brick covered with lime, broken marble, or glass have a specific architectural function but are also real sculptures integrated into the building.\nThe apartments feature plastered ceilings with dynamic reliefs, handcrafted wooden doors, windows, and furniture, as well as hydraulic tiles and various ornamental elements.\nThe stairways were intended as service entries, with the main access to the apartments by elevator except for the noble floor, where Gaud\u00ed added a prominent interior staircase. Gaud\u00ed wanted the people who lived in the flats to all know each other. Therefore, there were only elevators on every other floor, so people on different floors would meet one another.\nStructure.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 is characterized by its self-supporting stone facade, meaning that it is free of load-bearing walls. The facade connects to the internal structure of each floor by means of curved iron beams surrounding the perimeter of each floor. This construction system allows, on one hand, large openings in the facade which give light to the homes, and on the other, free structuring of the different levels, so that internal walls can be added and demolished without affecting the stability of the building. This allows the owners to change their minds at will and to modify, without problems, the interior layout of the homes.\nConstructive and decorative items.\nFacade.\nThe facade is composed of large blocks of limestone from the Garraf Massif on the first floor and from the Villefranche quarry for the higher levels. The blocks were cut to follow the plot of the projection of the model, then raised to their location and adjusted to align in a continuous curve to the pieces around them.\nThe windows of La Pedrera are an integral part of the overall facade design. Gaud\u00ed made sure that the windows were of varying sizes, designed to optimize the amount of natural light that could enter the building.\nViewed from the outside the building has three parts: the main body of the six-storey blocks with winding stone floors, two floors set a block back with a different curve, similar to waves, a smoother texture and whiter color, and with small holes that look like embrasures, and finally the body of the roof.\nGaud\u00ed's original facade had some of its lower-level ironwork removed. In 1928, the tailor Mosella opened the first store in La Pedrera, and he eliminated the bars. This did not concern anyone, because in the middle of twentieth century, wrought ironwork had little importance. The ironwork was lost until a few years later, when Americans donated one of them to the MoMa, where it is on display.\nWith restoration initiatives launched in 1987, the facade was rejoined to some pieces of stone that had fallen. In order to respect the fidelity of the original, material was obtained from the Villefranche quarry, even though by then it was no longer operating.\nHall and courtyards.\nThe building uses a completely original solution to solve the issue of a lobby being too closed and dark. Its open and airy courtyards provide a place of transit and are directly visible to those accessing the building. There are two patios on the side of the Passeig de Gracia and of the street Provence.\nPatios, structurally, are key as supporting loads of interior facades. The floor of the courtyard is supported by pillars of cast iron. In the courtyard, there are traditional elliptical beams and girders but Gaud\u00ed applied an ingenious solution of using two concentric cylindrical beams with stretched radial beams, like the spokes of a bicycle. They form a point outside of the beam to two points above and below, making the function of the central girder a keystone and working in tension and compression simultaneously. This supported structure is twelve feet in diameter and is considered \"the soul of the building\" with a clear resemblance to Gothic crypts. The centerpiece was built in a shipyard by Josep Maria Carandell who copied a steering wheel, interpreting Gaud\u00ed's intent as to represent the helm of the ship of life.\nAccess is protected by a massive iron gate with a design attributed to Jujol. It was originally used by both people and cars, as access to the garage is in the basement, now an auditorium.\nThe two halls are fully polychrome with oil paintings on the plaster surfaces, with eclectic references to mythology and flowers.\nDuring construction there was a problem including a basement as a garage for cars, the new invention that was thrilling the bourgeois at the time. The future neighbor Felix Anthony Meadows, owner of Industrial Linera, requested a change because his Rolls-Royce could not access it. Gaud\u00ed agreed to remove a pillar on the ramp that led into the garage so that Felix, who was establishing sales and factory in Parets del Vall\u00e8s, could go to both places with his car from La Pedrera.\nFor the floors of Casa Mil\u00e0, Gaud\u00ed used a model of floor forms of square timbers with two colors, and the hydraulic pavement hexagonal pieces of blue and sea motifs that had originally been designed for the Batllo house. The wax was designed in gray by John Bertrand under the supervision of Gaud\u00ed who \"touched up with their own fingers,\" in the words of the manufacturer Josep Bay.\nLoft.\nLike in Casa Batll\u00f3, Gaud\u00ed shows the application of the catenary arch as a support structure for the roof, a form which he had already used shortly after graduating in the wood frameworks of Matar\u00f3's cooperative known as \"L'Obrera Mataronense.\" In this case, Gaud\u00ed used the Catalan technique of timbrel, imported from Italy in the fourteenth century.\nThe attic, where the laundry rooms were located, was a clear room under a Catalan vault roof supported by 270 parabolic vaults of different heights and spaced by about 80\u00a0cm. The roof resembles both the ribs of a huge animal and a palm, giving the roof-deck a very unconventional shape similar to a landscape of hills and valleys. The shape and location of the courtyards makes the arches higher when the space is narrowed and lower when the space expands.\nThe builder Bay\u00f3 explained its construction: \"First the face of a wide wall was filled with mortar and plastered. Then Canaleta indicated the opening of each arch and Bay\u00f3 put a nail at each starting point of the arch at the top of the wall. From these nails was dangled a chain so that the lowest point coincided with the deflection of the arch. Then the profile displayed on the wall by the chain was drawn and on this profile the carpenter marked and placed the corresponding centering, and the timbrel vault was started with three rows of plane bricks. Gaud\u00ed wanted to add a longitudinal axis of bricks connecting all vaults at their keystones\".\nRoof and chimneys.\nThe work of Gaud\u00ed on the rooftop of La Pedrera brought his experience at Palau G\u00fcell together with solutions that were clearly more innovative\u00a0\u2013 this time creating shapes and volumes with more body, more prominence, and less polychromasia.\nOn the rooftop there are six skylights/staircase exits (four of which were covered with broken pottery and some that ended in a double cross typical of Gaud\u00ed), twenty-eight chimneys in several groupings, two half-hidden vents whose function is to renew the air in the building, and four domes that discharged to the facade. The staircases also house the water tanks; some of which are snail-shaped.\nThe stepped roof of La Pedrera, called \"the garden of warriors\" by the poet Pere Gimferrer because the chimneys appear to be protecting the skylights, has undergone a radical restoration, removing chimneys added in interventions after Gaud\u00ed, television antennas, and other elements that degraded the space. The restoration brought back the splendor to the chimneys and the skylights that were covered with fragments of marble and broken Valencia tiles. One of the chimneys was topped with glass pieces\u00a0\u2013 it was said that Gaud\u00ed did that the day after the inauguration of the building, taking advantage of the empty bottles from the party. It was restored with the bases of champagne bottles from the early twentieth century. The repair work has enabled the restoration of the original impact of the overhangs made of stone from Ulldecona with fragments of tiles. This whole set is more colorful than the facade, although here the creamy tones are dominant.\nFurniture.\nGaud\u00ed, as he had done in Casa Batll\u00f3, designed furniture specifically for the main floor. This was part of the concept artwork itself integral to modernism in which the architect assumed responsibility for global issues such as the structure and the facade, as well as every detail of the decor, designing furniture and accessories such as lamps, planters, floors or ceilings.\nThis was another point of friction with Segimon, who complained that there was no straight wall to place her Steinway piano. Gaud\u00ed's response was blunt: \"So play the violin.\" The result of these disagreements has been the loss of the decorative legacy of Gaud\u00ed, as most of the furniture was removed due to climate change and the changes she made to the main floor when Gaud\u00ed died. Some remain in private collections, including a curtain made of oak 4 m. long by 1.96 m. high in the Museum of Catalan Modernism; and a chair and desktop of Mil\u00e0.\nGaud\u00ed carved oak doors similar to what he had done for the Casa y Bardes, but these were only included on two floors as when Segimon discovered the price, she decided there would be no more at that quality.\nArchitecture.\n\"Casa Mil\u00e0\" is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site \"Works of Antoni Gaud\u00ed\". It was a predecessor of some buildings with a similar biomorphic appearance:\nFree exhibitions often are held on the first floor, which also provides some opportunity to see the interior design. There is a charge for entrance to the apartment on the fourth floor and the roof. The other floors are not open to visitors.\nConstructive similarities.\nGaud\u00ed's La Pedrera was inspired by a mountain, but there is no agreement as to which mountain was the reference model. Joan Berg\u00f3s thought it was the rocks of Fray Guerau in Prades mountains. Joan Matamala thought that the model could have been St. Miquel del Fai, while the sculptor Vicente Vilarubias believed it was inspired by the cliffs Torrent Pareis in Menorca. Other options include the mountains of U\u00e7hisar in Cappadocia, suggested by Juan Goytisolo, or Mola Gallifa, suggested by Louis Permanyer, based on the fact that Gaud\u00ed visited the area in 1885 to escape an outbreak of cholera in Barcelona.\nSome people say that the interior layout of La Pedrera comes from studies that Gaud\u00ed made of medieval fortresses. This image is reinforced by the seeming appearance of the rooftop chimneys as \"sentinels\" with great helmets. The structure of the iron door in the lobby does not follow any symmetry, straight or repetitive pattern. Rather, it evokes bubbles of soap that are formed between the hands or the structures of a plant cell.\nCriticism and controversy.\nThe building's unconventional style made it the subject of much criticism. It was given the nickname \"La Pedrera\", meaning \"the quarry\". Casa Mil\u00e0 appeared in many satirical magazines. Joan Junceda presented it as a traditional \"Easter cake\" by means of cartoons in \"Patufet\". Joaquim Garcia made a joke about the difficulty of setting the damask wrought iron balconies in his magazine. Homeowners in Passeig de Gracia became angry with Mil\u00e0 and ceased to greet him, arguing that the weird building by Gaud\u00ed would lower the price of land in the area.\nAdministrative problems.\nCasa Mil\u00e0 also caused some administrative problems. In December 1907 the City Hall stopped work on the building because of a pillar which occupied part of the sidewalk, not respecting the alignment of facades. Again on August 17, 1908, more problems occurred when the building surpassed the predicted height and borders of its construction site by . The Council called for a fine of 100,000 pesetas (approximately 25% of the cost of work) or for the demolition of the attic and roof. The dispute was resolved a year and a half later, December 28, 1909, when the Commission certified that it was a monumental building and thus not required to have a 'strict compliance' with the bylaws.\nDesign competitions.\nThe owner entered La Pedrera in the annual sponsored by the Barcelona City Council (\"Ayuntament\"). Other entries in the competition included two works by Sagnier (Calle Mallorca 264, and one on Corsica and Av. Diagonal), the by architect , and the , designed by . Although the most dramatic and clear favorite was Casa Mil\u00e0, the jury opined that even though the facades were complete, \"there's still a lot left to do before it's fully completed, finalized and in a perfect state of appreciation.\" The winner in 1910 was Samanillo Perez, for his building which now houses the headquarters of the Circulo Ecuestre.\nDesign disagreements.\nGaud\u00ed's relations with Segimon deteriorated during the construction and decoration of the house. There were many disagreements between them, one example being the monumental bronze virgin del Rosario, which Gaud\u00ed wanted as the statue on the front of the building in homage to the name of the owner, that the artist Carles Mani i Roig was to sculpt. The statue was not made although the words \"Ave gratia M plena Dominus tecum\" were written at the top of the facade. Continuing disagreements led Gaud\u00ed to take Mil\u00e0 to court over his fees. The lawsuit was won by Gaud\u00ed in 1916, and he gave the 105,000 pesetas he won in the case to charity, stating that \"the principles mattered more than money.\" Mil\u00e0 was having to pay the mortgage.\nAfter Gaud\u00ed's death in 1926, Segimon got rid of most of the furniture that Gaud\u00ed had designed and covered over parts of Gaud\u00ed's designs with new decorations in the style of Louis XVI. La Pedrera was acquired in 1986 by and when restoration was done four years later, some of the original decorations re-emerged.\nWhen the Civil War broke out in July 1936, the Mil\u00e0s were on vacation. Part of the building was collectivized by the Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia; the Mil\u00e0s fled the area with some artwork."}
{"id": "1327", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1327", "title": "Antiparticle", "text": "In particle physics, every type of particle of \"ordinary\" matter (as opposed to antimatter) is associated with an antiparticle with the same mass but with opposite physical charges (such as electric charge). For example, the antiparticle of the electron is the positron (also known as an antielectron). While the electron has a negative electric charge, the positron has a positive electric charge, and is produced naturally in certain types of radioactive decay. The opposite is also true: the antiparticle of the positron is the electron.\nSome particles, such as the photon, are their own antiparticle. Otherwise, for each pair of antiparticle partners, one is designated as the normal particle (the one that occurs in matter usually interacted with in daily life). The other (usually given the prefix \"anti-\") is designated the \"antiparticle\".\nParticle\u2013antiparticle pairs can annihilate each other, producing photons; since the charges of the particle and antiparticle are opposite, total charge is conserved. For example, the positrons produced in natural radioactive decay quickly annihilate themselves with electrons, producing pairs of gamma rays, a process exploited in positron emission tomography.\nThe laws of nature are very nearly symmetrical with respect to particles and antiparticles. For example, an antiproton and a positron can form an antihydrogen atom, which is believed to have the same properties as a hydrogen atom. This leads to the question of why the formation of matter after the Big Bang resulted in a universe consisting almost entirely of matter, rather than being a half-and-half mixture of matter and antimatter. The discovery of charge parity violation helped to shed light on this problem by showing that this symmetry, originally thought to be perfect, was only approximate. The question about how the formation of matter after the Big Bang resulted in a universe consisting almost entirely of matter remains an unanswered one, and explanations so far are not truly satisfactory, overall. \nBecause charge is conserved, it is not possible to create an antiparticle without either destroying another particle of the same charge (as is for instance the case when antiparticles are produced naturally via beta decay or the collision of cosmic rays with Earth's atmosphere), or by the simultaneous creation of both a particle \"and\" its antiparticle (pair production), which can occur in particle accelerators such as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.\nParticles and their antiparticles have equal and opposite charges, so that an uncharged particle also gives rise to an uncharged antiparticle. In many cases, the antiparticle and the particle coincide: pairs of photons, Z0\u00a0bosons, \u00a0mesons, and hypothetical gravitons and some hypothetical WIMPs all self-annihilate. However, electrically neutral particles need not be identical to their antiparticles: for example, the neutron and antineutron are distinct.\nHistory.\nExperiment.\nIn 1932, soon after the prediction of positrons by Paul Dirac, Carl D. Anderson found that cosmic-ray collisions produced these particles in a cloud chamber \u2013 a particle detector in which moving electrons (or positrons) leave behind trails as they move through the gas. The electric charge-to-mass ratio of a particle can be measured by observing the radius of curling of its cloud-chamber track in a magnetic field. Positrons, because of the direction that their paths curled, were at first mistaken for electrons travelling in the opposite direction. Positron paths in a cloud-chamber trace the same helical path as an electron but rotate in the opposite direction with respect to the magnetic field direction due to their having the same magnitude of charge-to-mass ratio but with opposite charge and, therefore, opposite signed charge-to-mass ratios.\nThe antiproton and antineutron were found by Emilio Segr\u00e8 and Owen Chamberlain in 1955 at the University of California, Berkeley. Since then, the antiparticles of many other subatomic particles have been created in particle accelerator experiments. In recent years, complete atoms of antimatter have been assembled out of antiprotons and positrons, collected in electromagnetic traps.\nDirac hole theory.\nSolutions of the Dirac equation contain negative energy quantum states. As a result, an electron could always radiate energy and fall into a negative energy state. Even worse, it could keep radiating infinite amounts of energy because there were infinitely many negative energy states available. To prevent this unphysical situation from happening, Dirac proposed that a \"sea\" of negative-energy electrons fills the universe, already occupying all of the lower-energy states so that, due to the Pauli exclusion principle, no other electron could fall into them. Sometimes, however, one of these negative-energy particles could be lifted out of this Dirac sea to become a positive-energy particle. But, when lifted out, it would leave behind a \"hole\" in the sea that would act exactly like a positive-energy electron with a reversed charge. These holes were interpreted as \"negative-energy electrons\" by Paul Dirac and mistakenly identified with protons in his 1930 paper \"A Theory of Electrons and Protons\" However, these \"negative-energy electrons\" turned out to be positrons, and not protons.\nThis picture implied an infinite negative charge for the universea problem of which Dirac was aware. Dirac tried to argue that we would perceive this as the normal state of zero charge. Another difficulty was the difference in masses of the electron and the proton. Dirac tried to argue that this was due to the electromagnetic interactions with the sea, until Hermann Weyl proved that hole theory was completely symmetric between negative and positive charges. Dirac also predicted a reaction \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0\u00a0+\u00a0, where an electron and a proton annihilate to give two photons. Robert Oppenheimer and Igor Tamm, however, proved that this would cause ordinary matter to disappear too fast. A year later, in 1931, Dirac modified his theory and postulated the positron, a new particle of the same mass as the electron. The discovery of this particle the next year removed the last two objections to his theory.\nWithin Dirac's theory, the problem of infinite charge of the universe remains. Some bosons also have antiparticles, but since bosons do not obey the Pauli exclusion principle (only fermions do), hole theory does not work for them. A unified interpretation of antiparticles is now available in quantum field theory, which solves both these problems by describing antimatter as negative energy states of the same underlying matter field, i.e. particles moving backwards in time.\nParticle\u2013antiparticle annihilation.\nIf a particle and antiparticle are in the appropriate quantum states, then they can annihilate each other and produce other particles. Reactions such as \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0 (the two-photon annihilation of an electron-positron pair) are an example. The single-photon annihilation of an electron-positron pair, \u00a0+\u00a0\u00a0\u2192\u00a0, cannot occur in free space because it is impossible to conserve energy and momentum together in this process. However, in the Coulomb field of a nucleus the translational invariance is broken and single-photon annihilation may occur. The reverse reaction (in free space, without an atomic nucleus) is also impossible for this reason. In quantum field theory, this process is allowed only as an intermediate quantum state for times short enough that the violation of energy conservation can be accommodated by the uncertainty principle. This opens the way for virtual pair production or annihilation in which a one particle quantum state may \"fluctuate\" into a two particle state and back. These processes are important in the vacuum state and renormalization of a quantum field theory. It also opens the way for neutral particle mixing through processes such as the one pictured here, which is a complicated example of mass renormalization.\nProperties.\nQuantum states of a particle and an antiparticle are interchanged by the combined application of charge conjugation formula_1, parity formula_2 and time reversal formula_3.\nformula_1 and formula_2 are linear, unitary operators, formula_3 is antilinear and antiunitary, \nformula_7. \nIf formula_8 denotes the quantum state of a particle formula_9 with momentum formula_10 and spin formula_11 whose component in the z-direction is formula_12, then one has\nwhere formula_14 denotes the charge conjugate state, that is, the antiparticle. In particular a massive particle and its antiparticle transform under the same irreducible representation of the Poincar\u00e9 group which means the antiparticle has the same mass and the same spin.\nIf formula_15, formula_16 and formula_17 \ncan be defined separately on the particles and antiparticles, then\nwhere the proportionality sign indicates that there might be a phase on the right hand side.\nAs formula_21 anticommutes with the charges, formula_22, particle and antiparticle have opposite electric charges q and -q.\nQuantum field theory.\nOne may try to quantize an electron field without mixing the annihilation and creation operators by writing\nwhere we use the symbol \"k\" to denote the quantum numbers \"p\" and \u03c3 of the previous section and the sign of the energy, \"E(k)\", and \"ak\" denotes the corresponding annihilation operators. Of course, since we are dealing with fermions, we have to have the operators satisfy canonical anti-commutation relations. However, if one now writes down the Hamiltonian\nthen one sees immediately that the expectation value of \"H\" need not be positive. This is because \"E(k)\" can have any sign whatsoever, and the combination of creation and annihilation operators has expectation value 1 or 0.\nSo one has to introduce the charge conjugate \"antiparticle\" field, with its own creation and annihilation operators satisfying the relations\nwhere \"k\" has the same \"p\", and opposite \u03c3 and sign of the energy. Then one can rewrite the field in the form\nwhere the first sum is over positive energy states and the second over those of negative energy. The energy becomes\nwhere \"E0\" is an infinite negative constant. The vacuum state is defined as the state with no particle or antiparticle, \"i.e.\", formula_28 and formula_29. Then the energy of the vacuum is exactly \"E0\". Since all energies are measured relative to the vacuum, H is positive definite. Analysis of the properties of \"ak\" and \"bk\" shows that one is the annihilation operator for particles and the other for antiparticles. This is the case of a fermion.\nThis approach is due to Vladimir Fock, Wendell Furry and Robert Oppenheimer. If one quantizes a real scalar field, then one finds that there is only one kind of annihilation operator; therefore, real scalar fields describe neutral bosons. Since complex scalar fields admit two different kinds of annihilation operators, which are related by conjugation, such fields describe charged bosons.\nFeynman\u2013St\u00fcckelberg interpretation.\nBy considering the propagation of the negative energy modes of the electron field backward in time, Ernst St\u00fcckelberg reached a pictorial understanding of the fact that the particle and antiparticle have equal mass m and spin J but opposite charges q. This allowed him to rewrite perturbation theory precisely in the form of diagrams. Richard Feynman later gave an independent systematic derivation of these diagrams from a particle formalism, and they are now called Feynman diagrams. Each line of a diagram represents a particle propagating either backward or forward in time. In Feynman diagrams, anti-particles are shown traveling backwards in time relative to normal matter, and vice versa. This technique is the most widespread method of computing amplitudes in quantum field theory today.\nSince this picture was first developed by St\u00fcckelberg, and acquired its modern form in Feynman's work, it is called the Feynman\u2013St\u00fcckelberg interpretation of antiparticles to honor both scientists."}
{"id": "1328", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1328", "title": "A.D.", "text": ""}
{"id": "1331", "revid": "1272935016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1331", "title": "Arabian Prince", "text": "Kim Renard Nazel (born June 17, 1965), better known by his stage names Arabian Prince or Professor X, is an American rapper and record producer. He was a founding member of N.W.A. and performed on a few tracks from the group's major debut \"Straight Outta Compton\" before leaving.\nEarly life.\nNazel was born in Compton, California, to the son of Joseph \"Skippy\" Nazel Jr., an African American author and radio talk show host. His musical background came from his mother, a piano teacher and classical musician. His family tried its best to shelter him, sending him to a Catholic school and keeping him busy with football to keep him away from the gangs. The younger Nazel got his first experience with making music at the radio station his father hosted his talk show on; Nazel used the radio station's equipment to put together mixtapes that he would sell at school. Nazel went on to graduate from Jun\u00edpero Serra High School in nearby Gardena.\nMusic career.\nNazel took the stage name of DJ Prince and started selling mixtapes at school. While working at a Petshop at a Lennox California Mall, its owner, Sam Nassif, asked him to DJ a party at a community dance hall. He kept performing there for several weekends and the success persuaded Nassif to invest even more in the place, renaming it \"The Cave\",(And Later \"The Basement\") where Nazel would continue to host for over three years and even after his N.W.A days. Nassif also funded DJ Prince's first record, \"Strange Life\".\nHe changed his stage name when he was 15 years old at the Skateland USA, the same skating venue credited for launching N.W.A a few years later, due to a fan's suggestion. He said about his name:\nArabian Prince started working with Bobby Jimmy &amp; the Critters in 1984. He also produced the hit single and album for J.J. Fad, \"Supersonic\".\nIn 1986, he was a founding member of N.W.A, helping with production on some tracks and appearing as a vocalist on the last track of N.W.A.'s hit studio album \"Straight Outta Compton\" (1989), \"Something 2 Dance 2\", a relatively radio-friendly song which was also removed from later pressings of the album due to a dispute. Arabian Prince left over royalty and contract disagreements. \"I started off as a solo artist\", he said, \"so I was aware of what a royalty statement was. I knew that when these many records were sold, there is a quarterly statement. When you look at it, you can see how much money was paid and then share it. This was not the case. We were also never paid for touring.\" Eazy-E, Ice Cube and MC Ren remained as the main performers, DJ Yella was the turntablist and Dr. Dre was the main producer.\nAfter leaving N.W.A, Arabian Prince began a solo career. His first album, \"Brother Arab\", was released in 1989 with the single \"She's Got A Big Posse\"; \"Where's My Bytches\" followed in 1993.\nIn the mid-2000s, he started releasing music again, with his Professor X project on the Dutch label Clone Records. \"I could not release the record under Arabian Prince\", he said, \"because I already had a single out, so I called myself Professor X on that record.\" In 2007, he performed as a DJ on the 2K Sports Holiday Bounce Tour with artists from the Stones Throw label. In 2008, Stones Throw released a compilation of his electro-rap material from the 1980s. One of his songs was included on the 2007 video game, \"College Hoops 2K8\".\nIn 2015, a biopic about N.W.A. titled \"Straight Outta Compton\" was released; however, Arabian Prince was not portrayed in the film. After the release film, Prince said to VladTV: \"A lot of the scenes in real life, I was there\u2014I'm just not there in the film, which I'm like, if you're gonna write me out of a movie, shoot some other scenes. Don't write scenes where I was there.\" Some of the pivotal scenes would be choosing the name for the band, the tour and the infamous Detroit concert. He also remembers himself as the main opposer to Jerry Heller about the royalties and the money, a role that in the film was instead given to Ice Cube.\nThe following year, N.W.A. was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, but again, Arabian Prince was not included nor mentioned.\nIn 2018, Arabian Prince appeared on the \"AmeriKKKant\" album of industrial-metal band Ministry. He made a second appearance on Ministry's 2021 album \"Moral Hygiene\".\nOther ventures.\nAside from his music career, he worked in special effects, 3D animation and video games."}
{"id": "1332", "revid": "48396901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1332", "title": "August 7", "text": ""}
{"id": "1333", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1333", "title": "August 8", "text": ""}
{"id": "1334", "revid": "14832365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1334", "title": "April 16", "text": ""}
{"id": "1335", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1335", "title": "Associative property", "text": "In mathematics, the associative property is a property of some binary operations that means that rearranging the parentheses in an expression will not change the result. In propositional logic, associativity is a valid rule of replacement for expressions in logical proofs.\nWithin an expression containing two or more occurrences in a row of the same associative operator, the order in which the operations are performed does not matter as long as the sequence of the operands is not changed. That is (after rewriting the expression with parentheses and in infix notation if necessary), rearranging the parentheses in such an expression will not change its value. Consider the following equations:\nformula_1\nEven though the parentheses were rearranged on each line, the values of the expressions were not altered. Since this holds true when performing addition and multiplication on any real numbers, it can be said that \"addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative operations\".\nAssociativity is not the same as commutativity, which addresses whether the order of two operands affects the result. For example, the order does not matter in the multiplication of real numbers, that is, , so we say that the multiplication of real numbers is a commutative operation. However, operations such as function composition and matrix multiplication are associative, but not (generally) commutative.\nAssociative operations are abundant in mathematics; in fact, many algebraic structures (such as semigroups and categories) explicitly require their binary operations to be associative.\nHowever, many important and interesting operations are non-associative; some examples include subtraction, exponentiation, and the vector cross product. In contrast to the theoretical properties of real numbers, the addition of floating point numbers in computer science is not associative, and the choice of how to associate an expression can have a significant effect on rounding error.\nDefinition.\nFormally, a binary operation formula_2 on a set is called associative if it satisfies the associative law:\nHere, \u2217 is used to replace the symbol of the operation, which may be any symbol, and even the absence of symbol (juxtaposition) as for multiplication.\nThe associative law can also be expressed in functional notation thus: formula_7\nGeneralized associative law.\nIf a binary operation is associative, repeated application of the operation produces the same result regardless of how valid pairs of parentheses are inserted in the expression. This is called the generalized associative law.\nThe number of possible bracketings is just the Catalan number, formula_8\n, for \"n\" operations on \"n+1\" values. For instance, a product of 3 operations on 4 elements may be written (ignoring permutations of the arguments), in formula_9 possible ways:\nIf the product operation is associative, the generalized associative law says that all these expressions will yield the same result. So unless the expression with omitted parentheses already has a different meaning (see below), the parentheses can be considered unnecessary and \"the\" product can be written unambiguously as\nAs the number of elements increases, the number of possible ways to insert parentheses grows quickly, but they remain unnecessary for disambiguation.\nAn example where this does not work is the logical biconditional . It is associative; thus, is equivalent to , but most commonly means , which is not equivalent.\nExamples.\nSome examples of associative operations include the following.\nPropositional logic.\nRule of replacement.\nIn standard truth-functional propositional logic, \"association\", or \"associativity\" are two valid rules of replacement. The rules allow one to move parentheses in logical expressions in logical proofs. The rules (using logical connectives notation) are:\nformula_16\nand\nformula_17\nwhere \"formula_18\" is a metalogical symbol representing \"can be replaced in a proof with\".\nTruth functional connectives.\n\"Associativity\" is a property of some logical connectives of truth-functional propositional logic. The following logical equivalences demonstrate that associativity is a property of particular connectives. The following (and their converses, since is commutative) are truth-functional tautologies.\nJoint denial is an example of a truth functional connective that is \"not\" associative.\nNon-associative operation.\nA binary operation formula_22 on a set \"S\" that does not satisfy the associative law is called non-associative. Symbolically,\nformula_23\nFor such an operation the order of evaluation \"does\" matter. For example:\nAlso although addition is associative for finite sums, it is not associative inside infinite sums (series). For example,\nformula_28\nwhereas\nformula_29\nSome non-associative operations are fundamental in mathematics. They appear often as the multiplication in structures called non-associative algebras, which have also an addition and a scalar multiplication. Examples are the octonions and Lie algebras. In Lie algebras, the multiplication satisfies Jacobi identity instead of the associative law; this allows abstracting the algebraic nature of infinitesimal transformations.\nOther examples are quasigroup, quasifield, non-associative ring, and commutative non-associative magmas.\nNonassociativity of floating point calculation.\nIn mathematics, addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative. By contrast, in computer science, addition and multiplication of floating point numbers are \"not\" associative, as different rounding errors may be introduced when dissimilar-sized values are joined in a different order.\nTo illustrate this, consider a floating point representation with a 4-bit significand:\nEven though most computers compute with 24 or 53 bits of significand, this is still an important source of rounding error, and approaches such as the Kahan summation algorithm are ways to minimise the errors. It can be especially problematic in parallel computing.\nNotation for non-associative operations.\nIn general, parentheses must be used to indicate the order of evaluation if a non-associative operation appears more than once in an expression (unless the notation specifies the order in another way, like formula_30). However, mathematicians agree on a particular order of evaluation for several common non-associative operations. This is simply a notational convention to avoid parentheses.\nA left-associative operation is a non-associative operation that is conventionally evaluated from left to right, i.e.,\nformula_31\nwhile a right-associative operation is conventionally evaluated from right to left:\nformula_32\nBoth left-associative and right-associative operations occur. Left-associative operations include the following:\nThis notation can be motivated by the currying isomorphism, which enables partial application.\nRight-associative operations include the following:\nNon-associative operations for which no conventional evaluation order is defined include the following.\nHistory.\nWilliam Rowan Hamilton seems to have coined the term \"associative property\" around 1844, a time when he was contemplating the non-associative algebra of the octonions he had learned about from John T. Graves."}
{"id": "1336", "revid": "18600472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1336", "title": "The Apache Software Foundation", "text": "The Apache Software Foundation ( ; ASF) is an American nonprofit corporation (classified as a 501(c)(3) organization in the United States) to support a number of open-source software projects. The ASF was formed from a group of developers of the Apache HTTP Server, and incorporated on March 25, 1999. it includes approximately 1000 members.\nThe Apache Software Foundation is a decentralized open source community of developers. The software they produce is distributed under the terms of the Apache License, a permissive open-source license for free and open-source software (FOSS). The Apache projects are characterized by a collaborative, consensus-based development process and an open and pragmatic software license, which is to say that it allows developers, who receive the software freely, to redistribute it under non-free terms. Each project is managed by a self-selected team of technical experts who are active contributors to the project. The ASF is a meritocracy, implying that membership of the foundation is granted only to volunteers who have actively contributed to Apache projects.\nAmong the ASF's objectives are: to provide legal protection to volunteers working on Apache projects, and to prevent the \"Apache\" brand name from being used by other organizations without permission.\nThe ASF also holds several ApacheCon conferences each year, highlighting Apache projects and related technology.\nHistory.\nThe history of the Apache Software Foundation is linked to the Apache HTTP Server, development beginning in February 1993. A group of eight developers started working on enhancing the NCSA HTTPd daemon. They came to be known as the Apache Group. On March 25, 1999, the Apache Software Foundation was formed. The first official meeting of the Apache Software Foundation was held on April 13, 1999. The initial members of the Apache Software Foundation consisted of the Apache Group: Brian Behlendorf, Ken Coar, Miguel Gonzales, Mark Cox, Lars Eilebrecht, Ralf S. Engelschall, Roy T. Fielding, Dean Gaudet, Ben Hyde, Jim Jagielski, Alexei Kosut, Martin Kraemer, Ben Laurie, Doug MacEachern, Aram Mirzadeh, Sameer Parekh, Cliff Skolnick, Marc Slemko, William (Bill) Stoddard, Paul Sutton, Randy Terbush and Dirk-Willem van Gulik. After a series of additional meetings to elect board members and resolve other legal matters regarding incorporation, the effective incorporation date of the Apache Software Foundation was set to June 1, 1999.\nCo-founder Brian Behlendorf states how the name 'Apache' was chosen: \"I suggested the name Apache partly because the web technologies at the time that were launching were being called cyber this or spider that or something on those themes and I was like we need something a little more interesting, a little more romantic, not to be a cultural appropriator or anything like that, I had just seen a documentary about Geronimo and the last days of a Native American tribe called the Apaches right, who succumbed to the invasion from the West, from the United States, and they were the last tribe to give up their territory and for me that almost romantically represented what I felt we were doing with this web-server project...\"\nProjects.\nApache divides its software development activities into separate semi-autonomous areas called \"top-level projects\" (formally known as a \"Project Management Committee\" in the bylaws), some of which have a number of sub-projects. Unlike some other organizations that host FOSS projects, before a project is hosted at Apache it has to be licensed to the ASF with a grant or contributor agreement. In this way, the ASF gains the necessary intellectual property rights for the development and distribution of all its projects.\nBoard of directors.\nThe Board of Directors of The Apache Software Foundation (ASF) is responsible for management and oversight of the business and affairs of the corporation in accordance with the Bylaws. This includes management of the corporate assets (funds, intellectual property, trademarks, and support equipment), appointment of a President and corporate officers managing the core operations of the ASF, and allocation of corporate resources for the benefit of Apache projects. Technical decision-making authority for every Apache project is assigned to their independent project management committee; the participants in each project provide direction, not the board.\nThe board is elected annually by the ASF membership.\nSince September 18, 2024, the board of directors has been:"}
{"id": "1338", "revid": "20888637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1338", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990", "text": "The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 or ADA () is a civil rights law that prohibits discrimination based on disability. It affords similar protections against discrimination to Americans with disabilities as the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which made discrimination based on race, religion, sex, national origin, and other characteristics illegal, and later sexual orientation and gender identity. In addition, unlike the Civil Rights Act, the ADA also requires covered employers to provide reasonable accommodations to employees with disabilities, and imposes accessibility requirements on public accommodations.\nIn 1986, the National Council on Disability had recommended the enactment of an Americans with Disabilities Act and drafted the first version of the bill which was introduced in the House and Senate in 1988. A broad bipartisan coalition of legislators supported the ADA, while the bill was opposed by business interests (who argued the bill imposed costs on business) and conservative evangelicals (who opposed protection for individuals with HIV). The final version of the bill was signed into law on July 26, 1990, by President George H. W. Bush. It was later amended in 2008 and signed by President George W. Bush with changes effective as of January 1, 2009.\nDisabilities included.\nConditions classed as disabilities under the ADA include both mental and physical conditions. A condition does not need to be severe or permanent to be a disability. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulations provide a list of conditions that should easily be concluded to be disabilities: amputation, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), autism, bipolar disorder, blindness, cancer, cerebral palsy, deafness, diabetes, epilepsy, HIV/AIDS, intellectual disability, major depressive disorder, mobility impairments requiring a wheelchair, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and schizophrenia. Other mental or physical health conditions also may be disabilities, depending on what the individual's symptoms would be in the absence of \"mitigating measures\" such as medication, therapy, assistive devices, or other means of restoring function, during an \"active episode\" of the condition (if the condition is episodic).\nCertain specific conditions that are widely considered anti-social, or tend to result in illegal activity, such as kleptomania, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, etc. are excluded under the definition of \"disability\" in order to prevent abuse of the statute's purpose. Additionally, sexual orientation is no longer considered a disorder and is also excluded from the definition of \"disability\". However, in 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit stated that the ADA covers individuals with gender dysphoria, which may aid transgender people in accessing legal protections they otherwise may be unable to.\nTitles.\nTitle I\u2014employment.\nThe ADA states that a \"covered entity\" shall not discriminate against \"a qualified individual with a disability\". This applies to job application procedures, hiring, advancement and discharge of employees, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment. \"Covered entities\" include employers with 15 or more employees, as well as employment agencies, labor organizations, and joint labor-management committees. There are strict limitations on when a covered entity can ask job applicants or employees disability-related questions or require them to undergo medical examination, and all medical information must be kept confidential.\nProhibited discrimination may include, among other things, firing or refusing to hire someone based on a real or perceived disability, segregation, and harassment based on a disability. Covered entities are also required to provide reasonable accommodations to job applicants and employees with disabilities. A reasonable accommodation is a change in the way things are typically done that the person needs because of a disability, and can include, among other things, special equipment that allows the person to perform the job, scheduling changes, and changes to the way work assignments are chosen or communicated. An employer is not required to provide an accommodation that would involve undue hardship (excessive difficulty or expense), and the individual who receives the accommodation must still perform the essential functions of the job and meet the normal performance requirements. An employee or applicant who currently engages in the illegal use of drugs is not considered qualified when a covered entity takes adverse action based on such use.\nPart of Title I was found unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court as it pertains to states in the case of \"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\" as violating the sovereign immunity rights of the several states as specified by the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Court determined that state employees cannot sue their employer for violating ADA rules. State employees can, however, file complaints at the Department of Justice or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, who can sue on their behalf.\nTitle II\u2014public entities (and public transportation).\nTitle II prohibits disability discrimination by all public entities at the local level, e.g., school district, municipal, city, or county, and at state level. Public entities must comply with Title II regulations by the U.S. Department of Justice. These regulations cover access to all programs and services offered by the entity. Access includes physical access described in the ADA Standards for Accessible Design and programmatic access that might be obstructed by discriminatory policies or procedures of the entity.\nTitle II applies to public transportation provided by public entities through regulations by the U.S. Department of Transportation. It includes the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak), along with all other commuter authorities. This section requires the provision of paratransit services by public entities that provide fixed-route services. ADA also sets minimum requirements for space layout in order to facilitate wheelchair securement on public transport.\nTitle II also applies to all state and local public housing, housing assistance, and housing referrals. The Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity is charged with enforcing this provision.\nTitle III\u2014public accommodations (and commercial facilities).\nUnder Title III, no individual may be discriminated against on the basis of disability with regards to the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodation. Public accommodations include most places of lodging (such as inns and hotels), recreation, transportation, education, and dining, along with stores, care providers, and places of public displays.\nUnder Title III of the ADA, all new construction (construction, modification or alterations) after the effective date of the ADA (approximately July 1992) must be fully compliant with the Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) found in the Code of Federal Regulations at 28\u00a0C.F.R., Part 36, Appendix \"A\".\nTitle III also has applications to existing facilities. One of the definitions of \"discrimination\" under Title III of the ADA is a \"failure to remove\" architectural barriers in existing facilities. See . This means that even facilities that have not been modified or altered in any way after the ADA was passed still have obligations. The standard is whether \"removing barriers\" (typically defined as bringing a condition into compliance with the ADAAG) is \"readily achievable\", defined as \"...easily accomplished without much difficulty or expense\".\nThe statutory definition of \"readily achievable\" calls for a balancing test between the cost of the proposed alteration and the wherewithal of the business and/or owners of the business. Thus, what might be \"readily achievable\" for a sophisticated and financially capable corporation might not be readily achievable for a small or local business.\nThere are exceptions to this title; many private clubs and religious organizations may not be bound by Title III. With regard to historic properties (those properties that are listed or that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or properties designated as historic under state or local law), those facilities must still comply with the provisions of Title III of the ADA to the \"maximum extent feasible\" but if following the usual standards would \"threaten to destroy the historic significance of a feature of the building\" then alternative standards may be used.\nUnder 2010 revisions of Department of Justice regulations, newly constructed or altered swimming pools, wading pools, and spas must have an accessible means of entrance and exit to pools for disabled people. However, the requirement is conditioned on whether providing access through a fixed lift is \"readily achievable\". Other requirements exist, based on pool size, include providing a certain number of accessible means of entry and exit, which are outlined in Section 242 of the standards. However, businesses are free to consider the differences in the application of the rules depending on whether the pool is new or altered, or whether the swimming pool was in existence before the effective date of the new rule. Full compliance may not be required for existing facilities; Section 242 and 1009 of the 2010 Standards outline such exceptions.\nService animals.\nADA provides explicit coverage for service animals. Guidelines protect persons with disabilities and indemnify businesses from damages related to granting access to service animals. Businesses are allowed to ask if the animal is a service animal and ask what tasks it is trained to perform, but are not allowed to ask the service animal to perform the task nor ask for an animal ID. They cannot ask what the person's disabilities are. A person with a disability cannot be removed from the premises unless one of two things happen: the animal is out of control and its owner cannot control it (e.g., a dog barking uncontrollably), or the animal is a direct threat to someone's health and safety. Allergies and fear of animals are not considered to be such a threat. \nBusinesses that prepare or serve food must allow service animals and their owners on the premises even if state or local health laws otherwise prohibit animals. Businesses that prepare or serve food are not required to provide care, food, a relief area for service animals. Extra fees for service animals are forbidden. They cannot be discriminated against, such as by isolation from people at a restaurant. \nPeople with disabilities cannot be treated as \"less than\" other customers. However, if a business normally charges for damages caused by the person to property, damage caused by a service animal can also require compensation.\nAuxiliary aids.\nThe ADA provides explicit coverage for auxiliary aids.\nADA says that \"a public accommodation shall take those steps that may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services, unless the public accommodation can demonstrate that taking those steps would fundamentally alter the nature of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations being offered or would result in an undue burden, i.e., significant difficulty or expense.\" The term \"auxiliary aids and services\" includes:\nCaptions are considered one type of auxiliary aid. Since the passage of the ADA, the use of captioning has expanded. Entertainment, educational, informational, and training materials are captioned for deaf and hard-of-hearing audiences at the time they are produced and distributed. The Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990 requires that all televisions larger than 13 inches sold in the United States after July 1993 have a special built-in decoder that enables viewers to watch closed-captioned programming. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 directs the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to adopt rules requiring closed captioning of most television programming. The FCC's rules on closed captioning became effective January 1, 1998.\nTitle IV\u2014telecommunications.\nTitle IV of the ADA amended the Communications Act of 1934 primarily by adding section . This section requires that all telecommunications companies in the U.S. take steps to ensure functionally equivalent services for consumers with disabilities, notably those who are deaf or hard of hearing and those with speech impairments. When Title IV took effect in the early 1990s, it led to the installation of public teletypewriter (TTY) machines and other TDD (telecommunications devices for the deaf). Title IV also led to the creation, in all 50 states and the District of Columbia, of what was then called dual-party relay services and now are known as Telecommunications Relay Services (TRS), such as STS relay. Today, many TRS-mediated calls are made over the Internet by consumers who use broadband connections. Some are Video Relay Service (VRS) calls, while others are text calls. In either variation, communication assistants translate between the signed or typed words of a consumer and the spoken words of others. In 2006, according to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), VRS calls averaged two million minutes a month.\nTitle V\u2014miscellaneous provisions.\nTitle V includes technical provisions. It discusses, for example, the fact that nothing in the ADA amends, overrides or cancels anything in Section 504. Additionally, Title V includes an anti-retaliation or coercion provision. The \"Technical Assistance Manual\" for the ADA explains this provision:\nHistory.\nThe ADA has roots in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.\nDrafting.\nThe law began in the Virginia House of Delegates in 1985 as the Virginians with Disabilities Act\u2014supported by Warren G. Stambaugh\u2014which was passed by the state Virginia. It is the first iteration of the Americans with Disabilities Act.\nIn 1986, the National Council on Disability (NCD), an independent federal agency, issued a report, Towards Independence, in which the Council examined incentives and disincentives in federal laws towards increasing the independence and full integration of people with disabilities into U.S. society. Among the disincentives to independence the Council identified was the existence of large remaining gaps in civil rights coverage for people with disabilities in the United States. A principal conclusion of the report was to recommend the adoption of comprehensive civil rights legislation, which became the ADA.\nThe idea of federal legislation enhancing and extending civil rights legislation to millions of Americans with disabilities gained bipartisan support in late 1988 and early 1989. In early 1989 both Congress and the newly inaugurated Bush White House worked separately, then jointly, to write legislation capable of expanding civil rights without imposing undue harm or costs on those already in compliance with existing rules and laws.\nLobbying.\nOver the years, key activists and advocates played an important role in lobbying members of the U.S. Congress to develop and pass the ADA, including Justin Whitlock Dart Jr., Patrisha Wright and others.\nWright is known as \"the General\" for her work in coordinating the campaign to enact the ADA. She is widely considered the main force behind the campaign lobbying for the ADA.\nSupport and opposition.\nSupport.\nSenator Bob Dole was a supporter and advocate for the bill.\nOpposition from religious groups.\nConservative evangelicals opposed the ADA because the legislation protected individuals with HIV, which they associated with homosexuality.\nThe debate over the Americans with Disabilities Act led some religious groups to take opposite positions. The Association of Christian Schools International opposed the ADA in its original form, primarily because the ADA labeled religious institutions \"public accommodations\" and thus would have required churches to make costly structural changes to ensure access for all. The cost argument advanced by ACSI and others prevailed in keeping religious institutions from being labeled as \"public accommodations\". Church groups such as the National Association of Evangelicals testified against the ADA's Title I employment provisions on grounds of religious liberty. The NAE believed the regulation of the internal employment of churches was \"... an improper intrusion [of] the federal government.\"\nOpposition from business interests.\nMany companies, corporations, and business groups opposed the Americans with Disabilities Act, arguing that the legislation would impose costs on businesses. Testifying before Congress, Greyhound Bus Lines stated that the act had the potential to \"deprive millions of people of affordable intercity public transportation and thousands of rural communities of their only link to the outside world.\" The US Chamber of Commerce argued that the costs of the ADA would be \"enormous\" and have \"a disastrous impact on many small businesses struggling to survive.\" The National Federation of Independent Business, an organization that lobbies for small businesses, called the ADA \"a disaster for small business\". Pro-business conservative commentators joined in opposition, writing that the Americans with Disabilities Act was \"an expensive headache to millions\" that would not necessarily improve the lives of people with disabilities.\n\"Capitol Crawl\".\nShortly before the act was passed, disability rights activists with physical disabilities coalesced in front of the Capitol Building, shed their crutches, wheelchairs, powerchairs and other assistive devices, and immediately proceeded to crawl and pull their bodies up all 100 of the Capitol's front steps, without warning. As the activists did so, many of them chanted \"ADA now\", and \"Vote, Now\". Some activists who remained at the bottom of the steps held signs and yelled words of encouragement at the \"Capitol Crawlers\". Jennifer Keelan, a second grader with cerebral palsy, was videotaped as she pulled herself up the steps, using mostly her hands and arms, saying \"I'll take all night if I have to.\" This direct action is reported to have \"inconvenienced\" several senators and to have pushed them to approve the act. While there are those who do not attribute much overall importance to this action, the \"Capitol Crawl\" of 1990 is seen by some present-day disability activists in the United States as a central act for encouraging the ADA into law.\nFinal passage.\nSenator Tom Harkin (D-IA) authored what became the final bill and was its chief sponsor in the Senate. Harkin delivered part of his introduction speech in sign language, saying it was so his deaf brother could understand.\nPresident George H. W. Bush, on signing the measure on July 26, 1990, said:\nADA Amendments Act, 2008.\nThe ADA defines a covered disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, a history of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) was charged with interpreting the 1990 law with regard to discrimination in employment. The EEOC developed regulations limiting an individual's impairment to one that \"severely or significantly restricts\" a major life activity. The ADAAA directed the EEOC to amend its regulations and replace \"severely or significantly\" with \"substantially limits\", a more lenient standard.\nOn September 25, 2008, President George W. Bush signed the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA) into law. The amendment broadened the definition of \"disability\", thereby extending the ADA's protections to a greater number of people. The ADAAA also added to the ADA examples of \"major life activities\" including, but not limited to, \"caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working\" as well as the operation of several specified \"major bodily functions\". The act overturned a 1999 US Supreme Court case that held that an employee was not disabled if the impairment could be corrected by mitigating measures; it specifically provides that such impairment must be determined without considering such ameliorative measures. It also overturned the court's finding that an impairment that substantially limits one major life activity must also limit others to be considered a disability.\nIn 2008, the United States House Committee on Education and Labor stated that the amendment \"makes it absolutely clear that the ADA is intended to provide broad coverage to protect anyone who faces discrimination on the basis of disability.\" Thus the ADAAA led to broader coverage of impaired employees.\nWeb Content Accessibility Guidelines, 2019.\nIn October 2019, the Supreme Court declined to resolve a circuit split as to whether websites are covered by the ADA. The Court turned down an appeal from Domino's Pizza and let stand a U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals ruling which held that the Americans with Disabilities Act protects access not just to brick-and-mortar public accommodations, but also to the websites and apps of those businesses.\nImpact.\nThe ADA led to significant improvements in terms of access to public services, accessibility in the built environment, and societal understanding of disability.\nEmployment.\nBetween 1991 (after the enactment of the ADA) and 1995, the employment rate of men with disabilities dropped by 7.8% regardless of age, educational level, or type of disability, with the most affected being young, less-educated and intellectually disabled men. While no causal link between the ADA and that trend has been definitively identified, some researchers have characterized the ADA as ineffectual and argued that it caused this decline by raising the cost of doing business for employers, who quietly avoid hiring people with disabilities for fear of lawsuit. To these employers, hiring people with disabilities became too expensive as they had to spend extra on assistive technology.\nIn 2001, for men of all working ages and women under 40, Current Population Survey data showed a sharp drop in the employment of disabled workers, leading at least two economists to attribute the cause to the Act. By contrast, a study in 2003 found that while the Act may have led to short term reactions by employers, in the long term, there were either positive or neutral consequences for wages and employment. In 2005, the rate of employment among disabled people increased to 45% of the population of disabled people.\n\"Professional plaintiffs\".\nSince enforcement of the act began in July 1992, it has quickly become a major component of employment law. The ADA allows private plaintiffs to receive only injunctive relief (a court order requiring the public accommodation to remedy violations of the accessibility regulations) and attorneys' fees, and does not provide monetary rewards to private plaintiffs who sue non-compliant businesses. Unless a state law, such as the California Unruh Civil Rights Act, provides for monetary damages to private plaintiffs, persons with disabilities do not obtain direct financial benefits from suing businesses that violate the ADA.\nThe attorneys' fees provision of Title III does provide incentive for lawyers to specialize and engage in serial ADA litigation, but a disabled plaintiff does not obtain a financial reward from attorneys' fees unless they act as their own attorney, or as mentioned above, a disabled plaintiff resides in a state that provides for minimum compensation and court fees in lawsuits. Moreover, there may be a benefit to these private attorneys general who identify and compel the correction of illegal conditions: they may increase the number of public accommodations accessible to persons with disabilities. \"Civil rights law depends heavily on private enforcement. Moreover, the inclusion of penalties and damages is the driving force that facilitates voluntary compliance with the ADA.\" Courts have noted:\nHowever, in states that have enacted laws that allow private individuals to win monetary awards from non-compliant businesses (as of 2008, these include California, Florida, Hawaii, and Illinois), \"professional plaintiffs\" are typically found. At least one of these plaintiffs in California has been barred by courts from filing lawsuits unless he receives prior court permission. Through the end of fiscal year 1998, 86% of the 106,988 ADA charges filed with and resolved by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, were either dropped or investigated and dismissed by EEOC but not without imposing opportunity costs and legal fees on employers.\nCase law.\nThere have been some notable cases regarding the ADA. For example, a major hotel room marketer (Hotels.com) with their business presence on the Internet was sued because their customers with disabilities could not reserve hotel rooms through their website without substantial extra efforts that persons without disabilities were not required to perform. Such lawsuits represent a major potential expansion of the ADA in that they (known as \"bricks vs. clicks\"), seek to expand the ADA's authority to cyberspace, where entities may not have actual physical facilities that are required to comply.\n\"Green v. State of California\".\n\"Green v. State of California, No. S137770 (Cal. August 23, 2007)\" was a case in which the California Supreme Court was faced with deciding whether an employee suing the state is required to prove they are able to perform \"essential\" job duties, regardless of whether or not there was \"reasonable accommodation\", or if the employer must prove the person suing was unable to do so. The court ruled the burden was on the employee, not the employer, and reversed a disputed decision by the lower courts. Plaintiff attorney David Greenberg brought forth considerations of the concept that, even in the state of California, employers do not have to employ a worker who is unable to perform \"essential job functions\" with \"reasonable accommodation\". Forcing employers to do so \"would defy logic and establish a poor public policy in employment matters.\"\n\"National Federation of the Blind v. Target Corporation\".\n\"National Federation of the Blind v. Target Corp.\" was a case where a major retailer, Target Corp., was sued because their web designers failed to design its website to enable persons with low or no vision to use it.\n\"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\".\n\"Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett\" was a United States Supreme Court case about Congress's enforcement powers under the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. It decided that Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act was unconstitutional insofar as it allowed private citizens to sue states for money damages.\n\"Barden v. The City of Sacramento\".\n\"Barden v. The City of Sacramento\", filed in March 1999, claimed that the City of Sacramento failed to comply with the ADA when, while making public street improvements, it did not bring its sidewalks into compliance with the ADA. Certain issues were resolved in federal court. One issue, whether sidewalks were covered by the ADA, was appealed to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals, which ruled that sidewalks were a \"program\" under the ADA and must be made accessible to persons with disabilities. The ruling was later appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which refused to hear the case, letting stand the ruling of the 9th Circuit.\n\"Bates v. United Parcel Service, Inc\".\n\"Bates v. United Parcel Service, Inc (UPS;\" begun in 1999) was the first equal opportunity employment class action brought on behalf of Deaf and Hard of Hearing workers throughout the country concerning workplace discrimination. It established legal precedent for these employees to be fully covered under the ADA. Key findings included:\nThe outcome was that UPS agreed to pay a $5.8 million award and agreed to a comprehensive accommodations program that was implemented in their facilities throughout the country.\n\"Spector v. Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd.\".\n\"Spector v. Norwegian Cruise Line Ltd.\" was a case that was decided by the United States Supreme Court in 2005. The defendant argued that as a vessel flying the flag of a foreign nation it was exempt from the requirements of the ADA. This argument was accepted by a federal court in Florida and, subsequently, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. However, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the ruling of the lower courts on the basis that Norwegian Cruise Lines was a business headquartered in the United States whose clients were predominantly Americans and, more importantly, operated out of port facilities throughout the United States.\n\"Olmstead v. L.C.\".\n\"Olmstead v. L.C.\" was a case before the United States Supreme Court in 1999. The two plaintiffs, Lois Curtis and E.W., were institutionalized in Georgia for diagnosed \"mental retardation\" and schizophrenia. Clinical assessments by the state determined that the plaintiffs could be appropriately treated in a community setting rather than the state institution. The plaintiffs sued the state of Georgia and the institution for being inappropriately treated and housed in the institutional setting rather than being treated in one of the state's community-based treatment facilities.\nThe Supreme Court decided under Title II of the ADA that mental illness is a form of disability and therefore covered under the ADA, and that unjustified institutional isolation of a person with a disability is a form of discrimination because it \"...perpetuates unwarranted assumptions that persons so isolated are incapable or unworthy of participating in community life.\" The court added, \"Confinement in an institution severely diminishes the everyday life activities of individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, economic independence, educational advancement, and cultural enrichment.\"\nTherefore, under Title II no person with a disability can be unjustly excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of services, programs or activities of any public entity.\n\"Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America v. The University of Michigan\".\n\"Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America v. The University of Michigan\" was a case filed before the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan. It was filed on behalf of the Michigan Paralyzed Veterans of America against the University of Michigan claiming that Michigan Stadium violated the Americans with Disabilities Act in its $226-million renovation by failing to add enough seats for disabled fans or accommodate the needs for disabled restrooms, concessions and parking. Additionally, the distribution of the accessible seating was at issue, with nearly all the seats being provided in the end-zone areas. The U.S. Department of Justice assisted in the suit, which was settled in March 2008. The settlement required the stadium to add 329 wheelchair seats throughout the stadium by 2010, and an additional 135 accessible seats in clubhouses to go along with the existing 88 wheelchair seats. This case was significant because it set a precedent for the uniform distribution of accessible seating and gave the DOJ the opportunity to clarify previously unclear rules. The agreement now is a blueprint for all stadiums and other public facilities regarding accessibility.\n\"Paralyzed Veterans of America v. Ellerbe Becket Architects and Engineers\".\nOne of the first major ADA lawsuits, \"Paralyzed Veterans of America v. Ellerbe Becket Architects and Engineers\" (PVA 1996) was focused on the wheelchair accessibility of a stadium project that was still in the design phase, MCI Center (now known as Capital One Arena) in Washington, D.C. Previous to this case, which was filed only five years after the ADA was passed, the DOJ was unable or unwilling to provide clarification on the distribution requirements for accessible wheelchair locations in large assembly spaces. While Section 4.33.3 of ADAAG makes reference to lines of sight, no specific reference is made to seeing over standing patrons. The MCI Center, designed by Ellerbe Becket Architects &amp; Engineers, was designed with too few wheelchair and companion seats, and the ones that were included did not provide sight lines that would enable the wheelchair user to view the playing area while the spectators in front of them were standing. This case and another related case established precedent on seat distribution and sight lines issues for ADA enforcement that continues to present day.\n\"Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams\".\n\"Toyota Motor Manufacturing, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams\", was a case in which the US Supreme Court interpreted the meaning of the phrase \"substantially impairs\" as used in the Americans with Disabilities Act. It reversed a Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals decision to grant partial summary judgment in favor of the respondent, Ella Williams, that classified her inability to perform manual job-related tasks as a disability. The Court held that the \"major life activity\" definition for evaluating the performance of manual tasks focuses the inquiry on whether Williams was unable to perform a range of tasks central to most people in carrying out the activities of daily living, not whether Williams was unable to perform her specific job tasks. Therefore, the determination of whether an impairment rises to the level of a disability is not limited to activities in the workplace solely, but rather to manual tasks in life in general. When the Supreme Court applied this standard, it found that the Court of Appeals had incorrectly determined the presence of a disability because it relied solely on her inability to perform specific manual work tasks, which was insufficient in proving the presence of a disability. The Court of Appeals should have taken into account the evidence presented that Williams retained the ability to do personal tasks and household chores, such activities being the nature of tasks most people do in their daily lives, and placed too much emphasis on her job disability. Since the evidence showed that Williams was performing normal daily tasks, it ruled that the Court of Appeals erred when it found that Williams was disabled. This ruling has since been legislatively overturned by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (ADAAA). In fact, Congress explicitly cited \"Toyota v. Williams\" in the text of the ADAAA itself as one of its driving influences for passing the ADAAA.\n\"US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett\".\n\"US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett\" was decided by the US Supreme Court in 2002. This case held that even requests for accommodation that might seem reasonable on their face, e.g., a transfer to a different position, can be rendered unreasonable because it would require a violation of the company's seniority system. While the court held that, in general, a violation of a seniority system renders an otherwise reasonable accommodation unreasonable, a plaintiff can present evidence that, despite the seniority system, the accommodation is reasonable in the specific case at hand, e.g., the plaintiff could offer evidence that the seniority system is so often disregarded that another exception would not make a difference.\nImportantly, the court held that the defendant need not provide proof that this particular application of the seniority system should prevail, and that, once the defendant showed that the accommodation violated the seniority system, it fell to Barnett to show it was nevertheless reasonable.\nIn this case, Barnett was a US Airways employee who injured his back, rendering him physically unable to perform his cargo-handling job. Invoking seniority, he transferred to a less-demanding mailroom job, but this position later became open to seniority-based bidding and was bid on by more senior employees. Barnett requested the accommodation of being allowed to stay on in the less-demanding mailroom job. US Airways denied his request, and he lost his job.\nThe Supreme Court decision invalidated both the approach of the district court, which found that the mere presence and importance of the seniority system was enough to warrant a summary judgment in favor of US Airways, as well as the circuit court's approach that interpreted 'reasonable accommodation' as 'effective accommodation.'\n\"Access Now v. Southwest Airlines\".\n\"Access Now, Inc. v. Southwest Airlines Co.\" was a 2002 case where the District Court decided that the website of Southwest Airlines was not in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, because the ADA is concerned with things with a physical existence and thus cannot be applied to cyberspace. Judge Patricia A. Seitz found that the \"virtual ticket counter\" of the website was a virtual construct, and hence not a \"public place of accommodation\". As such, \"To expand the ADA to cover 'virtual' spaces would be to create new rights without well-defined standards.\"\n\"Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc.\".\n\"Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc.\" (2011) held that a mere online presence does not subject a website to the ADA guidelines. Thus Myspace and YouTube were not liable for a dyslexic man's inability to navigate the site regardless of how impressive the \"online theater\" is.\n\"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\".\n\"Authors Guild v. HathiTrust\" was a case in which the District Court decided that the HathiTrust digital library was a transformative, fair use of copyrighted works, making a large number of written text available to those with print disability.\n\"Zamora-Quezada v. HealthTexas Medical Group\".\n\"Zamora-Quezada v. HealthTexas Medical Group\" (begun in 1998) was the first time this act was used against HMOs when a novel lawsuit was filed by Texas attorney Robert Provan against five HMOs for their practice of revoking the contracts of doctors treating disabled patients. In 1999, these HMOs sought to dismiss Provan's lawsuit, but a federal court ruled against them, and the case was settled out of court. Many decisions relating to Provan's unique lawsuit against these HMOs have been cited in other court cases since.\n\"Campbell v. General Dynamics Government Systems Corp.\".\n\"Campbell v. General Dynamics Government Systems Corp.\" (2005) concerned the enforceability of a mandatory arbitration agreement contained in a dispute resolution policy linked to an e-mailed company-wide announcement, insofar as it applies to employment discrimination claims brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act.\n\"Tennessee v. Lane\".\n\"Tennessee v. Lane\", 541 U.S. 509 (2004), was a case in the Supreme Court of the United States involving Congress's enforcement powers under section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. George Lane was unable to walk after a 1997 car accident in which he was accused of driving on the wrong side of the road. A woman was killed in the crash, and Lane faced misdemeanor charges of reckless driving. The suit was brought about because he was denied access to appear in criminal court because the courthouse had no elevator, even though the court was willing to carry him up the stairs and then willing to move the hearing to the first floor. He refused, citing he wanted to be treated as any other citizen, and was subsequently charged with failure to appear, after appearing at a previous hearing where he dragged himself up the stairs. The court ruled that Congress did have enough evidence that disabled people were being denied those fundamental rights that are protected by the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and had the enforcement powers under section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. It further ruled that \"reasonable accommodations\" mandated by the ADA were not unduly burdensome and disproportionate to the harm.\nGender dysphoria.\nIn 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit stated that the ADA covers individuals with gender dysphoria, which may aid transgender people in accessing legal protections they otherwise may be unable to."}
{"id": "1339", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1339", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Findings and Purposes", "text": ""}
{"id": "1340", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1340", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Definitions", "text": ""}
{"id": "1341", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1341", "title": "Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990/Title III", "text": ""}
{"id": "1342", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1342", "title": "A.D", "text": ""}
{"id": "1344", "revid": "39635320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1344", "title": "Apple I", "text": "The Apple Computer 1 (Apple-1), later known predominantly as the Apple\u00a0I, is an 8-bit motherboard-only personal computer designed by Steve Wozniak and released by the Apple Computer Company (now Apple Inc.) in 1976. The company was initially formed to sell the Apple Iits first product and would later become the world's largest technology company. The idea of starting a company and selling the computer came from Wozniak's friend and Apple co-founder Steve Jobs. A differentiator of the Apple I was that it included video display terminal circuitry on its circuit board, allowing it to connect to a low-cost composite video monitor or television, whereas others avoided this and used more expensive monitors because business was used to more characters per displayed/typewritten line. It and the Sol-20 were some of the first home computers to have this capability.\nTo finance the Apple I's development, Wozniak and Jobs sold some of their possessions for a few hundred dollars. Wozniak demonstrated the first prototype in July 1976 at the Homebrew Computer Club in Palo Alto, California, impressing an early computer retailer. After securing an order for 50 computers, Jobs was able to order the parts on credit and deliver the first Apple products after ten days.\nThe Apple I was one of the first computers available that used the inexpensive MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor. An expansion included a BASIC interpreter, allowing users to utilize BASIC at home instead of at institutions with mainframe computers, greatly lowering the entry cost for computing with BASIC.\nProduction was discontinued on September 30, 1977, after the June 10, 1977 introduction of its successor, the Apple II, which \"Byte\" magazine referred to as part of the \"1977 Trinity\" of personal computing (along with the PET 2001 from Commodore Business Machines and the TRS-80 Model I from Tandy Corporation). As relatively few computers were made before they were discontinued, coupled with their status as Apple's first product, surviving Apple I units are now displayed in computer museums.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1974, while visiting famous phone phreak John Draper in California, Steve Wozniak watched him connect a modem to the ARPANET \u2013 the precursor to the internet \u2013 and use a teleprinter to play chess with someone from Boston, which inspired him to make a cheap terminal that used an inexpensive keyboard from Sears and a standard TV. Later in March 1975, Wozniak started attending meetings of the Homebrew Computer Club, which was a major source of inspiration for him. New microcomputers such as the Altair 8800 inspired Wozniak to build a microprocessor into his video terminal circuit to make a complete computer. At the time the only appropriate CPUs available were the Intel 8080, and the Motorola 6800. Of these options, Wozniak preferred the 6800, though he was financially unable to obtain either. Instead, he began designing computers on paper until he could afford a CPU.\nWhen the $25 MOS Technology 6502 was released in late 1975, Wozniak wrote a version of BASIC for it, then began to design a computer for it to run on. The 6502 was developed by many of the same engineers that designed the 6800, as many in Silicon Valley left employers to form their own companies. Wozniak's earlier 6800 computer design needed only minor changes to run on the new processor.\nBy March 1, 1976, Wozniak completed the basic design of his computer. Wozniak originally offered the design to HP while working there, but it was rejected by the company on five occasions. When he demonstrated his computer at the Homebrew Computer Club, his friend and fellow club regular Steve Jobs was immediately interested in its commercial potential. Wozniak intended to share schematics of the machine for free, but Jobs advised him to start a business together and sell bare printed circuit boards for the computer. Wozniak, at first skeptical, was later convinced by Jobs that even if they were not successful they could at least say to their grandchildren that they had had their own company. To raise the money they needed to build the first batch of the circuit boards, Wozniak sold his HP-65 scientific calculator while Jobs sold his Volkswagen van.\nAfter the company was formed a month later, Jobs and Wozniak gave a presentation of the fully assembled \"Apple Computer A\" at the Homebrew Computer Club. Paul Terrell, who was starting a new computer shop in Mountain View, California, called the Byte Shop, saw the presentation and was impressed by the machine. Terrell told Jobs that he would order 50 units of the Apple I and pay $500 each on delivery, but only if they came fully assembledhe was not interested in buying bare printed circuit boards with no components.\nJobs took the purchase order from the Byte Shop to national electronic parts distributor Cramer Electronics, and ordered the components needed. When asked by the credit manager how he would pay for the parts, Jobs replied, \"I have this purchase order from the Byte Shop chain of computer stores for 50 of my computers and the payment terms are COD. If you give me the parts on net 30-day terms I can build and deliver the computers in that time frame, collect my money from Terrell at the Byte Shop and pay you.\"\nTo verify the purchase order, the credit manager called Paul Terrell, who assured him if the computers showed up, Jobs would have more than enough money for the parts order. The two Steves and their small crew spent day and night building and testing the computers, and delivered to Terrell on time. Terrell was surprised to receive a batch of assembled circuit boards, as he had expected complete computers with a case, monitor and keyboard. Nonetheless, he kept his word and paid the two Steves the money promised.\nAnnouncement and sales.\nThe Apple I went on sale in July 1976 at a price of . Wozniak later said he had no idea about the relation between the number and the number of the beast, and that he came up with the price because he liked \"repeating digits\" and because it was a one-third markup on the wholesale price. Jobs had managed to get the inventory into the nation's first four storefront microcomputer retailers: Byte Shop (Palo Alto, California), itty bitty machine company (Evanston, Illinois), Data Domain (Bloomington, Indiana), and Computer Mart (New York City).\nThe first unit produced was used in a high school math class, and donated to Liza Loop's public-access computer center. About 200 units were produced, and all but 25 were sold within nine or ten months.\nIn April 1977, the price was dropped to $475. It continued to be sold through August 1977, despite the introduction of the Apple II in April 1977, which began shipping in June of that year. In October 1977, the Apple I was officially discontinued and removed from Apple's price list. As Wozniak was the only person who could answer most customer support questions about the computer, the company offered Apple I owners discounts and trade-ins for Apple IIs to persuade them to return their computers. These recovered boards were then destroyed by Apple, contributing to their later rarity.\nBoth Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak have stated that Apple did not assign serial numbers to the Apple l. Several boards have been found with numbered stickers affixed to them, which appear to be inspection stickers from the PCB manufacturer/assembler. A batch of boards is known to have numbers hand-written in black permanent marker on the back; these usually appear as \"01-00##\". As of January 2022, 29 Apple-1s with a serial number are known. The highest known number is . Two original Apple-1s have been analyzed by Professional Sports Authenticator in Los Angeles, concluding that the serial numbers had been hand-written by Steve Jobs.\nHardware.\nThe Apple I used a MOS Technologies 6502 microprocessor running at , and its design was based largely on Wozniak's previous work centered around a Motorola 6800. The unconventional clock speed was chosen to be a fraction () of the NTSC color carrier, which simplified video circuitry. of memory was included on the base machine, which was expandable to on-board and up to by using an add-on card. On-board memory utilized newly available 4Kbit DRAM chips, and was designed to be upgradeable to the next generation of 16Kbit chips for a maximum of on-board memory. An optional $75 plug-in cassette interface card allowed users to store programs on ordinary audio cassette tapes. A BASIC interpreter, originally written by Wozniak, was provided with the cassette interface that let users easily write programs and play simple games. An onboard AC power supply was included.\nThe Apple I did not come with a case. It could be used bare, though some users chose to build custom (typically wooden) enclosures.\nVideo and Input.\nThe Apple I included built-in computer terminal circuitry with composite video output. To use the computer, a user-supplied composite monitor and ASCII-encoded keyboard needed to be connected. If a monitor was not available, a standard television set could be used along with an RF modulator. In comparison, competing machines generally required an expensive dedicated video display terminal or teletypewriter. This, combined with its single-board construction, made the Apple I an elegant and inexpensive machine for its day, though competitors such as the Sol-20 and Sphere 1 offered similar feature sets.\nThe computer generated its video output using a shift register memory and a Signetics 2513 64\u00d78\u00d75 Character Generator. It was capable of displaying uppercase characters, numbers and basic punctuation and math symbols with a 5x8 pixel font:\nApple Cassette Interface expansion.\nA cassette interface was available in the form of an optional add-on for the Apple I's expansion slot. A cassette deck plugged in to the expansion's phone connector ports could be written to and read from as a form of removable storage. The only alternative to the interface for loading programs was typing machine code by hand, making the add-on \"ubiquitous\".\nThe expansion came with a free cassette tape containing Steve Wozniak's Integer BASIC interpreter. Other software tapes were supplied \"at minimal cost\" including ported video games such as \"Hamurabi\", \"Lunar Lander\" and \"Star Trek\".\nConservation.\nOnly about 200 Apple I boards were produced, and the whereabouts of 62 to 82 are known. After the success of the Apple II, and of Apple broadly, the Apple I was recognized as an important historical computer. According to the 1986 \"Apple IIe Owner's Guide\", an Apple I was then worth \"between $10,000 and $15,000\" and a board was reportedly sold for $50,000 in 1999.\nIn November 2010, an Apple I with a cache of original documents and packaging sold for \u00a3133,250 ($) at Christie's auction house in London. The documents included the return label showing Steve Jobs's parents' address, a personally typed and signed letter from Jobs (answering technical questions about the computer), and the invoice (listing \"Steven\" as the salesman). The computer was brought to Polytechnic University of Turin for restoration.\nIn October 2014 the Henry Ford Museum purchased an Apple I at a Bonhams auction for . The sale included the keyboard, monitor, cassette decks and a manual. In 2017, an Apple I removed from Steve Jobs's office in 1985 by Apple quality control engineer Don Hutmacher was placed on display at .\nOn May 30, 2015, an elderly woman reportedly dropped off boxes of electronics for disposal at an electronics recycling center in the Silicon Valley of Northern California. Included in the electronics (removed from her garage after the death of her husband) was an original Apple I computer, which the recycling firm sold for . When a discarded item is sold, it is the company's practice to give 50% of the proceeds to the original owner, but the woman has not been identified.\nApple I computers with original documents and memorabilia have frequently been auctioned for over $300,000 throughout the 2010s and 2020s. The production prototype for the Apple I survives in a badly damaged state and was itself auctioned in 2022 for $677,196.\nReplicas.\nSeveral Apple I clones and replicas have been released in recent years. These are created by hobbyists and marketed to the hobbyist/collector community. Availability is usually limited to small runs in response to demand.\nEmulation.\nEmulation software for the Apple I has been written for modern home computers and for web browsers. It has also been emulated on 1980s era computers including the SAM Coup\u00e9 and Commodore 64."}
{"id": "1345", "revid": "6264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1345", "title": "Apache webserver", "text": ""}
{"id": "1346", "revid": "37956467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1346", "title": "Apatosaurus", "text": "Apatosaurus (; meaning \"deceptive lizard\") is a genus of herbivorous sauropod dinosaur that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic period. Othniel Charles Marsh described and named the first-known species, A. ajax, in 1877, and a second species, A. louisae, was discovered and named by William H. Holland in 1916. \"Apatosaurus\" lived about 152 to 151 million years ago (mya), during the late Kimmeridgian to early Tithonian age, and are now known from fossils in the Morrison Formation of modern-day Colorado, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Utah in the United States. \"Apatosaurus\" had an average length of , and an average mass of . A few specimens indicate a maximum length of 11\u201330% greater than average and a mass of approximately .\nThe cervical vertebrae of \"Apatosaurus\" are less elongated and more heavily constructed than those of \"Diplodocus\", a diplodocid like \"Apatosaurus\", and the bones of the leg are much stockier despite being longer, implying that \"Apatosaurus\" was a more robust animal. The tail was held above the ground during normal locomotion. \"Apatosaurus\" had a single claw on each forelimb and three on each hindlimb. The \"Apatosaurus\" skull, long thought to be similar to \"Camarasaurus\", is much more similar to that of \"Diplodocus\". \"Apatosaurus\" was a generalized browser that likely held its head elevated. To lighten its vertebrae, \"Apatosaurus\" had air sacs that made the bones internally full of holes. Like that of other diplodocids, its tail may have been used as a whip to create loud noises, or, as more recently suggested, as a sensory organ.\nThe skull of \"Apatosaurus\" was confused with that of \"Camarasaurus\" and \"Brachiosaurus\" until 1909, when the holotype of \"A. louisae\" was found, and a complete skull just a few meters away from the front of the neck. Henry Fairfield Osborn disagreed with this association, and went on to mount a skeleton of \"Apatosaurus\" with a \"Camarasaurus\" skull cast. \"Apatosaurus\" skeletons were mounted with speculative skull casts until 1970, when McIntosh showed that more robust skulls assigned to \"Diplodocus\" were more likely from \"Apatosaurus\".\n\"Apatosaurus\" is a genus in the family Diplodocidae. It is one of the more basal genera, with only \"Amphicoelias\" and possibly a new, unnamed genus more primitive. Although the subfamily Apatosaurinae was named in 1929, the group was not used validly until an extensive 2015 study. Only \"Brontosaurus\" is also in the subfamily, with the other genera being considered synonyms or reclassified as diplodocines. \"Brontosaurus\" has long been considered a junior synonym of \"Apatosaurus\"; its type species was reclassified as \"A.excelsus\" in 1903. A 2015 study concluded that \"Brontosaurus\" is a valid genus of sauropod distinct from \"Apatosaurus\", but not all paleontologists agree with this division. As it existed in North America during the late Jurassic, \"Apatosaurus\" would have lived alongside dinosaurs such as \"Allosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\".\nDescription.\n\"Apatosaurus\" was a large, long-necked, quadrupedal animal with a long, whip-like tail. Its forelimbs were slightly shorter than its hindlimbs. Most size estimates are based on specimen CM3018, the type specimen of \"A.louisae\", reaching in length and in body mass. A 2015 study that estimated the mass of volumetric models of \"Dreadnoughtus\", \"Apatosaurus\", and \"Giraffatitan\" estimates CM3018 at , similar in mass to \"Dreadnoughtus\". Some specimens of \"A.ajax\" (such as OMNH1670) represent individuals 1130% longer, suggesting masses twice that of CM3018 or , potentially rivaling the largest titanosaurs. However, the upper size estimate of OMNH1670 is likely an exaggeration, with the size estimates revised in 2020 at in length and in body mass based on volumetric analysis.\nThe skull is small in relation to the size of the animal. The jaws are lined with spatulate (chisel-like) teeth suited to an herbivorous diet. The snout of \"Apatosaurus\" and similar diplodocoids is squared, with only \"Nigersaurus\" having a squarer skull. The braincase of \"Apatosaurus\" is well preserved in specimen BYU17096, which also preserved much of the skeleton. A phylogenetic analysis found that the braincase had a morphology similar to those of other diplodocoids. Some skulls of \"Apatosaurus\" have been found still in articulation with their teeth. Those teeth that have the enamel surface exposed do not show any scratches on the surface; instead, they display a sugary texture and little wear.\nLike those of other sauropods, the neck vertebrae are deeply bifurcated; they carried neural spines with a large trough in the middle, resulting in a wide, deep neck. The vertebral formula for the holotype of \"A.louisae\" is 15cervicals, 10dorsals, 5sacrals, and 82caudals. The caudal vertebra number may vary, even within species. The cervical vertebrae of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" are stouter and more robust than those of other diplodocids and were found to be most similar to \"Camarasaurus\" by Charles Whitney Gilmore. In addition, they support cervical ribs that extend farther towards the ground than in diplodocines, and have vertebrae and ribs that are narrower towards the top of the neck, making the neck nearly triangular in cross-section. In \"Apatosaurus louisae\", the atlas-axis complex of the first cervicals is nearly fused. The dorsal ribs are not fused or tightly attached to their vertebrae and are instead loosely articulated. \"Apatosaurus\" has ten dorsal ribs on either side of the body. The large neck was filled with an extensive system of weight-saving air sacs. \"Apatosaurus\", like its close relative \"Supersaurus\", has tall neural spines, which make up more than half the height of the individual bones of its vertebrae. The shape of the tail is unusual for a diplodocid; it is comparatively slender because of the rapidly decreasing height of the vertebral spines with increasing distance from the hips. \"Apatosaurus\" also had very long ribs compared to most other diplodocids, giving it an unusually deep chest. As in other diplodocids, the tail transformed into a whip-like structure towards the end.\nThe limb bones are also very robust. Within Apatosaurinae, the scapula of \"Apatosaurus louisae\" is intermediate in morphology between those of \"A.ajax\" and \"Brontosaurus excelsus\". The arm bones are stout, so the humerus of \"Apatosaurus\" resembles that of \"Camarasaurus\", as well as \"Brontosaurus\". However, the humeri of \"Brontosaurus\" and \"A.ajax\" are more similar to each other than they are to \"A.louisae\". In 1936, Charles Gilmore noted that previous reconstructions of \"Apatosaurus\" forelimbs erroneously proposed that the radius and ulna could cross; in life they would have remained parallel. \"Apatosaurus\" had a single large claw on each forelimb, a feature shared by all sauropods more derived than \"Shunosaurus\". The first three toes had claws on each hindlimb. The phalangeal formula is 2-1-1-1-1, meaning the innermost finger (phalanx) on the forelimb has two bones and the next has one. The single manual claw bone (ungual) is slightly curved and squarely truncated on the anterior end. The pelvic girdle includes the robust ilia, and the fused (co-ossified) pubes and ischia. The femora of \"Apatosaurus\" are very stout and represent some of the most robust femora of any member of Sauropoda. The tibia and fibula bones are different from the slender bones of \"Diplodocus\" but are nearly indistinguishable from those of \"Camarasaurus\". The fibula is longer and slenderer than the tibia. The foot of \"Apatosaurus\" has three claws on the innermost digits; the digit formula is 3-4-5-3-2. The first metatarsal is the stoutest, a feature shared among diplodocids.\nDiscovery and species.\nInitial discovery.\nThe first \"Apatosaurus\" fossils were discovered by Arthur Lakes, a local miner, and his friend Henry C. Beckwith in the spring of 1877 in Morrison, a town in the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Jefferson County, Colorado. Arthur Lakes wrote to Othniel Charles Marsh, Professor of Paleontology at Yale University, and Edward Drinker Cope, a paleontologist based in Philadelphia, about the discovery until eventually collecting several fossils and sending them to both paleontologists. Marsh named \"Atlantosaurus montanus\" based on some of the fossils sent and hired Lakes to collect the rest of the material at Morrison and send it to Yale, while Cope attempted to hire Lakes as well but was rejected. One of the best specimens collected by Lakes in 1877 was a well preserved partial postcranial skeleton, including many vertebrae, and a partial braincase (YPM VP 1860), which was sent to Marsh and named \"Apatosaurus ajax\" in November 1877. The composite term \"Apatosaurus\" comes from the Greek words ' ()/' () meaning \"deception\"/\"deceptive\", and \"\" () meaning \"lizard\"; thus, \"deceptive lizard\". Marsh gave it this name based on the chevron bones, which are dissimilar to those of other dinosaurs; instead, the chevron bones of \"Apatosaurus\" showed similarities with those of mosasaurs, most likely that of the representative species \"Mosasaurus\". By the end of excavations at Lakes' quarry in Morrison, several partial specimens of \"Apatosaurus\" had been collected, but only the type specimen of \"A. ajax\" can be confidently referred to the species.\nDuring excavation and transportation, the bones of the holotype skeleton were mixed with those of another Apatosaurine individual originally described as \"Atlantosaurus immanis\"; as a consequence, some elements cannot be ascribed to either specimen with confidence. Marsh distinguished the new genus \"Apatosaurus\" from \"Atlantosaurus\" on the basis of the number of sacral vertebrae, with \"Apatosaurus\" possessing three and \"Atlantosaurus\" four. Recent research shows that traits usually used to distinguish taxa at this time were actually widespread across several taxa, causing many of the taxa named to be invalid, like \"Atlantosaurus\". Two years later, Marsh announced the discovery of a larger and more complete specimen (YPM VP 1980) from Como Bluff, Wyoming, he gave this specimen the name \"Brontosaurus excelsus\". Also at Como Bluff, the Hubbell brothers working for Edward Drinker Cope collected a tibia, fibula, scapula, and several caudal vertebrae along with other fragments belonging to \"Apatosaurus\" in 1877\u201378 at Cope's Quarry 5 at the site. Later in 1884, Othniel Marsh named \"Diplodocus lacustris\" based on a chimeric partial dentary, snout, and several teeth collected by Lakes in 1877 at Morrison. In 2013, it was suggested that the dentary of \"D. lacustris\" and its teeth were actually from \"Apatosaurus ajax\" based on its proximity to the type braincase of \"A. ajax\". All specimens currently considered \"Apatosaurus\" were from the Morrison Formation, the location of the excavations of Marsh and Cope.\nSecond Dinosaur Rush and skull issue.\nAfter the end of the Bone Wars, many major institutions in the eastern United States were inspired by the depictions and finds by Marsh and Cope to assemble their own dinosaur fossil collections. The competition to mount the first sauropod skeleton specifically was the most intense, with the American Museum of Natural History, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, and Field Museum of Natural History all sending expeditions to the west to find the most complete sauropod specimen, bring it back to the home institution, and mount it in their fossil halls. The American Museum of Natural History was the first to launch an expedition, finding a well preserved skeleton (AMNH 460), which is occasionally assigned to \"Apatosaurus\", is considered nearly complete; only the head, feet, and sections of the tail are missing, and it was the first sauropod skeleton mounted. The specimen was found north of Medicine Bow, Wyoming, in 1898 by Walter Granger, and took the entire summer to extract. To complete the mount, sauropod feet that were discovered at the same quarry and a tail fashioned to appear as Marsh believed it shouldbut which had too few vertebraewere added. In addition, a sculpted model of what the museum thought the skull of this massive creature might look like was made. This was not a delicate skull like that of \"Diplodocus\"which was later found to be more accuratebut was based on \"the biggest, thickest, strongest skull bones, lower jaws and tooth crowns from three different quarries\". These skulls were likely those of \"Camarasaurus\", the only other sauropod for which good skull material was known at the time. The mount construction was overseen by Adam Hermann, who failed to find \"Apatosaurus\" skulls. Hermann was forced to sculpt a stand-in skull by hand. Osborn said in a publication that the skull was \"largely conjectural and based on that of \"Morosaurus\"\" (now \"Camarasaurus\").\nIn 1903, Elmer Riggs published a study that described a well-preserved skeleton of a diplodocid from the Grand River Valley near Fruita, Colorado, Field Museum of Natural History specimen P25112. Riggs thought that the deposits were similar in age to those of the Como Bluff in Wyoming from which Marsh had described \"Brontosaurus\". Most of the skeleton was found, and after comparison with both \"Brontosaurus\" and \"Apatosaurus ajax\", Riggs realized that the holotype of \"A.ajax\" was immature, and thus the features distinguishing the genera were not valid. Since \"Apatosaurus\" was the earlier name, \"Brontosaurus\" should be considered a junior synonym of \"Apatosaurus\". Because of this, Riggs recombined \"Brontosaurus excelsus\" as \"Apatosaurus excelsus\". Based on comparisons with other species proposed to belong to \"Apatosaurus\", Riggs also determined that the Field Columbian Museum specimen was likely most similar to \"A.excelsus\".\nDespite Riggs' publication, Henry Fairfield Osborn, who was a strong opponent of Marsh and his taxa, labeled the \"Apatosaurus\" mount of the American Museum of Natural History \"Brontosaurus\". Because of this decision the name \"Brontosaurus\" was commonly used outside of scientific literature for what Riggs considered \"Apatosaurus\", and the museum's popularity meant that \"Brontosaurus\" became one of the best known dinosaurs, even though it was invalid throughout nearly all of the 20th and early 21st centuries.\nIt was not until 1909 that an \"Apatosaurus\" skull was found during the first expedition, led by Earl Douglass, to what would become known as the Carnegie Quarry at Dinosaur National Monument. The skull was found a short distance from a skeleton (specimen CM3018) identified as the new species \"Apatosaurus louisae\", named after Louise Carnegie, wife of Andrew Carnegie, who funded field research to find complete dinosaur skeletons in the American West. The skull was designated CM11162; it was very similar to the skull of \"Diplodocus\". Another smaller skeleton of \"A.louisae\" was found nearby CM11162 and CM3018. The skull was accepted as belonging to the \"Apatosaurus\" specimen by Douglass and Carnegie Museum director William H. Holland, although other scientistsmost notably Osbornrejected this identification. Holland defended his view in 1914 in an address to the Paleontological Society of America, yet he left the Carnegie Museum mount headless. While some thought Holland was attempting to avoid conflict with Osborn, others suspected Holland was waiting until an articulated skull and neck were found to confirm the association of the skull and skeleton. After Holland's death in 1934, museum staff placed a cast of a \"Camarasaurus\" skull on the mount.\nWhile most other museums were using cast or sculpted \"Camarasaurus\" skulls on \"Apatosaurus\" mounts, the Yale Peabody Museum decided to sculpt a skull based on the lower jaw of a \"Camarasaurus\", with the cranium based on Marsh's 1891 illustration of the skull. The skull also included forward-pointing nasalssomething unusual for any dinosaurand fenestrae differing from both the drawing and other skulls.\nNo \"Apatosaurus\" skull was mentioned in literature until the 1970s when John Stanton McIntosh and David Berman redescribed the skulls of \"Diplodocus\" and \"Apatosaurus\". They found that though he never published his opinion, Holland was almost certainly correct, that \"Apatosaurus\" had a \"Diplodocus\"-like skull. According to them, many skulls long thought to pertain to \"Diplodocus\" might instead be those of \"Apatosaurus\". They reassigned multiple skulls to \"Apatosaurus\" based on associated and closely associated vertebrae. Even though they supported Holland, it was noted that \"Apatosaurus\" might have possessed a \"Camarasaurus\"-like skull, based on a disarticulated \"Camarasaurus\"-like tooth found at the precise site where an \"Apatosaurus\" specimen was found years before. On October20, 1979, after the publications by McIntosh and Berman, the first true skull of \"Apatosaurus\" was mounted on a skeleton in a museum, that of the Carnegie. In 1998, it was suggested that the Felch Quarry skull that Marsh had included in his 1896 skeletal restoration instead belonged to \"Brachiosaurus\". This was supported in 2020 with a redescription of the brachiosaurid material found at the Felch Quarry.\nRecent discoveries and reassessment.\nIn 2011, the first specimen of \"Apatosaurus\" where a skull was found articulated with its cervical vertebrae was described. This specimen, CMCVP7180, was found to differ in both skull and neck features from \"A.louisae\", but shared many features of the cervical vertebrae with \"A.ajax\". Another well-preserved skull is Brigham Young University specimen 17096, a well-preserved skull and skeleton, with a preserved braincase. The specimen was found in Cactus Park Quarry in western Colorado. In 2013, Matthew Mossbrucker and several other authors published an abstract that described a premaxilla and maxilla from Lakes' original quarry in Morrison and referred the material to \"Apatosaurus ajax.\" \nAlmost all modern paleontologists agreed with Riggs that the two dinosaurs should be classified together in a single genus. According to the rules of the ICZN (which governs the scientific names of animals), the name \"Apatosaurus\", having been published first, has priority as the official name; \"Brontosaurus\" was considered a junior synonym and was therefore long discarded from formal use. Despite this, at least one paleontologistRobert T. Bakkerargued in the 1990s that \"A.ajax\" and \"A.excelsus\" were in fact sufficiently distinct for the latter to merit a separate genus.\nIn 2015, Emanuel Tschopp, Oct\u00e1vio Mateus, and Roger Benson released a paper on diplodocoid systematics, and proposed that genera could be diagnosed by thirteen differing characters, and species separated based on six. The minimum number for generic separation was chosen based on the fact that \"A.ajax\" and \"A.louisae\" differ in twelve characters, and \"Diplodocus carnegiei\" and \"D.hallorum\" differ in eleven characters. Thus, thirteen characters were chosen to validate the separation of genera. The six differing features for specific separation were chosen by counting the number of differing features in separate specimens generally agreed to represent one species, with only one differing character in \"D.carnegiei\" and \"A.louisae\", but five differing features in \"B.excelsus\". Therefore, Tschopp etal. argued that \"Apatosaurus excelsus\", originally classified as \"Brontosaurus excelsus\", had enough morphological differences from other species of \"Apatosaurus\" that it warranted being reclassified as a separate genus again. The conclusion was based on a comparison of 477 morphological characteristics across 81 different dinosaur individuals. Among the many notable differences are the widerand presumably strongerneck of \"Apatosaurus\" species compared to \"B.excelsus\". Other species previously assigned to \"Apatosaurus\", such as \"Elosaurus parvus\" and \"Eobrontosaurus yahnahpin\" were also reclassified as \"Brontosaurus\". Some features proposed to separate \"Brontosaurus\" from \"Apatosaurus\" include: posterior dorsal vertebrae with the centrum longer than wide; the scapula rear to the acromial edge and the distal blade being excavated; the acromial edge of the distal scapular blade bearing a rounded expansion; and the ratio of the proximodistal length to transverse breadth of the astragalus 0.55 or greater. Sauropod expert Michael D'Emic pointed out that the criteria chosen were to an extent arbitrary and that they would require abandoning the name \"Brontosaurus\" again if newer analyzes obtained different results. Mammal paleontologist Donald Prothero criticized the mass media reaction to this study as superficial and premature, concluding that he would keep \"Brontosaurus\" in quotes and not treat the name as a valid genus.\nValid species.\nMany species of \"Apatosaurus\" have been designated from scant material. Marsh named as many species as he could, which resulted in many being based upon fragmentary and indistinguishable remains. In 2005, Paul Upchurch and colleagues published a study that analyzed the species and specimen relationships of \"Apatosaurus\". They found that \"A.louisae\" was the most basal species, followed by FMNHP25112, and then a polytomy of \"A.ajax\", \"A.parvus\", and \"A.excelsus\". Their analysis was revised and expanded with many additional diplodocid specimens in 2015, which resolved the relationships of \"Apatosaurus\" slightly differently, and also supported separating \"Brontosaurus\" from \"Apatosaurus\".\nThe cladogram below is the result of an analysis by Tschopp, Mateus, and Benson (2015). The authors analyzed most diplodocid type specimens separately to deduce which specimen belonged to which species and genus.\nClassification.\n\"Apatosaurus\" is a member of the family Diplodocidae, a clade of gigantic sauropod dinosaurs. The family includes some of the longest creatures ever to walk the earth, including \"Diplodocus\", \"Supersaurus\", and \"Barosaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" is sometimes classified in the subfamily Apatosaurinae, which may also include \"Suuwassea\", \"Supersaurus\", and \"Brontosaurus\". Othniel Charles Marsh described \"Apatosaurus\" as allied to \"Atlantosaurus\" within the now-defunct group Atlantosauridae. In 1878, Marsh raised his family to the rank of suborder, including \"Apatosaurus\", \"Atlantosaurus\", \"Morosaurus\" (=\"Camarasaurus\") and \"Diplodocus\". He classified this group within Sauropoda, a group he erected in the same study. In 1903, Elmer S. Riggs said the name Sauropoda would be a junior synonym of earlier names; he grouped \"Apatosaurus\" within Opisthocoelia. Sauropoda is still used as the group name. In 2011, John Whitlock published a study that placed \"Apatosaurus\" a more basal diplodocid, sometimes less basal than \"Supersaurus\".\nCladogram of the Diplodocidae after Tschopp, Mateus, and Benson (2015).\nPaleobiology.\nIt was believed throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries that sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" were too massive to support their own weight on dry land. It was theorized that they lived partly submerged in water, perhaps in swamps. More recent findings do not support this; sauropods are now thought to have been fully terrestrial animals. A study of diplodocid snouts showed that the square snout, large proportion of pits, and fine, subparallel scratches of the teeth of \"Apatosaurus\" suggests it was a ground-height, nonselective browser. It may have eaten ferns, cycadeoids, seed ferns, horsetails, and algae. Stevens and Parish (2005) speculate that these sauropods fed from riverbanks on submerged water plants.\nA 2015 study of the necks of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" found many differences between them and other diplodocids, and that these variations may have shown that the necks of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" were used for intraspecific combat. Various uses for the single claw on the forelimb of sauropods have been proposed. One suggestion is that they were used for defense, but their shape and size make this unlikely. It was also possible they were for feeding, but the most probable use for the claw was grasping objects such as tree trunks when rearing.\nTrackways of sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" show that they may have had a range of around per day, and that they could potentially have reached a top speed of per hour. The slow locomotion of sauropods may be due to their minimal muscling, or to recoil after strides. A trackway of a juvenile has led some to believe that they were capable of bipedalism, though this is disputed.\nNeck posture.\nDiplodocids like \"Apatosaurus\" are often portrayed with their necks held high up in the air, allowing them to browse on tall trees. Some studies state diplodocid necks were less flexible than previously believed, because the structure of the neck vertebrae would not have allowed the neck to bend far upward, and that sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\" were adapted to low browsing or ground feeding.\nOther studies by Taylor find that all tetrapods appear to hold their necks at the maximum possible vertical extension when in a normal, alert posture; they argue the same would hold true for sauropods barring any unknown, unique characteristics that set the soft tissue anatomy of their necks apart from that of other animals. \"Apatosaurus\", like \"Diplodocus\", would have held its neck angled upward with the head pointing downward in a resting posture. Kent Stevens and Michael Parrish (1999 and 2005) state \"Apatosaurus\" had a great feeding range; its neck could bend into a U-shape laterally. The neck's range of movement would have also allowed the head to feed at the level of the feet.\nMatthew Cobley \"et al.\" (2013) dispute this, finding that large muscles and cartilage would have limited movement of the neck. They state the feeding ranges for sauropods like \"Diplodocus\" were smaller than previously believed, and the animals may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could browse vegetation. As such, they might have spent more time foraging to meet their minimum energy needs. The conclusions of Cobley \"etal.\" are disputed by Taylor, who analyzed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Diplodocus\". He found that the neck of \"Apatosaurus\" was very flexible.\nPhysiology.\nGiven the large body mass and long neck of sauropods like \"Apatosaurus\", physiologists have encountered problems determining how these animals breathed. Beginning with the assumption that, like crocodilians, \"Apatosaurus\" did not have a diaphragm, the dead-space volume (the amount of unused air remaining in the mouth, trachea, and air tubes after each breath) has been estimated at for a specimen. Paladino calculates its tidal volume (the amount of air moved in or out during a single breath) at with an avian respiratory system, if mammalian, and if reptilian.\nOn this basis, its respiratory system would likely have been parabronchi, with multiple pulmonary air sacs as in avian lungs, and a flow-through lung. An avian respiratory system would need a lung volume of about compared with a mammalian requirement of , which would exceed the space available. The overall thoracic volume of \"Apatosaurus\" has been estimated at , allowing for a , four-chambered heart and a lung capacity. That would allow about for the necessary tissue. Evidence for the avian system in \"Apatosaurus\" and other sauropods is also present in the pneumaticity of the vertebrae. Though this plays a role in reducing the weight of the animal, Wedel (2003) states they are also likely connected to air sacs, as in birds.\nJames Spotila \"et al.\" (1991) concludes that the large body size of sauropods would have made them unable to maintain high metabolic rates because they would not have been able to release enough heat. They assumed sauropods had a reptilian respiratory system. Wedel says that an avian system would have allowed it to dump more heat. Some scientists state that the heart would have had trouble sustaining sufficient blood pressure to oxygenate the brain. Others suggest that the near-horizontal posture of the head and neck would have eliminated the problem of supplying blood to the brain because it would not have been elevated.\nJames Farlow (1987) calculates that an \"Apatosaurus\"-sized dinosaur about would have possessed of fermentation contents, though he cautions that the regression equation being used is based on living mammals which are much smaller and physiologically different. Assuming \"Apatosaurus\" had an avian respiratory system and a reptilian resting-metabolism, Frank Paladino etal. (1997) estimate the animal would have needed to consume only about of water per day.\nGrowth.\nA 1999 microscopic study of \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Brontosaurus\" bones concluded the animals grew rapidly when young and reached near-adult sizes in about 10years. In 2008, a study on the growth rates of sauropods was published by Thomas Lehman and Holly Woodward. They said that by using growth lines and length-to-mass ratios, \"Apatosaurus\" would have grown to 25t (25 long tons; 28 short tons) in 15years, with growth peaking at in a single year. An alternative method, using limb length and body mass, found \"Apatosaurus\" grew per year, and reached its full mass before it was about 70years old. These estimates have been called unreliable because the calculation methods are not sound; old growth lines would have been obliterated by bone remodeling. One of the first identified growth factors of \"Apatosaurus\" was the number of sacral vertebrae, which increased to five by the time of the creature's maturity. This was first noted in 1903 and again in 1936.\nLong-bone histology enables researchers to estimate the age that a specific individual reached. A study by Eva Griebeler etal. (2013) examined long-bone histological data and concluded the \"Apatosaurus\" sp.SMA0014 weighed , reached sexual maturity at 21years, and died aged 28. The same growth model indicated \"Apatosaurus\" sp.BYU 601\u201317328 weighed , reached sexual maturity at 19years, and died aged 31.\nJuveniles.\nCompared with most sauropods, a relatively large amount of juvenile material is known from \"Apatosaurus\". Multiple specimens in the OMNH are from juveniles of an undetermined species of \"Apatosaurus\"; this material includes partial shoulder and pelvic girdles, some vertebrae, and limb bones. OMNH juvenile material is from at least two different age groups and based on overlapping bones likely comes from more than three individuals. The specimens exhibit features that distinguish \"Apatosaurus\" from its relatives, and thus likely belong to the genus. Juvenile sauropods tend to have proportionally shorter necks and tails, and a more pronounced forelimb-hindlimb disparity than found in adult sauropods.\nTail.\nAn article published in 1997 reported research of the mechanics of \"Apatosaurus\" tails by Nathan Myhrvold and paleontologist Philip J. Currie. Myhrvold carried out a computer simulation of the tail, which in diplodocids like \"Apatosaurus\" was a very long, tapering structure resembling a bullwhip. This computer modeling suggested diplodocids were capable of producing a whiplike cracking sound of over 200 decibels, comparable to the volume of a cannon being fired.\nA pathology has been identified on the tail of \"Apatosaurus\", caused by a growth defect. Two caudal vertebrae are seamlessly fused along the entire articulating surface of the bone, including the arches of the neural spines. This defect might have been caused by the lack or inhibition of the substance that forms intervertebral disks or joints. It has been proposed that the whips could have been used in combat and defense, but the tails of diplodocids were quite light and narrow compared to \"Shunosaurus\" and mamenchisaurids, and thus to injure another animal with the tail would severely injure the tail itself. More recently, Baron (2020) considers the use of the tail as a bullwhip unlikely because of the potentially catastrophic muscle and skeletal damage such speeds could cause on the large and heavy tail. Instead, he proposes that the tails might have been used as a tactile organ to keep in touch with the individuals behind and on the sides in a group while migrating, which could have augmented cohesion and allowed communication among individuals while limiting more energetically demanding activities like stopping to search for dispersed individuals, turning to visually check on individuals behind, or communicating vocally.\nPaleoecology.\nThe Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which, according to radiometric dating, dates from between 156.3mya at its base, and 146.8mya at the top, placing it in the late Oxfordian, Kimmeridgian, and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period. This formation is interpreted as originating in a locally semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons. The Morrison Basin, where dinosaurs lived, stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan; it was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west. The deposits from their east-facing drainage basins were carried by streams and rivers and deposited in swampy lowlands, lakes, river channels, and floodplains. This formation is similar in age to the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania.\n\"Apatosaurus\" was the second most common sauropod in the Morrison Formation ecosystem, after \"Camarasaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" may have been more solitary than other Morrison Formation dinosaurs. Fossils of the genus have only been found in the upper levels of the formation. Those of \"Apatosaurus ajax\" are known exclusively from the upper Brushy Basin Member, about 152\u2013151 mya. \"A.louisae\" fossils are rare, known only from one site in the upper Brushy Basin Member; they date to the late Kimmeridgian stage, about 151mya. Additional \"Apatosaurus\" remains are known from similarly aged or slightly younger rocks, but they have not been identified as any particular species, and thus may instead belong to \"Brontosaurus\".\nThe Morrison Formation records a time when the local environment was dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs. Dinosaurs known from the Morrison Formation include the theropods \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Ornitholestes\", and \"Torvosaurus\"; the sauropods \"Brontosaurus\", \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", and \"Diplodocus\"; and the ornithischians \"Camptosaurus\", \"Dryosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Apatosaurus\" is commonly found at the same sites as \"Allosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" accounted for 70\u201375% of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web. Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are of the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the Lourinh\u00e3 Formationmainly \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", and \"Torvosaurus\"or have a close counterpart\"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Lusotitan\", \"Camptosaurus\" and \"Draconyx\", and \"Apatosaurus\" and \"Dinheirosaurus\". Other vertebrates that are known to have shared this paleo-environment include ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphs, and several species of pterosaur. Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common. The flora of the period has been evidenced in fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers. Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of tree ferns with fern understory (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the \"Araucaria\"-like conifer \"Brachyphyllum\"."}
{"id": "1347", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1347", "title": "Allosaurus", "text": "Allosaurus () is an extinct genus of large carnosaurian theropod dinosaur that lived 155 to 145\u00a0million years ago during the Late Jurassic period (Kimmeridgian to late Tithonian ages). The name \"Allosaurus\" means \"different lizard\", alluding to its unique (at the time of its discovery) concave vertebrae. It is derived from the Greek words (') (\"different\", \"strange\", or \"other\") and (') (\"lizard\" or \"reptile\"). The first fossil remains that could definitively be ascribed to this genus were described in 1877 by famed paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh. The genus has a very complicated taxonomy and includes at least three valid species, the best known of which is \"A. fragilis\". The bulk of \"Allosaurus\" remains have come from North America's Morrison Formation, with material also known from the Alcoba\u00e7a Formation and Lourinh\u00e3 Formation in Portugal with teeth known from Germany. It was known for over half of the 20th century as \"Antrodemus\", but a study of the abundant remains from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry returned the name \"Allosaurus\" to prominence. As one of the first well-known theropod dinosaurs, it has long attracted attention outside of paleontological circles.\n\"Allosaurus\" was a large bipedal predator for its time. Its skull was light, robust, and equipped with dozens of sharp, serrated teeth. It averaged in length for \"A. fragilis\", with the largest specimens estimated as being long. Relative to the large and powerful legs, its three-fingered hands were small and the body was balanced by a long, muscular tail. It is classified as an allosaurid, a type of carnosaurian theropod dinosaur. As the most abundant large predator of the Morrison Formation, \"Allosaurus\" was at the top of the food chain and probably preyed on contemporaneous large herbivorous dinosaurs, with the possibility of hunting other predators. Potential prey included ornithopods, stegosaurids, and sauropods. Some paleontologists interpret \"Allosaurus\" as having had cooperative social behavior and hunting in packs, while others believe individuals may have been aggressive toward each other and that congregations of this genus are the result of lone individuals feeding on the same carcasses.\nDiscovery and history.\nEarly discoveries and research.\nThe discovery and early study of \"Allosaurus\" is complicated by the multiplicity of names coined during the Bone Wars of the late 19th century. The first described fossil in this history was a bone obtained secondhand by Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden in 1869. It came from Middle Park, near Granby, Colorado, probably from Morrison Formation rocks. The locals had identified such bones as \"petrified horse hoofs\". Hayden sent his specimen to Joseph Leidy, who identified it as half of a tail vertebra and tentatively assigned it to the European dinosaur genus \"Poekilopleuron\" as \"Poicilopleuron\" \"valens\". He later decided it deserved its own genus, \"Antrodemus\".\n\"Allosaurus\" itself is based on YPM 1930, a small collection of fragmentary bones including parts of three vertebrae, a rib fragment, a tooth, a toe bone, and (most useful for later discussions) the shaft of the right humerus (upper arm). Othniel Charles Marsh gave these remains the formal name \"Allosaurus fragilis\" in 1877. \"Allosaurus\" comes from the Greek words \"/\", meaning \"strange\" or \"different\", and \"/\", meaning \"lizard\" or \"reptile\". It was named 'different lizard' because its vertebrae were different from those of other dinosaurs known at the time of its discovery. The species epithet \"fragilis\" is Latin for \"fragile\", referring to lightening features in the vertebrae. The bones were collected from the Morrison Formation of Garden Park, north of Ca\u00f1on City. O. C. Marsh and Edward Drinker Cope, who were in scientific competition with each other, went on to coin several other genera based on similarly sparse material that would later figure in the taxonomy of \"Allosaurus\". These include Marsh's \"Creosaurus\" and \"Labrosaurus\", as well as Cope's \"Epanterias\".\nIn their haste, Cope and Marsh did not always follow up on their discoveries (or, more commonly, those made by their subordinates). For example, after the discovery by Benjamin Mudge of the type specimen of \"Allosaurus\" in Colorado, Marsh elected to concentrate work in Wyoming. When work resumed at Garden Park in 1883, M. P. Felch found an almost complete \"Allosaurus\" and several partial skeletons. In addition, one of Cope's collectors, H. F. Hubbell, found a specimen in the Como Bluff area of Wyoming in 1879, but apparently did not mention its completeness and Cope never unpacked it. Upon unpacking it in 1903 (several years after Cope had died), it was found to be one of the most complete theropod specimens then known and the skeleton, now cataloged as AMNH 5753, was put on public view in 1908. This is the well-known mount poised over a partial \"Apatosaurus\" skeleton as if scavenging it, illustrated as such in a painting by Charles R. Knight. Although notable as the first free-standing mount of a theropod dinosaur and often illustrated and photographed, it has never been scientifically described.\nThe multiplicity of early names complicated later research, with the situation compounded by the terse descriptions provided by Marsh and Cope. Even at the time, authors such as Samuel Wendell Williston suggested that too many names had been coined. For example, Williston pointed out in 1901 that Marsh had never been able to adequately distinguish \"Allosaurus\" from \"Creosaurus\". The most influential early attempt to sort out the convoluted situation was produced by Charles W. Gilmore in 1920. He came to the conclusion that the tail vertebra named \"Antrodemus\" by Leidy was indistinguishable from those of \"Allosaurus\" and that \"Antrodemus\" should be the preferred name because, as the older name, it had priority. \"Antrodemus\" became the accepted name for this familiar genus for over 50 years, until James Henry Madsen published on the Cleveland-Lloyd specimens and concluded that \"Allosaurus\" should be used because \"Antrodemus\" was based on material with poor, if any, diagnostic features and locality information. For example, the geological formation that the single bone of \"Antrodemus\" came from is unknown. \"Antrodemus\" has been used informally for convenience when distinguishing between the skull Gilmore restored and the composite skull restored by Madsen.\nCleveland-Lloyd discoveries.\nAlthough sporadic work at what became known as the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Emery County, Utah, had taken place as early as 1927 and the fossil site itself described by William L. Stokes in 1945, major operations did not begin there until 1960. Under a cooperative effort involving nearly 40\u00a0institutions, thousands of bones were recovered between 1960 and 1965, led by James Henry Madsen. The quarry is notable for the predominance of \"Allosaurus\" remains, the condition of the specimens, and the lack of scientific resolution on how it came to be. The majority of bones belong to the large theropod \"Allosaurus fragilis\" (it is estimated that the remains of at least 46\u00a0\"A. fragilis\" have been found there, out of at a minimum 73\u00a0dinosaurs) and the fossils found there are disarticulated and well-mixed. Nearly a dozen scientific papers have been written on the taphonomy of the site, suggesting numerous mutually exclusive explanations for how it may have formed. Suggestions have ranged from animals getting stuck in a bog, becoming trapped in deep mud, falling victim to drought-induced mortality around a waterhole, and getting trapped in a spring-fed pond or seep. Regardless of the actual cause, the great quantity of well-preserved \"Allosaurus\" remains has allowed this genus to be known in great detail, making it among the best-known of all theropods. Skeletal remains from the quarry pertain to individuals of almost all ages and sizes, from less than to long, and the disarticulation is an advantage for describing bones usually found fused. Due to being one of Utah's two fossil quarries where numerous \"Allosaurus\" specimens have been discovered, \"Allosaurus\" was designated as the state fossil of Utah in 1988.\nModern study.\nThe period since Madsen's monograph has been marked by a great expansion in studies dealing with topics concerning \"Allosaurus\" in life (paleobiological and paleoecological topics). Such studies have covered topics including skeletal variation, growth, skull construction, hunting methods, the brain, and the possibility of gregarious living and parental care. Reanalysis of old material (particularly of large 'allosaur' specimens), new discoveries in Portugal, and several very complete new specimens have also contributed to the growing knowledge base.\n\"Big Al\" and \"Big Al II\".\nIn 1991, \"Big Al\" (MOR 693), a 95%\u00a0complete, partially articulated specimen of \"Allosaurus\" was discovered, measuring about long. MOR 693 was excavated near Shell, Wyoming, by a joint Museum of the Rockies and University of Wyoming Geological Museum team. This skeleton was discovered by a Swiss team, led by Kirby Siber. Chure and Loewen in 2020 identified the individual as a representative of the species \"A. jimmadseni\". In 1996, the same team discovered a second \"Allosaurus\", \"Big Al II\". This specimen, the best preserved skeleton of its kind to date, is also referred to \"A. jimmadseni\".\nThe completeness, preservation, and scientific importance of this skeleton gave \"Big Al\" its name. The individual itself was below the average size for \"Allosaurus fragilis\", as it was a subadult estimated at only 87%\u00a0grown. The specimen was described by Breithaupt in 1996. Nineteen of its bones were broken or showed signs of serious infection, which may have contributed to \"Big Al's\" death. Pathologic bones included five ribs, five vertebrae, and four bones of the feet. Several of its damaged bones showed signs of osteomyelitis, a severe bone infection. A particular problem for the living animal was infection and trauma to the right foot that probably affected movement and may have also predisposed the other foot to injury because of a change in gait. \"Big Al\" had an infection on the first phalanx on the third toe that was afflicted by an involucrum. The infection was long-lived, perhaps up to six months. \"Big Al II\" is also known to have multiple injuries.\nPortuguese discoveries.\nIn 1988, during construction works of a warehouse, a skeleton of a large theropod was discovered near the village of Andr\u00e9s, Leiria District, Portugal. The Andr\u00e9s quarry is included in the Bombarral Formation (\"Gr\u00e9s Superiores\"). The lower part of this formation is diachronic with the Alcoba\u00e7a Formation in the northen Lusitanian Basin, and is dated to the Early Tithonian. This specimen was reported in 1999 as the first occurrence of \"Allosaurus fragilis\" outside North America. The specimen, labeled MNHNUL/AND.001, is deposited in the National Museum of Natural History and Science, Lisbon. It consists of a partial skeleton, composed of an incomplete right quadrate, several vertebrae and chevrons, several dorsal ribs and gastralia, a partial pelvis, most of the hind limbs and several indeterminate fragments. In 2003, Miguel Telles Antunes and Oct\u00e1vio Mateus published a review of the dinosaurs from Portugal, where they assigned the Andr\u00e9s specimen to \"Allosaurus\" sp.\nThe Guimarota coal mine in Leiria, Portugal, produced plenty of remains of micro-vertebrates while it was being explored. The Guimarota beds belong to the Alcoba\u00e7a Formation, and are dated of the Late Kimmeridgian. In 2005, Oliver Rauhut and Regina Fechner describe the right maxilla of a juvenile theropod (IPFUB Gui Th 4) from the Guimarota mine, that was stored in the collections of the Institute of Geological Sciences of the Free University of Berlin. They attribute the maxilla to \"Allosaurus\" sp. based on the large maxillary fenestra and coeval presence of the other \"Allosaurus\" specimens. This specimen allowed the authors to conclude that the development of paranasal pneumacity in theropods is heterochronic, with juveniles having more pronouced pneumaticity than adults.\nIn 2006, a new species of \"Allosaurus\", \"A. europaeus\", was reported based a specimen found in a beach near Vale Frades, Lourinh\u00e3, Portugal. The specimen, labeled ML415, is deposited in the Lourinh\u00e3 Museum, and consists of a partial skull, three cervical vertebrae and cervical ribs. It was found in rocks of the Praia Azul Member of the Lourinh\u00e3 Formation, which in that sector is dated to the Early Tithonian.\nIn 2005, the Andr\u00e9s quarry was reactivated for further prospection, which yielded remains of a diverse vertebrate fauna and new \"Allosaurus\" remains. These new remains (such as a partial right frontal, MNHNUL/AND.001/062), along with further preparation of the original Andr\u00e9s specimen, allowed for a more detailed comparison with other \"Allosaurus\" species. The authors concluded that the Andr\u00e9s specimen is compatible with the diagnosis of \"A. fragilis\", and also disputed the attribution of the Vale Frades specimen to a new species, claiming that the autapomorphies proposed in the diagnosis of \"A. europaeus\" can be explained by individual variation. In 2010, new \"Allosaurus\" elements from the Andr\u00e9s quarry are reported, including new cranial remains such as a right quadrate-quadratojudal, two lacrimals, a right dentary, a right frontal, the posterior end of the right mandible and a complete braincase. A second complete left ilium suggests the presence of a second \"Allosaurus\" individual in the quarry, larger than the first. The authors once again claim that \"A. europaeus\" should be considered a \"nomen dubium\" until a more detailed description of the Vale Frades specimen is published.\nA detailed description of the remains of the Andr\u00e9s specimen was published on the doctoral thesis of Elisabete Malafaia. The remains were collected between 1988 and 2010, and include cranial elements (such as the maxilla, nasal, lacrimals, prefrontal, postorbitals, frontals, palatines, quadrate, quadratojugal, squamosal, vomer, braincase, articular, surangulars, prearticular, angulars, supradentary and coronoid, isolated mesial and lateral teeth) and postcranial elements (intercentrum of the atlas, dorsal, sacral and caudal vertebrae, cervical and dorsal ribs, chevrons, coracoid, ilium, pubes, femora, tibiae, fibulae, astragalus and calcaneum, distal tarsal III, second, tird, and fourth metatarsals, and several phalanges). Duplicate elements reported in the thesis include the previously mentioned left ilium, a fragmentary pubic peduncle in articulation with the pubes, and a right frontal, caudal vertebra, and pedal phalanges of a third much smaller individual. The author claims that the Andr\u00e9s specimens present noticeable differences with both \"A. fragilis\" and the type specimen of \"A. europaeus\", but tentatively assigns it to \"Allosaurus\" cf. \"europaeus\", pending the discovery of more specimens that allow the comparison between the two.\nIn 2024, Burigo and Mateus publish a redescription and revised diagnosis of the Vale Frades specimen. The authors report new elements, such as the atlas-axis, coronoid, new teeth and rib fragments, and confirm the validity of the species. A specimen-level phylogenetic analysis using scored cranial characters was performed. The authors claim that the Andr\u00e9s specimen is attributable to \"A. europaeus\", and that \"A. europaeus\" is more closely related to \"A. jimmadsenni\" than to \"A. fragilis\".\nSpecies.\nSeven species of \"Allosaurus\" have been named: \"A. anax\", \"A. amplus\", \"A. atrox\", \"A. europaeus\", the type species \"A. fragilis\", \"A. jimmadseni\" and \"A. lucasi\". Among these (excluding \"A. anax\", which was named in 2024), Daniel Chure and Mark Loewen in 2020 only recognized the species \"A. fragilis\", \"A. europaeus\", and the newly-named \"A. jimmadseni\" as being valid species. Some studies have suggested that \"A. europaeus\" does not show any unique characters compared to the North American species, though other authors have suggested that the species is valid and has a number of distinguishing characters.\n\"A. fragilis\" is the type species and was named by Marsh in 1877. It is known from the remains of at least 60 individuals, all found in the Kimmeridgian\u2013Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming. Details of the humerus (upper arm) of \"A. fragilis\" have been used as diagnostic among Morrison theropods, but \"A. jimmadseni\" indicates that this is no longer the case at the species level.\n\"A. jimmadseni\" has been scientifically described based on two nearly complete skeletons. The first specimen to wear the identification was unearthed in Dinosaur National Monument in northeastern Utah, with the original \"Big Al\" individual subsequently recognized as belonging to the same species. This species differs from \"A. fragilis\" in several anatomical details, including a jugal (cheekbone) with a straight lower margin. Fossils are confined to the Salt Wash Member of the Morrison Formation, with \"A. fragilis\" only found in the higher Brushy Basin Member. The specific name \"jimmadseni\" is named in honor of Madsen, for his contributions to the taxonomy of the genus, notably for his 1976 work.\n\"A. fragilis\", \"A. jimmadseni\", \"A. anax\", \"A. amplus\", and \"A. lucasi\" are all known from remains discovered in the Kimmeridgian\u2013Tithonian Upper Jurassic-age Morrison Formation of the United States, spread across Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming. \"A. fragilis\" is regarded as the most common, known from the remains of at least 60 individuals. For a while in the late 1980s and early 1990s, it was common to recognize \"A. fragilis\" as the short-snouted species, with the long-snouted taxon being \"A. atrox.\" However, subsequent analysis of specimens from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, Como Bluff, and Dry Mesa Quarry showed that the differences seen in the Morrison Formation material could be attributed to individual variation. A study of skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the lacrimal horns and the proposed differentiation of \"A. jimmadseni\" based on the shape of the jugal. \"A. anax\" was described and named in 2024 from several fossils representing various skeleton parts, the holotype being a postorbital numbered as OMNH 1771. This species is characterized by the lack of rugose ornamentation on the postorbital, the dorsal vertebrae with hourglass-shaped centra and pneumatic foramina, and other features of the postorbital, cervical vertebrae, and fibula. The specific name comes from the Ancient Greek \u1f04\u03bd\u03b1\u03be (\"anax\", \"king\", \"lord\" or \"tribal chief\"), and is intended to be an updated reference to the now dubious saurischian genus \"Saurophaganax\", to which the fossils were previously attributed.\nThe \"Allosaurus\" material from Portugal has a controversial taxonomic research history. The Andr\u00e9s \"Allosaurus\" specimens, consisting of very complete cranial and post-cranial remains, have been attributed to \"A. fragilis\", \"A.\" sp\", A. europaeus\" and \"A.\" cf. \"europaeus\". The Vale Frades \"Allosaurus\", consisting of a partial skull and cervical vertebrae and ribs, is the type specimen of \"A. europaeus\", although the validity of that species has been previously questioned. In 2024, a revised diagnosis of \"A. europaeus\" was published, confirming the validity of the species. The specific affinities of the Andr\u00e9s specimens are still unclear.\nThe issue of species and potential synonyms was historically complicated by the type specimen of \"Allosaurus fragilis\" (YPM 1930) being extremely fragmentary, consisting of a few incomplete vertebrae, limb fragments, rib fragments, and a single tooth. Because of this, several scientists have interpreted the type specimen as potentially dubious, meaning the genus \"Allosaurus\" itself or at least the species \"A. fragilis\" would be a \"nomen dubium\" (\"dubious name\", based on a specimen too incomplete to compare to other specimens or to classify). To address this situation, Gregory S. Paul and Kenneth Carpenter (2010) submitted a petition to the ICZN to have the name \"A. fragilis\" officially transferred to the more complete specimen USNM4734 (as a neotype), a decision that was ratified by the ICZN on December 29, 2023.\nTeeth of indeterminate species of \"Allosaurus\" have been reported from T\u00f6nniesberg and Kahlberg in Saxony, Germany, dating to the upper Kimmeridigian.\nSynonyms.\n\"Creosaurus\", \"Epanterias\", and \"Labrosaurus\" are regarded as junior synonyms of \"Allosaurus\". Most of the species that are regarded as synonyms of \"A. fragilis\", or that were misassigned to the genus, are obscure and based on very scrappy remains. One exception is \"Labrosaurus ferox\", named in 1884 by Marsh for an oddly formed partial lower jaw, with a prominent gap in the tooth row at the tip of the jaw, and a rear section greatly expanded and turned down. Later researchers suggested that the bone was pathologic, showing an injury to the living animal, and that part of the unusual form of the rear of the bone was due to plaster reconstruction. It is now regarded as an example of \"A. fragilis\".\nIn his 1988 book, \"Predatory Dinosaurs of the World\", the freelance artist &amp; author Gregory S. Paul proposed that \"A. fragilis\" had tall pointed horns and a slender build compared to a postulated second species \"A. atrox\", as well as not being a different sex due to rarity. \"Allosaurus atrox\" was originally named by Marsh in 1878 as the type species of its own genus, \"Creosaurus\", and is based on YPM 1890, an assortment of bones that includes a couple of pieces of the skull, portions of nine tail vertebrae, two hip vertebrae, an ilium, and ankle and foot bones. Although the idea of two common Morrison allosaur species was followed in some semi-technical and popular works, the 2000 thesis on Allosauridae noted that Charles Gilmore mistakenly reconstructed USNM 4734 as having a shorter skull than the specimens referred by Paul to \"atrox\", refuting supposed differences between USNM 4734 and putative \"A. atrox\" specimens like DINO 2560, AMNH 600, and AMNH 666.\n\"Allosaurus agilis\", seen in Zittel, 1887, and Osborn, 1912, is a typographical error for \"A. fragilis.\" \"Allosaurus ferox\" is a typographical error by Marsh for \"A. fragilis\" in a figure caption for the partial skull YPM 1893 and YPM 1893 has been treated as a specimen of \"A fragilis\". Likewise, \"Labrosaurus fragilis\" is a typographical error by Marsh (1896) for \"Labrosaurus ferox\". \"A. whitei\" is a \"nomen nudum\" coined by Pickering in 1996 for the complete \"Allosaurus\" specimens that Paul referred to \"A. atrox\".\n\"Madsenius\" was coined by David Lambert in 1990, being based on remains from Dinosaur National Monument assigned to \"Allosaurus\" or \"Creosaurus\" (a synonym of \"Allosaurus\"), and was to be described by paleontologist Robert Bakker as \"Madsenius trux\". However, \"Madsenius\" is now seen as yet another synonym of \"Allosaurus\" because Bakker's action was predicated upon the false assumption of USNM 4734 being distinct from long-snouted \"Allosaurus\" due to errors in Gilmore's 1920 reconstruction of USNM 4734.\n\"Wyomingraptor\" was informally coined by Bakker for allosaurid remains from the Morrison Formation of the Late Jurassic. The remains unearthed are labeled as \"Allosaurus\" and are housed in the Tate Geological Museum. However, there has been no official description of the remains and \"Wyomingraptor\" has been dismissed as a \"nomen nudum\", with the remains referable to \"Allosaurus\".\nFormerly assigned species and fossils.\nSeveral species initially classified within or referred to \"Allosaurus\" do not belong within the genus. \"A. medius\" was named by Marsh in 1888 for various specimens from the Early Cretaceous Arundel Formation of Maryland, although most of the remains were removed by Richard Swann Lull to the new ornithopod species \"Dryosaurus grandis\", except for a tooth. It was transferred to \"Antrodemus\" by Oliver Hay in 1902, but Hay later clarified that this was an inexplicable error on his part. Gilmore considered the tooth nondiagnostic but transferred it to \"Dryptosaurus\", as \"D. medius\". The referral was not accepted in the most recent review of basal tetanurans, and \"Allosaurus medius\" was simply listed as a dubious species of theropod. It may be closely related to \"Acrocanthosaurus\".\n\"Allosaurus valens\" is a new combination for \"Antrodemus valens\" used by Friedrich von Huene in 1932; \"Antrodemus valens\" itself may also pertain to \"Allosaurus fragilis\", as Gilmore suggested in 1920.\n\"A. lucaris\", another Marsh name, was given to a partial skeleton in 1878. He later decided it warranted its own genus, \"Labrosaurus\", but this has not been accepted, and \"A. lucaris\" is also regarded as another specimen of \"A. fragilis\". \"Allosaurus lucaris\", is known mostly from vertebrae, sharing characters with \"Allosaurus\". Paul and Carpenter stated that the type specimen of this species, YPM 1931, was from a younger age than \"Allosaurus\", and might represent a different genus. However, they found that the specimen was undiagnostic, and thus \"A. lucaris\" was a \"nomen dubium\".\n\"Allosaurus sibiricus\" was described in 1914 by A. N. Riabinin on the basis of a bone, later identified as a partial fourth metatarsal, from the Early Cretaceous of Buryatia, Russia. It was transferred to \"Chilantaisaurus\" in 1990, but is now considered a \"nomen dubium\" indeterminate beyond Theropoda.\n\"Allosaurus meriani\" was a new combination by George Olshevsky for \"Megalosaurus meriani\" Greppin, 1870, based on a tooth from the Late Jurassic of Switzerland. However, a recent overview of \"Ceratosaurus\" included it in \"Ceratosaurus\" sp.\n\"Apatodon mirus\", based on a scrap of vertebra Marsh first thought to be a mammalian jaw, has been listed as a synonym of \"Allosaurus fragilis\". However, it was considered indeterminate beyond Dinosauria by Chure, and Mickey Mortimer believes that the synonymy of \"Apatodon\" with \"Allosaurus\" was due to correspondence to Ralph Molnar by John McIntosh, whereby the latter reportedly found a paper saying that Othniel Charles Marsh admitted that the \"Apatodon\" holotype was actually an allosaurid dorsal vertebra.\n\"A. amplexus\" was named by Gregory S. Paul for giant Morrison allosaur remains, and included in his conception \"Saurophagus maximus\" (later \"Saurophaganax\"). \"A. amplexus\" was originally coined by Cope in 1878 as the type species of his new genus \"Epanterias\", and is based on what is now AMNH 5767, parts of three vertebrae, a coracoid, and a metatarsal. Following Paul's work, this species has been accepted as a synonym of \"A. fragilis\". A 2010 study by Paul and Kenneth Carpenter, however, indicates that \"Epanterias\" is temporally younger than the \"A. fragilis\" type specimen, so it is a separate species at minimum.\n\"A. maximus\" was a new combination by David K. Smith for Chure's \"Saurophaganax maximus\", a taxon created by Chure in 1995 for giant allosaurid remains from the Morrison of Oklahoma. These remains had been known as \"Saurophagus\", but that name was already in use, leading Chure to propose a substitute. Smith, in his 1998 analysis of variation, concluded that \"S. maximus\" was not different enough from \"Allosaurus\" to be a separate genus, but did warrant its own species, \"A. maximus\". This reassignment was rejected in a review of basal tetanurans. A 2024 reassessment of fossil material assigned to \"Saurophaganax\" suggested that the holotype neural arch of this taxon could not confidently be assigned to a theropod, but that it exhibited some similarities to sauropods. Other \"Saurophaganax\" bones could be referred to diplodocid sauropods. As such, the researchers assigned the remaining theropod bones to a new species of \"Allosaurus\", \"A. anax\".\nThere are also several species left over from the synonymizations of \"Creosaurus\" and \"Labrosaurus\" with \"Allosaurus\". \"Creosaurus potens\" was named by Lull in 1911 for a vertebra from the Early Cretaceous of Maryland. It is now regarded as a dubious theropod. \"Labrosaurus stechowi\", described in 1920 by Janensch based on isolated \"Ceratosaurus\"-like teeth from the Tendaguru beds of Tanzania, was listed by Donald F. Glut as a species of \"Allosaurus\", is now considered a dubious ceratosaurian related to \"Ceratosaurus\". \"L. sulcatus\", named by Marsh in 1896 for a Morrison theropod tooth, which like \"L. stechowi\" is now regarded as a dubious \"Ceratosaurus\"-like ceratosaur.\n\"A. tendagurensis\" was named in 1925 by Werner Janensch for a partial shin (MB.R.3620) found in the Kimmeridgian-age Tendaguru Formation in Mtwara, Tanzania. Although tabulated as a tentatively valid species of \"Allosaurus\" in the second edition of the Dinosauria, subsequent studies place it as indeterminate beyond Tetanurae, either a carcharodontosaurian or megalosaurid. Although obscure, it was a large theropod, possibly around long and in weight.\nKurzanov and colleagues in 2003 designated six teeth from Siberia as \"Allosaurus\" sp. (meaning the authors found the specimens to be most like those of \"Allosaurus\", but did not or could not assign a species to them). They were reclassified as an indeterminate theropod. Also, reports of \"Allosaurus\" in Shanxi, China go back to at least 1982. These were interpreted as \"Torvosaurus\" remains in 2012.\nAn astragalus (ankle bone) thought to belong to a species of \"Allosaurus\" was found at Cape Paterson, Victoria in Early Cretaceous beds in southeastern Australia. It was thought to provide evidence that Australia was a refugium for animals that had gone extinct elsewhere. This identification was challenged by Samuel Welles, who thought it more resembled that of an ornithomimid, but the original authors defended their identification. With fifteen years of new specimens and research to look at, Daniel Chure reexamined the bone and found that it was not \"Allosaurus\", but could represent an allosauroid. Similarly, Yoichi Azuma and Phil Currie, in their description of \"Fukuiraptor\", noted that the bone closely resembled that of their new genus. This specimen is sometimes referred to as \"Allosaurus robustus\", an informal museum name. It likely belonged to something similar to \"Australovenator\", although one study considered it to belong to an abelisaur.\nDescription.\n\"Allosaurus\" was a typical large theropod, having a massive skull on a short neck, a long, slightly sloping tail, and reduced forelimbs. \"Allosaurus fragilis\", the best-known species, had an average length of and mass of , with the largest definitive \"Allosaurus\" specimen (AMNH 680) estimated at long, with an estimated weight of . In his 1976 monograph on \"Allosaurus\", James H. Madsen mentioned a range of bone sizes which he interpreted to show a maximum length of . As with dinosaurs in general, weight estimates are debatable, and since 1980 have ranged between , , and approximately for modal adult weight (not maximum). John Foster, a specialist on the Morrison Formation, suggests that is reasonable for large adults of \"A. fragilis\", but that is a closer estimate for individuals represented by the average-sized thigh bones he has measured. Using the subadult specimen nicknamed \"Big Al\", since assigned to the species \"Allosaurus jimmadseni\", researchers using computer modeling arrived at a best estimate of for the individual, but by varying parameters they found a range from approximately to approximately . A separate computational project estimated the adaptive optimum body mass in \"Allosaurus\" to be ~2,345\u00a0kg. \"A. europaeus\" has been measured up to in length and in body mass.\nSeveral gigantic specimens have been attributed to \"Allosaurus\", but may in fact belong to other genera. The dubious genus \"Saurophaganax\" (OMNH 1708) was estimated to reach around in length, and its single species was sometimes included in the genus \"Allosaurus\" as \"Allosaurus maximus\". However, a 2024 study concluded that some material assigned to \"Saurophaganax\" actually belonged to a diplodocid sauropod with the material confidently assigned to Allosauridae belonging to a new species of \"Allosaurus\", \"A. anax\", and the body mass of this species was tentatively estimated around based on fragmentary material. Another potential specimen of \"Allosaurus\", once assigned to the genus \"Epanterias\" (AMNH 5767), may have measured in length. A more recent discovery is a partial skeleton from the Peterson Quarry in Morrison rocks of New Mexico; this large allosaurid was suggested to be a potential specimen of \"Saurophaganax\" prior to this taxon's 2024 reassessment.\nDavid K. Smith, examining \"Allosaurus\" fossils by quarry, found that the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry (Utah) specimens are generally smaller than those from Como Bluff (Wyoming) or Brigham Young University's Dry Mesa Quarry (Colorado), but the shapes of the bones themselves did not vary between the sites. A later study by Smith incorporating Garden Park (Colorado) and Dinosaur National Monument (Utah) specimens found no justification for multiple species based on skeletal variation; skull variation was most common and was gradational, suggesting individual variation was responsible. Further work on size-related variation again found no consistent differences, although the Dry Mesa material tended to clump together on the basis of the astragalus, an ankle bone. Kenneth Carpenter, using skull elements from the Cleveland-Lloyd site, found wide variation between individuals, calling into question previous species-level distinctions based on such features as the shape of the horns, and the proposed differentiation of \"A. jimmadseni\" based on the shape of the jugal. A study published by Motani et al., in 2020 suggests that \"Allosaurus\" was also sexually dimorphic in the width of the femur's head against its length.\nSkull.\nThe skull and teeth of \"Allosaurus\" were modestly proportioned for a theropod of its size. Paleontologist Gregory S. Paul gives a length of for a skull belonging to an individual he estimates at long. Each premaxilla (the bones that formed the tip of the snout) held five teeth with D-shaped cross-sections, and each maxilla (the main tooth-bearing bones in the upper jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth; the number of teeth does not exactly correspond to the size of the bone. Each dentary (the tooth-bearing bone of the lower jaw) had between 14 and 17 teeth, with an average count of 16. The teeth became shorter, narrower, and more curved toward the back of the skull. All of the teeth had saw-like edges. They were shed easily, and were replaced continually, making them common fossils. Its skull was light, robust and equipped with dozens of sharp, serrated teeth.\nThe skull had a pair of horns above and in front of the eyes. These horns were composed of extensions of the lacrimal bones, and varied in shape and size. There were also lower paired ridges running along the top edges of the nasal bones that led into the horns. The horns were probably covered in a keratin sheath and may have had a variety of functions, including acting as sunshades for the eyes, being used for display, and being used in combat against other members of the same species (although they were fragile). There was a ridge along the back of the skull roof for muscle attachment, as is also seen in tyrannosaurids.\nInside the lacrimal bones were depressions that may have held glands, such as salt glands. Within the maxillae were sinuses that were better developed than those of more basal theropods such as \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Marshosaurus\"; they may have been related to the sense of smell, perhaps holding something like Jacobson's organs. The roof of the braincase was thin, perhaps to improve thermoregulation for the brain. The skull and lower jaws had joints that permitted motion within these units. In the lower jaws, the bones of the front and back halves loosely articulated, permitting the jaws to bow outward and increasing the animal's gape. The braincase and frontals may also have had a joint.\nPostcranial skeleton.\n\"Allosaurus\" had nine vertebrae in the neck, 14 in the back, and five in the sacrum supporting the hips. The number of tail vertebrae is unknown and varied with individual size; James Madsen estimated about 50, while Gregory S. Paul considered that to be too many and suggested 45 or less. There were hollow spaces in the neck and anterior back vertebrae. Such spaces, which are also found in modern theropods (that is, the birds), are interpreted as having held air sacs used in respiration. The rib cage was broad, giving it a barrel chest, especially in comparison to less derived theropods like \"Ceratosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" had gastralia (belly ribs), but these are not common findings, and they may have ossified poorly. In one published case, the gastralia show evidence of injury during life. A furcula (wishbone) was also present, but has only been recognized since 1996; in some cases furculae were confused with gastralia. The ilium, the main hip bone, was massive, and the pubic bone had a prominent foot that may have been used for both muscle attachment and as a prop for resting the body on the ground. Madsen noted that in about half of the individuals from the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry, independent of size, the pubes had not fused to each other at their foot ends. He suggested that this was a sexual characteristic, with females lacking fused bones to make egg-laying easier. This proposal has not attracted further attention, however.\nThe forelimbs of \"Allosaurus\" were short in comparison to the hindlimbs (only about 35% the length of the hindlimbs in adults) and had three fingers per hand, tipped with large, strongly curved and pointed claws. The arms were powerful, and the forearm was somewhat shorter than the upper arm (1:1.2 ulna/humerus ratio). The wrist had a version of the semilunate carpal also found in more derived theropods like maniraptorans. Of the three fingers, the innermost (or thumb) was the largest, and diverged from the others. The phalangeal formula is 2-3-4-0-0, meaning that the innermost finger (phalange) has two bones, the next has three, and the third finger has four. The legs were not as long or suited for speed as those of tyrannosaurids, and the claws of the toes were less developed and more hoof-like than those of earlier theropods. Each foot had three weight-bearing toes and an inner dewclaw, which Madsen suggested could have been used for grasping in juveniles. There was also what is interpreted as the splint-like remnant of a fifth (outermost) metatarsal, perhaps used as a lever between the Achilles tendon and foot.\nSkin.\nSkin impressions from \"Allosaurus\" have been described. One impression, from a juvenile specimen, measures 30\u00a0cm\u00b2 and is associated with the anterior dorsal ribs/pectoral region. The impression shows small scales measuring 1\u20133\u00a0mm in diameter. A skin impression from the \"Big Al Two\" specimen, associated with the base of the tail, measures 20\u00a0cm x 20\u00a0cm and shows large scales measuring up to 2\u00a0cm in diameter. However, it has been noted that these scales are more similar to those of sauropods, and due to the presence of non-theropod remains associated with the tail of \"Big Al Two\" there is a possibility that this skin impression is not from \"Allosaurus\".\nAnother \"Allosaurus\" fossil features a skin impression from the mandible, showing scales measuring 1\u20132\u00a0mm in diameter. The same fossil also preserves skin measuring 20 x 20\u00a0cm from the ventral side of the neck, showing scutate scales measuring 0.5\u00a0cm wide and 11\u00a0cm long. A small skin impression from an \"Allosaurus\" skull has been reported but never described.\nClassification.\n\"Allosaurus\" was an allosaurid, a member of a family of large theropods within the larger group Carnosauria. The family name Allosauridae was created for this genus in 1878 by Othniel Charles Marsh, but the term was largely unused until the 1970s in favor of Megalosauridae, another family of large theropods that eventually became a wastebasket taxon. This, along with the use of \"Antrodemus\" for \"Allosaurus\" during the same period, is a point that needs to be remembered when searching for information on \"Allosaurus\" in publications that predate James Madsen's 1976 monograph. Major publications using the name \"Megalosauridae\" instead of \"Allosauridae\" include Gilmore, 1920, von Huene, 1926, Romer, 1956 and 1966, Steel, 1970, and Walker, 1964.\nFollowing the publication of Madsen's influential monograph, Allosauridae became the preferred family assignment, but it too was not strongly defined. Semi-technical works used Allosauridae for a variety of large theropods, usually those that were larger and better-known than megalosaurids. Typical theropods that were thought to be related to \"Allosaurus\" included \"Indosaurus\", \"Piatnitzkysaurus\", \"Piveteausaurus\", \"Yangchuanosaurus\", \"Acrocanthosaurus\", \"Chilantaisaurus\", \"Compsosuchus\", \"Stokesosaurus\", and \"Szechuanosaurus\". Given modern knowledge of theropod diversity and the advent of cladistic study of evolutionary relationships, none of these theropods is now recognized as an allosaurid, although several, like \"Acrocanthosaurus\" and \"Yangchuanosaurus\", are members of closely related families.\nBelow is a cladogram based on the analysis of Benson et al. in 2010.\nAllosauridae is one of four families in Allosauroidea; the other three are Neovenatoridae, Carcharodontosauridae and Sinraptoridae. Allosauridae has at times been proposed as ancestral to the Tyrannosauridae (which would make it paraphyletic), one example being Gregory S. Paul's \"Predatory Dinosaurs of the World\", but this has been rejected, with tyrannosaurids identified as members of a separate branch of theropods, the Coelurosauria. Allosauridae is the smallest of the carnosaur families, with only \"Saurophaganax\" and a currently unnamed French allosauroid accepted as possible valid genera besides \"Allosaurus\" in the most recent review. Another genus, \"Epanterias\", is a potential valid member, but it and \"Saurophaganax\" may turn out to be large examples of \"Allosaurus\". Some reviews have kept the genus \"Saurophaganax\" and included \"Epanterias\" with \"Allosaurus\".\nThe controversial \"Saurophaganax\", initially recognized as a large \"Allosaurus\"-like theropod, has had a controversial taxonomic history. In 2019, Rauhut and Pol noted that its taxonomic placement within Allosauroidea is unstable, being recovered as a sister taxon of Metriacanthosauridae or Allosauria, or even as the basalmost carcharodontosaurian. In 2024, \"Saurophaganax\" was reassessed as a dubious, chimeric taxon with the holotype being so fragmentary that it could only be confidently referred to the Saurischia, and some specimens more likely belonging to a diplodocid sauropod.\nPaleobiology.\nLife history.\nThe wealth of \"Allosaurus\" fossils, from nearly all ages of individuals, allows scientists to study how the animal grew and how long its lifespan may have been. Remains may reach as far back in the lifespan as eggs\u2014crushed eggs from Colorado have been suggested as those of \"Allosaurus\". Based on histological analysis of limb bones, bone deposition appears to stop at around 22 to 28 years, which is comparable to that of other large theropods like \"Tyrannosaurus\". From the same analysis, its maximum growth appears to have been at age 15, with an estimated growth rate of about 150 kilograms (330 lb) per year.\nMedullary bone tissue (endosteally derived, ephemeral, mineralization located inside the medulla of the long bones in gravid female birds) has been reported in at least one \"Allosaurus\" specimen, a shin bone from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry. Today, this bone tissue is only formed in female birds that are laying eggs, as it is used to supply calcium to shells. Its presence in the \"Allosaurus\" individual has been used to establish sex and show it had reached reproductive age. However, other studies have called into question some cases of medullary bone in dinosaurs, including this \"Allosaurus\" individual. Data from extant birds suggested that the medullary bone in this \"Allosaurus\" individual may have been the result of a bone pathology instead. However, with the confirmation of medullary tissue indicating sex in a specimen of \"Tyrannosaurus\", it may be possible to ascertain whether or not the \"Allosaurus\" in question was indeed female.\nThe discovery of a juvenile specimen with a nearly complete hindlimb shows that the legs were relatively longer in juveniles, and the lower segments of the leg (shin and foot) were relatively longer than the thigh. These differences suggest that younger \"Allosaurus\" were faster and had different hunting strategies than adults, perhaps chasing small prey as juveniles, then becoming ambush hunters of large prey upon adulthood. The thigh bone became thicker and wider during growth, and the cross-section less circular, as muscle attachments shifted, muscles became shorter, and the growth of the leg slowed. These changes imply that juvenile legs has less predictable stresses compared with adults, which would have moved with more regular forward progression. Conversely, the skull bones appear to have generally grown isometrically, increasing in size without changing in proportion.\nFeeding.\nMost paleontologists accept \"Allosaurus\" as an active predator of large animals. There is dramatic evidence for allosaur attacks on \"Stegosaurus\", including an \"Allosaurus\" tail vertebra with a partially healed puncture wound that fits a \"Stegosaurus\" tail spike, and a \"Stegosaurus\" neck plate with a U-shaped wound that correlates well with an \"Allosaurus\" snout. Sauropods seem to be likely candidates as both live prey and as objects of scavenging, based on the presence of scrapings on sauropod bones fitting allosaur teeth well and the presence of shed allosaur teeth with sauropod bones. However, as Gregory Paul noted in 1988, \"Allosaurus\" was probably not a predator of fully grown sauropods, unless it hunted in packs, as it had a modestly sized skull and relatively small teeth, and was greatly outweighed by contemporaneous sauropods. Another possibility is that it preferred to hunt juveniles instead of fully grown adults. Research in the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century may have found other solutions to this question. Robert T. Bakker, comparing \"Allosaurus\" to Cenozoic saber-toothed carnivorous mammals, found similar adaptations, such as a reduction of jaw muscles and increase in neck muscles, and the ability to open the jaws extremely wide. Although \"Allosaurus\" did not have saber teeth, Bakker suggested another mode of attack that would have used such neck and jaw adaptations: the short teeth in effect became small serrations on a saw-like cutting edge running the length of the upper jaw, which would have been driven into prey. This type of jaw would permit slashing attacks against much larger prey, with the goal of weakening the victim.\nSimilar conclusions were drawn by another study using finite element analysis on an \"Allosaurus\" skull. According to their biomechanical analysis, the skull was very strong but had a relatively small bite force. By using jaw muscles only, it could produce a bite force of 805 to 8,724 N, but the skull could withstand nearly 55,500 N of vertical force against the tooth row. The authors suggested that \"Allosaurus\" used its skull like a machete against prey, attacking open-mouthed, slashing flesh with its teeth, and tearing it away without splintering bones, unlike \"Tyrannosaurus\", which is thought to have been capable of damaging bones. They also suggested that the architecture of the skull could have permitted the use of different strategies against different prey; the skull was light enough to allow attacks on smaller and more agile ornithopods, but strong enough for high-impact ambush attacks against larger prey like stegosaurids and sauropods. Their interpretations were challenged by other researchers, who found no modern analogs to a hatchet attack and considered it more likely that the skull was strong to compensate for its open construction when absorbing the stresses from struggling prey. The original authors noted that \"Allosaurus\" itself has no modern equivalent, that the tooth row is well-suited to such an attack, and that articulations in the skull cited by their detractors as problematic actually helped protect the palate and lessen stress. Another possibility for handling large prey is that theropods like \"Allosaurus\" were \"flesh grazers\" which could take bites of flesh out of living sauropods that were sufficient to sustain the predator so it would not have needed to expend the effort to kill the prey outright. This strategy would also potentially have allowed the prey to recover and be fed upon in a similar way later. An additional suggestion notes that ornithopods were the most common available dinosaurian prey, and that \"Allosaurus\" may have subdued them by using an attack similar to that of modern big cats: grasping the prey with their forelimbs, and then making multiple bites on the throat to crush the trachea. This is compatible with other evidence that the forelimbs were strong and capable of restraining prey. Studies done by Stephen Lautenschager et al. from the University of Bristol also indicate \"Allosaurus\" could open its jaws quite wide and sustain considerable muscle force. When compared with \"Tyrannosaurus\" and the therizinosaurid \"Erlikosaurus\" in the same study, it was found that \"Allosaurus\" had a wider gape than either; the animal was capable of opening its jaws to a 92-degree angle at maximum. The findings also indicate that large carnivorous dinosaurs, like modern carnivores, had wider jaw gapes than herbivores.\nA biomechanical study published in 2013 by Eric Snively and colleagues found that \"Allosaurus\" had an unusually low attachment point on the skull for the longissimus capitis superficialis neck muscle compared to other theropods such as \"Tyrannosaurus\". This would have allowed the animal to make rapid and forceful vertical movements with the skull. The authors found that vertical strikes as proposed by Bakker and Rayfield are consistent with the animal's capabilities. They also found that the animal probably processed carcasses by vertical movements in a similar manner to falcons, such as kestrels: The animal could have gripped prey with the skull and feet, then pulled back and up to remove flesh. This differs from the prey-handling envisioned for tyrannosaurids, which probably tore flesh with lateral shakes of the skull, similar to crocodilians. In addition, \"Allosaurus\" was able to \"move its head and neck around relatively rapidly and with considerable control\", at the cost of power.\nOther aspects of feeding include the eyes, arms, and legs. The shape of the skull of \"Allosaurus\" limited potential binocular vision to 20\u00b0 of width, slightly less than that of modern crocodilians. As with crocodilians, this may have been enough to judge prey distance and time attacks. The arms, compared with those of other theropods, were suited for both grasping prey at a distance or clutching it close, and the articulation of the claws suggests that they could have been used to hook things. Finally, the top speed of \"Allosaurus\" has been estimated at per hour.\nA paper on the cranio-dental morphology of \"Allosaurus\" and how it worked has deemed the hatchet jaw attack unlikely, reinterpreting the unusually wide gape as an adaptation to allow \"Allosaurus\" to deliver a muscle-driven bite to large prey, with the weaker jaw muscles being a trade-off to allow for the widened gape.\nSauropod carrion may also have been important to large theropods in the Morrison Formation. Forensic techniques indicate that sauropod carcasses were targeted by \"Allosaurus\" at all stages of decomposition, indicating that late-stage decay pathogens were not a significant deterrent. A survey of sauropod bones from the Morrison Formation also reported widespread bite marks on sauropod bones in low-economy regions, which suggests that large theropods scavenged large sauropods when available, with the scarcity of such bite marks on the remains of smaller bones being potentially attributable to much more complete consumption of smaller or adolescent sauropods and on ornithischians, which would have been more commonly taken as live prey. A single dead adult \"Barosaurus\" or \"Brachiosaurus\" would have had enough calories to sustain multiple large theropods for weeks or months, though the vast majority of the Morrison's sauropod fossil record consisted of much smaller-bodied taxa such as \"Camarasaurus lentus\" or \"Diplodocus\".\nIt has also been argued that disabled individuals such as Big Al and Big Al II were physically incapable of hunting due to their numerous injuries but were able to survive nonetheless as scavengers of giant sauropod-falls, Interestingly, a recent review of paleopathologies in theropods may support this conclusion. The researchers found a positive association between allosaurids and fractures to the appendicular skeleton, while tyrannosaurs had a statistically negative association with these types of injuries. The fact that allosaurs were more likely to survive and heal even when severe fractures limited their locomotion abilities can be explained, in part, by different resource accessibility paradigms for the two groups, as allosauroids generally lived in sauropod-inhabited ecosystems, some of which, including the Morrison, have been interpreted as arid and highly water-stressed environments; however, the water-stressed nature of the Morrison has been heavily criticized in several more recent works on the basis of fossil evidence for the presence of extensive forest cover and aquatic ecosystems.\nSocial behavior.\nIt has been speculated since the 1970s that \"Allosaurus\" preyed on sauropods and other large dinosaurs by hunting in groups.\nSuch a depiction is common in semitechnical and popular dinosaur literature. Robert T. Bakker has extended social behavior to parental care, and has interpreted shed allosaur teeth and chewed bones of large prey animals as evidence that adult allosaurs brought food to lairs for their young to eat until they were grown, and prevented other carnivores from scavenging on the food. However, there is actually little evidence of gregarious behavior in theropods, and social interactions with members of the same species would have included antagonistic encounters, as shown by injuries to gastralia and bite wounds to skulls (the pathologic lower jaw named \"Labrosaurus ferox\" is one such possible example). Such head-biting may have been a way to establish dominance in a pack or to settle territorial disputes.\nAlthough \"Allosaurus\" may have hunted in packs, it has been argued that \"Allosaurus\" and other theropods had largely aggressive interactions instead of cooperative interactions with other members of their own species. The study in question noted that cooperative hunting of prey much larger than an individual predator, as is commonly inferred for theropod dinosaurs, is rare among vertebrates in general, and modern diapsid carnivores (including lizards, crocodiles, and birds) rarely cooperate to hunt in such a way. Instead, they are typically territorial and will kill and cannibalize intruders of the same species, and will also do the same to smaller individuals that attempt to eat before they do when aggregated at feeding sites. According to this interpretation, the accumulation of remains of multiple \"Allosaurus\" individuals at the same site; e.g., in the Cleveland\u2013Lloyd Quarry, are not due to pack hunting, but to the fact that \"Allosaurus\" individuals were drawn together to feed on other disabled or dead allosaurs, and were sometimes killed in the process. This could explain the high proportion of juvenile and subadult allosaurs present, as juveniles and subadults are disproportionally killed at modern group feeding sites of animals like crocodiles and Komodo dragons. The same interpretation applies to Bakker's lair sites. There is some evidence for cannibalism in \"Allosaurus\", including \"Allosaurus\" shed teeth found among rib fragments, possible tooth marks on a shoulder blade, and cannibalized allosaur skeletons among the bones at Bakker's lair sites.\nBrain and senses.\nThe brain of \"Allosaurus\", as interpreted from spiral CT scanning of an endocast, was more consistent with crocodilian brains than those of the other living archosaurs, birds. The structure of the vestibular apparatus indicates that the skull was held nearly horizontal, as opposed to strongly tipped up or down. The structure of the inner ear was like that of a crocodilian, indicating that \"Allosaurus\" was more adapted to hear lower frequencies and would have had difficulty hearing subtle sounds. The olfactory bulbs were large and well suited for detecting odors, but were typical for an animal of its size.\nPaleopathology.\nIn 2001, Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress-fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior. Since stress-fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by the behavior of the animal than other kinds of injury. Stress-fractures and tendon avulsions occurring in the forelimb have special behavioral significance since while injuries to the feet could be caused by running or migration, resistant prey items are the most probable source of injuries to the hand. \"Allosaurus\" was one of only two theropods examined in the study to exhibit a tendon avulsion, and in both cases the avulsion occurred on the forelimb. When the researchers looked for stress-fractures, they found that \"Allosaurus\" had a significantly greater number of stress-fractures than \"Albertosaurus\", \"Ornithomimus\" or \"Archaeornithomimus\". Of the 47 hand bones the researchers studied, three were found to contain stress-fractures. Of the feet, 281 bones were studied and 17 were found to have stress-fractures. The stress-fractures in the foot bones \"were distributed to the proximal phalanges\" and occurred across all three weight-bearing toes in \"statistically indistinguishable\" numbers. Since the lower end of the third metatarsal would have contacted the ground first while an allosaur was running, it would have borne the most stress. If the allosaurs' stress-fractures were caused by damage accumulating while walking or running this bone should have experience more stress-fractures than the others. The lack of such a bias in the examined \"Allosaurus\" fossils indicates an origin for the stress-fractures from a source other than running. The authors conclude that these fractures occurred during interaction with prey, like an allosaur trying to hold struggling prey with its feet. The abundance of stress-fractures and avulsion injuries in \"Allosaurus\" provide evidence for \"very active\" predation-based rather than scavenging diets.\nThe left scapula and fibula of an \"Allosaurus fragilis\" specimen cataloged as USNM 4734 are both pathological, both probably due to healed fractures. The specimen USNM 8367 preserved several pathological gastralia which preserve evidence of healed fractures near their middle. Some of the fractures were poorly healed and \"formed pseudoarthroses\". A specimen with a fractured rib was recovered from the Cleveland-Lloyd Quarry. Another specimen had fractured ribs and fused vertebrae near the end of the tail. An apparent subadult male \"Allosaurus fragilis\" was reported to have extensive pathologies, with a total of fourteen separate injuries. The specimen MOR 693 had pathologies on five ribs, the sixth neck vertebra, the third, eighth, and thirteenth back vertebrae, the second tail vertebra and its chevron, the gastralia right scapula, manual phalanx I left ilium metatarsals III and V, the first phalanx of the third toe and the third phalanx of the second. The ilium had \"a large hole...caused by a blow from above\". The near end of the first phalanx of the third toe was afflicted by an involucrum.\nAdditionally, a subadult \"Allosaurus\" individual that suffered from spondyloarthropathy has been discovered in Dana Quarry in Wyoming. This finding represents the first known fossil evidence of spondyloarthropathy occurring in a theropod.\nOther pathologies reported in \"Allosaurus\" include:\nPaleoecology.\n\"Allosaurus\" was the most common large theropod in the vast tract of Western American fossil-bearing rock known as the Morrison Formation, accounting for 70 to 75% of theropod specimens, and as such was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food chain. The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains. Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of conifers, tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the \"Araucaria\"-like conifer \"Brachyphyllum\".\nThe Morrison Formation has been a rich fossil hunting ground. The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, ferns, cycads, ginkgoes, and several families of conifers. Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphs, several species of pterosaur, numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts, multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts. Dinosaurs known from the Morrison include the theropods \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Ornitholestes\", \"Tanycolagreus\", and \"Torvosaurus\", the sauropods \"Haplocanthosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Cathetosaurus\", \"Brachiosaurus\", \"Suuwassea\", \"Apatosaurus\", \"Brontosaurus\", \"Barosaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", \"Supersaurus\", \"Amphicoelias\", and \"Maraapunisaurus\", and the ornithischians \"Camptosaurus\", \"Dryosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". \"Allosaurus\" is commonly found at the same sites as \"Apatosaurus\", \"Camarasaurus\", \"Diplodocus\", and \"Stegosaurus\". The Late Jurassic formations of Portugal where \"Allosaurus\" is present are interpreted as having been similar to the Morrison, but with a stronger marine influence. Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks (mainly \"Allosaurus\", \"Ceratosaurus\", \"Torvosaurus\", and \"Stegosaurus\"), or have a close counterpart (\"Brachiosaurus\" and \"Lusotitan\", \"Camptosaurus\" and \"Draconyx\").\n\"Allosaurus\" coexisted with fellow large theropods \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Torvosaurus\" in both the United States and Portugal. The three appear to have had different ecological niches, based on anatomy and the location of fossils. \"Ceratosaurus\" and \"Torvosaurus\" may have preferred to be active around waterways, and had lower, thinner bodies that would have given them an advantage in forest and underbrush terrains, whereas \"Allosaurus\" was more compact, with longer legs, faster but less maneuverable, and seems to have preferred dry floodplains. \"Ceratosaurus\", better known than \"Torvosaurus\", differed noticeably from \"Allosaurus\" in functional anatomy by having a taller, narrower skull with large, broad teeth. \"Allosaurus\" was itself a potential food item to other carnivores, as illustrated by an \"Allosaurus\" pubic foot marked by the teeth of another theropod, probably \"Ceratosaurus\" or \"Torvosaurus\". The location of the bone in the body (along the bottom margin of the torso and partially shielded by the legs), and the fact that it was among the most massive in the skeleton, indicates that the \"Allosaurus\" was being scavenged.\nA bone assemblage in the Upper Jurassic Mygatt-Moore Quarry preserves an unusually high occurrence of theropod bite marks, most of which can be attributed to \"Allosaurus\" and \"Ceratosaurus\", while others could have been made by \"Torvosaurus\" given the size of the striations. While the position of the bite marks on the herbivorous dinosaurs is consistent with predation or early access to remains, bite marks found on \"Allosaurus\" material suggest scavenging, either from the other theropods or from another \"Allosaurus\". The unusually high concentration of theropod bite marks compared to other assemblages could be explained either by a more complete utilization of resources during a dry season by theropods, or by a collecting bias in other localities."}
{"id": "1348", "revid": "39072105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1348", "title": "AK-47", "text": "The AK-47, officially known as the Avtomat Kalashnikova (; also known as the Kalashnikov or just AK), is an assault rifle that is chambered for the 7.62\u00d739mm cartridge. Developed in the Soviet Union by Russian small-arms designer Mikhail Kalashnikov, it is the originating firearm of the Kalashnikov (or \"AK\") family of rifles. After more than seven decades since its creation, the AK-47 model and its variants remain one of the most popular and widely used firearms in the world.\nDesign work on the AK-47 began in 1945. It was presented for official military trials in 1947, and, in 1948, the fixed-stock version was introduced into active service for selected units of the Soviet Army. In early 1949, the AK was officially accepted by the Soviet Armed Forces and used by the majority of the member states of the Warsaw Pact.\nThe model and its variants owe their global popularity to their reliability under harsh conditions, low production cost (compared to contemporary weapons), availability in virtually every geographic region, and ease of use. The AK has been manufactured in many countries and has seen service with armed forces as well as irregular forces and insurgencies throughout the world. , \"of the estimated 500 million firearms worldwide, approximately 100 million belong to the Kalashnikov family, three-quarters of which are AK-47s\". The model is the basis for the development of many other types of individual, crew-served, and specialized firearms.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nDuring World War II, the Sturmgewehr 44 rifle used by German forces made a deep impression on their Soviet counterparts. The select-fire rifle was chambered for a new intermediate cartridge, the 7.92\u00d733mm Kurz, and combined the firepower of a submachine gun with the range and accuracy of a rifle. On 15 July 1943, an earlier model of the Sturmgewehr was demonstrated before the People's Commissariat of Arms of the USSR. The Soviets were impressed with the weapon and immediately set about developing an intermediate caliber fully automatic rifle of their own, to replace the PPSh-41 submachine guns and outdated Mosin\u2013Nagant bolt-action rifles that armed most of the Soviet Army.\nThe Soviets soon developed the 7.62\u00d739mm M43 cartridge, used in the semi-automatic SKS carbine and the RPD light machine gun. Shortly after World War II, the Soviets developed the AK-47 rifle, which quickly replaced the SKS in Soviet service. Introduced in 1959, the AKM is a lighter stamped steel version and the most ubiquitous variant of the entire AK series of firearms. In the 1960s, the Soviets introduced the RPK light machine gun, an AK-type weapon with a stronger receiver, a longer heavy barrel, and a bipod, that eventually replaced the RPD light machine gun.\nConcept.\nMikhail Kalashnikov began his career as a weapon designer in 1941 while recuperating from a shoulder wound that he received during the Battle of Bryansk. Kalashnikov himself stated...\"I was in the hospital, and a soldier in the bed beside me asked: 'Why do our soldiers have only one rifle for two or three of our men when the Germans have automatics?' So I designed one. I was a soldier, and I created a machine gun for a soldier. It was called an Avtomat Kalashnikova, the automatic weapon of Kalashnikov\u2014AK\u2014and it carried the year of its first manufacture, 1947.\"\nThe AK-47 is best described as a hybrid of previous rifle technology innovations. \"Kalashnikov decided to design an automatic rifle combining the best features of the American M1 Garand and the German StG 44.\" Kalashnikov's team had access to these weapons and did not need to \"reinvent the wheel\". Kalashnikov himself observed: \"A lot of Russian Army soldiers ask me how one can become a constructor, and how new weaponry is designed. These are very difficult questions. Each designer seems to have his own paths, his own successes and failures. But one thing is clear: before attempting to create something new, it is vital to have a good appreciation of everything that already exists in this field. I myself have had many experiences confirming this to be so.\"\nSome claimed that Kalashnikov copied designs like Bulkin's TKB-415 or Simonov's AVS-31.\nEarly designs.\nKalashnikov started work on a submachine gun design in 1942 and a light machine gun design in 1943. Early in 1944, Kalashnikov was given some 7.62\u00d739mm M43 cartridges and informed that other designers were working on weapons for this new Soviet small-arms cartridge. It was suggested that a new weapon might well lead to greater things. He then undertook work on the new rifle. In 1944, he entered a design competition with this new 7.62\u00d739mm, semi-automatic, gas-operated, long-stroke piston carbine, strongly influenced by the American M1 Garand. The new rifle was in the same class as the SKS-45 carbine, with a fixed magazine and gas tube above the barrel. However, the new Kalashnikov design lost out to a Simonov design.\nIn 1946, a new design competition was initiated to develop a new rifle. Kalashnikov submitted a gas-operated rifle with a short-stroke gas piston above the barrel, a breechblock mechanism similar to his 1944 carbine, and a curved 30-round magazine. Kalashnikov's rifles, the AK-1 (with a milled receiver) and AK-2 (with a stamped receiver) proved to be reliable weapons and were accepted to a second round of competition along with other designs.\nThese prototypes (also known as the AK-46) had a rotary bolt, a two-part receiver with separate trigger unit housing, dual controls (separate safety and fire selector switches), and a non-reciprocating charging handle located on the left side of the weapon. This design had many similarities to the StG 44. In late 1946, as the rifles were being tested, one of Kalashnikov's assistants, Aleksandr Zaitsev, suggested a major redesign to improve reliability. At first, Kalashnikov was reluctant, given that their rifle had already fared better than its competitors. Eventually, however, Zaitsev managed to persuade Kalashnikov.\nIn November 1947, the new prototypes (AK-47s) were completed. The rifle used a long-stroke gas piston above the barrel. The upper and lower receivers were combined into a single receiver. The selector and safety were combined into a single control lever/dust cover on the right side of the rifle and the bolt handle was attached to the bolt carrier. This simplified the design and production of the rifle. The first army trial series began in early 1948. The new rifle proved to be reliable under a wide range of conditions and possessed convenient handling characteristics. In 1949, it was adopted by the Soviet Army as the \"7.62\u00a0mm Kalashnikov rifle (AK)\".\nFurther development.\nThere were many difficulties during the initial phase of production. The first production models had stamped sheet metal receivers with a milled trunnion and butt stock insert and a stamped body. Difficulties were encountered in welding the guide and ejector rails, causing high rejection rates. Instead of halting production, a heavy machined receiver was substituted for the sheet metal receiver. Even though production of these milled rifles started in 1951, they were officially referred to as AK-49, based on the date their development started, but they are widely known in the collectors' and current commercial market as \"Type 2 AK-47\". This was a more costly process, but the use of machined receivers accelerated production as tooling and labor for the earlier Mosin\u2013Nagant rifle's machined receiver were easily adapted. Partly because of these problems, the Soviets were not able to distribute large numbers of the new rifles to soldiers until 1956. During this time, production of the interim SKS rifle continued.\nOnce the manufacturing difficulties of non-milled receivers had been overcome, a redesigned version designated the AKM (M for \"modernized\" or \"upgraded\"; in Russian: []) was introduced in 1959. This new model used a stamped sheet metal receiver and featured a slanted muzzle brake on the end of the barrel to compensate for muzzle rise under recoil. In addition, a hammer retarder was added to prevent the weapon from firing out of battery (without the bolt being fully closed), during rapid or fully automatic fire. This is also sometimes referred to as a \"cyclic rate reducer\", or simply \"rate reducer\", as it also has the effect of reducing the number of rounds fired per minute during fully automatic fire. The rifle was also roughly one-third lighter than the previous model.\nMost licensed and unlicensed productions of the Kalashnikov assault rifle abroad were of the AKM variant, partially due to the much easier production of the stamped receiver. This model is the most commonly encountered, having been produced in much greater quantities. All rifles based on the Kalashnikov design are often colloquially referred to as \"AK-47s\" in the West and some parts of Asia, although this is only correct when applied to rifles based on the original three receiver types. In most former Eastern Bloc countries, the weapon is known simply as the \"Kalashnikov\" or \"AK\". The differences between the milled and stamped receivers includes the use of rivets rather than welds on the stamped receiver, as well as the placement of a small dimple above the magazine well for stabilization of the magazine.\nReplacement.\nIn 1974, the Soviets began replacing their AK-47 and AKM rifles with a newer design, the AK-74, which uses 5.45\u00d739mm ammunition. This new rifle and cartridge had only started to be manufactured in Eastern European nations when the Soviet Union collapsed, drastically slowing the production of the AK-74 and other weapons of the former Soviet bloc.\nDesign.\nThe AK-47 was designed to be a simple, reliable fully automatic rifle that could be manufactured quickly and cheaply, using mass production methods that were state of the art in the Soviet Union during the late 1940s. The AK-47 uses a long-stroke gas system generally associated with high reliability in adverse conditions. The large gas piston, generous clearance between moving parts, and tapered cartridge case design allow the gun to endure large amounts of foreign matter and fouling without failing to cycle.\nCartridge.\nThe AK fires the 7.62\u00d739mm cartridge with a muzzle velocity of .\nThe cartridge weight is , and the projectile weight is . The original Soviet M43 bullets are 123-grain boat-tail bullets with a copper-plated steel jacket, a large steel core, and some lead between the core and the jacket. The AK has excellent penetration when shooting through heavy foliage, walls, or a common vehicle's metal body and into an opponent attempting to use these things as cover. The 7.62\u00d739mm M43 projectile does not generally fragment when striking an opponent and has an unusual tendency to remain intact even after making contact with bone. The 7.62\u00d739mm round produces significant wounding in cases where the bullet tumbles (yaws) in tissue, but produces relatively minor wounds in cases where the bullet exits before beginning to yaw. In the absence of yaw, the M43 round can pencil through tissue with relatively little injury.\nMost, if not all, of the 7.62\u00d739mm ammunition found today is of the upgraded M67 variety. This variety deleted the steel insert, shifting the center of gravity rearward, and allowing the projectile to destabilize (or yaw) at about , nearly earlier in tissue than the M43 round. This change also reduces penetration in ballistic gelatin to ~ for the newer M67 round versus ~ for the older M43 round. However, the wounding potential of M67 is mostly limited to the small permanent wound channel the bullet itself makes, especially when the bullet yaws.\nOperating mechanism.\nTo fire, the operator inserts a loaded magazine, pulls back and releases the charging handle, and then pulls the trigger. In semi-automatic, the firearm fires only once, requiring the trigger to be released and depressed again for the next shot. In fully automatic, the rifle continues to fire automatically cycling fresh rounds into the chamber until the magazine is exhausted or pressure is released from the trigger. After ignition of the cartridge primer and propellant, rapidly expanding propellant gases are diverted into the gas cylinder above the barrel through a vent near the muzzle. The build-up of gases inside the gas cylinder drives the long-stroke piston and bolt carrier rearward and a cam guide machined into the underside of the bolt carrier, along with an ejector spur on the bolt carrier rail guide, rotates the bolt approximately 35\u00b0 and unlocks it from the barrel extension via a camming pin on the bolt. The moving assembly has about of free travel, which creates a delay between the initial recoil impulse of the piston and the bolt unlocking sequence, allowing gas pressures to drop to a safe level before the seal between the chamber and the bolt is broken. The AK-47 does not have a gas valve; excess gases are ventilated through a series of radial ports in the gas cylinder. Unlike many other rifle platforms, such as the AR-15 platform, the Kalashnikov platform bolt locking lugs are chamfered allowing for primary extraction upon bolt rotation which aids reliable feeding and extraction, albeit not with that much force due to the short distance the bolt carrier travels before acting on the locking lug. The Kalashnikov platform then uses an extractor claw along with a fin shaped ejector to eject the spent cartridge case.\nBarrel.\nThe rifle received a barrel with a chrome-lined bore and four right-hand grooves at a 240\u00a0mm (1 in 9.45 in) or 31.5 calibers rifling twist rate. The gas block contains a gas channel that is installed at a slanted angle with the bore axis. The muzzle is threaded for the installation of various muzzle devices such as a muzzle brake or a blank-firing adaptor.\nGas block.\nThe gas block of the AK-47 features a cleaning rod capture or sling loop. Gas relief ports that alleviate gas pressure are placed horizontally in a row on the gas cylinder.\nFire selector.\nThe fire selector is a large lever located on the right side of the rifle; it acts as a dust cover and prevents the charging handle from being pulled fully to the rear when it is on safe. It is operated by the shooter's right fore-fingers and has three settings: safe (up), full-auto (center), and semi-auto (down). The reason for this is that a soldier under stress will push the selector lever down with considerable force, bypassing the full-auto stage and setting the rifle to semi-auto. To set the AK-47 to full-auto requires the deliberate action of centering the selector lever. To operate the fire selector lever, right-handed shooters have to briefly remove their right hand from the pistol grip, which is ergonomically sub-optimal. Some AK-type rifles also have a more traditional selector lever on the left side of the receiver, just above the pistol grip. This lever is operated by the shooter's right thumb and has three settings: safe (forward), full-auto (center), and semi-auto (backward).\nSights.\nThe AK-47 uses a notched rear tangent iron sight calibrated in increments from . The front sight is a post adjustable for elevation in the field. Horizontal adjustment requires a special drift tool and is done by the armory before the issue or if the need arises by an armorer after the issue. The sight line elements are approximately over the bore axis. The \"point-blank range\" battle zero setting \"\u041f\" standing for \"\u043f\u043e\u0441\u0442\u043e\u044f\u043d\u043d\u0430\u044f\" (constant) on the 7.62\u00d739mm AK-47 rear tangent sight element corresponds to a zero. These settings mirror the Mosin\u2013Nagant and SKS rifles, which the AK-47 replaced. For the AK-47 combined with service cartridges, the 300 m battle zero setting limits the apparent \"bullet rise\" within approximately relative to the line of sight. Soldiers are instructed to fire at any target within this range by simply placing the sights on the center of mass (the belt buckle, according to Russian and former Soviet doctrine) of the enemy target. Any errors in range estimation are tactically irrelevant, as a well-aimed shot will hit the torso of the enemy soldier. Some AK-type rifles have a front sight with a flip-up luminous dot that is calibrated at , for improved night fighting.\nFurniture.\nThe AK-47 was originally equipped with a buttstock, handguard, and an upper heat guard made from solid wood. With the introduction of the Type 3 receiver the buttstock, lower handguard, and upper heat guard were manufactured from birch plywood laminates. Such engineered woods are stronger and resist warping better than the conventional one-piece patterns, do not require lengthy maturing, and are cheaper. The wooden furniture was finished with the Russian amber shellac finishing process. AKS and AKMS models featured a downward-folding metal butt-stock similar to that of the German MP40 submachine-gun, for use in the restricted space in the BMP infantry combat vehicle, as well as by paratroops. All 100 series AKs use plastic furniture with side-folding stocks.\nMagazines.\nThe standard magazine capacity is 30 rounds. There are also 10-, 20-, and 40-round box magazines, as well as 75-round drum magazines.\nThe AK-47's standard 30-round magazines have a pronounced curve that allows them to smoothly feed ammunition into the chamber. Their heavy steel construction combined with \"feed-lips\" (the surfaces at the top of the magazine that control the angle at which the cartridge enters the chamber) machined from a single steel billet makes them highly resistant to damage. These magazines are so strong that \"Soldiers have been known to use their mags as hammers, and even bottle openers\". This contributes to the AK-47 magazine being more reliable but makes it heavier than U.S. and NATO magazines.\nThe early slab-sided steel AK-47 30-round detachable box magazines had sheet-metal bodies and weighed empty. The later steel AKM 30-round magazines had lighter sheet-metal bodies with prominent reinforcing ribs weighing empty. To further reduce weight, a lightweight magazine with an aluminum body with a prominent reinforcing waffle rib pattern weighing empty was developed for the AKM that proved to be too fragile, and the small issued amount of these magazines were quickly withdrawn from service. As a replacement steel-reinforced 30-round plastic 7.62\u00d739mm box magazines were introduced. These rust-colored magazines weigh empty and are often mistakenly identified as being made of Bakelite (a phenolic resin), but were fabricated from two parts of AG-S4 molding compound (a glass-reinforced phenol-formaldehyde binder impregnated composite), assembled using an epoxy resin adhesive. Noted for their durability, these magazines did however compromise the rifle's camouflage and lacked the small horizontal reinforcing ribs running down both sides of the magazine body near the front that were added on all later plastic magazine generations. A second-generation steel-reinforced dark-brown (color shades vary from maroon to plum to near black) 30-round 7.62\u00d739mm magazine was introduced in the early 1980s, fabricated from ABS plastic. The third generation steel-reinforced 30-round 7.62\u00d739mm magazine is similar to the second generation, but is darker colored and has a matte non-reflective surface finish. The current issue is a steel-reinforced matte true black non- reflective surface finished 7.62\u00d739mm 30-round magazine, fabricated from ABS plastic weighing empty.\nEarly steel AK-47 magazines are long; the later ribbed steel AKM and newer plastic 7.62\u00d739mm magazines are about shorter.\nThe transition from steel to mainly plastic magazines yields a significant weight reduction and allows a soldier to carry more ammunition for the same weight.\nAll 7.62\u00d739mm AK magazines are backward compatible with older AK variants.\n10.12\u00a0kg (22.3\u00a0lb) is the maximum amount of ammo that the average soldier can comfortably carry. It also allows for the best comparison of the three most common 7.62\u00d739mm AK magazines.\nMost Yugoslavian and some East German AK magazines were made with cartridge followers that hold the bolt open when empty; however, most AK magazine followers allow the bolt to close when the magazine is empty.\nAccessories.\nAccessories supplied with the rifle include a long 6H3 bayonet featuring a long spear point blade. The AK-47 bayonet is installed by slipping the diameter muzzle ring around the muzzle and latching the handle down on the bayonet lug under the front sight base.\nAll current model AKM rifles can mount under-barrel 40\u00a0mm grenade launchers such as the GP-25 and its variants, which can fire up to 20 rounds per minute and have an effective range of up to 400 meters. The main grenade is the VOG-25 (VOG-25M) fragmentation grenade which has a 6\u00a0m (9\u00a0m) (20\u00a0ft (30\u00a0ft)) lethality radius. The VOG-25P/VOG-25PM (\"jumping\") variant explodes above the ground.\nThe AK-47 can also mount a (rarely used) cup-type grenade launcher, the Kalashnikov grenade launcher that fires standard RGD-5 Soviet hand grenades. The maximum effective range is approximately 150 meters. This launcher can also be used to launch tear gas and riot control grenades.\nAll current AKs (100 series) and some older models have side rails for mounting a variety of scopes and sighting devices, such as the PSO-1 Optical Sniper Sight. The side rails allow for the removal and remounting of optical accessories without interfering with the zeroing of the optic. However, the 100 series side folding stocks cannot be folded with the optics mounted.\nCharacteristics.\nService life.\nThe AK-47 and its variants have been and are made in dozens of countries, with \"quality ranging from finely engineered weapons to pieces of questionable workmanship.\" As a result, the AK-47 has a service/system life of approximately 6,000, to 10,000, to 15,000 rounds. The AK-47 was designed to be a cheap, simple, easy-to-manufacture rifle, perfectly matching Soviet military doctrine that treats equipment and weapons as disposable items. As units are often deployed without adequate logistical support and dependent on \"battlefield cannibalization\" for resupply, it is more cost-effective to replace rather than repair weapons.\nThe AK-47 has small parts and springs that need to be replaced every few thousand rounds. However, \"Every time it is disassembled beyond the field stripping stage, it will take some time for some parts to regain their fit, and some parts may tend to shake loose and fall out when firing the weapon. Some parts of the AK-47 line are riveted together. Repairing these can be quite a hassle since the end of the rivet has to be ground off and a new one set after the part is replaced.\"\nVariants.\nFor the further developed AK models, see Kalashnikov rifles.\nProduction.\nManufacturing countries of AK-47 and its variants in alphabetical order.\nA private company Kalashnikov Concern (formerly Izhmash) from Russia has repeatedly claimed that the majority of foreign manufacturers are producing AK-type rifles without proper licensing.\nAccuracy potential.\nUS military method.\nThe AK-47's accuracy is generally sufficient to hit an adult male torso out to about , though even experts firing from prone or bench rest positions at this range were observed to have difficulty placing ten consecutive rounds on target. Later designs did not significantly improve the rifle's accuracy. An AK can fire a 10-shot group of at , and at The newer stamped-steel receiver AKM models, while more rugged and less prone to metal fatigue, are less accurate than the forged/milled receivers of their predecessors: the milled AK-47s are capable of shooting groups at , whereas the stamped AKMs are capable of shooting groups at .\nThe best shooters can hit a man-sized target at within five shots (firing from a prone or bench rest position) or ten shots (standing).\nThe single-shot hit-probability on the NATO E-type Silhouette Target (a human upper body half and head silhouette) of the AK-47 and the later developed AK-74, M16A1, and M16A2 rifles were measured by the US military under ideal proving ground conditions in the 1980s as follows:\nUnder worst field exercise circumstances, the hit probabilities for all the tested rifles were drastically reduced, from 34% at 50m down to 3\u20134% at 600m with no significant differences between weapons at each range.\nRussian method.\nThe following table represents the Russian circular error probable method for determining accuracy, which involves drawing two circles on the target, one for the maximum vertical dispersion of hits and one for the maximum horizontal dispersion of hits. They then disregard the hits on the outer part of the target and only count half of the hits (50% or R50) on the inner part of the circles. This significantly reduces the overall diameter of the groups. They then use both the vertical and horizontal measurements of the reduced groups to measure accuracy. When the R50 results are doubled, the hit probability increases to 93.7%.\nThe vertical and horizontal mean (R50) deviations with service ammunition at for AK platforms are.\nUsers.\nIllicit trade.\nThroughout the world, the AK and its variants are commonly used by governments, revolutionaries, terrorists, criminals, and civilians alike. In some countries, such as Somalia, Rwanda, Mozambique, Congo, and Tanzania, the prices for Black Market AKs are between $30 and $125 per weapon and prices have fallen in the last few decades due to mass counterfeiting. In Kenya, \"an AK-47 fetches five head of cattle (about 10,000 Kenya shillings or 100 U.S. dollars) when offered for barter, but costs almost half that price when cash is paid\". There are places around the world where AK-type weapons can be purchased on the black market \"for as little as $6, or traded for a chicken or a sack of grain\".\nThe AK-47 has also spawned a cottage industry of sorts and has been copied and manufactured (one gun at a time) in small shops around the world (see Khyber Pass Copy). The estimated numbers of AK-type weapons vary greatly. The Small Arms Survey suggests that \"between 70 and 100\u00a0million of these weapons have been produced since 1947\". The World Bank estimates that out of the 500\u00a0million total firearms available worldwide, 100\u00a0million are of the Kalashnikov family, and 75\u00a0million are AK-47s. Because AK-type weapons have been made in many countries, often illicitly, it is impossible to know how many exist.\nConflicts.\nThe AK-47 has been used in the following conflicts:\nCultural influence and impact.\nDuring the Cold War, the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, as well as United States and other NATO nations supplied arms and technical knowledge to numerous countries and rebel forces around the world. During this time the Western countries used relatively expensive automatic rifles, such as the FN FAL, the HK G3, the M14, and the M16. In contrast, the Russians and Chinese used the AK-47; its low production cost and ease of manufacture allow them to make AKs in vast numbers.\nIn the pro-communist states, the AK-47 became a symbol of the Third World revolution. They were utilized in the Cambodian Civil War and the Cambodian\u2013Vietnamese War. During the 1980s, the Soviet Union became the principal arms dealer to countries embargoed by Western nations, including Middle Eastern nations such as Libya and Syria, which welcomed Soviet Union backing against Israel. After the fall of the Soviet Union, AK-47s were sold both openly and on the black market to any group with cash, including drug cartels and dictatorial states, and more recently they have been seen in the hands of Islamic groups such as Al-Qaeda, ISIL, and the Taliban in Afghanistan and Iraq, and FARC, Ej\u00e9rcito de Liberaci\u00f3n Nacional guerrillas in Colombia.\nIn Russia, the Kalashnikov is a tremendous source of national pride. \"The family of the inventor of the world's most famous rifle, Mikhail Kalashnikov, has authorized German engineering company MMI to use the well-known Kalashnikov name on a variety of not-so-deadly goods.\" In recent years, Kalashnikov Vodka has been marketed with souvenir bottles in the shape of the AK-47 Kalashnikov. There are also Kalashnikov watches, umbrellas, and knives.\nThe Kalashnikov Museum (also called the AK-47 museum) opened on 4 November 2004 in Izhevsk, Udmurt Republic. This city is in the Ural Region of Russia. The museum chronicles the biography of General Kalashnikov and documents the invention of the AK-47. The museum complex of Kalashnikov's small arms, a series of halls, and multimedia exhibitions are devoted to the evolution of the AK-47 rifle and attracts 10,000 monthly visitors. Nadezhda Vechtomova, the museum director, stated in an interview that the purpose of the museum is to honor the ingenuity of the inventor and the hard work of the employees and to \"separate the weapon as a weapon of murder from the people who are producing it and to tell its history in our country\".\nOn 19 September 2017 a monument of Kalashnikov was unveiled in central Moscow. A protester, later detained by police, attempted to unfurl a banner reading \"a creator of weapons is a creator of death\".\nThe proliferation of this weapon is reflected by more than just numbers. The AK-47 is included on the flag of Mozambique and its emblem, an acknowledgment that the country gained its independence in large part through the effective use of their AK-47s. It is also found in the coats of arms of East Timor, Zimbabwe and the revolution era Burkina Faso, as well as in the flags of Hezbollah, Syrian Resistance, FARC-EP, the New People's Army, TKP/TIKKO and the International Revolutionary People's Guerrilla Forces.\nU.S. and Western Europe countries frequently associate the AK-47 with their enemies; both Cold War era and present-day. For example, Western works of fiction (movies, television, novels, video games) often portray criminals, gang members, insurgents, and terrorists using AK-47s as the weapon of choice. Conversely, throughout the developing world, the AK-47 can be positively attributed with revolutionaries against foreign occupation, imperialism, or colonialism.\nIn Ireland the AK-47 is associated with The Troubles due to its extensive use by republican paramilitaries during this period. In 2013, a decommissioned AK-47 was included in the \"A History of Ireland in 100 Objects\" collection.\nThe AK-47 made an appearance in U.S. popular culture as a recurring focus in the Nicolas Cage film \"Lord of War\" (2005). Numerous monologues in the movie focus on the weapon, and its effects on global conflict and the gun running market.\nIn Iraq and Afghanistan, private military company contractors from the U.K. and other countries used the AK-47 and its variants along with Western firearms such as the AR-15.\nIn 2006, the Colombian musician and peace activist C\u00e9sar L\u00f3pez devised the \"escopetarra\", an AK converted into a guitar. One sold for US$17,000 in a fundraiser held to benefit the victims of anti-personnel mines, while another was exhibited at the United Nations' Conference on Disarmament.\nIn Mexico, the AK-47 is known as \"Cuerno de Chivo\" (literally \"Goat's Horn\") because of its curved magazine design. It is one of the weapons of choice of Mexican drug cartels. It is sometimes mentioned in Mexican folk music lyrics."}
{"id": "1349", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1349", "title": "Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer", "text": "The Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer (ABC) was the first automatic electronic digital computer. The device was limited by the technology of the day. The ABC's priority is debated among historians of computer technology, because it was neither programmable, nor Turing-complete. Conventionally, the ABC would be considered the first electronic ALU (arithmetic logic unit) which is integrated into every modern processor's design.\nIts unique contribution was to make computing faster by being the first to use vacuum tubes to do arithmetic calculations. Prior to this, slower electro-mechanical methods were used by Konrad Zuse's Z1 computer, and the simultaneously developed Harvard Mark\u00a0I. The first electronic, programmable, digital machine, the Colossus computer from 1943 to 1945, used similar tube-based technology as ABC.\nOverview.\nConceived in 1937, the machine was built by Iowa State College mathematics and physics professor John Vincent Atanasoff with the help of graduate student Clifford Berry. It was designed only to solve systems of linear equations and was successfully tested in 1942. However, its intermediate result storage mechanism, a paper card writer/reader, was not perfected, and when John Vincent Atanasoff left Iowa State College for World War II assignments, work on the machine was discontinued. The ABC pioneered important elements of modern computing, including binary arithmetic and electronic switching elements, but its special-purpose nature and lack of a changeable, stored program distinguish it from modern computers. The computer was designated an IEEE Milestone in 1990.\nAtanasoff and Berry's computer work was not widely known until it was rediscovered in the 1960s, amid patent disputes over the first instance of an electronic computer. At that time ENIAC, that had been created by John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert, was considered to be the first computer in the modern sense, but in 1973 a U.S. District Court invalidated the ENIAC patent and concluded that the ENIAC inventors had derived the subject matter of the electronic digital computer from Atanasoff. When, in the mid-1970s, the secrecy surrounding the British World War II development of the Colossus computers that pre-dated ENIAC, was lifted and Colossus was described at a conference in Los Alamos, New Mexico, in June 1976, John Mauchly and Konrad Zuse were reported to have been astonished.\nDesign and construction.\nAccording to Atanasoff's account, several key principles of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer were conceived in a sudden insight after a long nighttime drive to Rock Island, Illinois, during the winter of 1937\u201338. The ABC innovations included electronic computation, binary arithmetic, parallel processing, regenerative capacitor memory, and a separation of memory and computing functions. The mechanical and logic design was worked out by Atanasoff over the next year. A grant application to build a proof of concept prototype was submitted in March 1939 to the Agronomy department, which was also interested in speeding up computation for economic and research analysis. $5,000 of further funding () to complete the machine came from the nonprofit Research Corporation of New York City.\nThe ABC was built by Atanasoff and Berry in the basement of the physics building at Iowa State College from 1939 to 1942. The initial funds were released in September, and the 11-tube prototype was first demonstrated in October 1939. A December demonstration prompted a grant for construction of the full-scale machine. The ABC was built and tested over the next two years. A January 15, 1941, story in the \"Des Moines Register\" announced the ABC as \"an electrical computing machine\" with more than 300 vacuum tubes that would \"compute complicated algebraic equations\" (but gave no precise technical description of the computer). The system weighed more than . It contained approximately of wire, 280 dual-triode vacuum tubes, 31 thyratrons, and was about the size of a desk.\nIt was not programmable, which distinguishes it from more general machines of the same era, such as Konrad Zuse's 1941 Z3 (or earlier iterations) and the Colossus computers of 1943\u20131945. Nor did it implement the stored-program architecture, first implemented in the Manchester Baby of 1948, required for fully general-purpose practical computing machines.\nThe machine was, however, the first to implement:\nThe memory of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer was a system called \"regenerative capacitor memory\", which consisted of a pair of drums, each containing 1600 capacitors that rotated on a common shaft once per second. The capacitors on each drum were organized into 32 \"bands\" of 50 (30 active bands and two spares in case a capacitor failed), giving the machine a speed of 30 additions/subtractions per second. Data was represented as 50-bit binary fixed-point numbers. The electronics of the memory and arithmetic units could store and operate on 60 such numbers at a time (3000\u00a0bits).\nThe alternating current power-line frequency of 60\u00a0Hz was the primary clock rate for the lowest-level operations.\nThe arithmetic logic functions were fully electronic, implemented with vacuum tubes. The family of logic gates ranged from inverters to two- and three-input gates. The input and output levels and operating voltages were compatible between the different gates. Each gate consisted of one inverting vacuum-tube amplifier, preceded by a resistor divider input network that defined the logical function. The control logic functions, which only needed to operate once per drum rotation and therefore did not require electronic speed, were electromechanical, implemented with relays.\nThe ALU operated on only one bit of each number at a time; it kept the carry/borrow bit in a capacitor for use in the next AC cycle.\nAlthough the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer was an important step up from earlier calculating machines, it was not able to run entirely automatically through an entire problem. An operator was needed to operate the control switches to set up its functions, much like the electro-mechanical calculators and unit record equipment of the time. Selection of the operation to be performed, reading, writing, converting to or from binary to decimal, or reducing a set of equations was made by front-panel switches and, in some cases, jumpers.\nThere were two forms of input and output: primary user input and output and an intermediate results output and input. The intermediate results storage allowed operation on problems too large to be handled entirely within the electronic memory. (The largest problem that could be solved without the use of the intermediate output and input was two simultaneous equations, a trivial problem.)\nIntermediate results were binary, written onto paper sheets by electrostatically modifying the resistance at 1500 locations to represent 30 of the 50-bit numbers (one equation). Each sheet could be written or read in one second. The reliability of the system was limited to about 1 error in 100,000 calculations by these units, primarily attributed to lack of control of the sheets' material characteristics. In retrospect, a solution could have been to add a parity bit to each number as written. This problem was not solved by the time Atanasoff left the university for war-related work.\nPrimary user input was decimal, via standard IBM 80-column punched cards, and output was decimal, via a front-panel display.\nFunction.\nThe ABC was designed for a specific purpose the solution of systems of simultaneous linear equations. It could handle systems with up to 29 equations, a difficult problem for the time. Problems of this scale were becoming common in physics, the department in which John Atanasoff worked. The machine could be fed two linear equations with up to 29 variables and a constant term and eliminate one of the variables. This process would be repeated manually for each of the equations, which would result in a system of equations with one fewer variable. Then the whole process would be repeated to eliminate another variable.\nGeorge W. Snedecor, the head of Iowa State's Statistics Department, was very likely the first user of an electronic digital computer to solve real-world mathematics problems. He submitted many of these problems to Atanasoff.\nPatent dispute.\nOn June 26, 1947, J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly were the first to file for patent on a digital computing device (ENIAC), much to the surprise of Atanasoff. The ABC had been examined by John Mauchly in June 1941, and Isaac Auerbach, a former student of Mauchly's, alleged that it influenced his later work on ENIAC, although Mauchly denied this. The ENIAC patent did not issue until 1964, and by 1967 Honeywell sued Sperry Rand in an attempt to break the ENIAC patents, arguing that the ABC constituted prior art. The United States District Court for the District of Minnesota released its judgement on October 19, 1973, finding in \"Honeywell v. Sperry Rand\" that the ENIAC patent was a derivative of John Atanasoff's invention.\nCampbell-Kelly and Aspray conclude:\nThe case was legally resolved on October 19, 1973, when U.S. District Judge Earl R.\u00a0Larson held the ENIAC patent invalid, ruling that the ENIAC derived many basic ideas from the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer. Judge Larson explicitly stated:\nHerman Goldstine, one of the original developers of ENIAC wrote:\nReplica.\nThe original ABC was eventually dismantled in 1948, when the university converted the basement to classrooms, and all of its pieces except for one memory drum were discarded.\nIn 1997, a team of researchers led by Delwyn Bluhm and John Gustafson from Ames Laboratory (located on the Iowa State University campus) finished building a working replica of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry computer at a cost of $350,000 (equivalent to $ in ). The replica ABC was on display in the first floor lobby of the Durham Center for Computation and Communication at Iowa State University and was subsequently exhibited at the Computer History Museum."}
{"id": "1354", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1354", "title": "Andes", "text": "The Andes ( ), Andes Mountains or Andean Mountain Range (; ) are the longest continental mountain range in the world, forming a continuous highland along the western edge of South America. The range is long and wide (widest between 18\u00b0S and 20\u00b0S latitude) and has an average height of about . The Andes extend from South to North through seven South American countries: Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.\nAlong their length, the Andes are split into several ranges, separated by intermediate depressions. The Andes are the location of several high plateaus\u2014some of which host major cities such as Quito, Bogot\u00e1, Cali, Arequipa, Medell\u00edn, Bucaramanga, Sucre, M\u00e9rida, El Alto, and La Paz. The Altiplano Plateau is the world's second highest after the Tibetan Plateau. These ranges are in turn grouped into three major divisions based on climate: the Tropical Andes, the Dry Andes, and the Wet Andes.\nThe Andes are the highest mountain range outside of Asia. The range's highest peak, Argentina's Aconcagua, rises to an elevation of about above sea level. The peak of Chimborazo in the Ecuadorian Andes is farther from the Earth's center than any other location on the Earth's surface, due to the equatorial bulge resulting from the Earth's rotation. The world's highest volcanoes are in the Andes, including Ojos del Salado on the Chile-Argentina border, which rises to .\nThe Andes are also part of the American Cordillera, a chain of mountain ranges (cordillera) that consists of an almost continuous sequence of mountain ranges that form the western \"backbone\" of the Americas and Antarctica.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"Andes\" has been debated. The majority consensus is that it derives from the Quechua word \"east\" as in \"Antisuyu\" (Quechua for \"east region\"), one of the four regions of the Inca Empire.\nThe term \"cordillera\" comes from the Spanish word \"cordel\" \"rope\" and is used as a descriptive name for several contiguous sections of the Andes, as well as the entire Andean range, and the combined mountain chain along the western part of the North and South American continents.\nGeography.\nThe Andes can be divided into three sections:\nAt the northern end of the Andes, the separate Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta range is often, but not always, treated as part of the Northern Andes.\nThe Leeward Antilles islands Aruba, Bonaire, and Cura\u00e7ao, which lie in the Caribbean Sea off the coast of Venezuela, were formerly thought to represent the submerged peaks of the extreme northern edge of the Andes range, but ongoing geological studies indicate that such a simplification does not do justice to the complex tectonic boundary between the South American and Caribbean plates.\nGeology.\nThe Andes are an orogenic belt of mountains along the Pacific Ring of Fire, a zone of volcanic activity that encompasses the Pacific rim of the Americas as well as the Asia-Pacific region. The Andes are the result of tectonic plate processes extending during the Mesozoic and Tertiary eras, caused by the subduction of oceanic crust beneath the South American Plate as the Nazca Plate and South American Plate converge. These processes were accelerated by the effects of climate. As the uplift of the Andes created a rain shadow on the western fringes of Chile, ocean currents and prevailing winds carried moisture away from the Chilean coast. This caused some areas of the subduction zone to be sediment-starved, causing excess friction and an increased rate of compressed coastal uplift. The main cause of the rise of the Andes is the compression of the western rim of the South American Plate due to the subduction of the Nazca Plate and the Antarctic Plate. To the east, the Andes range is bounded by several sedimentary basins, such as the Orinoco Basin, the Amazon Basin, the Madre de Dios Basin, and the Gran Chaco, that separate the Andes from the ancient cratons in eastern South America. In the south, the Andes share a long boundary with the former Patagonia Terrane. To the west, the Andes end at the Pacific Ocean, although the Peru-Chile trench can be considered their ultimate western limit. From a geographical approach, the Andes are considered to have their western boundaries marked by the appearance of coastal lowlands and less-rugged topography. The Andes also contain large quantities of iron ore located in many mountains within the range.\nThe Andean orogen has a series of bends or oroclines. The Bolivian Orocline is a seaward-concave bending in the coast of South America and the Andes Mountains at about 18\u00b0 S. At this point, the orientation of the Andes turns from northwest in Peru to south in Chile and Argentina. The Andean segments north and south of the Orocline have been rotated 15\u00b0 counter-clockwise to 20\u00b0 clockwise respectively. The Bolivian Orocline area overlaps with the area of the maximum width of the Altiplano Plateau, and according to Isacks (1988) the Orocline is related to crustal shortening. The specific point at 18\u00b0 S where the coastline bends is known as the Arica Elbow. Further south lies the Maipo Orocline, a more subtle orocline between 30\u00b0 S and 38\u00b0S with a seaward-concave break in the trend at 33\u00b0 S. Near the southern tip of the Andes lies the Patagonian Orocline.\nOrogeny.\nThe western rim of the South American Plate has been the place of several pre-Andean orogenies since at least the late Proterozoic and early Paleozoic, when several terranes and microcontinents collided and amalgamated with the ancient cratons of eastern South America, by then the South American part of Gondwana.\nThe formation of the modern Andes began with the events of the Triassic, when Pangaea began the breakup that resulted in developing several rifts. The development continued through the Jurassic Period. It was during the Cretaceous Period that the Andes began to take their present form, by the uplifting, faulting, and folding of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks of the ancient cratons to the east. The rise of the Andes has not been constant, as different regions have had different degrees of tectonic stress, uplift, and erosion.\nAcross the Drake Passage lie the mountains of the Antarctic Peninsula south of the Scotia Plate, which appear to be a continuation of the Andes chain.\nThe far east regions of the Andes experience a series of changes resulting from the Andean orogeny. Parts of the Suns\u00e1s Orogen in Amazonian craton disappeared from the surface of the earth, being overridden by the Andes. The Sierras de C\u00f3rdoba, where the effects of the ancient Pampean orogeny can be observed, owe their modern uplift and relief to the Andean orogeny in the Tertiary. Further south in southern Patagonia, the onset of the Andean orogeny caused the Magallanes Basin to evolve from being an extensional back-arc basin in the Mesozoic to being a compressional foreland basin in the Cenozoic.\nSeismic activity.\nTectonic forces above the subduction zone along the entire west coast of South America where the Nazca Plate and a part of the Antarctic Plate are sliding beneath the South American Plate continue to produce an ongoing orogenic event resulting in minor to major earthquakes and volcanic eruptions to this day. Many high-magnitude earthquakes have been recorded in the region, such as the 2010 Maule earthquake (M8.8), the 2015 Illapel earthquake (M8.2), and the 1960 Valdivia earthquake (M9.5), which as of 2024 was the strongest ever recorded on seismometers.\nThe amount, magnitude, and type of seismic activity varies greatly along the subduction zone. These differences are due to a wide range of factors, including friction between the plates, angle of subduction, buoyancy of the subducting plate, rate of subduction, and hydration value of the mantle material. The highest rate of seismic activity is observed in the central portion of the boundary, between 33\u00b0S and 35\u00b0S. In this area, the angle of subduction is very low, meaning the subducting plate is nearly horizontal. Studies of mantle hydration across the subduction zone have shown a correlation between increased material hydration and lower-magnitude, more-frequent seismic activity. Zones exhibiting dehydration instead are thought to have a higher potential for larger, high-magnitude earthquakes in the future.\nThe mountain range is also a source of shallow intraplate earthquakes within the South American Plate. The largest such earthquake (as of 2024) struck Peru in 1947 and measured 7.5. In the Peruvian Andes, these earthquakes display normal (1946), strike-slip (1976), and reverse (1969, 1983) mechanisms. The Amazonian Craton is actively underthrusted beneath the sub-Andes region of Peru, producing thrust faults. In Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru, thrust faulting occurs along the sub-Andes due in response to compression brought on by subduction, while in the high Andes, normal faulting occurs in response to gravitational forces.\nIn the extreme south, a major transform fault separates Tierra del Fuego from the small Scotia Plate.\nVolcanism.\nThe Andes range has many active volcanoes distributed in four volcanic zones separated by areas of inactivity. The Andean volcanism is a result of the subduction of the Nazca Plate and Antarctic Plate underneath the South American Plate. The belt is subdivided into four main volcanic zones that are separated from each other by volcanic gaps. The volcanoes of the belt are diverse in terms of activity style, products, and morphology. Although some differences can be explained by which volcanic zone a volcano belongs to, there are significant differences inside volcanic zones and even between neighboring volcanoes. Despite being a typical location for calc-alkalic and subduction volcanism, the Andean Volcanic Belt has a large range of volcano-tectonic settings, such as rift systems, extensional zones, transpressional faults, subduction of mid-ocean ridges, and seamount chains apart from a large range of crustal thicknesses and magma ascent paths, and different amount of crustal assimilations.\nOre deposits and evaporates.\nThe Andes Mountains host large ore and salt deposits, and some of their eastern fold and thrust belts act as traps for commercially exploitable amounts of hydrocarbons. In the forelands of the Atacama Desert, some of the largest porphyry copper mineralizations occur, making Chile and Peru the first- and second-largest exporters of copper in the world. Porphyry copper in the western slopes of the Andes has been generated by hydrothermal fluids (mostly water) during the cooling of plutons or volcanic systems. The porphyry mineralization further benefited from the dry climate that reduced the disturbing actions of meteoric water. The dry climate in the central western Andes has also led to the creation of extensive saltpeter deposits that were extensively mined until the invention of synthetic nitrates. Yet another result of the dry climate are the salars of Atacama and Uyuni, the former being the largest source of lithium and the latter the world's largest reserve of the element. Early Mesozoic and Neogene plutonism in Bolivia's Cordillera Central created the Bolivian tin belt as well as the famous, now mostly depleted, deposits of Cerro Rico de Potos\u00ed.\nHistory.\nThe Andes Mountains, initially inhabited by hunter-gatherers, experienced the development of agriculture and the rise of politically centralized civilizations, which culminated in the establishment of the century-long Inca Empire. This all changed in the 16th century, when the Spanish conquistadors colonized the mountains in advance of the mining economy.\nIn the tide of anti-imperialist nationalism, the Andes became the scene of a series of independence wars in the 19th century, when rebel forces swept through the region to overthrow Spanish colonial rule. Since then, many former Spanish territories have become five independent Andean states.\nClimate and hydrology.\nThe climate in the Andes varies greatly depending on latitude, altitude, and proximity to the sea. Temperature, atmospheric pressure, and humidity decrease in higher elevations. The southern section is rainy and cool, while the central section is dry. The northern Andes are typically rainy and warm, with an average temperature of in Colombia. The climate is known to change drastically in rather short distances. Rainforests exist just kilometers away from the snow-covered peak of Cotopaxi. The mountains have a large effect on the temperatures of nearby areas. The snow line depends on the location. It is between in the tropical Ecuadorian, Colombian, Venezuelan, and northern Peruvian Andes, rising to in the drier mountains of southern Peru and northern Chile south to about 30\u00b0S before descending to on Aconcagua at 32\u00b0S, at 40\u00b0S, at 50\u00b0S, and only in Tierra del Fuego at 55\u00b0S; from 50\u00b0S, several of the larger glaciers descend to sea level.\nThe Andes of Chile and Argentina can be divided into two climatic and glaciological zones: the Dry Andes and the Wet Andes. Since the Dry Andes extend from the latitudes of the Atacama Desert to the area of the Maule River, precipitation is more sporadic, and there are strong temperature oscillations. The line of equilibrium may shift drastically over short periods of time, leaving a whole glacier in the ablation area or in the accumulation area.\nIn the high Andes of Central Chile and Mendoza Province, rock glaciers are larger and more common than glaciers; this is due to the high exposure to solar radiation. In these regions, glaciers occur typically at higher altitudes than rock glaciers. The lowest active rock glaciers occur at 900 m a.s.l. in Aconcagua.\nThough precipitation increases with height, there are semiarid conditions in the nearly highest mountains of the Andes. This dry steppe climate is considered to be typical of the subtropical position at 32\u201334\u00b0 S. The valley bottoms have no woods, just dwarf scrub. The largest glaciers, for example the Plomo Glacier and the Horcones Glaciers, do not even reach in length and have only insignificant ice thickness. At glacial times, however, 20,000 years ago, the glaciers were over ten times longer. On the east side of this section of the Mendozina Andes, they flowed down to and on the west side to about above sea level. The massifs of Aconcagua (), Tupungato (), and Nevado Juncal () are tens of kilometres away from each other and were connected by a joint ice stream network. The Andes' dendritic glacier arms, components of valley glaciers, were up to long and over thick, and spanned a vertical distance of . The climatic glacier snowline (ELA) was lowered from to at glacial times.\nFlora.\nThe Andean region cuts across several natural and floristic regions, due to its extension, from Caribbean Venezuela to cold, windy, and wet Cape Horn passing through the hyperarid Atacama Desert. Rainforests and tropical dry forests used to encircle much of the northern Andes but are now greatly diminished, especially in the Choc\u00f3 and inter-Andean valleys of Colombia. Opposite the humid Andean slopes are the relatively dry Andean slopes in most of western Peru, Chile, and Argentina. Along with several Interandean Valles, they are typically dominated by deciduous woodland, shrub and xeric vegetation, reaching the extreme in the slopes near the virtually lifeless Atacama Desert.\nAbout 30,000 species of vascular plants live in the Andes, with roughly half being endemic to the region, surpassing the diversity of any other hotspot. The small tree \"Cinchona pubescens\", a source of quinine that is used to treat malaria, is found widely in the Andes as far south as Bolivia. Other important crops that originated from the Andes are tobacco and potatoes. The high-altitude \"Polylepis\" forests and woodlands are found in the Andean areas of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and Chile. These trees, by locals referred to as Que\u00f1ua, Yagual, and other names, can be found at altitudes of above sea level. It remains unclear if the patchy distribution of these forests and woodlands is natural, or the result of clearing that began during the Incan period. Regardless, in modern times, the clearance has accelerated, and the trees are now considered highly endangered, with some believing that as little as 10% of the original woodland remains.\nFauna.\nThe Andes are rich in fauna: With almost 1,000 species, of which roughly 2/3 are endemic to the region, the Andes are the most important region in the world for amphibians. The diversity of animals in the Andes is high, with almost 600 species of mammals (13% endemic), more than 1,700 species of birds (about 1/3 endemic), more than 600 species of reptiles (about 45% endemic), and almost 400 species of fish (about 1/3 endemic).\nThe vicu\u00f1a and guanaco can be found living in the Altiplano, while the closely related domesticated llama and alpaca are widely kept by locals as pack animals and for their meat and wool. The crepuscular (active during dawn and dusk) chinchillas, two threatened members of the rodent order, inhabit the Andes' alpine regions. The Andean condor, the largest bird of its kind in the Western Hemisphere, occurs throughout much of the Andes but generally in very low densities. Other animals found in the relatively open habitats of the high Andes include the huemul, cougar, foxes in the genus \"Pseudalopex\", and, for birds, certain species of tinamous (notably members of the genus \"Nothoprocta\"), Andean goose, giant coot, flamingos (mainly associated with hypersaline lakes), lesser rhea, Andean flicker, diademed sandpiper-plover, miners, sierra-finches and diuca-finches.\nLake Titicaca hosts several endemics, among them the highly endangered Titicaca flightless grebe and Titicaca water frog. A few species of hummingbirds, notably some hillstars, can be seen at altitudes above , but far higher diversities can be found at lower altitudes, especially in the humid Andean forests (\"cloud forests\") growing on slopes in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and far northwestern Argentina. These forest-types, which includes the Yungas and parts of the Choc\u00f3, are very rich in flora and fauna, although few large mammals exist, exceptions being the threatened mountain tapir, spectacled bear, and yellow-tailed woolly monkey.\nBirds of humid Andean forests include mountain toucans, quetzals, and the Andean cock-of-the-rock, while mixed-species flocks dominated by tanagers and furnariids are commonly seen\u2014in contrast to several vocal but typically cryptic species of wrens, tapaculos, and antpittas.\nA number of species such as the royal cinclodes and white-browed tit-spinetail are associated with \"Polylepis\", and consequently also threatened.\nHuman activity.\nThe Andes Mountains form a north\u2013south axis of cultural influences. A long series of cultural development culminated in the expansion of the Inca civilization and Inca Empire in the central Andes during the 15th century. The Incas formed this civilization through imperialistic militarism as well as careful and meticulous governmental management. The government sponsored the construction of aqueducts and roads in addition to pre-existing installations. Some of these constructions still exist today.\nDevastated by European diseases and by civil war, the Incas were defeated in 1532 by an alliance composed of tens of thousands of allies from nations they had subjugated (e.g. Huancas, Chachapoyas, Ca\u00f1aris) and a small army of 180 Spaniards led by Francisco Pizarro. One of the few Inca sites the Spanish never found in their conquest was Machu Picchu, which lay hidden on a peak on the eastern edge of the Andes where they descend to the Amazon. The main surviving languages of the Andean peoples are those of the Quechua and Aymara language families. Woodbine Parish and Joseph Barclay Pentland surveyed a large part of the Bolivian Andes from 1826 to 1827.\nCities.\nIn modern times, the largest cities in the Andes are Bogot\u00e1, with a metropolitan population of over ten million, and Santiago, Medell\u00edn, Cali, and Quito. Lima is a coastal city adjacent to the Andes and is the largest city of all Andean countries. It is the seat of the Andean Community of Nations.\nLa Paz, Bolivia's seat of government, is the highest capital city in the world, at an elevation of approximately . Parts of the La Paz conurbation, including the city of El Alto, extend up to .\nOther cities in or near the Andes include Bariloche, Catamarca, Jujuy, Mendoza, Salta, San Juan, Tucum\u00e1n, and Ushuaia in Argentina; Calama and Rancagua in Chile; Cochabamba, Oruro, Potos\u00ed, Sucre, Tarija, and Yacuiba in Bolivia; Arequipa, Cajamarca, Cusco, Huancayo, Hu\u00e1nuco, Huaraz, Juliaca, and Puno in Peru; Ambato, Cuenca, Ibarra, Latacunga, Loja, Riobamba, and Tulc\u00e1n in Ecuador; Armenia, C\u00facuta, Bucaramanga, Duitama, Ibagu\u00e9, Ipiales, Manizales, Palmira, Pasto, Pereira, Popay\u00e1n, Rionegro, Sogamoso, Tunja, and Villavicencio in Colombia; and Barquisimeto, La Grita, M\u00e9rida, San Crist\u00f3bal, Tovar, Trujillo, and Valera in Venezuela. The cities of Caracas, Valencia, and Maracay are in the Venezuelan Coastal Range, which is a debatable extension of the Andes at the northern extremity of South America.\nTransportation.\nCities and large towns are connected with asphalt-paved roads, while smaller towns are often connected by dirt roads, which may require a four-wheel-drive vehicle.\nThe rough terrain has historically put the costs of building highways and railroads that cross the Andes out of reach of most neighboring countries, even with modern civil engineering practices. For example, the main crossover of the Andes between Argentina and Chile is still accomplished through the Paso Internacional Los Libertadores. Only recently have the ends of some highways that came rather close to one another from the east and the west been connected. Much of the transportation of passengers is done via aircraft.\nThere is one railroad that connects Chile with Peru via the Andes, however, and there are others that make the same connection via southern Bolivia.\nThere are multiple highways in Bolivia that cross the Andes. Some of these were built during a period of war between Bolivia and Paraguay, in order to transport Bolivian troops and their supplies to the war front in the lowlands of southeastern Bolivia and western Paraguay.\nFor decades, Chile claimed ownership of land on the eastern side of the Andes. These claims were given up in about 1870 during the War of the Pacific between Chile and the allied Bolivia and Peru, in a diplomatic deal to keep Peru out of the war. The Chilean Army and Chilean Navy defeated the combined forces of Bolivia and Peru, and Chile took over Bolivia's only province on the Pacific Coast, some land from Peru that was returned to Peru decades later. Bolivia has been completely landlocked ever since. It mostly uses seaports in eastern Argentina and Uruguay for international trade because its diplomatic relations with Chile have been suspended since 1978.\nBecause of the tortuous terrain in places, villages and towns in the mountains\u2014to which travel via motorized vehicles is of little use\u2014are still located in the high Andes of Chile, Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador. Locally, the relatives of the camel, the llama, and the alpaca continue to carry out important uses as pack animals, but this use has generally diminished in modern times. Donkeys, mules, and horses are also useful.\nAgriculture.\nThe ancient peoples of the Andes such as the Incas have practiced irrigation techniques for over 6,000 years. Because of the mountain slopes, terracing has been a common practice. Terracing, however, was only extensively employed after Incan imperial expansions to fuel their expanding realm. The potato holds a very important role as an internally consumed staple crop. Maize was also an important crop for these people, and was used for the production of chicha, important to Andean native people. Currently, tobacco, cotton, and coffee are the main export crops. Coca, despite eradication programs in some countries, remains an important crop for legal local use in a mildly stimulating herbal tea, and illegally for the production of cocaine.\nIrrigation.\nIn unirrigated land, pasture is the most common type of land use. In the rainy season (summer), part of the rangeland is used for cropping (mainly potatoes, barley, broad beans, and wheat).\nIrrigation is helpful in advancing the sowing data of the summer crops, which guarantees an early yield in periods of food shortage. Also, by early sowing, maize can be cultivated higher up in the mountains (up to ). In addition, it makes cropping in the dry season (winter) possible and allows the cultivation of frost-resistant vegetable crops like onion and carrot.\nMining.\nThe Andes rose to fame for their mineral wealth during the Spanish conquest of South America. Although Andean Amerindian peoples crafted ceremonial jewelry of gold and other metals, the mineralizations of the Andes were first mined on a large scale after the Spanish arrival. Potos\u00ed in present-day Bolivia and Cerro de Pasco in Peru were among the principal mines of the Spanish Empire in the New World. R\u00edo de la Plata and Argentina derive their names from the silver of Potos\u00ed.\nCurrently, mining in the Andes of Chile and Peru places these countries as the first and second major producers of copper in the world. Peru also contains the 4th-largest goldmine in the world: the Yanacocha. The Bolivian Andes principally produce tin, although historically silver mining had a huge impact on the economy of 17th-century Europe.\nThere is a long history of mining in the Andes, from the Spanish silver mines in Potos\u00ed in the 16th century to the vast current porphyry copper deposits of Chuquicamata and Escondida in Chile and Toquepala in Peru. Other metals, including iron, gold, and tin, in addition to non-metallic resources are important. The Andes have a vast supply of lithium; Argentina, Bolivia, and Chile have the three largest reserves in the world respectively.\nAccion Andina's reforestation plan.\nDepending on the country, this species goes by different names. In Peru, it is known as que\u00f1ual, queu\u00f1a, or que\u00f1oa; in Bolivia, as kewi\u00f1a; in Ecuador, as yagual; and in Argentina, tabaquillo. Regardless of the name, \"Polylepis\" is a high-Andean genus encompassing up to 45 species of trees and shrubs distributed across the South American Andes, from Venezuela to Patagonia, found up to 5,000 meters above sea level.\nIn 2000, biologist Constantino Aucca founded Ecoan, an NGO promoting conservation of threatened species and endangered Andean ecosystems. Since then, the organization has reforested 4.5 million plants across 16 protected areas, involving 37 Andean communities in the process.\nAucca's efforts caught the attention of Florent Kaiser, a Franco-German forest engineer. During a visit to Peru in 2018, Aucca invited Kaiser to the Queu\u00f1a Raymi festival, where Cusco communities engage in que\u00f1ual reforestation.\nPeaks.\nThis list contains some of the major peaks in the Andes mountain range. The highest peak is Aconcagua of Argentina."}
{"id": "1355", "revid": "1338881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1355", "title": "Anderida", "text": ""}
{"id": "1356", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1356", "title": "Ancylopoda", "text": "Ancylopoda is a group of browsing, herbivorous, mammals in the Perissodactyla that show long, curved and cleft claws. Morphological evidence indicates the Ancylopoda diverged from the tapirs, rhinoceroses and horses (Euperissodactyla) after the Brontotheria; however, earlier authorities such as Osborn sometimes considered the Ancylopoda to be outside Perissodactyla or, as was popular more recently, to be related to Brontotheriidae.\n\"Macrotherium\", which is typically from the middle Miocene of Sansan, in Gers, France, may indicate a distinct genus. Limb-bones resembling those of \"Macrotherium\", but relatively stouter, have been described from the Pliocene beds of Attica and Samos as \"Ancylotherium\". In the Americas, the names \"Morothorium\" and \"Moropus\" have been applied to similar bones, in the belief that they indicated xenarthrans. \"Macrotherium magnum\" must have been an animal of about in length."}
{"id": "1358", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1358", "title": "Anchor", "text": "An anchor is a device, normally made of metal, used to secure a vessel to the bed of a body of water to prevent the craft from drifting due to wind or current. The word derives from Latin \"\", which itself comes from the Greek ().\nAnchors can either be temporary or permanent. Permanent anchors are used in the creation of a mooring, and are rarely moved; a specialist service is normally needed to move or maintain them. Vessels carry one or more temporary anchors, which may be of different designs and weights.\nA sea anchor is a drag device, not in contact with the seabed, used to minimise drift of a vessel relative to the water. A drogue is a drag device used to slow or help steer a vessel running before a storm in a following or overtaking sea, or when crossing a bar in a breaking sea.\nAnchoring.\nAnchors achieve holding power either by \"hooking\" into the seabed, or weight, or a combination of the two. The weight of the anchor chain can be more than that of the anchor and is critical to proper holding. Permanent moorings use large masses (commonly a block or slab of concrete) resting on the seabed. Semi-permanent mooring anchors (such as mushroom anchors) and large ship's anchors derive a significant portion of their holding power from their weight, while also hooking or embedding in the bottom. Modern anchors for smaller vessels have metal \"flukes\" that hook on to rocks on the bottom or bury themselves in soft seabed.\nThe vessel is attached to the anchor by the \"rode\" (also called a \"cable\" or a \"warp\"). It can be made of rope, chain or a combination of rope and chain. The ratio of the length of rode to the water depth is known as the scope.\nHolding ground is the area of sea floor that holds an anchor, and thus the attached ship or boat. Different types of anchor are designed to hold in different types of holding ground. Some bottom materials hold better than others; for instance, hard sand holds well, shell holds poorly. Holding ground may be fouled with obstacles. An anchorage location may be chosen for its holding ground. In poor holding ground, only the weight of an anchor and chain matters; in good holding ground, it is able to dig in, and the holding power can be significantly higher.\nThe basic anchoring consists of determining the location, dropping the anchor, laying out the scope, setting the hook, and assessing where the vessel ends up. The ship seeks a location that is sufficiently protected; has suitable holding ground, enough depth at low tide and enough room for the boat to swing.\nThe location to drop the anchor should be approached from down wind or down current, whichever is stronger. As the chosen spot is approached, the vessel should be stopped or even beginning to drift back. The anchor should initially be lowered quickly but under control until it is on the bottom (see anchor windlass). The vessel should continue to drift back, and the cable should be veered out under control (slowly) so it is relatively straight.\nOnce the desired scope is laid out, the vessel should be gently forced astern, usually using the auxiliary motor but possibly by backing a sail. A hand on the anchor line may telegraph a series of jerks and jolts, indicating the anchor is dragging, or a smooth tension indicative of digging in. As the anchor begins to dig in and resist backward force, the engine may be throttled up to get a thorough set. If the anchor continues to drag, or sets after having dragged too far, it should be retrieved and moved back to the desired position (or another location chosen.)\nUsing an anchor weight, kellet or sentinel.\nLowering a concentrated, heavy weight down the anchor line \u2013 rope or chain \u2013 directly in front of the bow to the seabed behaves like a heavy chain rode and lowers the angle of pull on the anchor. If the weight is suspended off the seabed it acts as a spring or shock absorber to dampen the sudden actions that are normally transmitted to the anchor and can cause it to dislodge and drag. In light conditions, a kellet reduces the swing of the vessel considerably. In heavier conditions these effects disappear as the rode becomes straightened and the weight ineffective. Known as an \"anchor chum weight\" or \"angel\" in the UK.\nForked moor.\nUsing two anchors set approximately 45\u00b0 apart, or wider angles up to 90\u00b0, from the bow is a strong mooring for facing into strong winds. To set anchors in this way, first one anchor is set in the normal fashion. Then, taking in on the first cable as the boat is motored into the wind and letting slack while drifting back, a second anchor is set approximately a half-scope away from the first on a line perpendicular to the wind. After this second anchor is set, the scope on the first is taken up until the vessel is lying between the two anchors and the load is taken equally on each cable.\nThis moor also to some degree limits the range of a vessel's swing to a narrower oval. Care should be taken that other vessels do not swing down on the boat due to the limited swing range.\nBow and stern.\n(Not to be mistaken with the \"Bahamian moor\", below.) In the \"bow and stern\" technique, an anchor is set off each the bow and the stern, which can severely limit a vessel's swing range and also align it to steady wind, current or wave conditions. One method of accomplishing this moor is to set a bow anchor normally, then drop back to the limit of the bow cable (or to double the desired scope, e.g. 8:1 if the eventual scope should be 4:1, 10:1 if the eventual scope should be 5:1, etc.) to lower a stern anchor. By taking up on the bow cable the stern anchor can be set. After both anchors are set, tension is taken up on both cables to limit the swing or to align the vessel.\nBahamian moor.\nSimilar to the above, a \"Bahamian moor\" is used to sharply limit the swing range of a vessel, but allows it to swing to a current. One of the primary characteristics of this technique is the use of a swivel as follows: the first anchor is set normally, and the vessel drops back to the limit of anchor cable. A second anchor is attached to the end of the anchor cable, and is dropped and set. A swivel is attached to the middle of the anchor cable, and the vessel connected to that.\nThe vessel now swings in the middle of two anchors, which is acceptable in strong reversing currents, but a wind perpendicular to the current may break out the anchors, as they are not aligned for this load.\nBacking an anchor.\nAlso known as \"tandem anchoring\", in this technique two anchors are deployed in line with each other, on the same rode. With the foremost anchor reducing the load on the aft-most, this technique can develop great holding power and may be appropriate in \"ultimate storm\" circumstances. It does not limit swinging range, and might not be suitable in some circumstances. There are complications, and the technique requires careful preparation and a level of skill and experience above that required for a single anchor.\nKedging.\n\"Kedging\" or \"warping\" is a technique for moving or turning a ship by using a relatively light anchor.\nIn yachts, a kedge anchor is an anchor carried in addition to the main, or bower, anchor, and usually stowed aft. Every yacht should carry at least two anchors \u2013 the main or \"bower\" anchor and a second lighter \"kedge\" anchor. It is used occasionally when it is necessary to limit the turning circle as the yacht swings when it is anchored, such as in a narrow river or a deep pool in an otherwise shallow area. Kedge anchors are sometimes used to recover vessels that have run aground.\nFor ships, a kedge may be dropped while a ship is underway, or carried out in a suitable direction by a tender or ship's boat to enable the ship to be winched off if aground or swung into a particular heading, or even to be held steady against a tidal or other stream.\nHistorically, it was of particular relevance to sailing warships that used them to outmaneuver opponents when the wind had dropped but might be used by any vessel in confined, shoal water to place it in a more desirable position, provided she had enough manpower.\nClub hauling.\nClub hauling is an archaic technique. When a vessel is in a narrow channel or on a lee shore so that there is no room to tack the vessel in a conventional manner, an anchor attached to the lee quarter may be dropped from the lee bow. This is deployed when the vessel is head to wind and has lost headway. As the vessel gathers sternway the strain on the cable pivots the vessel around what is now the weather quarter turning the vessel onto the other tack. The anchor is then normally cut away (the ship's momentum prevents recovery without aborting the maneuver). \nMultiple anchor patterns.\nWhen it is necessary to moor a ship or floating platform with precise positioning and alignment, such as when drilling the seabed, for some types of salvage work, and for some types of diving operation, several anchors are set in a pattern which allows the vessel to be positioned by shortening and lengthening the scope of the anchors, and adjusting the tension on the rodes. The anchors are usually laid in prearranged positions by an anchor tender, and the moored vessel uses its own winches to adjust position and tension.\nSimilar arrangements are used for some types of single buoy moorings, like the catenary anchor leg mooring (CALM) used for loading and unloading liquid cargoes.\nWeighing anchor.\nSince all anchors that embed themselves in the bottom require the strain to be along the seabed, anchors can be broken out of the bottom by shortening the rope until the vessel is directly above the anchor; at this point the anchor chain is \"up and down\", in naval parlance. If necessary, motoring slowly around the location of the anchor also helps dislodge it. Anchors are sometimes fitted with a trip line attached to the crown, by which they can be unhooked from underwater hazards.\nThe term \"aweigh\" describes an anchor when it is hanging on the rope and not resting on the bottom. This is linked to the term \"to weigh anchor\", meaning to lift the anchor from the sea bed, allowing the ship or boat to move. An anchor is described as \"aweigh\" when it has been broken out of the bottom and is being hauled up to be \"stowed\". \"Aweigh\" should not be confused with \"under way\", which describes a vessel that is not \"moored\" to a dock or \"anchored\", whether or not the vessel is moving through the water. \"Aweigh\" is also often confused with \"away\", which is incorrect.\nHistory.\nEvolution of the anchor.\nThe earliest anchors were probably rocks, and many rock anchors have been found dating from at least the Bronze Age. Pre-European M\u0101ori waka (canoes) used one or more hollowed stones, tied with flax ropes, as anchors. Many modern moorings still rely on a large rock as the primary element of their design. However, using pure weight to resist the forces of a storm works well only as a permanent mooring; a large enough rock would be nearly impossible to move to a new location.\nThe ancient Greeks used baskets of stones, large sacks filled with sand, and wooden logs filled with lead. According to Apollonius Rhodius and Stephen of Byzantium, anchors were formed of stone, and Athenaeus states that they were also sometimes made of wood. Such anchors held the vessel merely by their weight and by their friction along the bottom.\nFluked anchors.\nIron was afterwards introduced for the construction of anchors, and an improvement was made by forming them with teeth, or \"flukes\", to fasten themselves into the bottom. This is the iconic anchor shape most familiar to non-sailors.\nThis form has been used since antiquity. The Roman Nemi ships of the 1st century AD used this form. The Viking Ladby ship (probably 10th century) used a fluked anchor of this type, made of iron, which would have had a wooden stock mounted perpendicular to the shank and flukes to make the flukes contact the bottom at a suitable angle to hook or penetrate.\nAdmiralty anchor.\nThe Admiralty Pattern anchor, or simply \"Admiralty\", also known as a \"Fisherman\", consists of a central shank with a ring or shackle for attaching the rode (the rope, chain, or cable connecting the ship and the anchor). At the other end of the shank there are two arms, carrying the flukes, while the stock is mounted to the shackle end, at ninety degrees to the arms. When the anchor lands on the bottom, it generally falls over with the arms parallel to the seabed. As a strain comes onto the rope, the stock digs into the bottom, canting the anchor until one of the flukes catches and digs into the bottom.\nThe Admiralty Anchor is an entirely independent reinvention of a classical design, as seen in one of the Nemi ship anchors. This basic design remained unchanged for centuries, with the most significant changes being to the overall proportions, and a move from stocks made of wood to iron stocks in the late 1830s and early 1840s.\nSince one fluke always protrudes up from the set anchor, there is a great tendency of the rode to foul the anchor as the vessel swings due to wind or current shifts. When this happens, the anchor may be pulled out of the bottom, and in some cases may need to be hauled up to be re-set. In the mid-19th century, numerous modifications were attempted to alleviate these problems, as well as improve holding power, including one-armed mooring anchors. The most successful of these \"patent anchors\", the Trotman Anchor, introduced a pivot at the centre of the crown where the arms join the shank, allowing the \"idle\" upper arm to fold against the shank. When deployed the lower arm may fold against the shank tilting the tip of the fluke upwards, so each fluke has a tripping palm at its base, to hook on the bottom as the folded arm drags along the seabed, which unfolds the downward oriented arm until the tip of the fluke can engage the bottom.\nHandling and storage of these anchors requires special equipment and procedures. Once the anchor is hauled up to the hawsepipe, the ring end is hoisted up to the end of a timber projecting from the bow known as the cathead. The crown of the anchor is then hauled up with a heavy tackle until one fluke can be hooked over the rail. This is known as \"catting and fishing\" the anchor. Before dropping the anchor, the fishing process is reversed, and the anchor is dropped from the end of the cathead.\nStockless anchor.\nThe stockless anchor, patented in England in 1821, represented the first significant departure in anchor design in centuries. Although their holding-power-to-weight ratio is significantly lower than admiralty pattern anchors, their ease of handling and stowage aboard large ships led to almost universal adoption. In contrast to the elaborate stowage procedures for earlier anchors, stockless anchors are simply hauled up until they rest with the shank inside the hawsepipes, and the flukes against the hull (or inside a recess in the hull called the anchor box).\nWhile there are numerous variations, stockless anchors consist of a set of heavy flukes connected by a pivot or ball and socket joint to a shank. Cast into the crown of the anchor is a set of tripping palms, projections that drag on the bottom, forcing the main flukes to dig in.\nSmall boat anchors.\nUntil the mid-20th century, anchors for smaller vessels were either scaled-down versions of admiralty anchors, or simple grapnels. As new designs with greater holding-power-to-weight ratios were sought, a great variety of anchor designs have emerged. Many of these designs are still under patent, and other types are best known by their original trademarked names.\nGrapnel anchor / drag.\nA traditional design, the grapnel is merely a shank (no stock) with four or more tines, also known as a \"drag\". It has a benefit in that, no matter how it reaches the bottom, one or more tines are aimed to set. In coral, or rock, it is often able to set quickly by hooking into the structure, but may be more difficult to retrieve. A grapnel is often quite light, and may have additional uses as a tool to recover gear lost overboard. Its weight also makes it relatively easy to move and carry, however its shape is generally not compact and it may be awkward to stow unless a collapsing model is used.\nGrapnels rarely have enough fluke area to develop much hold in sand, clay, or mud. It is not unknown for the anchor to foul on its own rode, or to foul the tines with refuse from the bottom, preventing it from digging in. On the other hand, it is quite possible for this anchor to find such a good hook that, without a trip line from the crown, it is impossible to retrieve.\nHerreshoff anchor.\nDesigned by yacht designer L. Francis Herreshoff, this is essentially the same pattern as an admiralty anchor, albeit with small diamond-shaped flukes or palms. The novelty of the design lay in the means by which it could be broken down into three pieces for stowage. In use, it still presents all the issues of the admiralty pattern anchor.\nNorthill anchor.\nOriginally designed as a lightweight anchor for seaplanes, this design consists of two plough-like blades mounted to a shank, with a folding stock crossing through the crown of the anchor.\nCQR plough anchor.\nMany manufacturers produce a plough-type anchor, so-named after its resemblance to an agricultural plough. All such anchors are copied from the original CQR (\"Coastal Quick Release\", or \"Clyde Quick Release\", later rebranded as 'secure' by Lewmar), a 1933 design patented in the UK by mathematician Geoffrey Ingram Taylor.\nPlough anchors stow conveniently in a roller at the bow, and have been popular with cruising sailors and private boaters. Ploughs can be moderately good in all types of seafloor, though not exceptional in any. Contrary to popular belief, the CQR's hinged shank is not to allow the anchor to turn with direction changes rather than breaking out, but actually to prevent the shank's weight from disrupting the fluke's orientation while setting. The hinge can wear out and may trap a sailor's fingers. Some later plough anchors have a rigid shank, such as the Lewmar's \"Delta\".\nA plough anchor has a fundamental flaw: like its namesake, the agricultural plough, it digs in but then tends to break out back to the surface. Plough anchors sometimes have difficulty setting at all, and instead skip across the seafloor. By contrast, modern efficient anchors tend to be \"scoop\" types that dig ever deeper.\nDelta anchor.\nThe Delta anchor was derived from the CQR. It was patented by Philip McCarron, James Stewart, and Gordon Lyall of British marine manufacturer Simpson-Lawrence Ltd in 1992. It was designed as an advance over the anchors used for floating systems such as oil rigs. It retains the weighted tip of the CQR but has a much higher fluke area to weight ratio than its predecessor. The designers also eliminated the sometimes troublesome hinge. It is a plough anchor with a rigid, arched shank. It is described as \"self-launching\" because it can be dropped from a bow roller simply by paying out the rode, without manual assistance. This is an oft copied design with the European Brake and Australian Sarca Excel being two of the more notable ones. Although it is a plough type anchor, it sets and holds reasonably well in hard bottoms.\nDanforth anchor.\nAmerican Richard Danforth invented the Danforth Anchor in the 1940s for use aboard landing craft. It uses a stock at the crown to which two large flat triangular flukes are attached. The stock is hinged so the flukes can orient toward the bottom (and on some designs may be adjusted for an optimal angle depending on the bottom type). Tripping palms at the crown act to tip the flukes into the seabed. The design is a burying variety, and once well set can develop high resistance. Its lightweight and compact flat design make it easy to retrieve and relatively easy to store; some anchor rollers and hawsepipes can accommodate a fluke-style anchor.\nA Danforth does not usually penetrate or hold in gravel or weeds. In boulders and coral it may hold by acting as a hook. If there is much current, or if the vessel is moving while dropping the anchor, it may \"kite\" or \"skate\" over the bottom due to the large fluke area acting as a sail or wing.\nThe FOB HP anchor designed in Brittany in the 1970s is a Danforth variant designed to give increased holding through its use of rounded flukes setting at a 30\u00b0 angle.\nThe Fortress is an American aluminum alloy Danforth variant that can be disassembled for storage and it features an adjustable 32\u00b0 and 45\u00b0 shank/fluke angle to improve holding capability in common sea bottoms such as hard sand and soft mud. This anchor performed well in a 1989 US Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) test and in an August 2014 holding power test that was conducted in the soft mud bottoms of the Chesapeake Bay.\nBruce or claw anchor.\nThis claw-shaped anchor was designed by Peter Bruce from Scotland in the 1970s. Bruce gained his early reputation from the production of large-scale commercial anchors for ships and fixed installations such as oil rigs. It was later scaled down for small boats, and copies of this popular design abound. The Bruce and its copies, known generically as \"claw type anchors\", have been adopted on smaller boats (partly because they stow easily on a bow roller) but they are most effective in larger sizes. Claw anchors are quite popular on charter fleets as they have a high chance to set on the first try in many bottoms. They have the reputation of not breaking out with tide or wind changes, instead slowly turning in the bottom to align with the force.\nBruce anchors can have difficulty penetrating weedy bottoms and grass. They offer a fairly low holding-power-to-weight ratio and generally have to be oversized to compete with newer types.\nScoop type anchors.\nThree time circumnavigator German Rolf Kaczirek invented the B\u00fcgel Anker in the 1980s. Kaczirek wanted an anchor that was self-righting without necessitating a ballasted tip. Instead, he added a roll bar and switched out the plough share for a flat blade design. As none of the innovations of this anchor were patented, copies of it abound.\nAlain Poiraud of France introduced the scoop type anchor in 1996. Similar in design to the B\u00fcgel anchor, Poiraud's design features a concave fluke shaped like the blade of a shovel, with a shank attached parallel to the fluke, and the load applied toward the digging end. It is designed to dig into the bottom like a shovel, and dig deeper as more pressure is applied. The common challenge with all the scoop type anchors is that they set so well, they can be difficult to weigh.\nPermanent anchors.\nThese are used where the vessel is permanently or semi-permanently sited, for example in the case of lightvessels or channel marker buoys. The anchor needs to hold the vessel in all weathers, including the most severe storm, but needs to be lifted only occasionally, at most \u2013 for example, only if the vessel is to be towed into port for maintenance. An alternative to using an anchor under these circumstances, especially if the anchor need never be lifted at all, may be to use a pile that is driven into the seabed.\nPermanent anchors come in a wide range of types and have no standard form. A slab of rock with an iron staple in it to attach a chain to would serve the purpose, as would any dense object of appropriate weight (for instance, an engine block). Modern moorings may be anchored by augers, which look and act like oversized screws drilled into the seabed, or by barbed metal beams pounded in (or even driven in with explosives) like pilings, or by a variety of other non-mass means of getting a grip on the bottom. One method of building a mooring is to use three or more conventional anchors laid out with short lengths of chain attached to a swivel, so no matter which direction the vessel moves, one or more anchors are aligned to resist the force.\nMushroom.\nThe mushroom anchor is suitable where the seabed is composed of silt or fine sand. It was invented by Robert Stevenson, for use by an 82-ton converted fishing boat, \"Pharos\", which was used as a lightvessel between 1807 and 1810 near to Bell Rock whilst the lighthouse was being constructed. It was equipped with a 1.5-ton example.\nIt is shaped like an inverted mushroom, the head becoming buried in the silt. A counterweight is often provided at the other end of the shank to lay it down before it becomes buried.\nA mushroom anchor normally sinks in the silt to the point where it has displaced its own weight in bottom material, thus greatly increasing its holding power. These anchors are suitable only for a silt or mud bottom, since they rely upon suction and cohesion of the bottom material, which rocky or coarse sand bottoms lack. The holding power of this anchor is at best about twice its weight until it becomes buried, when it can be as much as ten times its weight. They are available in sizes from about 5\u00a0kg up to several tons.\nDeadweight.\nA deadweight is an anchor that relies solely on being a heavy weight. It is usually just a large block of concrete or stone at the end of the chain. Its holding power is defined by its weight underwater (i.e., taking its buoyancy into account) regardless of the type of seabed, although suction can increase this if it becomes buried. Consequently, deadweight anchors are used where mushroom anchors are unsuitable, for example in rock, gravel or coarse sand. An advantage of a deadweight anchor over a mushroom is that if it does drag, it continues to provide its original holding force. The disadvantage of using deadweight anchors in conditions where a mushroom anchor could be used is that it needs to be around ten times the weight of the equivalent mushroom anchor.\nAuger.\nAuger anchors can be used to anchor permanent moorings, floating docks, fish farms, etc. These anchors, which have one or more slightly pitched self-drilling threads, must be screwed into the seabed with the use of a tool, so require access to the bottom, either at low tide or by use of a diver. Hence they can be difficult to install in deep water without special equipment.\nWeight for weight, augers have a higher holding than other permanent designs, and so can be cheap and relatively easily installed, although difficult to set in extremely soft mud.\nHigh-holding-types.\nThere is a need in the oil-and-gas industry to resist large anchoring forces when laying pipelines and for drilling vessels. These anchors are installed and removed using a support tug and pennant/pendant wire. Some examples are the Stevin range supplied by Vrijhof Ankers. Large plate anchors such as the Stevmanta are used for permanent moorings.\nAnchoring gear.\nThe elements of anchoring gear include the anchor, the cable (also called a \"rode\"), the method of attaching the two together, the method of attaching the cable to the ship, charts, and a method of learning the depth of the water.\nVessels may carry a number of anchors: \"bower anchors\" are the main anchors used by a vessel and normally carried at the bow of the vessel. A \"kedge anchor\" is a light anchor used for warping an anchor, also known as \"kedging\", or more commonly on yachts for mooring quickly or in benign conditions. A \"stream anchor\", which is usually heavier than a \"kedge anchor\", can be used for kedging or warping in addition to temporary mooring and restraining stern movement in tidal conditions or in waters where vessel movement needs to be restricted, such as rivers and channels.\nCharts are vital to good anchoring. Knowing the location of potential dangers, as well as being useful in estimating the effects of weather and tide in the anchorage, is essential in choosing a good place to drop the hook. One can get by without referring to charts, but they are an important tool and a part of good anchoring gear, and a skilled mariner would not choose to anchor without them.\nAnchor rode.\nThe anchor rode (or \"cable\" or \"warp\") that connects the anchor to the vessel is usually made up of chain, rope, or a combination of those. Large ships use only chain rode. Smaller craft might use a rope/chain combination or an all chain rode. All rodes should have some chain; chain is heavy but it resists abrasion from coral, sharp rocks, or shellfish beds, whereas a rope warp is susceptible to abrasion and can fail in a short time when stretched against an abrasive surface. The weight of the chain also helps keep the direction of pull on the anchor closer to horizontal, which improves holding, and absorbs part of snubbing loads. Where weight is not an issue, a heavier chain provides better holding by forming a catenary curve through the water and resting as much of its length on the bottom as would not be lifted by tension of the mooring load. Any changes to the tension are accommodated by additional chain being lifted or settling on the bottom, and this absorbs shock loads until the chain is straight, at which point the full load is taken by the anchor. Additional dissipation of shock loads can be achieved by fitting a snubber between the chain and a bollard or cleat on deck. This also reduces shock loads on the deck fittings, and the vessel usually lies more comfortably and quietly. \nBeing strong and elastic, nylon rope is the most suitable as an anchor rode. Polyester (terylene) is stronger but less elastic than nylon. Both materials sink, so they avoid fouling other craft in crowded anchorages and do not absorb much water. Neither breaks down quickly in sunlight. Elasticity helps absorb shock loading, but causes faster abrasive wear when the rope stretches over an abrasive surface, like a coral bottom or a poorly designed chock. Polypropylene (\"polyprop\") is not suited to rodes because it floats and is much weaker than nylon, being barely stronger than natural fibres. Some grades of polypropylene break down in sunlight and become hard, weak, and unpleasant to handle. Natural fibres such as manila or hemp are still used in developing nations but absorb a lot of water, are relatively weak, and rot, although they do give good handling grip and are often relatively cheap. Ropes that have little or no elasticity are not suitable as anchor rodes. Elasticity is partly a function of the fibre material and partly of the rope structure. \nAll anchors should have chain at least equal to the boat's length. Some skippers prefer an all chain warp for greater security on coral or sharp edged rock bottoms. The chain should be shackled to the warp through a steel eye or spliced to the chain using a chain splice. The shackle pin should be securely wired or moused. Either galvanized or stainless steel is suitable for eyes and shackles, galvanised steel being the stronger of the two. Some skippers prefer to add a swivel to the rode. There is a school of thought that says these should not be connected to the anchor itself, but should be somewhere in the chain. However, most skippers connect the swivel directly to the anchor.\nScope.\nScope is the ratio of length of the rode to the depth of the water measured from the highest point (usually the anchor roller or bow chock) to the seabed, making allowance for the highest expected tide. When making this ratio large enough, one can ensure that the pull on the anchor is as horizontal as possible. This will make it unlikely for the anchor to break out of the bottom and drag, if it was properly embedded in the seabed to begin with. When deploying chain, a large enough scope leads to a load that is entirely horizontal, whilst an anchor rode made only of rope will never achieve a strictly horizontal pull. \nIn moderate conditions, the ratio of rode to water depth should be 4:1 \u2013 where there is sufficient swing-room, a greater scope is always better. In rougher conditions it should be up to twice this with the extra length giving more stretch and a smaller angle to the bottom to resist the anchor breaking out. For example, if the water is deep, and the anchor roller is above the water, then the 'depth' is 9 meters (~30 feet). The amount of rode to let out in moderate conditions is thus 36 meters (120 feet). (For this reason, it is important to have a reliable and accurate method of measuring the depth of water.) \nWhen using a rope rode, there is a simple way to estimate the scope: The ratio of bow height of the rode to length of rode above the water while lying back hard on the anchor is the same or less than the scope ratio. The basis for this is simple geometry (Intercept Theorem): The ratio between two sides of a triangle stays the same regardless of the size of the triangle as long as the angles do not change.\nGenerally, the rode should be between 5 and 10 times the depth to the seabed, giving a scope of 5:1 or 10:1; the larger the number, the shallower the angle is between the cable and the seafloor, and the less upwards force is acting on the anchor. A 10:1 scope gives the greatest holding power, but also allows for much more drifting about due to the longer amount of cable paid out. Anchoring with sufficient scope and/or heavy chain rode brings the direction of strain close to parallel with the seabed. This is particularly important for light, modern anchors designed to bury in the bottom, where scopes of 5:1 to 7:1 are common, whereas heavy anchors and moorings can use a scope of 3:1, or less. Some modern anchors, such as the Ultra holds with a scope of 3:1; but, unless the anchorage is crowded, a longer scope always reduces shock stresses.\nA major disadvantage of the concept of scope is that it does not take into account the fact that a chain is forming a catenary when hanging between two points (i.e., bow roller and the point where the chain hits the seabed), and thus is a non-linear curve (in fact, a cosh() function), whereas scope is a linear function. As a consequence, in deep water the scope needed will be less, whilst in very shallow water the scope must be chosen much larger to achieve the same pulling angle at the anchor shank. For this reason, the British Admiralty does not use a linear scope formula, but a square root formula instead.\nA couple of online calculators exist to work out the amount of chain and rope needed to achieve a (possibly nearly) horizontal pull at the anchor shank, and the associated anchor load.\nAs symbol.\nAn anchor frequently appears on the flags and coats of arms of institutions involved with the sea, as well as of port cities and seacoast regions and provinces in various countries. There also exists in heraldry the \"Anchored Cross\", or Mariner's Cross, a stylized cross in the shape of an anchor. The symbol can be used to signify 'fresh start' or 'hope'.\nThe Mariner's Cross is also referred to as St. Clement's Cross, in reference to the way this saint was killed (being tied to an anchor and thrown from a boat into the Black Sea in 102). Anchored crosses are occasionally a feature of coats of arms in which context they are referred to by the heraldic terms \"anchry\" or \"ancre\".\nThe Unicode anchor (Miscellaneous Symbols) is represented by: ."}
{"id": "1359", "revid": "42677165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1359", "title": "Anbar (town)", "text": " \nAnbar (, ) was an ancient and medieval town in central Iraq. It played a role in the Roman\u2013Persian Wars of the 3rd\u20134th centuries, and briefly became the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate before the founding of Baghdad in 762. It remained a moderately prosperous town through the 10th century, but quickly declined thereafter. As a local administrative centre, it survived until the 14th century, but was later abandoned.\nIts ruins are near modern Fallujah. The city gives its name to the Al-Anbar Governorate.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe city is located on the left bank of the Middle Euphrates, at the junction with the Nahr Isa canal, the first of the navigable canals that link the Euphrates to the River Tigris to the east. The origins of the city are unknown, but ancient, perhaps dating to the Babylonian era and even earlier: the local artificial mound of Tell Aswad dates to .\nSasanian period.\nThe town was originally known as Misiche (Greek: ), Mesiche (), or Massice ( m\u0161yk; m\u0161yk). As a major crossing point of the Euphrates, and occupying the northernmost point of the complex irrigation network of the Sawad, the town was of considerable strategic significance. As the western gate to central Mesopotamia, it was fortified by the Sasanian ruler Shapur I () to shield his capital, Ctesiphon, from the Roman Empire. After his decisive victory over the Roman emperor Gordian III at the Battle of Misiche in 244, Shapur renamed the town to Peroz-Shapur (\"P\u0113r\u014dz-\u0160\u0101p\u016br\" or \"P\u0113r\u014dz-\u0160\u0101buhr\", from , meaning \"victorious Shapur\"; in ; in ). It became known as Pirisapora or Bersabora () to the Greeks and Romans.\nThe city was fortified by a double wall, possibly through the use of Roman prisoner labour; it was sacked and burned after an agreement with its garrison in March 363 by the Roman emperor Julian during his invasion of the Sasanian Empire. It was rebuilt by Shapur II. By 420, it is attested as a bishopric, both for the Church of the East and for the Syriac Orthodox Church. The town's garrison was Persian, but it also contained sizeable Arab and Jewish populations. Anbar was adjacent or identical to the Babylonian Jewish center of Nehardea (), and lies a short distance from the present-day town of Fallujah, formerly the Babylonian Jewish center of Pumbedita ().\nIslamic period.\nThe city fell to the Rashidun Caliphate in July 633, after a fiercely fought siege. When Ali ibn Abi Talib (r. 656\u2013661) passed through the city, he was warmly welcomed by ninety-thousand Jews who then lived there, and he \"received them with great friendliness.\"\nThe Arabs retained the name (\"F\u012br\u016bz Sh\u0101b\u016br\") for the surrounding district, but the town itself became known as Anbar (Middle Persian word for \"granary\" or \"storehouse\") from the granaries in its citadel, a name that had appeared already during the 6th century. According to Baladhuri, the third mosque to be built in Iraq was erected in the city by Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas. Ibn Abi Waqqas initially considered Anbar as a candidate for the location of one of the first Muslim garrison towns, but the fever and fleas endemic in the area persuaded him otherwise.\nAccording to medieval Arabic sources, most of the inhabitants of the town migrated north to found the city of Hdatta south of Mosul. The famous governor al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf cleared the canals of the city.\nAbu'l-Abbas as-Saffah (), the founder of the Abbasid Caliphate, made it his capital in 752, constructing a new town half a \"farsakh\" () to the north for his Khurasani troops. There he died and was buried at the palace he had built. His successor, al-Mansur (), remained in the city until the founding of Baghdad in 762. The Abbasids also dug the great Nahr Isa canal to the south of the city, which carried water and commerce east to Baghdad. The Nahr al-Saqlawiyya or Nahr al-Qarma canal, which branches off from the Euphrates to the west of the city, is sometimes erroneously held to be the Nahr Isa, but it is more likely that it is to be identified with the pre-Islamic Nahr al-Rufayl.\nIt continued to be a place of much importance throughout the Abbasid period. Caliph Harun al-Rashid () stayed at the town in 799 and in 803. The town's prosperity was founded on agricultural activities, but also on trade between Iraq and Syria. The town was still prosperous in the early 9th century, but the decline of Abbasid authority during the later 9th century exposed it to Bedouin attacks in 882 and 899. In 927, the Qarmatians under Abu Tahir al-Jannabi sacked the city during their invasion of Iraq, and the devastation was compounded by another Bedouin attack two years later. The town's decline accelerated after that: while the early 10th-century geographer Istakhri still calls the town modest but populous, with the ruins of the buildings of as-Saffah still visible, Ibn Hawqal and al-Maqdisi, who wrote a generation later, attest to its decline, and the diminution of its population.\nThe town was sacked again in 1262 by the Mongols under Kerboka. The Ilkhanids retained Anbar as an administrative centre, a role it retained until the first half of the 14th century; the Ilkhanid minister Shams al-Din Juvayni had a canal dug from the city to Najaf, and the city was surrounded by a wall of sun-dried bricks.\nEcclesiastical history.\nAnbar used to host an Assyrian community from the fifth century: the town was the seat of a bishopric of the Church of the East. The names of fourteen of its bishops of the period 486\u20131074 are known, three of whom became Chaldean Patriarchs of Babylon.\nTitular see.\nAnbar is listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see of the Chaldean Catholic Church, established as titular bishopric in 1980.\nIt has had the following incumbents:\nToday.\nIt is now entirely deserted, occupied only by mounds of ruins, whose great number indicate the city's former importance. Its ruins are northwest of Fallujah, with a circumference of some . The remains include traces of the late medieval wall, a square fortification, and the early Islamic mosque. "}
{"id": "1360", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1360", "title": "Anazarbus", "text": "Anazarbus, also known as Justinopolis (, medieval Ain Zarba; modern Anavarza; ), was an ancient Cilician city. Under the late Roman Empire, it was the capital of Cilicia Secunda. Roman emperor Justinian I rebuilt the city in 527 after a strong earthquake hit it. It was destroyed in 1374 by the forces of the Mamluk Empire, after their conquest of Cilician Armenia.\nLocation.\nIt was situated in Anatolia in modern Turkey, in the present \u00c7ukurova (or classical Aleian plain) about 15\u00a0km west of the main stream of the present Ceyhan River (or classical Pyramus river) and near its tributary the Sempas Su.\nA lofty isolated ridge formed its acropolis. Though some of the masonry in the ruins is certainly pre-Roman, the Suda's identification of it with Cyinda, famous as a treasure city in the wars of Eumenes of Cardia, cannot be accepted in the face of Strabo's express location of Cyinda in western Cilicia.\nHistory.\nAccording to the \"Suda\", the original name of the place was Cyinda or Kyinda or Quinda (); and that it was next called Diocaesarea (\u0394\u03b9\u03bf\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\u03c3\u03ac\u03c1\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1). A city in Cilicia called Kundu rebelled against the Assyrian king Esarhaddon in 7th century BC, but it's unclear if there is a connection. At least it's known a city called Anazarbus (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03bf\u03c2) and Anazarba (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03b1) and Anazarbon (\u1f08\u03bd\u03ac\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u03bf\u03bd), situated on the river Pyramus, existed in the first century BC and was a part of the small client-kingdom of Tarcondimotus I until it was annexed by Rome. How the city obtained the name is a matter of conjecture. According to Stephanus of Byzantium, after the city was destroyed by an earthquake, the emperor Nerva sent thither one Anazarbus, a man of senatorial rank, who rebuilt the city, and gave to it his own name. This account cannot be accurate, as Valesius remarks, for it was called Anazarbus in Pliny's time. There are three writers of antiquity from this city. Pedanius Dioscorides is called a native of Anazarbus; but the period of Dioscorides is not certain. It was also the home of the poet Oppian and the historian Asclepiades of Anazarba. Its later name was Caesarea ad Anazarbum, and there are many medals of the place in which it is both named Anazarbus and Caesarea at or under Anazarbus. On the division of Cilicia it became the chief place of the Roman province of Cilicia Secunda, with the title of Metropolis. Early in the sixth century, in the reign of Eastern Roman emperor Justin I, it was named Justinopolis or Ioustinoupolis (\u1f38\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd\u03bf\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c2). The city suffered from an earthquake in 526 and was rebuilt by Justinian I and renamed Justinianopolis or Ioustinianoupolis (\u1f38\u03bf\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03bd\u03b9\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03cd\u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03c2); but the old name persisted, and when Thoros I, king of Lesser Armenia, made it his capital early in the 12th century, it was known as Anazarva.\nIts great natural strength and situation, not far from the mouth of the Sis pass, and near the great road which debouched from the Cilician Gates, made Anazarbus play a considerable part in the struggles between the Eastern Roman Empire and the early Muslim invaders. It had been rebuilt by Harun al-Rashid in 796, refortified at great expense by the Hamdanid Sayf al-Dawla (mid-10th century) and again destroyed in 962 by Nikephoros II Phokas. In the 11th century it was again a major fortress, comparable to Tarsos and Marash, and belonged to the realm of Philaretos Brachamios before it was captured around 1084 by the Seljuk Turks. In late 1097 or early 1098 it was captured by the armies of the First Crusade and after the conquest of Antioch it was incorporated into Bohemond of Taranto's Principality of Antioch. \nThe site briefly exchanged hands between the Byzantine Empire and Armenians, until it was formally part of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia. Anazarbus was one of a chain of Armenian fortifications stretching through Cilicia. The castle of Sis (modern Kozan, Adana) lies to the north while Tumlu Castle and Yilankale are to the south, and the fortresses of Amouda and Sarvandikar are to the east. The Mamluk Empire of Egypt finally destroyed the city in 1374.\nRemains.\nThe Crusaders are probably responsible for the construction of an impressive donjon atop the center of the outcrop. Most of the remaining fortifications, including the curtain walls, massive horseshoe-shaped towers, undercrofts, cisterns, and free-standing structures date from the Armenian periods of occupation, which began with the arrival of the Rubenid Baron T\u201boros I, . Within the fortress are two Armenian chapels and the magnificent (but severely damaged) three-aisle church built by T\u201boros I to celebrate his conquests. The church was once surrounded by a continuous, well-executed dedicatory inscription in Armenian.\nThe present wall of the lower city is of late construction. It encloses a mass of ruins conspicuous in which are a fine triumphal arch, the colonnades of two streets, a gymnasium, etc. A stadium and a theatre lie outside the walls to the south. The remains of the acropolis fortifications are very interesting, including roads and ditches hewn in the rock. There are no notable structures in the upper town. For picturesqueness the site is not equaled in Cilicia, and it is worthwhile to trace the three fine aqueducts to their sources. A necropolis on the escarpment to the south of the curtain wall can also be seen complete with signs of illegal modern excavations.\nA modest Turkish farming village (Dilekkaya) lies to the southwest of the ancient city. A small outdoor museum with some of the artifacts collected in the area can be viewed for a small fee. Also nearby are some beautiful mosaics discovered in a farmers field.\nA visit in December 2002 showed that the three aqueducts mentioned above have been nearly completely destroyed. Only small, isolated sections are left standing with the largest portion lying in a pile of rubble that stretches the length of where the aqueducts once stood. A powerful earthquake that struck the area in 1945 is thought to be responsible for the destruction.\nIn 2013, excavations uncovered the first known colonnaded double-lane road of the ancient world, 34 meters wide and 2700 meters long, also uncovered the ruins of a church and a bathhouse.\nIn 2017, archaeologists discovered a limestone statue of the goddess Hygieia and the god Eros. The statue is thought to date to the third or fourth century B.C.\nEcclesiastical history.\nAnazarbus was the capital and so also from 553 (the date of the Second Council of Constantinople) the metropolitan see of the Late Roman province of Cilicia Secunda.\nIn the 4th century, one of the bishops of Anazarbus was Athanasius, a \"consistent expounder of the theology of Arius.\" His theological opponent, Athanasius of Alexandria, in \"De Synodis\" 17, 1 refers to Anazarbus as \u039d\u03b1\u03b6\u03b1\u03c1\u03b2\u1ff6\u03bd.\nMaximin of Anazarbus attended the Council of Chalcedon.\nA 6th century \"Notitia Episcopatuum\" indicates that it had as suffragan sees Epiphania, Alexandria Minor, Irenopolis, Flavias, Castabala and Aegeae. Rhosus was also subject to Anazarbus, but after the 6th century was made exempt, and Mopsuestia was raised to the rank of autocephalous metropolitan see, though without suffragans.\nLatin Catholic titular see.\nThe titular archbishopric was revived in the 18th century as a see of the Latin Catholic church, Anazarbus.\nIt is vacant, having had the following incumbents, generally of the highest (Metropolitan) rank, \"with an episcopal (lowest rank) exception:\"\nArmenian Catholic titular see.\nIn the 19th century, an Armenian Catholic titular bishopric of Anazarbus (of the Armenians) (Anazarbus degli Armeni in Curiate Italian) was established.\nIt was a suppressed in 1933, having had a single incumbent, of the intermediary (archiepiscopal) rank :"}
{"id": "1361", "revid": "47272779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1361", "title": "Anagram", "text": "An anagram is a word or phrase formed by rearranging the letters of a different word or phrase, typically using all the original letters exactly once. For example, the word \"anagram\" itself can be rearranged into the phrase \"nag a ram\"; which is an Easter egg suggestion in Google after searching for the word \"anagram\".\nThe original word or phrase is known as the \"subject\" of the anagram. Any word or phrase that exactly reproduces the letters in another order is an anagram. Someone who creates anagrams may be called an \"anagrammatist\", and the goal of a serious or skilled anagrammatist is to produce anagrams that reflect or comment on their subject.\nExamples.\nAnagrams may be created as a commentary on the subject. They may be a parody, a criticism or satire. For example:\nAn anagram may also be a synonym of the original word. For example:\nAn anagram that has a meaning opposed to that of the original word or phrase is called an \"antigram\". For example:\nThey can sometimes change from a proper noun or personal name into an appropriate sentence:\nThey can change part of speech, such as the adjective \"silent\" to the verb \"listen\".\n\"Anagrams\" itself can be anagrammatized as \"Ars magna\" (Latin, 'the great art').\nHistory.\nAnagrams can be traced back to the time of the ancient Greeks, and were used to find the hidden and mystical meaning in names.\nThey were popular throughout Europe during the Middle Ages, for example with the poet and composer Guillaume de Machaut. They are said to date back at least to the Greek poet Lycophron, in the third century BCE; but this relies on an account of Lycophron given by John Tzetzes in the 12th century.\nIn the Talmudic and Midrashic literature, anagrams were used to interpret the Hebrew Bible, notably by Eleazar of Modi'im. Later, Kabbalists took this up with enthusiasm, calling anagrams \"temurah\".\nAnagrams in Latin were considered witty over many centuries. \"Est vir qui adest\", explained below, was cited as the example in Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\". They became hugely popular in the early modern period, especially in Germany.\nAny historical material on anagrams must always be interpreted in terms of the assumptions and spellings that were current for the language in question. In particular, spelling in English only slowly became fixed. There were attempts to regulate anagram formation, an important one in English being that of George Puttenham's \"Of the Anagram or Posy Transposed\" in \"The Art of English Poesie\" (1589).\nInfluence of Latin.\nAs a literary game when Latin was the common property of the literate, Latin anagrams were prominent. Two examples are the change of \"Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum\" (Latin: Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord [is] with you) into \"Virgo serena, pia, munda et immaculata\" (Latin: Serene virgin, pious, clean and spotless), and the anagrammatic answer to Pilate's question, \"Quid est veritas?\" (Latin: What is truth?), namely, \"Est vir qui adest\" (Latin: It is the man who is here). The origins of these are not documented.\nLatin continued to influence letter values (such as I = J, U = V and W = VV). There was an ongoing tradition of allowing anagrams to be \"perfect\" if the letters were all used once, but allowing for these interchanges. This can be seen in a popular Latin anagram against the Jesuits: \"Societas Jesu\" turned into \"Vitiosa seces\" (Latin: Cut off the wicked things). Puttenham, in the time of Elizabeth I, wished to start from \"Elissabet Anglorum Regina\" (Latin: Elizabeth Queen of the English), to obtain \"Multa regnabis ense gloria\" (Latin: By thy sword shalt thou reign in great renown); he explains carefully that H is \"a note of aspiration only and no letter\", and that Z in Greek or Hebrew is a mere SS. The rules were not completely fixed in the 17th century. William Camden in his \"Remains\" commented, singling out some letters\u2014\u00c6, K, W, and Z\u2014not found in the classical Roman alphabet:\nEarly modern period.\nWhen it comes to the 17th century and anagrams in English or other languages, there is a great deal of documented evidence of learned interest. The lawyer Thomas Egerton was praised through the anagram \"gestat honorem\" ('he carries honor'); the physician George Ent took the anagrammatic motto \"genio surget\" ('he rises through spirit/genius'), which requires his first name as \"Georgius\". James I's courtiers discovered in \"James Stuart\" \"a just master\", and converted \"Charles James Stuart\" into \"Claims Arthur's seat\" (even at that point in time, the letters I and J were more-or-less interchangeable). Walter Quin, tutor to the future Charles I, worked hard on multilingual anagrams on the name of father James. A notorious murder scandal, the Overbury case, threw up two imperfect anagrams that were aided by typically loose spelling and were recorded by Simonds D'Ewes: \"Francis Howard\" (for Frances Carr, Countess of Somerset, her maiden name spelled in a variant) became \"Car findes a whore\", with the letters E hardly counted, and the victim Thomas Overbury, as \"Thomas Overburie\", was written as \"O! O! a busie murther\" (an old form of \"murder\"), with a V counted as U.\nWilliam Drummond of Hawthornden, in an essay \"On the Character of a Perfect Anagram\", tried to lay down rules for permissible substitutions (such as S standing for Z) and letter omissions. William Camden provided a definition of \"Anagrammatisme\" as \"a dissolution of a name truly written into his letters, as his elements, and a new connection of it by artificial transposition, without addition, subtraction or change of any letter, into different words, making some perfect sense appliable (i.e., applicable) to the person named.\" Dryden in \"MacFlecknoe\" disdainfully called the pastime the \"torturing of one poor word ten thousand ways\".\n\"Eleanor Audeley\", wife of Sir John Davies, is said to have been brought before the High Commission in 1634 for extravagances, stimulated by the discovery that her name could be transposed to \"Reveale, O Daniel\", and to have been laughed out of court by another anagram submitted by Sir John Lambe, the dean of the Arches, \"Dame Eleanor Davies\", \"Never soe mad a ladie\".\nAn example from France was a flattering anagram for Cardinal Richelieu, comparing him to Hercules or at least one of his hands (Hercules being a kingly symbol), where \"Armand de Richelieu\" became \"Ardue main d'Hercule\" (\"difficult hand of Hercules\").\nModern period.\nExamples from the 19th century are the transposition of \"Horatio Nelson\" into \"Honor est a Nilo\" (Latin: Honor is from the Nile); and of \"Florence Nightingale\" into \"Flit on, cheering angel\". The Victorian love of anagramming as recreation is alluded to by the mathematician Augustus De Morgan using his own name as an example; \"Great Gun, do us a sum!\" is attributed to his son William De Morgan, but a family friend John Thomas Graves was prolific, and a manuscript with over 2,800 has been preserved.\nWith the advent of surrealism as a poetic movement, anagrams regained the artistic respect they had had in the Baroque period. The German poet Unica Z\u00fcrn, who made extensive use of anagram techniques, came to regard obsession with anagrams as a \"dangerous fever\", because it created isolation of the author. The surrealist leader Andr\u00e9 Breton coined the anagram \"Avida Dollars\" for Salvador Dal\u00ed, to tarnish his reputation by the implication of commercialism.\nApplications.\nWhile anagramming is certainly a recreation first, there are ways in which anagrams are put to use, and these can be more serious, or at least not quite frivolous and formless. For example, psychologists use anagram-oriented tests, often called \"anagram solution tasks\", to assess the implicit memory of young adults and adults alike.\nEstablishment of priority.\nNatural philosophers (astronomers and others) of the 17th century transposed their discoveries into Latin anagrams, to establish their priority. In this way they laid claim to new discoveries before their results were ready for publication.\nGalileo used ' for ' (Latin: I have observed the most distant planet to have a triple form) for discovering the rings of Saturn in 1610. Galileo announced his discovery that Venus had phases like the Moon in the form ' (Latin: These immature ones have already been read in vain by me -oy), that is, when rearranged, ' (Latin: The Mother of Loves [= Venus] imitates the figures of Cynthia [= the moon]). In both cases, Johannes Kepler had solved the anagrams incorrectly, assuming they were talking about the Moons of Mars (') and a red spot on Jupiter ('), respectively. By coincidence, he turned out to be right about the actual objects existing.\nIn 1656, Christiaan Huygens, using a better telescope than those available to Galileo, figured that Galileo's earlier observations of Saturn actually meant it had a ring (Galileo's tools were only sufficient to see it as bumps) and, like Galileo, had published an anagram, '. Upon confirming his observations, three years later he revealed it to mean ' (Latin: It [Saturn] is surrounded by a thin, flat, ring, nowhere touching, inclined to the ecliptic).\nWhen Robert Hooke discovered Hooke's law in 1660, he first published it in anagram form, ', for ' (Latin: as the extension, so the force).\nPseudonyms.\nAnagrams are connected to pseudonyms, by the fact that they may conceal or reveal, or operate somewhere in between like a mask that can establish identity. For example, Jim Morrison used an anagram of his name in the Doors song \"L.A. Woman\", calling himself \"Mr. Mojo Risin'\". The use of anagrams and fabricated personal names may be to circumvent restrictions on the use of real names, as happened in the 18th century when Edward Cave wanted to get around restrictions imposed on the reporting of the House of Commons. In a genre such as farce or parody, anagrams as names may be used for pointed and satiric effect.\nPseudonyms adopted by authors are sometimes transposed forms of their names; thus \"Calvinus\" becomes \"Alcuinus\" (here V = U) or \"Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais\" = \"Alcofribas Nasier\". The name \"Voltaire\" of Fran\u00e7ois Marie Arouet fits this pattern, and is allowed to be an anagram of \"Arouet, l[e] j[eune]\" (U = V, J = I) that is, \"Arouet the younger\". Other examples include:\nSeveral of these are \"imperfect anagrams\", letters having been left out in some cases for the sake of easy pronunciation.\nTitles.\nAnagrams used for titles afford scope for some types of wit. Examples:\nCoincidences.\nIn Hebrew, the name \"Gernot Zippe\" (\u05d2\u05e8\u05e0\u05d5\u05d8 \u05e6\u05d9\u05e4\u05d4), the inventor of the Zippe-type centrifuge, is an anagram of the word \"centrifuge\" (\u05e6\u05e0\u05d8\u05e8\u05d9\u05e4\u05d5\u05d2\u05d4).\nThe sentence \"Name is Anu Garg\", referring to anagrammer and founder of wordsmith.org Anu Garg, can be rearranged to spell \"Anagram genius\".\nGames and puzzles.\nAnagrams are in themselves a recreational activity, but they also make up part of many other games, puzzles and game shows. The Jumble is a puzzle found in many newspapers in the United States requiring the unscrambling of letters to find the solution. Cryptic crossword puzzles frequently use anagrammatic clues, usually indicating that they are anagrams by the inclusion of a descriptive term like \"confused\" or \"in disarray\". An example would be \"Businessman burst into tears (9 letters)\". The solution, \"stationer\", is an anagram of \"into tears\", the letters of which have \"burst\" out of their original arrangement to form the name of a type of \"businessman\".\nNumerous other games and contests involve some element of anagram formation as a basic skill. Some examples:\nCiphers.\nMultiple anagramming is a technique used to solve some kinds of cryptograms, such as a permutation cipher, a transposition cipher, and the Jefferson disk. Solutions may be computationally found using a Jumble algorithm.\nMethods of construction.\nSometimes, it is possible to \"see\" anagrams in words, unaided by tools, though the more letters involved the more difficult this becomes. The difficulty is that for a word of different letters, there are (factorial of ) different permutations and so different anagrams of the word. Anagram dictionaries can also be used. Computer programs, known as \"anagram search\", \"anagram servers\", and \"anagram solvers\", among other names, offer a much faster route to creating anagrams, and a large number of these programs are available on the Internet. Some programs use the Anatree algorithm to compute anagrams efficiently.\nThe program or server carries out an exhaustive search of a database of words, to produce a list containing every possible combination of words or phrases from the input word or phrase using a jumble algorithm. Some programs (such as \"Lexpert\") restrict to one-word answers. Many anagram servers (for example, The Words Oracle) can control the search results, by excluding or including certain words, limiting the number or length of words in each anagram, or limiting the number of results. Anagram solvers are often banned from online anagram games. The disadvantage of computer anagram solvers, especially when applied to multi-word anagrams, is their poor understanding of the meaning of the words they are manipulating. They usually cannot filter out meaningful or appropriate anagrams from large numbers of nonsensical word combinations. Some servers attempt to improve on this using statistical techniques that try to combine only words that appear together often. This approach provides only limited success since it fails to recognize ironic and humorous combinations.\nSome anagrammatists indicate the method they used. Anagrams constructed without the aid of a computer are noted as having been done \"manually\" or \"by hand\"; those made by utilizing a computer may be noted \"by machine\" or \"by computer\", or may indicate the name of the computer program (using \"Anagram Genius\").\nThere are also a few \"natural\" instances: English words unconsciously created by switching letters around. The French \"chaise longue\" (\"long chair\") became the American \"chaise lounge\" by metathesis (transposition of letters and/or sounds). It has also been speculated that the English \"curd\" comes from the Latin \"crudus\" (\"raw\"). Similarly, the ancient English word for bird was \"brid\".\nNotable anagrammatists.\nThe French king Louis XIII had a man named Thomas Billon appointed as his Royal Anagrammatist with an annual salary of 1,200 livres. Among contemporary anagrammers, Anu Garg, created an Internet Anagram Server in 1994 together with the satirical anagram-based newspaper \"The Anagram Times\". Mike Keith has anagrammed the complete text of \"Moby Dick\". He, along with Richard Brodie, has published \"The Anagrammed Bible\" that includes anagrammed version of many books of the Bible. Popular television personality Dick Cavett is known for his anagrams of famous celebrities such as Alec Guinness and Spiro Agnew."}
{"id": "1362", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1362", "title": "Anadyr (river)", "text": "The Anadyr (; Yukaghir: \u041e\u043d\u0430\u043d\u0434\u044b\u0440\u044c; ) is a river in the far northeast of Siberia which flows into the Gulf of Anadyr of the Bering Sea and drains much of the interior of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Its basin corresponds to the Anadyrsky District of Chukotka.\nGeography.\nThe Anadyr is long and has a basin of . It is frozen from October to late May and has a maximum flow in June with the snowmelt. It is navigable in small boats for about to near Markovo. West of Markovo it is in the Anadyr Highlands (moderate mountains and valleys with a few trees) and east of Markovo it moves into the Anadyr Lowlands (very flat treeless tundra with lakes and bogs). The drop from Markovo to the sea is less than .\nIt rises at about 67\u00b0N latitude and 171\u00b0E longitude in the Anadyr Highlands, near the headwaters of the Maly Anyuy, flows southwest receiving the waters of the rivers Yablon and Yeropol, turns east around the Shchuchy Range and passes Markvovo and the old site of Anadyrsk, turns north and east and receives the Mayn from the south, thereby encircling the Lebediny Zakaznik, turns northeast to receive the Belaya from the north in the Parapol-Belsky Lowlands, then past Ust-Belaya it turns southeast into the Anadyr Lowlands past the Ust-Tanyurer Zakaznik and receives the Tanyurer from the north. At Lake Krasnoye, it turns east and flows into the Onemen Bay of the Anadyr Estuary. If the Onemen Bay is considered part of the river, it also receives the Velikaya from the south and the Kanchalan from the north. Other important tributaries are the Yablon, Yeropol and Mamolina from the right and the Chineyveyem and Ubiyenka from the left.\nIts basin is surrounded by the Amguema and Palyavaam basins to the north, the Bolshoy Anyuy, Oloy and Kolyma basins to the northwest, and the Penzhina basin to the southwest.\nHistory.\nIn 1648, Semyon Dezhnev reached the mouth of the Anadyr after being shipwrecked on the coast. In 1649, he went upriver and built winter quarters at Anadyrsk. For the next 100 years, the Anadyr was the main route from the Arctic to the Pacific and Kamchatka. In the 18th century, the Anadyr was described by the polar explorer Dmitry Laptev.\nEcology.\nThe country through which it passes is thinly populated, and is dominated by tundra, with a rich variety of plant life. Much of the region's landscapes are dominated by rugged mountains. For nine months of the year the ground is covered with snow, and the frozen rivers become navigable roads. George Kennan, an American working on the Western Union Telegraph Expedition in the late 1860s, found that dog sled travel on the lower Anadyr was limited by lack of firewood.\nReindeer, upon which the local inhabitants subsisted, were once found in considerable numbers, but the domestic reindeer population has collapsed dramatically since the reorganization and privatization of state-run collective farms beginning in 1992. As herds of domestic reindeer have declined, herds of wild caribou have increased.\nThere are ten species of salmon inhabiting the Anadyr river basin. Every year, on the last Sunday in April, there is an ice fishing competition in the frozen estuarine waters of the Anadyr's mouth. This festival is locally known as Korfest.\nThe area is a summering place for a number of migratory birds including brent geese, Eurasian wigeons, and the pintails of California."}
{"id": "1363", "revid": "44393282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1363", "title": "Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re", "text": "Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re (, ; ; 20 January 177510 June 1836) was a French physicist and mathematician who was one of the founders of the science of classical electromagnetism, which he referred to as \"electrodynamics\". He is also the inventor of numerous applications, such as the solenoid (a term coined by him) and the electrical telegraph. As an autodidact, Amp\u00e8re was a member of the French Academy of Sciences and professor at the \u00c9cole polytechnique and the Coll\u00e8ge de France.\nThe SI unit of electric current, the ampere (A), is named after him. His name is also one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower. The term \"kinematic\" is the English version of his \"cin\u00e9matique\", which he constructed from the Greek \"kinema\" (\"movement, motion\"), itself derived from \"kinein\" (\"to move\").\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAndr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re was born on 20 January 1775 in Lyon to Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re, a prosperous businessman, and Jeanne Antoinette Desuti\u00e8res-Sarcey Amp\u00e8re, during the height of the French Enlightenment. He spent his childhood and adolescence at the family property at Poleymieux-au-Mont-d'Or near Lyon. Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re, a successful merchant, was an admirer of the philosophy of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose theories of education (as outlined in his treatise \"\u00c9mile\") were the basis of Amp\u00e8re's education. Rousseau believed that young boys should avoid formal schooling and pursue instead a \"direct education from nature.\" Amp\u00e8re's father actualized this ideal by allowing his son to educate himself within the walls of his well-stocked library. French Enlightenment masterpieces such as Georges-Louis Leclerc, comte de Buffon's \"Histoire naturelle, g\u00e9n\u00e9rale et particuli\u00e8re\" (begun in 1749) and Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" (volumes added between 1751 and 1772) thus became Amp\u00e8re's schoolmasters. The young Amp\u00e8re, however, soon resumed his Latin lessons, which enabled him to master the works of Leonhard Euler and Daniel Bernoulli.\nFrench Revolution.\nIn addition, Amp\u00e8re used his access to the latest books to begin teaching himself advanced mathematics at age 12. In later life Amp\u00e8re claimed that he knew as much about mathematics and science when he was eighteen as ever he knew, but as a polymath, his reading embraced history, travels, poetry, philosophy, and the natural sciences. His mother was a devout Catholic, so Amp\u00e8re was also initiated into the Catholic faith along with Enlightenment science. The French Revolution (1789\u201399) that began during his youth was also influential: Amp\u00e8re's father was called into public service by the new revolutionary government, becoming a local judge (\"juge de paix\") in a small town near Lyon. When the Jacobin faction seized control of the Revolutionary government in 1792, his father Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re resisted the new political tides, and he was guillotined on 24 November 1793, as part of the Jacobin purges of the period.\nIn 1796, Amp\u00e8re met Julie Carron and, in 1799, they were married. Amp\u00e8re took his first regular job in 1799 as a mathematics teacher, which gave him the financial security to marry Carron and father his first child, Jean-Jacques (named after his father), the next year. (Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re eventually achieved his own fame as a scholar of languages.) Amp\u00e8re's maturation corresponded with the transition to the Napoleonic regime in France, and the young father and teacher found new opportunities for success within the technocratic structures favoured by the new French First Consul. In 1802, Amp\u00e8re was appointed a professor of physics and chemistry at the \u00c9cole Centrale in Bourg-en-Bresse, leaving his ailing wife and infant son Jean-Jacques Antoine Amp\u00e8re in Lyon. He used his time in Bourg to research mathematics, producing \"Consid\u00e9rations sur la th\u00e9orie math\u00e9matique du jeu\" (1802; \"Considerations on the Mathematical Theory of Games\"), a treatise on mathematical probability that he sent to the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1803.\nTeaching career.\nAfter the death of his wife in July 1803, Amp\u00e8re moved to Paris, where he began a tutoring post at the new \u00c9cole Polytechnique in 1804. Despite his lack of formal qualifications, Amp\u00e8re was appointed a professor of mathematics at the school in 1809. As well as holding positions at this school until 1828, in 1819 and 1820 Amp\u00e8re offered courses in philosophy and astronomy, respectively, at the University of Paris, and in 1824 he was elected to the prestigious chair in experimental physics at the Coll\u00e8ge de France. In 1814, Amp\u00e8re was invited to join the class of mathematicians in the new \"Institut Imp\u00e9rial\", the umbrella under which the reformed state Academy of Sciences would sit.\nAmp\u00e8re engaged in a diverse array of scientific inquiries during the years leading up to his election to the academy\u2014writing papers and engaging in topics from mathematics and philosophy to chemistry and astronomy, which was customary among the leading scientific intellectuals of the day. Amp\u00e8re claimed that \"at eighteen years he found three culminating points in his life, his First Communion, the reading of Antoine Leonard Thomas's \"Eulogy of Descartes\", and the Taking of the Bastille. On the day of his wife's death he wrote two verses from the Psalms, and the prayer, 'O Lord, God of Mercy, unite me in Heaven with those whom you have permitted me to love on earth.' In times of duress he would take refuge in the reading of the Bible and the Fathers of the Church.\"\nA lay Catholic, he took for a time into his family the young student Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Ozanam (1813\u20131853), one of the founders of the Conference of Charity, later known as the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul. Ozanam would much later be beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1998. Through Amp\u00e8re, Ozanam had contact with leaders of the neo-Catholic movement, such as Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire, and Charles Forbes Ren\u00e9 de Montalembert. \nWork in electromagnetism.\nIn September 1820, Amp\u00e8re's friend and eventual eulogist Fran\u00e7ois Arago showed the members of the French Academy of Sciences the surprising discovery by Danish physicist Hans Christian \u00d8rsted that a magnetic needle is deflected by an adjacent electric current. Amp\u00e8re began developing a mathematical and physical theory to understand the relationship between electricity and magnetism. Furthering \u00d8rsted's experimental work, Amp\u00e8re showed that two parallel wires carrying electric currents attract or repel each other, depending on whether the currents flow in the same or opposite directions, respectively - this laid the foundation of electrodynamics. He also applied mathematics in generalizing physical laws from these experimental results. The most important of these was the principle that came to be called Amp\u00e8re's law, which states that the mutual action of two lengths of current-carrying wire is proportional to their lengths and to the intensities of their currents. Amp\u00e8re also applied this same principle to magnetism, showing the harmony between his law and French physicist Charles Augustin de Coulomb's law of electric action. Amp\u00e8re's devotion to, and skill with, experimental techniques anchored his science within the emerging fields of experimental physics.\nAmp\u00e8re also provided a physical understanding of the electromagnetic relationship, theorizing the existence of an \"electrodynamic molecule\" (the forerunner of the idea of the electron) that served as the component element of both electricity and magnetism. Using this physical explanation of electromagnetic motion, Amp\u00e8re developed a physical account of electromagnetic phenomena that was both empirically demonstrable and mathematically predictive. Almost 100 years later, in 1915, Albert Einstein together with Wander Johannes de Haas made the proof of the correctness of Amp\u00e8re's hypothesis through the Einstein\u2013de Haas effect. In 1827, Amp\u00e8re published his magnum opus, \"M\u00e9moire sur la th\u00e9orie math\u00e9matique des ph\u00e9nom\u00e8nes \u00e9lectrodynamiques uniquement d\u00e9duite de l'experience\" (Memoir on the Mathematical Theory of Electrodynamic Phenomena, Uniquely Deduced from Experience), the work that coined the name of his new science, \"electrodynamics\", and became known ever after as its founding treatise.\nIn 1827, Amp\u00e8re was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society and in 1828, a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Science. Probably the highest recognition came from James Clerk Maxwell, who in his \"Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism\" named Amp\u00e8re \"the Newton of electricity\".\nHonours.\nLegacy.\nAn international convention, signed at the 1881 International Exposition of Electricity, established the ampere as one of the standard units of electrical measurement, in recognition of his contribution to the creation of modern electrical science and along with the coulomb, volt, ohm, watt and farad, which are named, respectively, after Amp\u00e8re's contemporaries Charles-Augustin de Coulomb of France, Alessandro Volta of Italy, Georg Ohm of Germany, James Watt of Scotland and Michael Faraday of England. Amp\u00e8re's name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.\nMany streets and squares are named after Amp\u00e8re, as are schools, a Lyon metro station, a graphics processing unit microarchitecture, a mountain on the moon and an electric ferry in Norway.\nWritings.\nPartial translations:\nComplete translations:"}
{"id": "1365", "revid": "5128741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1365", "title": "Ammonia", "text": "Ammonia is an inorganic chemical compound of nitrogen and hydrogen with the formula . A stable binary hydride and the simplest pnictogen hydride, ammonia is a colourless gas with a distinctive pungent smell. Biologically, it is a common nitrogenous waste, and it contributes significantly to the nutritional needs of terrestrial organisms by serving as a precursor to fertilisers. Around 70% of ammonia produced industrially is used to make fertilisers in various forms and composition, such as urea and diammonium phosphate. Ammonia in pure form is also applied directly into the soil.\nAmmonia, either directly or indirectly, is also a building block for the synthesis of many chemicals.\nAmmonia occurs in nature and has been detected in the interstellar medium. In many countries, it is classified as an extremely hazardous substance.\nAmmonia is produced biologically in a process called nitrogen fixation, but even more is generated industrially by the Haber process. The process helped revolutionize agriculture by providing cheap fertilizers. The global industrial production of ammonia in 2021 was 235\u00a0million tonnes. Industrial ammonia is transported by road in tankers, by rail in tank wagons, by sea in gas carriers, or in cylinders.\nAmmonia boils at at a pressure of one atmosphere, but the liquid can often be handled in the laboratory without external cooling. Household ammonia or ammonium hydroxide is a solution of ammonia in water.\nEtymology.\nPliny, in Book XXXI of his Natural History, refers to a salt named \"hammoniacum\", so called because of the proximity of its source to the Temple of Jupiter Amun (Greek \u1f0c\u03bc\u03bc\u03c9\u03bd \"Ammon\") in the Roman province of Cyrenaica. However, the description Pliny gives of the salt does not conform to the properties of ammonium chloride. According to Herbert Hoover's commentary in his English translation of Georgius Agricola's \"De re metallica\", it is likely to have been common sea salt. In any case, that salt ultimately gave ammonia and ammonium compounds their name.\nNatural occurrence (abiological).\nTraces of ammonia/ammonium are found in rainwater. Ammonium chloride (sal ammoniac), and ammonium sulfate are found in volcanic districts. Crystals of ammonium bicarbonate have been found in Patagonia guano.\nAmmonia is found throughout the Solar System on Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, among other places: on smaller, icy bodies such as Pluto, ammonia can act as a geologically important antifreeze, as a mixture of water and ammonia can have a melting point as low as if the ammonia concentration is high enough and thus allow such bodies to retain internal oceans and active geology at a far lower temperature than would be possible with water alone. Substances containing ammonia, or those that are similar to it, are called \"ammoniacal\".\nProperties.\nAmmonia is a colourless gas with a characteristically pungent smell. It is lighter than air, its density being 0.589 times that of air. It is easily liquefied due to the strong hydrogen bonding between molecules. Gaseous ammonia turns to a colourless liquid, which boils at , and freezes to colourless crystals at . Little data is available at very high temperatures and pressures, but the liquid-vapor critical point occurs at 405\u00a0K and 11.35\u00a0MPa.\nSolid.\nThe crystal symmetry is cubic, Pearson symbol cP16, space group P213 No.198, lattice constant 0.5125\u00a0nm.\nLiquid.\nLiquid ammonia possesses strong ionising powers reflecting its high \"\u03b5\" of 22 at . Liquid ammonia has a very high standard enthalpy change of vapourization (23.5\u00a0kJ/mol; for comparison, water's is 40.65\u00a0kJ/mol, methane 8.19\u00a0kJ/mol and phosphine 14.6\u00a0kJ/mol) and can be transported in pressurized or refrigerated vessels; however, at standard temperature and pressure liquid anhydrous ammonia will vaporize.\nSolvent properties.\nAmmonia readily dissolves in water. In an aqueous solution, it can be expelled by boiling. The aqueous solution of ammonia is basic, and may be described as aqueous ammonia or ammonium hydroxide. The maximum concentration of ammonia in water (a saturated solution) has a specific gravity of 0.880 and is often known as '.880 ammonia'.\nLiquid ammonia is a widely studied nonaqueous ionising solvent. Its most conspicuous property is its ability to dissolve alkali metals to form highly coloured, electrically conductive solutions containing solvated electrons. Apart from these remarkable solutions, much of the chemistry in liquid ammonia can be classified by analogy with related reactions in aqueous solutions. Comparison of the physical properties of with those of water shows has the lower melting point, boiling point, density, viscosity, dielectric constant and electrical conductivity. These differences are attributed at least in part to the weaker hydrogen bonding in . The ionic self-dissociation constant of liquid at \u221250\u00a0\u00b0C is about 10\u221233.\nLiquid ammonia is an ionising solvent, although less so than water, and dissolves a range of ionic compounds, including many nitrates, nitrites, cyanides, thiocyanates, metal cyclopentadienyl complexes and metal bis(trimethylsilyl)amides. Most ammonium salts are soluble and act as acids in liquid ammonia solutions. The solubility of halide salts increases from fluoride to iodide. A saturated solution of ammonium nitrate (Divers' solution, named after Edward Divers) contains 0.83\u00a0mol solute per mole of ammonia and has a vapour pressure of less than 1\u00a0bar even at . However, few oxyanion salts with other cations dissolve.\nLiquid ammonia will dissolve all of the alkali metals and other electropositive metals such as Ca, Sr, Ba, Eu and Yb (also Mg using an electrolytic process). At low concentrations (&lt;0.06\u00a0mol/L), deep blue solutions are formed: these contain metal cations and solvated electrons, free electrons that are surrounded by a cage of ammonia molecules.\nThese solutions are strong reducing agents. At higher concentrations, the solutions are metallic in appearance and in electrical conductivity. At low temperatures, the two types of solution can coexist as phases.\nRedox properties of liquid ammonia.\nThe range of thermodynamic stability of liquid ammonia solutions is very narrow, as the potential for oxidation to dinitrogen, \"E\"\u00b0 (), is only +0.04\u00a0V. In practice, both oxidation to dinitrogen and reduction to dihydrogen are slow. This is particularly true of reducing solutions: the solutions of the alkali metals mentioned above are stable for several days, slowly decomposing to the metal amide and dihydrogen. Most studies involving liquid ammonia solutions are done in reducing conditions; although oxidation of liquid ammonia is usually slow, there is still a risk of explosion, particularly if transition metal ions are present as possible catalysts.\nStructure.\nThe ammonia molecule has a trigonal pyramidal shape, as predicted by the valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR theory) with an experimentally determined bond angle of 106.7\u00b0. The central nitrogen atom has five outer electrons with an additional electron from each hydrogen atom. This gives a total of eight electrons, or four electron pairs that are arranged tetrahedrally. Three of these electron pairs are used as bond pairs, which leaves one lone pair of electrons. The lone pair repels more strongly than bond pairs; therefore, the bond angle is not 109.5\u00b0, as expected for a regular tetrahedral arrangement, but 106.7\u00b0. This shape gives the molecule a dipole moment and makes it polar. The molecule's polarity, and especially its ability to form hydrogen bonds, makes ammonia highly miscible with water. The lone pair makes ammonia a base, a proton acceptor. Ammonia is moderately basic; a 1.0\u00a0M aqueous solution has a pH of 11.6, and if a strong acid is added to such a solution until the solution is neutral (), 99.4% of the ammonia molecules are protonated. Temperature and salinity also affect the proportion of ammonium . The latter has the shape of a regular tetrahedron and is isoelectronic with methane.\nThe ammonia molecule readily undergoes nitrogen inversion at room temperature; a useful analogy is an umbrella turning itself inside out in a strong wind. The energy barrier to this inversion is 24.7\u00a0kJ/mol, and the resonance frequency is 23.79\u00a0GHz, corresponding to microwave radiation of a wavelength of 1.260\u00a0cm. The absorption at this frequency was the first microwave spectrum to be observed and was used in the first maser.\nAmphotericity.\nOne of the most characteristic properties of ammonia is its basicity. Ammonia is considered to be a weak base. It combines with acids to form ammonium salts; thus, with hydrochloric acid it forms ammonium chloride (sal ammoniac); with nitric acid, ammonium nitrate, etc. Perfectly dry ammonia gas will not combine with perfectly dry hydrogen chloride gas; moisture is necessary to bring about the reaction.\nAs a demonstration experiment under air with ambient moisture, opened bottles of concentrated ammonia and hydrochloric acid solutions produce a cloud of ammonium chloride, which seems to appear 'out of nothing' as the salt aerosol forms where the two diffusing clouds of reagents meet between the two bottles.\nThe salts produced by the action of ammonia on acids are known as the and all contain the ammonium ion ().\nAlthough ammonia is well known as a weak base, it can also act as an extremely weak acid. It is a protic substance and is capable of formation of amides (which contain the ion). For example, lithium dissolves in liquid ammonia to give a blue solution (solvated electron) of lithium amide:\nSelf-dissociation.\nLike water, liquid ammonia undergoes molecular autoionisation to form its acid and base conjugates:\nAmmonia often functions as a weak base, so it has some buffering ability. Shifts in pH will cause more or fewer ammonium cations () and amide anions () to be present in solution. At standard pressure and temperature,\nCombustion.\nAmmonia does not burn readily or sustain combustion, except under narrow fuel-to-air mixtures of 15\u201328% ammonia by volume in air. When mixed with oxygen, it burns with a pale yellowish-green flame. Ignition occurs when chlorine is passed into ammonia, forming nitrogen and hydrogen chloride; if chlorine is present in excess, then the highly explosive nitrogen trichloride () is also formed.\nThe combustion of ammonia to form nitrogen and water is exothermic:\nThe standard enthalpy change of combustion, \u0394\"H\"\u00b0c, expressed per mole of ammonia and with condensation of the water formed, is \u2212382.81\u00a0kJ/mol. Dinitrogen is the thermodynamic product of combustion: all nitrogen oxides are unstable with respect to and , which is the principle behind the catalytic converter. Nitrogen oxides can be formed as kinetic products in the presence of appropriate catalysts, a reaction of great industrial importance in the production of nitric acid:\nA subsequent reaction leads to :\nThe combustion of ammonia in air is very difficult in the absence of a catalyst (such as platinum gauze or warm chromium(III) oxide), due to the relatively low heat of combustion, a lower laminar burning velocity, high auto-ignition temperature, high heat of vapourization, and a narrow flammability range. However, recent studies have shown that efficient and stable combustion of ammonia can be achieved using swirl combustors, thereby rekindling research interest in ammonia as a fuel for thermal power production. The flammable range of ammonia in dry air is 15.15\u201327.35% and in 100% relative humidity air is 15.95\u201326.55%. For studying the kinetics of ammonia combustion, knowledge of a detailed reliable reaction mechanism is required, but this has been challenging to obtain.\nPrecursor to organonitrogen compounds.\nAmmonia is a direct or indirect precursor to most manufactured nitrogen-containing compounds. It is the precursor to nitric acid, which is the source for most N-substituted aromatic compounds.\nAmines can be formed by the reaction of ammonia with alkyl halides or, more commonly, with alcohols:\nIts ring-opening reaction with ethylene oxide give ethanolamine, diethanolamine, and triethanolamine.\nAmides can be prepared by the reaction of ammonia with carboxylic acid and their derivatives. For example, ammonia reacts with formic acid (HCOOH) to yield formamide () when heated. Acyl chlorides are the most reactive, but the ammonia must be present in at least a twofold excess to neutralise the hydrogen chloride formed. Esters and anhydrides also react with ammonia to form amides. Ammonium salts of carboxylic acids can be dehydrated to amides by heating to 150\u2013200\u00a0\u00b0C as long as no thermally sensitive groups are present.\nOther organonitrogen compounds include alprazolam, ethanolamine, ethyl carbamate and hexamethylenetetramine.\nPrecursor to inorganic nitrogenous compounds.\nNitric acid is generated via the Ostwald process by oxidation of ammonia with air over a platinum catalyst at , \u22489\u00a0atm. Nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide are intermediate in this conversion:\nNitric acid is used for the production of fertilisers, explosives, and many organonitrogen compounds.\nThe hydrogen in ammonia is susceptible to replacement by a myriad substituents. \nAmmonia gas reacts with metallic sodium to give sodamide, .\nWith chlorine, monochloramine is formed.\nPentavalent ammonia is known as \u03bb5-amine, nitrogen pentahydride decomposes spontaneously into trivalent ammonia (\u03bb3-amine) and hydrogen gas at normal conditions. This substance was once investigated as a possible solid rocket fuel in 1966.\nAmmonia is also used to make the following compounds:\nAmmonia is a ligand forming metal ammine complexes. For historical reasons, ammonia is named ammine in the nomenclature of coordination compounds. One notable ammine complex is cisplatin (, a widely used anticancer drug. Ammine complexes of chromium(III) formed the basis of Alfred Werner's revolutionary theory on the structure of coordination compounds. Werner noted only two isomers (\"fac\"- and \"mer\"-) of the complex could be formed, and concluded the ligands must be arranged around the metal ion at the vertices of an octahedron.\nAmmonia forms 1:1 adducts with a variety of Lewis acids such as , phenol, and . Ammonia is a hard base (HSAB theory) and its E &amp; C parameters are EB = 2.31 and CB = 2.04. Its relative donor strength toward a series of acids, versus other Lewis bases, can be illustrated by C-B plots.\nDetection and determination.\nAmmonia in solution.\nAmmonia and ammonium salts can be readily detected, in very minute traces, by the addition of Nessler's solution, which gives a distinct yellow colouration in the presence of the slightest trace of ammonia or ammonium salts. The amount of ammonia in ammonium salts can be estimated quantitatively by distillation of the salts with sodium (NaOH) or potassium hydroxide (KOH), the ammonia evolved being absorbed in a known volume of standard sulfuric acid and the excess of acid then determined volumetrically; or the ammonia may be absorbed in hydrochloric acid and the ammonium chloride so formed precipitated as ammonium hexachloroplatinate, .\nGaseous ammonia.\nSulfur sticks are burnt to detect small leaks in industrial ammonia refrigeration systems. Larger quantities can be detected by warming the salts with a caustic alkali or with quicklime, when the characteristic smell of ammonia will be at once apparent. Ammonia is an irritant and irritation increases with concentration; the permissible exposure limit is 25\u00a0ppm, and lethal above 500\u00a0ppm by volume. Higher concentrations are hardly detected by conventional detectors, the type of detector is chosen according to the sensitivity required (e.g. semiconductor, catalytic, electrochemical). Holographic sensors have been proposed for detecting concentrations up to 12.5% in volume.\nIn a laboratorial setting, gaseous ammonia can be detected by using concentrated hydrochloric acid or gaseous hydrogen chloride. A dense white fume (which is ammonium chloride vapor) arises from the reaction between ammonia and HCl(g).\nAmmoniacal nitrogen (NH3\u2013N).\nAmmoniacal nitrogen (NH3\u2013N) is a measure commonly used for testing the quantity of ammonium ions, derived naturally from ammonia, and returned to ammonia via organic processes, in water or waste liquids. It is a measure used mainly for quantifying values in waste treatment and water purification systems, as well as a measure of the health of natural and man-made water reserves. It is measured in units of mg/L (milligram per litre).\nHistory.\nThe ancient Greek historian Herodotus mentioned that there were outcrops of salt in an area of Libya that was inhabited by a people called the 'Ammonians' (now the Siwa oasis in northwestern Egypt, where salt lakes still exist). The Greek geographer Strabo also mentioned the salt from this region. However, the ancient authors Dioscorides, Apicius, Arrian, Synesius, and A\u00ebtius of Amida described this salt as forming clear crystals that could be used for cooking and that were essentially rock salt. \"Hammoniacus sal\" appears in the writings of Pliny, although it is not known whether the term is equivalent to the more modern sal ammoniac (ammonium chloride).\nThe fermentation of urine by bacteria produces a solution of ammonia; hence fermented urine was used in Classical Antiquity to wash cloth and clothing, to remove hair from hides in preparation for tanning, to serve as a mordant in dying cloth, and to remove rust from iron. It was also used by ancient dentists to wash teeth.\nIn the form of sal ammoniac (\u0646\u0634\u0627\u062f\u0631, \"nushadir\"), ammonia was important to the Muslim alchemists. It was mentioned in the \"Book of Stones\", likely written in the 9th century and attributed to J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n. It was also important to the European alchemists of the 13th century, being mentioned by Albertus Magnus. It was also used by dyers in the Middle Ages in the form of fermented urine to alter the colour of vegetable dyes. In the 15th century, Basilius Valentinus showed that ammonia could be obtained by the action of alkalis on sal ammoniac. At a later period, when sal ammoniac was obtained by distilling the hooves and horns of oxen and neutralizing the resulting carbonate with hydrochloric acid, the name 'spirit of hartshorn' was applied to ammonia.\nGaseous ammonia was first isolated by Joseph Black in 1756 by reacting \"sal ammoniac\" (ammonium chloride) with \"calcined magnesia\" (magnesium oxide). It was isolated again by Peter Woulfe in 1767, by Carl Wilhelm Scheele in 1770 and by Joseph Priestley in 1773 and was termed by him 'alkaline air'. Eleven years later in 1785, Claude Louis Berthollet ascertained its composition.\nThe production of ammonia from nitrogen in the air (and hydrogen) was invented by Fritz Haber and Robert LeRossignol. The patent was sent in 1909 (USPTO Nr 1,202,995) and awarded in 1916. Later, Carl Bosch developed the industrial method for ammonia production (Haber\u2013Bosch process). It was first used on an industrial scale in Germany during World War I, following the allied blockade that cut off the supply of nitrates from Chile. The ammonia was used to produce explosives to sustain war efforts. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1918 was awarded to Fritz Haber \"for the synthesis of ammonia from its elements\".\nBefore the availability of natural gas, hydrogen as a precursor to ammonia production was produced via the electrolysis of water or using the chloralkali process.\nWith the advent of the steel industry in the 20th century, ammonia became a byproduct of the production of coking coal.\nApplications.\nFertiliser.\nIn the US , approximately 88% of ammonia was used as fertilisers either as its salts, solutions or anhydrously. When applied to soil, it helps provide increased yields of crops such as maize and wheat. 30% of agricultural nitrogen applied in the US is in the form of anhydrous ammonia, and worldwide, 110\u00a0million tonnes are applied each year.\nSolutions of ammonia ranging from 16% to 25% are used in the fermentation industry as a source of nitrogen for microorganisms and to adjust pH during fermentation.\nRefrigeration\u2013R717.\nBecause of ammonia's vapourization properties, it is a useful refrigerant. It was commonly used before the popularisation of chlorofluorocarbons (Freons). Anhydrous ammonia is widely used in industrial refrigeration applications and hockey rinks because of its high energy efficiency and low cost. It suffers from the disadvantage of toxicity, and requiring corrosion resistant components, which restricts its domestic and small-scale use. Along with its use in modern vapour-compression refrigeration it is used in a mixture along with hydrogen and water in absorption refrigerators. The Kalina cycle, which is of growing importance to geothermal power plants, depends on the wide boiling range of the ammonia\u2013water mixture.\nAmmonia coolant is also used in the radiators aboard the International Space Station in loops that are used to regulate the internal temperature and enable temperature-dependent experiments. The ammonia is under sufficient pressure to remain liquid throughout the process. Single-phase ammonia cooling systems also serve the power electronics in each pair of solar arrays.\nThe potential importance of ammonia as a refrigerant has increased with the discovery that vented CFCs and HFCs are potent and stable greenhouse gases.\nAntimicrobial agent for food products.\nAs early as in 1895, it was known that ammonia was 'strongly antiseptic ... it requires 1.4\u00a0grams per litre to preserve beef tea (broth).' In one study, anhydrous ammonia destroyed 99.999% of zoonotic bacteria in three types of animal feed, but not silage. Anhydrous ammonia is currently used commercially to reduce or eliminate microbial contamination of beef.\nLean finely textured beef (popularly known as 'pink slime') in the beef industry is made from fatty beef trimmings (c. 50\u201370% fat) by removing the fat using heat and centrifugation, then treating it with ammonia to kill \"E. coli\". The process was deemed effective and safe by the US Department of Agriculture based on a study that found that the treatment reduces \"E. coli\" to undetectable levels. There have been safety concerns about the process as well as consumer complaints about the taste and smell of ammonia-treated beef.\nFuel.\nAmmonia has been used as fuel, and is a proposed alternative to fossil fuels and hydrogen. Being liquid at ambient temperature under its own vapour pressure and having high volumetric and gravimetric energy density, ammonia is considered a suitable carrier for hydrogen, and may be cheaper than direct transport of liquid hydrogen.\nCompared to hydrogen, ammonia is easier to store. Compared to hydrogen as a fuel, ammonia is much more energy efficient, and could be produced, stored and delivered at a much lower cost than hydrogen, which must be kept compressed or as a cryogenic liquid. The raw energy density of liquid ammonia is 11.5\u00a0MJ/L, which is about a third that of diesel.\nAmmonia can be converted back to hydrogen to be used to power hydrogen fuel cells, or it may be used directly within high-temperature solid oxide direct ammonia fuel cells to provide efficient power sources that do not emit greenhouse gases. Ammonia to hydrogen conversion can be achieved through the sodium amide process or the catalytic decomposition of ammonia using solid catalysts.\nAmmonia engines or ammonia motors, using ammonia as a working fluid, have been proposed and occasionally used. The principle is similar to that used in a fireless locomotive, but with ammonia as the working fluid, instead of steam or compressed air. Ammonia engines were used experimentally in the 19th century by Goldsworthy Gurney in the UK and the St. Charles Avenue Streetcar line in New Orleans in the 1870s and 1880s, and during World War II ammonia was used to power buses in Belgium.\nAmmonia is sometimes proposed as a practical alternative to fossil fuel for internal combustion engines. However, ammonia cannot be easily used in existing Otto cycle engines because of its very narrow flammability range. Despite this, several tests have been run. Its high octane rating of 120 and low flame temperature allows the use of high compression ratios without a penalty of high production. Since ammonia contains no carbon, its combustion cannot produce carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, or soot.\nAmmonia production currently creates 1.8% of global emissions. 'Green ammonia' is ammonia produced by using green hydrogen (hydrogen produced by electrolysis with electricity from renewable energy), whereas 'blue ammonia' is ammonia produced using blue hydrogen (hydrogen produced by steam methane reforming (= SMR) where the carbon dioxide has been captured and stored (cfr. carbon capture and storage = CCS).\nRocket engines have also been fueled by ammonia. The Reaction Motors XLR99 rocket engine that powered the hypersonic research aircraft used liquid ammonia. Although not as powerful as other fuels, it left no soot in the reusable rocket engine, and its density approximately matches the density of the oxidiser, liquid oxygen, which simplified the aircraft's design.\nIn 2020, Saudi Arabia shipped 40 metric tons of liquid 'blue ammonia' to Japan for use as a fuel. It was produced as a by-product by petrochemical industries, and can be burned without giving off greenhouse gases. Its energy density by volume is nearly double that of liquid hydrogen. If the process of creating it can be scaled up via purely renewable resources, producing green ammonia, it could make a major difference in avoiding climate change. The company ACWA Power and the city of Neom have announced the construction of a green hydrogen and ammonia plant in 2020.\nGreen ammonia is considered as a potential fuel for future container ships. In 2020, the companies DSME and MAN Energy Solutions announced the construction of an ammonia-based ship, DSME plans to commercialize it by 2025. The use of ammonia as a potential alternative fuel for aircraft jet engines is also being explored.\nJapan intends to implement a plan to develop ammonia co-firing technology that can increase the use of ammonia in power generation, as part of efforts to assist domestic and other Asian utilities to accelerate their transition to carbon neutrality.\nIn October 2021, the first International Conference on Fuel Ammonia (ICFA2021) was held.\nIn June 2022, IHI Corporation succeeded in reducing greenhouse gases by over 99% during combustion of liquid ammonia in a 2,000-kilowatt-class gas turbine achieving truly -free power generation.\nIn July 2022, Quad nations of Japan, the U.S., Australia and India agreed to promote technological development for clean-burning hydrogen and ammonia as fuels at the security grouping's first energy meeting. , however, significant amounts of are produced. Nitrous oxide may also be a problem as it is a \"greenhouse gas that is known to possess up to 300 times the Global Warming Potential (GWP) of carbon dioxide\".\nThe IEA forecasts that ammonia will meet approximately 45% of shipping fuel demands by 2050.\nAt high temperature and in the presence of a suitable catalyst ammonia decomposes into its constituent elements. Decomposition of ammonia is a slightly endothermic process requiring 23\u00a0kJ/mol (5.5\u00a0kcal/mol) of ammonia, and yields hydrogen and nitrogen gas.\nOther.\nRemediation of gaseous emissions.\nAmmonia is used to scrub from the burning of fossil fuels, and the resulting product is converted to ammonium sulfate for use as fertiliser. Ammonia neutralises the nitrogen oxide () pollutants emitted by diesel engines. This technology, called SCR (selective catalytic reduction), relies on a vanadia-based catalyst.\nAmmonia may be used to mitigate gaseous spills of phosgene.\nStimulant.\nAmmonia, as the vapour released by smelling salts, has found significant use as a respiratory stimulant. Ammonia is commonly used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine through a Birch reduction. The Birch method of making methamphetamine is dangerous because the alkali metal and liquid ammonia are both extremely reactive, and the temperature of liquid ammonia makes it susceptible to explosive boiling when reactants are added.\nTextile.\nLiquid ammonia is used for treatment of cotton materials, giving properties like mercerisation, using alkalis. In particular, it is used for prewashing of wool.\nLifting gas.\nAt standard temperature and pressure, ammonia is less dense than atmosphere and has approximately 45\u201348% of the lifting power of hydrogen or helium. Ammonia has sometimes been used to fill balloons as a lifting gas. Because of its relatively high boiling point (compared to helium and hydrogen), ammonia could potentially be refrigerated and liquefied aboard an airship to reduce lift and add ballast (and returned to a gas to add lift and reduce ballast).\nFuming.\nAmmonia has been used to darken quartersawn white oak in Arts &amp; Crafts and Mission-style furniture. Ammonia fumes react with the natural tannins in the wood and cause it to change colour.\nSafety.\nThe US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set a 15-minute exposure limit for gaseous ammonia of 35\u00a0ppm by volume in the environmental air and an 8-hour exposure limit of 25\u00a0ppm by volume. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recently reduced the IDLH (Immediately Dangerous to Health or Life, the level to which a healthy worker can be exposed for 30 minutes without suffering irreversible health effects) from 500 ppm to 300 ppm based on recent more conservative interpretations of original research in 1943. The 1 hour IDLH limit is still 500 ppm. Other organisations have varying exposure levels. US Navy Standards [U.S. Bureau of Ships 1962] maximum allowable concentrations (MACs): for continuous exposure (60 days) is 25\u00a0ppm; for exposure of 1 hour is 400\u00a0ppm.\nAmmonia vapour has a sharp, irritating, pungent odor that acts as a warning of potentially dangerous exposure. The average odor threshold is 5\u00a0ppm, well below any danger or damage. Exposure to very high concentrations of gaseous ammonia can result in lung damage and death. Ammonia is regulated in the US as a non-flammable gas, but it meets the definition of a material that is toxic by inhalation and requires a hazardous safety permit when transported in quantities greater than .\nLiquid ammonia is dangerous because it is hygroscopic and because it can cause caustic burns. See for more information.\nToxicity.\nThe toxicity of ammonia solutions does not usually cause problems for humans and other mammals, as a specific mechanism exists to prevent its build-up in the bloodstream. Ammonia is converted to carbamoyl phosphate by the enzyme carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, and then enters the urea cycle to be either incorporated into amino acids or excreted in the urine. Fish and amphibians lack this mechanism, as they can usually eliminate ammonia from their bodies by direct excretion. Ammonia even at dilute concentrations is highly toxic to aquatic animals, and for this reason it is classified as \"dangerous for the environment\". Atmospheric ammonia plays a key role in the formation of fine particulate matter.\nAmmonia is a constituent of tobacco smoke.\nCoking wastewater.\nAmmonia is present in coking wastewater streams, as a liquid by-product of the production of coke from coal. In some cases, the ammonia is discharged to the marine environment where it acts as a pollutant. The Whyalla Steelworks in South Australia is one example of a coke-producing facility that discharges ammonia into marine waters.\nAquaculture.\nAmmonia toxicity is believed to be a cause of otherwise unexplained losses in fish hatcheries. Excess ammonia may accumulate and cause alteration of metabolism or increases in the body pH of the exposed organism. Tolerance varies among fish species. At lower concentrations, around 0.05\u00a0mg/L, un-ionised ammonia is harmful to fish species and can result in poor growth and feed conversion rates, reduced fecundity and fertility and increase stress and susceptibility to bacterial infections and diseases. Exposed to excess ammonia, fish may suffer loss of equilibrium, hyper-excitability, increased respiratory activity and oxygen uptake and increased heart rate. At concentrations exceeding 2.0\u00a0mg/L, ammonia causes gill and tissue damage, extreme lethargy, convulsions, coma, and death. Experiments have shown that the lethal concentration for a variety of fish species ranges from 0.2 to 2.0\u00a0mg/L.\nDuring winter, when reduced feeds are administered to aquaculture stock, ammonia levels can be higher. Lower ambient temperatures reduce the rate of algal photosynthesis so less ammonia is removed by any algae present. Within an aquaculture environment, especially at large scale, there is no fast-acting remedy to elevated ammonia levels. Prevention rather than correction is recommended to reduce harm to farmed fish and in open water systems, the surrounding environment.\nStorage information.\nSimilar to propane, anhydrous ammonia boils below room temperature when at atmospheric pressure. A storage vessel capable of is suitable to contain the liquid. Ammonia is used in numerous different industrial applications requiring carbon or stainless steel storage vessels. Ammonia with at least 0.2% by weight water content is not corrosive to carbon steel. carbon steel construction storage tanks with 0.2% by weight or more of water could last more than 50 years in service. Experts warn that ammonium compounds not be allowed to come in contact with bases (unless in an intended and contained reaction), as dangerous quantities of ammonia gas could be released.\nLaboratory.\nThe hazards of ammonia solutions depend on the concentration: 'dilute' ammonia solutions are usually 5\u201310% by weight (&lt;\u00a05.62\u00a0mol/L); 'concentrated' solutions are usually prepared at &gt;25% by weight. A 25% (by weight) solution has a density of 0.907\u00a0g/cm3, and a solution that has a lower density will be more concentrated. The European Union classification of ammonia solutions is given in the table.\nThe ammonia vapour from concentrated ammonia solutions is severely irritating to the eyes and the respiratory tract, and experts warn that these solutions only be handled in a fume hood. Saturated ('0.880'\u2013see \"\") solutions can develop a significant pressure inside a closed bottle in warm weather, and experts also warn that the bottle be opened with care. This is not usually a problem for 25% ('0.900') solutions.\nExperts warn that ammonia solutions not be mixed with halogens, as toxic and/or explosive products are formed. Experts also warn that prolonged contact of ammonia solutions with silver, mercury or iodide salts can also lead to explosive products: such mixtures are often formed in qualitative inorganic analysis, and that it needs to be lightly acidified but not concentrated (&lt;6%\u00a0w/v) before disposal once the test is completed.\nLaboratory use of anhydrous ammonia (gas or liquid).\nAnhydrous ammonia is classified as toxic (T) and dangerous for the environment (N). The gas is flammable (autoignition temperature: 651\u00a0\u00b0C) and can form explosive mixtures with air (16\u201325%). The permissible exposure limit (PEL) in the United States is 50\u00a0ppm (35\u00a0mg/m3), while the IDLH concentration is estimated at 300\u00a0ppm. Repeated exposure to ammonia lowers the sensitivity to the smell of the gas: normally the odour is detectable at concentrations of less than 50\u00a0ppm, but desensitised individuals may not detect it even at concentrations of 100\u00a0ppm. Anhydrous ammonia corrodes copper- and zinc-containing alloys, which makes brass fittings not appropriate for handling the gas. Liquid ammonia can also attack rubber and certain plastics.\nAmmonia reacts violently with the halogens. Nitrogen triiodide, a primary high explosive, is formed when ammonia comes in contact with iodine. Ammonia causes the explosive polymerisation of ethylene oxide. It also forms explosive fulminating compounds with compounds of gold, silver, mercury, germanium or tellurium, and with stibine. Violent reactions have also been reported with acetaldehyde, hypochlorite solutions, potassium ferricyanide and peroxides.\nProduction.\nAmmonia has one of the highest rates of production of any inorganic chemical. Production is sometimes expressed in terms of 'fixed nitrogen'. Global production was estimated as being 160 million tonnes in 2020 (147 tons of fixed nitrogen). China accounted for 26.5% of that, followed by Russia at 11.0%, the United States at 9.5%, and India at 8.3%.\nBefore the start of World War I, most ammonia was obtained by the dry distillation of nitrogenous vegetable and animal waste products, including camel dung, where it was distilled by the reduction of nitrous acid and nitrites with hydrogen; in addition, it was produced by the distillation of coal, and also by the decomposition of ammonium salts by alkaline hydroxides such as quicklime:\nFor small scale laboratory synthesis, one can heat urea and calcium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide:\nElectrochemical.\nThe electrochemical synthesis of ammonia involves the reductive formation of lithium nitride, which can be protonated to ammonia, given a proton source. The first use of this chemistry was reported in 1930, where lithium solutions in ethanol were used to produce ammonia at pressures of up to 1000\u00a0bar, with ethanol acting as the proton source. Beyond simply mediating proton transfer to the nitrogen reduction reaction, ethanol has been found to play a multifaceted role, influencing electrolyte transformations and contributing to the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase, which enhances overall reaction efficiency \nIn 1994, Tsuneto et al. used lithium electrodeposition in tetrahydrofuran to synthesize ammonia at more moderate pressures with reasonable Faradaic efficiency. Subsequent studies have further explored the ethanol\u2013tetrahydrofuran system for electrochemical ammonia synthesis.\nIn 2020, a solvent-agnostic gas diffusion electrode was shown to improve nitrogen transport to the reactive lithium. production rates of up to and Faradaic efficiencies of up to 47.5 \u00b1 4% at ambient temperature and 1\u00a0bar pressure were achieved.\nIn 2021, it was demonstrated that ethanol could be replaced with a tetraalkyl phosphonium salt. The study observed production rates of at 69 \u00b1 1% Faradaic efficiency experiments under 0.5\u00a0bar hydrogen and 19.5\u00a0bar nitrogen partial pressure at ambient temperature. Technology based on this electrochemistry is being developed for commercial fertiliser and fuel production.\nIn 2022, ammonia was produced via the lithium mediated process in a continuous-flow electrolyzer also demonstrating the hydrogen gas as proton source. The study synthesized ammonia at 61 \u00b1 1% Faradaic efficiency at a current density of \u22126 mA/cm2 at 1\u00a0bar and room temperature.\nBiochemistry and medicine.\nAmmonia is essential for life. For example, it is required for the formation of amino acids and nucleic acids, fundamental building blocks of life. Ammonia is however quite toxic. Nature thus uses carriers for ammonia. Within a cell, glutamate serves this role. In the bloodstream, glutamine is a source of ammonia.\nEthanolamine, required for cell membranes, is the substrate for ethanolamine ammonia-lyase, which produces ammonia:\nAmmonia is both a metabolic waste and a metabolic input throughout the biosphere. It is an important source of nitrogen for living systems. Although atmospheric nitrogen abounds (more than 75%), few living creatures are capable of using atmospheric nitrogen in its diatomic form, gas. Therefore, nitrogen fixation is required for the synthesis of amino acids, which are the building blocks of protein. Some plants rely on ammonia and other nitrogenous wastes incorporated into the soil by decaying matter. Others, such as nitrogen-fixing legumes, benefit from symbiotic relationships with rhizobia bacteria that create ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen.\nIn humans, inhaling ammonia in high concentrations can be fatal. Exposure to ammonia can cause headaches, edema, impaired memory, seizures and coma as it is neurotoxic in nature.\nBiosynthesis.\nIn certain organisms, ammonia is produced from atmospheric nitrogen by enzymes called nitrogenases. The overall process is called nitrogen fixation. Intense effort has been directed toward understanding the mechanism of biological nitrogen fixation. The scientific interest in this problem is motivated by the unusual structure of the active site of the enzyme, which consists of an ensemble.\nAmmonia is also a metabolic product of amino acid deamination catalyzed by enzymes such as glutamate dehydrogenase 1. Ammonia excretion is common in aquatic animals. In humans, it is quickly converted to urea (by liver), which is much less toxic, particularly less basic. This urea is a major component of the dry weight of urine. Most reptiles, birds, insects, and snails excrete uric acid solely as nitrogenous waste.\nPhysiology.\nAmmonia plays a role in both normal and abnormal animal physiology. It is biosynthesised through normal amino acid metabolism and is toxic in high concentrations. The liver converts ammonia to urea through a series of reactions known as the urea cycle. Liver dysfunction, such as that seen in cirrhosis, may lead to elevated amounts of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia). Likewise, defects in the enzymes responsible for the urea cycle, such as ornithine transcarbamylase, lead to hyperammonemia. Hyperammonemia contributes to the confusion and coma of hepatic encephalopathy, as well as the neurological disease common in people with urea cycle defects and organic acidurias.\nAmmonia is important for normal animal acid/base balance. After formation of ammonium from glutamine, \u03b1-ketoglutarate may be degraded to produce two bicarbonate ions, which are then available as buffers for dietary acids. Ammonium is excreted in the urine, resulting in net acid loss. Ammonia may itself diffuse across the renal tubules, combine with a hydrogen ion, and thus allow for further acid excretion.\nExcretion.\nAmmonium ions are a toxic waste product of metabolism in animals. In fish and aquatic invertebrates, it is excreted directly into the water. In mammals, sharks, and amphibians, it is converted in the urea cycle to urea, which is less toxic and can be stored more efficiently. In birds, reptiles, and terrestrial snails, metabolic ammonium is converted into uric acid, which is solid and can therefore be excreted with minimal water loss.\nExtraterrestrial occurrence.\nAmmonia has been detected in the atmospheres of the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, along with other gases such as methane, hydrogen, and helium. The interior of Saturn may include frozen ammonia crystals. It is found on Deimos and Phobos\u2013the two moons of Mars.\nInterstellar space.\nAmmonia was first detected in interstellar space in 1968, based on microwave emissions from the direction of the galactic core. This was the first polyatomic molecule to be so detected. The sensitivity of the molecule to a broad range of excitations and the ease with which it can be observed in a number of regions has made ammonia one of the most important molecules for studies of molecular clouds. The relative intensity of the ammonia lines can be used to measure the temperature of the emitting medium.\nThe following isotopic species of ammonia have been detected: , , , and . The detection of triply deuterated ammonia was considered a surprise as deuterium is relatively scarce. It is thought that the low-temperature conditions allow this molecule to survive and accumulate.\nSince its interstellar discovery, has proved to be an invaluable spectroscopic tool in the study of the interstellar medium. With a large number of transitions sensitive to a wide range of excitation conditions, has been widely astronomically detected\u2013its detection has been reported in hundreds of journal articles. Listed below is a sample of journal articles that highlights the range of detectors that have been used to identify ammonia.\nThe study of interstellar ammonia has been important to a number of areas of research in the last few decades. Some of these are delineated below and primarily involve using ammonia as an interstellar thermometer.\nInterstellar formation mechanisms.\nThe interstellar abundance for ammonia has been measured for a variety of environments. The []/[] ratio has been estimated to range from 10\u22127 in small dark clouds up to 10\u22125 in the dense core of the Orion molecular cloud complex. Although a total of 18 total production routes have been proposed, the principal formation mechanism for interstellar is the reaction:\nThe rate constant, \"k\", of this reaction depends on the temperature of the environment, with a value of formula_1 at 10\u00a0K. The rate constant was calculated from the formula . For the primary formation reaction, and . Assuming an abundance of formula_2and an electron abundance of 10\u22127 typical of molecular clouds, the formation will proceed at a rate of in a molecular cloud of total density .\nAll other proposed formation reactions have rate constants of between two and 13 orders of magnitude smaller, making their contribution to the abundance of ammonia relatively insignificant. As an example of the minor contribution other formation reactions play, the reaction:\nhas a rate constant of 2.2. Assuming densities of 105 and []/[] ratio of 10\u22127, this reaction proceeds at a rate of 2.2, more than three orders of magnitude slower than the primary reaction above.\nSome of the other possible formation reactions are:\nInterstellar destruction mechanisms.\nThere are 113 total proposed reactions leading to the destruction of . Of these, 39 were tabulated in extensive tables of the chemistry among C, N and O compounds. A review of interstellar ammonia cites the following reactions as the principal dissociation mechanisms:\nwith rate constants of 4.39\u00d710\u22129 and 2.2\u00d710\u22129, respectively. The above equations (, ) run at a rate of 8.8\u00d710\u22129 and 4.4\u00d710\u221213, respectively. These calculations assumed the given rate constants and abundances of []/[] = 10\u22125, []/[] = 2\u00d710\u22125, []/[] = 2\u00d710\u22129, and total densities of \"n\" = 105, typical of cold, dense, molecular clouds. Clearly, between these two primary reactions, equation () is the dominant destruction reaction, with a rate \u224810,000 times faster than equation (). This is due to the relatively high abundance of .\nSingle antenna detections.\nRadio observations of from the Effelsberg 100-m Radio Telescope reveal that the ammonia line is separated into two components\u2013a background ridge and an unresolved core. The background corresponds well with the locations previously detected CO. The 25\u00a0m Chilbolton telescope in England detected radio signatures of ammonia in H II regions, HNH2O masers, H\u2013H objects, and other objects associated with star formation. A comparison of emission line widths indicates that turbulent or systematic velocities do not increase in the central cores of molecular clouds.\nMicrowave radiation from ammonia was observed in several galactic objects including W3(OH), Orion A, W43, W51, and five sources in the galactic centre. The high detection rate indicates that this is a common molecule in the interstellar medium and that high-density regions are common in the galaxy.\nInterferometric studies.\nVLA observations of in seven regions with high-velocity gaseous outflows revealed condensations of less than 0.1\u00a0pc in L1551, S140, and Cepheus A. Three individual condensations were detected in Cepheus A, one of them with a highly elongated shape. They may play an important role in creating the bipolar outflow in the region.\nExtragalactic ammonia was imaged using the VLA in IC 342. The hot gas has temperatures above 70\u00a0K, which was inferred from ammonia line ratios and appears to be closely associated with the innermost portions of the nuclear bar seen in CO. was also monitored by VLA toward a sample of four galactic ultracompact HII regions: G9.62+0.19, G10.47+0.03, G29.96-0.02, and G31.41+0.31. Based upon temperature and density diagnostics, it is concluded that in general such clumps are probably the sites of massive star formation in an early evolutionary phase prior to the development of an ultracompact HII region.\nInfrared detections.\nAbsorption at 2.97 micrometres due to solid ammonia was recorded from interstellar grains in the Becklin\u2013Neugebauer Object and probably in NGC 2264-IR as well. This detection helped explain the physical shape of previously poorly understood and related ice absorption lines.\nA spectrum of the disk of Jupiter was obtained from the Kuiper Airborne Observatory, covering the 100 to 300\u00a0cm\u22121 spectral range. Analysis of the spectrum provides information on global mean properties of ammonia gas and an ammonia ice haze.\nA total of 149 dark cloud positions were surveyed for evidence of 'dense cores' by using the (J,K) = (1,1) rotating inversion line of NH3. In general, the cores are not spherically shaped, with aspect ratios ranging from 1.1 to 4.4. It is also found that cores with stars have broader lines than cores without stars.\nAmmonia has been detected in the Draco Nebula and in one or possibly two molecular clouds, which are associated with the high-latitude galactic infrared cirrus. The finding is significant because they may represent the birthplaces for the Population I metallicity B-type stars in the galactic halo that could have been borne in the galactic disk.\nObservations of nearby dark clouds.\nBy balancing and stimulated emission with spontaneous emission, it is possible to construct a relation between excitation temperature and density. Moreover, since the transitional levels of ammonia can be approximated by a 2-level system at low temperatures, this calculation is fairly simple. This premise can be applied to dark clouds, regions suspected of having extremely low temperatures and possible sites for future star formation. Detections of ammonia in dark clouds show very narrow linesindicative not only of low temperatures, but also of a low level of inner-cloud turbulence. Line ratio calculations provide a measurement of cloud temperature that is independent of previous CO observations. The ammonia observations were consistent with CO measurements of rotation temperatures of \u224810\u00a0K. With this, densities can be determined, and have been calculated to range between 104 and 105\u00a0cm\u22123 in dark clouds. Mapping of gives typical clouds sizes of 0.1\u00a0pc and masses near 1 solar mass. These cold, dense cores are the sites of future star formation.\nUC HII regions.\nUltra-compact HII regions are among the best tracers of high-mass star formation. The dense material surrounding UCHII regions is likely primarily molecular. Since a complete study of massive star formation necessarily involves the cloud from which the star formed, ammonia is an invaluable tool in understanding this surrounding molecular material. Since this molecular material can be spatially resolved, it is possible to constrain the heating/ionising sources, temperatures, masses, and sizes of the regions. Doppler-shifted velocity components allow for the separation of distinct regions of molecular gas that can trace outflows and hot cores originating from forming stars.\nExtragalactic detection.\nAmmonia has been detected in external galaxies, and by simultaneously measuring several lines, it is possible to directly measure the gas temperature in these galaxies. Line ratios imply that gas temperatures are warm (\u224850\u00a0K), originating from dense clouds with sizes of tens of parsecs. This picture is consistent with the picture within our Milky Way galaxyhot dense molecular cores form around newly forming stars embedded in larger clouds of molecular material on the scale of several hundred parsecs (giant molecular clouds; GMCs)."}
{"id": "1366", "revid": "507787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1366", "title": "Amethyst", "text": "Amethyst is a violet variety of quartz. The name comes from the Koine Greek from - , \"not\" and (Ancient Greek) / (Modern Greek), \"intoxicate\", a reference to the belief that the stone protected its owner from drunkenness. Ancient Greeks wore amethyst and carved drinking vessels from it in the belief that it would prevent intoxication.\nAmethyst, a semiprecious stone, is often used in jewelry.\nStructure.\nAmethyst is a violet variety of quartz () and owes its violet color to irradiation, impurities of iron () and in some cases other transition metals, and the presence of other trace elements, which result in complex crystal lattice substitutions.\nThe irradiation causes the iron ions that replace Si in the lattice to lose an electron and form a color center.\nAmethyst is a three-dimensional network of tetrahedra where the silicon atoms are in the center and are surrounded by four oxygen atoms located at the vertices of a tetrahedron. This structure is quite rigid and results in quartz's hardness and resistance to weathering. The hardness of the mineral is the same as quartz, thus making it suitable for use in jewelry.\nHue and tone.\nAmethyst occurs in primary hues from a light lavender or pale violet to a deep purple. Amethyst may exhibit one or both secondary hues, red and blue.\nHigh-quality amethyst can be found in Siberia, Sri Lanka, Brazil, Uruguay, and the Far East. The ideal grade, called \"Deep Siberian\", has a primary purple hue of around 75\u201380%, with 15\u201320% blue and (depending on the light source) red secondary hues.\n\"Rose de France\" is defined by its markedly light shade of the purple, reminiscent of a lavender / lilac shade. These pale colors were once considered undesirable, but have recently become popular due to intensive marketing.\nGreen quartz is sometimes called \"green amethyst\"; the scientific name is prasiolite.\nOther names for green quartz are \"vermarine\" and \"lime citrine\".\nAmethyst frequently shows color zoning, with the most intense color typically found at the crystal terminations. One of gem cutters' tasks is to make a finished product with even color. Sometimes, only a thin layer of a natural, uncut amethyst is violet colored, or the color is very uneven. The uncut gem may have only a small portion that is suitable for faceting.\nThe color of amethyst has been demonstrated to result from substitution by irradiation of trivalent iron (Fe3+) for silicon in the structure, in the presence of trace elements of large ionic radius, and to a certain extent, the amethyst color can naturally result from displacement of transition elements even if the iron concentration is low. Natural amethyst is dichroic in reddish violet and bluish violet, but when heated, turns yellow-orange, yellow-brown, or dark brownish and may resemble citrine, but loses its dichroism, unlike genuine citrine. When partially heated, amethyst can result in ametrine.\nAmethyst can fade in tone if overexposed to light sources, and can be artificially darkened with adequate irradiation. It does not fluoresce under either short-wave or long-wave UV light.\nGeographic distribution.\nAmethyst is found in many locations around the world. Between 2000 and 2010, the greatest production was from Marab\u00e1 and Pau d'Arco, Par\u00e1, and the Paran\u00e1 Basin, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; Sandoval, Santa Cruz, Bolivia; Artigas, Uruguay; Kalomo, Zambia; and Thunder Bay, Ontario. Lesser amounts are found in many other locations in Africa, Brazil, Spain, Argentina, Russia, Afghanistan, South Korea, Mexico, and the United States.\nAmethyst is produced in abundance in the state of Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil where it occurs in large geodes within volcanic rocks.\nMany of the hollow agates of southwestern Brazil and Uruguay contain a crop of amethyst crystals in the interior. Artigas, Uruguay and neighboring Brazilian state Rio Grande do Sul are large world producers, with lesser quantities mined in Minas Gerais and Bahia states.\nThe largest amethyst geode found as of 2007 was the Empress of Uruguay, found in Artigas, Uruguay in 2007. It stands at a height of 3.27\u00a0meters, lies open along its length, and weighs 2.5\u00a0tons.\nAmethyst is also found and mined in South Korea. The large opencast amethyst vein at Maissau, Lower Austria, was historically important, but is no longer included among significant producers. Much fine amethyst comes from Russia, especially near Mursinka in the Ekaterinburg district, where it occurs in drusy cavities in granitic rocks. Amethyst was historically mined in many localities in south India, though these are no longer significant producers. One of the largest global amethyst producers is Zambia in southern Africa, with an annual production around 1000\u00a0tons.\nAmethyst occurs at many localities in the United States. The most important production is at Four Peaks, Gila and Maricopa Counties, Arizona, and Jackson's Crossroads, Wilkes County, Georgia.\nSmaller occurrences have been reported in the Red Feather Lakes, near Fort Collins, Colorado; Amethyst Mountain, Texas; Yellowstone National Park; Delaware County, Pennsylvania; Haywood County, North Carolina; Deer Hill and Stow, Maine, and in the Lake Superior region of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.\nAmethyst is relatively common in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Nova Scotia. The largest amethyst mine in North America is located in Thunder Bay, Ontario.\nAmethyst is the official state gemstone of South Carolina. Several South Carolina amethysts are on display at the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History.\nHistory.\nAmethyst was used as a gemstone by the ancient Egyptians and was largely employed in antiquity for intaglio engraved gems.\nThe ancient Greeks believed amethyst gems could prevent intoxication,\nwhile medieval European soldiers wore amethyst amulets as protection in battle in the belief that amethysts heal people and keep them cool-headed.\nBeads of amethyst were found in Anglo-Saxon graves in England.\nAnglican bishops wear an episcopal ring often set with an amethyst, an allusion to the description of the Apostles as \"not drunk\" at Pentecost in Acts 2:15.\nA large geode, or \"amethyst-grotto\", from near Santa Cruz in southern Brazil was presented at a 1902 exhibition in D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany.\nSynthetic amethyst.\nSynthetic (laboratory-grown) amethyst is produced by a synthesis method called hydrothermal growth, which grows the crystals inside a high-pressure autoclave.\nSynthetic amethyst is made to imitate the best quality amethyst. Its chemical and physical properties are the same as those of natural amethyst, and it cannot be differentiated with absolute certainty without advanced gemmological testing (which is often cost-prohibitive). One test based on \"Brazil law twinning\" (a form of quartz twinning where right- and left-hand quartz structures are combined in a single crystal) can be used to identify most synthetic amethyst rather easily. Synthesizing twinned amethyst is possible, but this type is not available in large quantities in the market.\nTreated amethyst is produced by gamma ray, X-ray, or electron-beam irradiation of clear quartz (rock crystal), which has been first doped with ferric impurities. Exposure to heat partially cancels the irradiation effects and amethyst generally becomes yellow or even green. Much of the citrine, cairngorm, or yellow quartz of jewelry is said to be merely \"burnt amethyst\".\nCultural history.\nAncient Greece.\nThe Greek word may be translated as \"not drunken\", from Greek , \"not\" + , \"intoxicated\". Amethyst was considered to be a strong antidote against drunkenness.\nIn his poem \"L'Amethyste, ou les Amours de Bacchus et d'Amethyste\" (Amethyst or the loves of Bacchus and Amethyste), the French poet R\u00e9my Belleau (1528\u20131577) invented a myth in which Bacchus, the god of intoxication, of wine, and grapes was pursuing a maiden named Amethyste, who refused his affections. Amethyste prayed to the gods to remain chaste, a prayer which the chaste goddess Diana answered, transforming her into a white stone. Humbled by Amethyste's desire to remain chaste, Bacchus poured wine over the stone as an offering, dyeing the crystals purple.\nVariations of the story include that Dionysus had been insulted by a mortal and swore to slay the next mortal who crossed his path, creating fierce tigers to carry out his wrath. The mortal turned out to be a beautiful young woman, Amethystos, who was on her way to pay tribute to Artemis. Her life was spared by Artemis, who transformed the maiden into a statue of pure crystalline quartz to protect her from the brutal claws. Dionysus wept tears of wine in remorse for his action at the sight of the beautiful statue. The god's tears then stained the quartz purple.\nThis myth and its variations are not found in classical sources. However, the goddess Rhea does present Dionysus with an amethyst stone to preserve the wine-drinker's sanity in historical text.\nOther cultural associations.\nTibetans consider amethyst sacred to the Buddha and make prayer beads from it. Amethyst is considered the birthstone of February.\nIn the Middle Ages, it was considered a symbol of royalty and used to decorate English regalia. In the Old World, amethyst was considered one of the cardinal gems, in that it was one of the five gemstones considered precious above all others, until large deposits were found in Brazil.\nValue.\nUntil the 18th century, amethyst was included in the cardinal, or most valuable, gemstones (along with diamond, sapphire, ruby, and emerald), but since the discovery of extensive deposits in locations such as Brazil, it has lost most of its value. It is now considered a semiprecious stone.\nCollectors look for depth of color, possibly with red flashes if cut conventionally.\nAs amethyst is readily available in large structures, the value of the gem is not primarily defined by carat weight. This is different from most gemstones, since the carat weight typically exponentially increases the value of the stone. The biggest factor in the value of amethyst is the color displayed.\nThe highest-grade amethyst (called \"deep Russian\") is exceptionally rare. When one is found, its value is dependent on the demand of collectors; however, the highest-grade sapphires or rubies are still orders of magnitude more expensive than amethyst.\nHandling and care.\nThe most suitable setting for gem amethyst is a prong or a bezel setting. The channel method must be used with caution.\nAmethyst has a good hardness, and handling it with proper care will prevent any damage to the stone. Amethyst is sensitive to strong heat and may lose or change its colour when exposed to prolonged heat or light. Polishing the stone or cleaning it by ultrasonic or steamer must be done with caution."}
{"id": "1367", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1367", "title": "Albertosaurus", "text": "Albertosaurus (; meaning \"Alberta lizard\") is a genus of large tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived in northwestern North America during the early to middle Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous period, about 71\u00a0million years ago. The type species, \"A. sarcophagus\", was apparently restricted in range to the modern-day Canadian province of Alberta, after which the genus is named, although an indeterminate species (\"cf. \"Albertosaurus\" sp.\") has been discovered in the Corral de Enmedio and Packard Formations of Mexico. Scientists disagree on the content of the genus and some recognize \"Gorgosaurus libratus\" as a second species.\nAs a tyrannosaurid, \"Albertosaurus\" was a bipedal predator with short arms, two-fingered hands, and a massive head with dozens of large, sharp teeth, a strong sense of smell, powerful binocular vision, and a bone crushing bite force. It may have even been the apex predator in its local ecosystem. While \"Albertosaurus\" was certainly large for a theropod, it was still much smaller than its larger and more famous relative \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", growing up to in length and weighing .\nSince the first discovery in 1884, fossils of more than 30 individuals have been recovered that provide scientists with a more detailed knowledge of \"Albertosaurus\" anatomy than what is available for most other tyrannosaurids. The discovery of 26 individuals in one particular site provides evidence of gregarious behavior and allows for studies of ontogeny and population biology. These are near impossible with lesser-known dinosaurs because their remains are rarer and more fragmentary when compared to those of \"Albertosaurus\".\nHistory of discovery.\nNaming.\n\"Albertosaurus\" was named by Henry Fairfield Osborn in a one-page note at the end of his 1905 description of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\". Its namesake is Alberta, the Canadian province established the very same year where the first remains were found. The generic name also incorporates the Greek word /\"sauros\", meaning \"lizard\", which is the most common suffix in dinosaur names. The type species is \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\" and the specific name is derived from the Ancient Greek term \u03c3\u03b1\u03c1\u03ba\u03bf\u03c6\u03ac\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 ('), meaning \"flesh-eating\", and having the same etymology as the funeral container with which it shares its name, which is a combination of the Greek words \u03c3\u03b1\u03c1\u03be/' (\"flesh\") and /\"\" (\"to eat\"). More than 30 specimens of all ages are known to science.\nEarly discoveries.\nThe type specimen is a partial skull collected on June 9, 1884, from an outcrop of the Horseshoe Canyon Formation alongside the Red Deer River in Alberta. It was recovered by an expedition of the Geological Survey of Canada, led by the famous geologist Joseph Burr Tyrrell. Due to a lack of specialised equipment, the almost complete skull could only be partially secured. In 1889, Tyrrell's colleague Thomas Chesmer Weston found an incomplete smaller skull associated with some skeletal material at a location nearby. The two skulls were assigned to the preexisting species \"Laelaps incrassatus\" by Edward Drinker Cope in 1892. Although the name \"Laelaps\" was preoccupied by a genus of mite and had been changed to \"Dryptosaurus\" in 1877 by Othniel Charles Marsh, Cope stubbornly refused to recognize the new name created by his archrival. However, Lawrence Lambe used the name \"Dryptosaurus incrassatus\" instead of \"Laelaps incrassatus\" when he described the remains in detail in 1903 and 1904, which was a combination first coined by Oliver Perry Hay in 1902.\nShortly later, Osborn pointed out that \"D. incrassatus\" was based on generic tyrannosaurid teeth, so the two Horseshoe Canyon skulls could not be confidently referred to that species. The Horseshoe Canyon skulls also differed markedly from the remains of \"D. aquilunguis\", type species of \"Dryptosaurus\", so Osborn gave them the new name \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\" in 1905. He did not describe the remains in any great detail, citing Lambe's complete description the year before. Both specimens, the holotype CMN 5600 and the paratype CMN 5601, are stored in the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa. By the early twenty-first century, some concerns had arisen that, due to the damaged state of the holotype, \"Albertosaurus\" might be a \"nomen dubium\" that could only be used for the type specimen itself because other fossils could not reliably be assigned to it. However, in 2010, Thomas Carr established that the holotype, the paratype, and comparable later finds all shared a single common unique trait, or autapomorphy. The possession of an enlarged pneumatic opening in the back rim of the side of the palatine bone proves that \"Albertosaurus\" is a valid taxon.\nDry Island bone bed.\nOn August 11, 1910, American paleontologist Barnum Brown discovered the remains of a large group of \"Albertosaurus\" at another quarry alongside the Red Deer River. Because of the large number of bones and the limited time available, Brown's party did not collect every specimen, but made sure to collect remains from all of the individuals that they could identify in the bone bed. Among the bones deposited in the American Museum of Natural History collections in New York City are seven sets of right metatarsals, along with two isolated toe bones that did not match any of the metatarsals in size. This indicated the presence of at least nine individuals in the quarry. Palaeontologist Philip J. Currie of the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology rediscovered the bonebed in 1997 and resumed fieldwork at the site, which is now located inside Dry Island Buffalo Jump Provincial Park. Further excavation from 1997 to 2005 turned up the remains of 13 more individuals of various ages, including a diminutive two-year-old and a very old individual estimated at over long. None of these individuals are known from complete skeletons and most are represented by remains in both museums. Excavations continued until 2008, when the minimum number of individuals present had been established at 12 (on the basis of preserved elements that occur only once in a skeleton) and at 26 if mirrored elements were counted when differing in size due to ontogeny. A total of 1,128 \"Albertosaurus\" bones had been secured, which is the largest concentration of large theropod fossils known from the Cretaceous.\nOther discoveries.\nIn 1911, Barnum Brown, during the second year of the American Museum of Natural History's operations in Alberta, uncovered a fragmentary partial \"Albertosaurus\" skull at the Red Deer River near Tolman Bridge (specimen AMNH 5222).\nWilliam Parks described a new species in 1928, \"Albertosaurus arctunguis\", based on a partial skeleton lacking a skull that was excavated by Gus Lindblad and Ralph Hornell near the Red Deer River in 1923, but this species has been considered identical to \"A. sarcophagus\" since 1970. Parks' specimen (ROM 807) is housed in the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto.\nNo \"Albertosaurus\" fossils were found from 1926 to 1972, but there has been an increase in findings since then. Apart from the Dry Island bonebed, six more skulls and skeletons have since been discovered in Alberta and are housed in various Canadian museums. Specimen RTMP 81.010.001 was found in 1978 by amateur paleontologist Maurice Stefanuk. RTMP 85.098.001 was found by Stefanuk on June 16, 1985. RTMP 86.64.001 was found in December 1985. RTMP 86.205.001 was found in 1986. RTMP 97.058.0001 was found in 1996 and then there is CMN 11315. Unfortunately, none of these skeletons were found with complete skulls. Fossils have also been reported from the American states of Montana, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Missouri, but they are doubted to be from \"A. sarcophagus\" and may not even belong to the genus \"Albertosaurus\".\nTwo specimens from \"cf \"Albertosaurus\" \".sp\" have been found in Mexico (Packard Formation and Corral de Enmedio Formation).\n\"Gorgosaurus libratus\".\nIn 1913, paleontologist Charles H. Sternberg recovered another tyrannosaurid skeleton from the slightly older Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta. Lawrence Lambe named this dinosaur \"Gorgosaurus libratus\" in 1914. Other specimens were later found in Alberta and the US state of Montana. Finding no significant differences to separate the two taxa (due mostly to a lack of good \"Albertosaurus\" skull material), Dale Russell declared the name \"Gorgosaurus\" a junior synonym of \"Albertosaurus\", which had been named first, and \"G. libratus\" was renamed \"Albertosaurus libratus\" in 1970. A species distinction was maintained because of the age difference. The addition extended the temporal range of the genus \"Albertosaurus\" earlier by several million years and its geographic range southwards by hundreds of kilometres.\nIn 2003, Philip J. Currie, benefiting from much more extensive finds and a general increase in anatomical knowledge of theropods, compared several tyrannosaurid skulls and came to the conclusion that the two species are more distinct than previously thought. As the two species are sister taxa, they are more closely related to each other than to any other species of tyrannosaurid. Recognizing this, Currie nevertheless recommended that \"Albertosaurus\" and \"Gorgosaurus\" be kept as separate genera, as he concluded that they were no more similar than \"Daspletosaurus\" and \"Tyrannosaurus\", which are almost always separated. In addition to this, several albertosaurine specimens have been recovered from Alaska and New Mexico. Currie suggested that the \"Albertosaurus\"-\"Gorgosaurus\" situation may be clarified once these are fully described. Most authors have followed Currie's recommendation, but some have not.\nOther species.\nIn 1930, Anatoly Nikolaevich Riabinin named \"Albertosaurus pericolosus\" based on a tooth from China that probably belonged to \"Tarbosaurus\". In 1932, Friedrich von Huene renamed \"Dryptosaurus incrassatus\", not considered a \"nomen dubium\" by him, to \"Albertosaurus incrassatus\". Because he had identified \"Gorgosaurus\" with \"Albertosaurus\", in 1970, Russell also renamed \"Gorgosaurus sternbergi\" (Matthew &amp; Brown 1922) into \"Albertosaurus sternbergi\" and \"Gorgosaurus lancensis\" (Gilmore 1946) into \"Albertosaurus lancensis\". The former species is today seen as a juvenile form of \"Gorgosaurus libratus\" and the latter is seen as either identical to \"Tyrannosaurus\" or representing a separate genus, \"Nanotyrannus\". In 1988, Gregory S. Paul based \"Albertosaurus megagracilis\" on a small tyrannosaurid skeleton, specimen LACM 28345, from the Hell Creek Formation of Montana. It was renamed \"Dinotyrannus\" in 1995, but is now thought to represent a juvenile \"Tyrannosaurus rex\". Also in 1988, Paul renamed \"Alectrosaurus olseni\" (Gilmore 1933) into \"Albertosaurus olseni\", but this has found no general acceptance. In 1989, \"Gorgosaurus novojilovi\" (Maleev 1955) was renamed by Bryn Mader and Robert Bradley as \"Albertosaurus novojilovi\".\nOn two occasions, species based on valid \"Albertosaurus\" material were reassigned to a different genus, \"Deinodon\". In 1922, William Diller Matthew renamed \"A. sarcophagus\" into \"Deinodon sarcophagus\". In 1939, German paleontologist Oskar Kuhn renamed \"A. arctunguis\" into \"Deinodon arctunguis\".\nDescription.\n\"Albertosaurus\" was a fairly large bipedal predator, but smaller than \"Tarbosaurus\" and \"Tyrannosaurus rex\". Typical \"Albertosaurus\" adults measured up to long and weighed between in body mass.\n\"Albertosaurus\" shared a similar body appearance with all other tyrannosaurids, \"Gorgosaurus\" in particular. Typical for a theropod, \"Albertosaurus\" was bipedal and balanced its large, heavy head and torso with a long, muscular tail. However, tyrannosaurid forelimbs were extremely small for their body size and retained only two functional fingers, the second being longer than the first. The legs were long and ended in a four-toed foot on which the first toe, the hallux, was very short and did not reach the ground. The third toe was longer than the rest. \"Albertosaurus\" may have been able to reach walking speeds of 14\u201321\u00a0km/hour (8\u201313\u00a0mi/hour). At least for the younger individuals, a high running speed is plausible.\nTwo skin impressions from \"Albertosaurus\" are known, and both show scales. One patch was found associated with some gastralic ribs and the impression of a long, unknown bone, indicating that the patch is from the belly. The scales are pebbly and gradually become larger and somewhat hexagonal in shape. Also preserved are two larger feature scales, placed 4.5\u00a0cm apart from each other, making \"Albertosaurus\", along with \"Carnotaurus\", the only known theropods with preserved feature scales. Another skin impression is from an unknown part of the body. These scales are small, diamond-shaped, and arranged in rows.\nSkull and teeth.\nThe massive skull of \"Albertosaurus\", which was perched on a muscular, short, S-shaped neck, was about long in the largest adults. Wide openings in the skull, called fenestrae, provided space for muscle attachment sites and sensory organs that reduced its overall weight. Its long jaws contained, both sides combined, 58 or more banana-shaped teeth. Larger tyrannosaurids possessed fewer teeth, but \"Gorgosaurus\" had 62. Unlike most theropods, \"Albertosaurus\" and other tyrannosaurids were heterodont, with teeth of different forms depending on their position in the mouth. The premaxillary teeth at the tip of the upper jaw, four per side, were much smaller than the rest, more closely packed, and D-shaped in cross section. Like with \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", the maxillary (cheek) teeth of \"Albertosaurus\" were adapted in general form to resist lateral forces exerted by a struggling prey animal. The bite force of \"Albertosaurus\" was less formidable, however, with the maximum force, by the back teeth, reaching 3,413 Newtons. Above the eyes were short bony crests that may have been brightly coloured in life and possibly used, by males in particular, in courtship to attract a mate.\nIn 2001, William Abler observed that \"Albertosaurus\" tooth serrations resemble a crack in the tooth ending in a round void called an ampulla. Tyrannosaurid teeth were used as holdfasts for pulling flesh off a body, so when a tyrannosaur pulled back on a piece of meat, the tension could cause a purely crack-like serration to spread through the tooth. However, the presence of the ampulla distributed these forces over a larger surface area and lessened the risk of damage to the tooth under strain. The presence of incisions ending in voids has parallels in human engineering. Guitar makers use incisions ending in voids to, as Abler describes, \"impart alternating regions of flexibility and rigidity\" to wood that they work on. The use of a drill to create an \"ampulla\" of sorts and prevent the propagation of cracks through material is also used to protect aircraft surfaces. Abler demonstrated that a plexiglass bar with incisions called \"kerfs\" and drilled holes was more than 25% stronger than one with only regularly placed incisions. Unlike tyrannosaurs, more ancient predators, like phytosaurs and \"Dimetrodon\", had no adaptations to prevent the crack-like serrations of their teeth from spreading when subjected to the forces of feeding.\nClassification and systematics.\n\"Albertosaurus\" is a member of the theropod family Tyrannosauridae, specifically the subfamily Albertosaurinae. Its closest relative is the slightly older \"Gorgosaurus libratus\" (sometimes called \"Albertosaurus libratus\"; see below). These two species are the only described albertosaurines, but other undescribed species may exist. Thomas Holtz found \"Appalachiosaurus\" to be an albertosaurine in 2004, but his more recent unpublished work places it as a basal eotyrannosaurian just outside of Tyrannosauridae, in agreement with other authors.\nThe other major subfamily of tyrannosaurids is Tyrannosaurinae, which includes members like \"Daspletosaurus\", \"Tarbosaurus\", and \"Tyrannosaurus\". Compared with the more robust tyrannosaurines, albertosaurines had slender builds, with proportionately smaller skulls and longer bones of the lower legs (tibia) and feet (metatarsals and phalanges).\nBelow is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen \"et al.\" in 2013.\nPalaeobiology.\nGrowth pattern.\nMost age categories of \"Albertosaurus\" are represented in the fossil record. Using bone histology, the age of an individual animal at the time of death can often be determined, allowing growth rates to be estimated and compared with other species. The youngest known \"Albertosaurus\" is a two-year-old discovered in the Dry Island bonebed, which would have weighed about 50 kilograms (110\u00a0lb) and measured slightly more than long. The specimen from the same quarry is 28 years old, the oldest and largest one known. When specimens of intermediate age and size are plotted on a graph, an \"S\"-shaped growth curve results, with the most rapid growth occurring in a four-year period ending around the sixteenth year of life, a pattern also seen in other tyrannosaurids. The growth rate during this phase was per year, based on an adult weighing 1.3\u00a0tonnes. Other studies have suggested higher adult weights, which would affect the magnitude of the growth rate, but not the overall pattern. Tyrannosaurids similar in size to \"Albertosaurus\" had similar growth rates, although the much larger \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" grew at almost five times this rate ( per year) at its peak. The end of the rapid growth phase suggests the onset of sexual maturity in \"Albertosaurus\", although growth continued at a slower rate throughout the animals' lives. Sexual maturation while still actively growing appears to be a shared trait among small and large dinosaurs, as well as in large mammals like humans and elephants. This pattern of relatively early sexual maturation differs strikingly from the pattern in birds, which delay their sexual maturity until after they have finished growing.\nDuring growth, thickening of the tooth morphology changed so much that, had the association of young and adult skeletons on the Dry Island bonebed not proven that they belonged to the same taxon, the teeth of juveniles would likely have been identified by statistical analysis as those of a different species.\nLife history.\nMost known \"Albertosaurus\" individuals were aged 14 years or older at the time of death. Juvenile animals are rarely fossilized for several reasons, mainly preservation bias, where the smaller bones of younger animals were less likely to be preserved by fossilization than the larger bones of adults, and collection bias, where smaller fossils are less likely to be noticed by collectors in the field. Young \"Albertosaurus\" are relatively large for juvenile animals, but their remains are still rare in the fossil record when compared to adults. It has been suggested that this phenomenon is a consequence of life history, rather than bias, and that fossils of juvenile \"Albertosaurus\" are rare because they simply did not die as often as adults did.\nA hypothesis of \"Albertosaurus\" life history postulates that hatchlings died in large numbers, but have not been preserved in the fossil record because of their small size and fragile construction. After just two years, juveniles were larger than any other predator in the region, aside from adult \"Albertosaurus\", and more fleet-footed than most of their prey animals. This resulted in a dramatic decrease in their mortality rate and a corresponding rarity of fossil remains. Mortality rates doubled at age twelve, perhaps the result of the physiological demands of the rapid growth phase, and then doubled again with the onset of sexual maturity between the ages of fourteen and sixteen. This elevated mortality rate continued throughout adulthood, perhaps due to the high physiological demands of procreation, including stress and injuries received during intraspecific competition for mates and resources, and the eventual, ever-increasing effects of senescence. The higher mortality rate in adults may explain their more common preservation. Very large animals were rare because few individuals survived long enough to attain such size. High infant mortality rates, followed by reduced mortality among juveniles and a sudden increase in mortality after sexual maturity, with very few animals reaching maximum size, is a pattern observed in many modern large mammals, including elephants, African buffalo, and rhinoceros. The same pattern is also seen in other tyrannosaurids. The comparison with modern animals and other tyrannosaurids lends support to this life history hypothesis, but bias in the fossil record may still play a large role, especially since more than two-thirds of all \"Albertosaurus\" specimens are known from the exact same locality.\nPack behaviour.\nThe Dry Island bonebed discovered by Barnum Brown and his crew contains the remains of 26 \"Albertosaurus\", the most individuals found in one locality of any large Cretaceous theropod and the second-most of any large theropod dinosaur behind the \"Allosaurus\" assemblage at the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur Quarry in Utah. The group seems to be composed of one very old adult, eight adults between 17 and 23 years old, seven sub-adults undergoing their rapid growth phases at between 12 and 16 years old, and six juveniles between the ages of 2 and 11 years old that had not yet reached the growth phase.\nThe near-absence of herbivore remains and the similar state of preservation common to the many individuals at the \"Albertosaurus\" bonebed quarry led Currie to conclude that the locality was not a predator trap, such as the La Brea Tar Pits in California, and that all of the preserved animals died at the same time. Currie claims this as evidence of pack behavior. Other scientists are skeptical, observing that the animals may have been driven together by a drought, flood, or other reasons.\nThere is plentiful evidence for gregarious behaviour among herbivorous dinosaurs, including ceratopsians and hadrosaurs. However, only rarely are so many dinosaurian predators found at the same site. Small theropods, like \"Deinonychus\" and \"Coelophysis\", have been found in aggregations, as have larger predators, such as \"Allosaurus\" and \"Mapusaurus\". There is some evidence of gregarious behaviour in other tyrannosaurids as well, as fragmentary remains of smaller individuals were found alongside \"Sue\", the \"Tyrannosaurus\" mounted in the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, and a bonebed in the Two Medicine Formation of Montana contains at least three specimens of \"Daspletosaurus\" preserved alongside several hadrosaurs. These findings may corroborate the evidence for social behaviour in \"Albertosaurus\", although some or all of the above localities may represent temporary or unnatural aggregations. Others have speculated that, instead of social groups, at least some of these finds represent Komodo dragon-like mobbing of carcasses, where aggressive competition leads to some of the predators being killed and even cannibalized. The evidence of cannibalism was later reported in 2024 by Coppock and Currie.\nCurrie has also speculated on the pack-hunting habits of \"Albertosaurus\". The leg proportions of the smaller individuals were comparable to those of ornithomimids, which were probably among the fastest dinosaurs. Younger \"Albertosaurus\" were probably equally fleet-footed or at least faster than their prey. Currie hypothesized that the younger members of the pack may have been responsible for driving their prey towards the adults, who were larger and more powerful, but also slower. Juveniles may also have had different lifestyles than adults, filling predator niches between the enormous adults and the smaller contemporaneous theropods, the largest of which were two orders of magnitude smaller than adult \"Albertosaurus\" in mass. A similar situation is observed in modern Komodo dragons, with hatchlings beginning life as small insectivores before growing to become the dominant predators on their islands. However, as the preservation of behaviour in the fossil record is exceedingly rare, these ideas cannot readily be tested. In 2010, Currie, though still favouring the hunting pack hypothesis, admitted that the concentration could have been brought about by other causes, such as a slowly rising water level during an extended flood.\nPalaeopathology.\nIn 2009, researchers hypothesized that smooth-edged holes found in the fossil jaws of tyrannosaurid dinosaurs, such as \"Albertosaurus\", were caused by a parasite similar to \"Trichomonas gallinae\", which infects birds. They suggested that tyrannosaurids transmitted the infection by biting each other and that the infection impaired their ability to eat.\nIn 2001, Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior. They found that only one of the 319 \"Albertosaurus\" foot bones checked for stress fractures actually had them and none of the four hand bones did. The scientists found that stress fractures were \"significantly\" less common in \"Albertosaurus\" than in the carnosaur \"Allosaurus\". ROM 807, the holotype of \"A. arctunguis\" (now referred to \"A. sarcophagus\"), had a deep hole in the iliac blade, although the describer of the species did not recognize this as pathological. The specimen also contains some exostosis on the fourth left metatarsal. In 1970, two of the five \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\" specimens with humeri were reported by Dale Russel as having pathological damage to them.\nIn 2010, the health of the Dry Island \"Albertosaurus\" assembly was reported upon. Most specimens showed no sign of disease. On three phalanges of the foot, strange bony spurs that consisted of abnormal ossifications of the tendons, so-called enthesophytes, were present, but their cause is unknown. Two ribs and a belly-rib showed signs of breaking and healing. One adult specimen had a left lower jaw showing a puncture wound and both healed and unhealed bite marks. The low number of abnormalities compares favourably with the health condition of a \"Majungasaurus\" population of which it was established, in 2007, that 19% of individuals showed bone pathologies.\nPalaeoecology.\nMost fossils of \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\" are known from the upper Horseshoe Canyon Formation in Alberta. These younger units of this geologic formation date to the early Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous period, about 70 to 68 million years ago. Immediately below this formation is the Bearpaw Shale, a marine formation representing a section of the Western Interior Seaway. The Inland Sea was receding as the climate cooled and sea levels subsided towards the end of the Cretaceous, thus exposing land that had previously been underwater. It was not a smooth process, however, and the seaway would periodically rise to cover parts of the region throughout Horseshoe Canyon before finally receding altogether in the years after. Due to the changing sea levels, many different environments are represented in the Horseshoe Canyon Formation, including offshore and near-shore marine habitats and coastal habitats, such as lagoons, estuaries, and tidal flats. Numerous coal seams represent ancient peat swamps. Like most of the other vertebrate fossils from the formation, \"Albertosaurus\" remains are found in deposits laid down in the deltas and floodplains of large rivers during the later half of Horseshoe Canyon times.\nThe fauna of the Horseshoe Canyon Formation is well-known, as vertebrate fossils, including those of dinosaurs, are very common. Sharks, rays, sturgeons, bowfins, gars, and the gar-like \"Aspidorhynchus\" made up the fish fauna. Mammals included multituberculates and the marsupial \"Didelphodon\". The saltwater plesiosaur \"Leurospondylus\" has been found in marine sediments in the Horseshoe Canyon, while freshwater environments were populated by turtles, \"Champsosaurus\", and crocodilians like \"Leidyosuchus\" and \"Stangerochampsa\". Dinosaurs dominate the fauna, especially hadrosaurs, which make up half of all dinosaurs known. These include the genera \"Edmontosaurus\", \"Saurolophus\", and \"Hypacrosaurus\". Ceratopsians and ornithomimids were also very common, together making up another third of the known fauna. Along with much rarer ankylosaurians and pachycephalosaurs, all of these animals would have been prey for a diverse array of carnivorous theropods, including troodontids, dromaeosaurids, and caenagnathids. Intermingled with the \"Albertosaurus\" remains of the Dry Island bonebed, the bones of the small theropod \"Albertonykus\" were found. Adult \"Albertosaurus\" were the apex predators in their environment, with intermediate niches possibly filled by juvenile \"Albertosaurus\"."}
{"id": "1368", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1368", "title": "Assembly language", "text": "In computer programming, assembly language (alternatively assembler language or symbolic machine code), often referred to simply as assembly and commonly abbreviated as ASM or asm, is any low-level programming language with a very strong correspondence between the instructions in the language and the architecture's machine code instructions. Assembly language usually has one statement per machine instruction (1:1), but constants, comments, assembler directives, symbolic labels of, e.g., memory locations, registers, and macros are generally also supported.\nThe first assembly code in which a language is used to represent machine code instructions is found in Kathleen and Andrew Donald Booth's 1947 work, \"Coding for A.R.C.\". Assembly code is converted into executable machine code by a utility program referred to as an \"assembler\". The term \"assembler\" is generally attributed to Wilkes, Wheeler and Gill in their 1951 book \"The Preparation of Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer\", who, however, used the term to mean \"a program that assembles another program consisting of several sections into a single program\". The conversion process is referred to as \"assembly\", as in \"assembling\" the source code. The computational step when an assembler is processing a program is called \"assembly time\".\nBecause assembly depends on the machine code instructions, each assembly language is specific to a particular computer architecture.\nSometimes there is more than one assembler for the same architecture, and sometimes an assembler is specific to an operating system or to particular operating systems. Most assembly languages do not provide specific syntax for operating system calls, and most assembly languages can be used universally with any operating system, as the language provides access to all the real capabilities of the processor, upon which all system call mechanisms ultimately rest. In contrast to assembly languages, most high-level programming languages are generally portable across multiple architectures but require interpreting or compiling, much more complicated tasks than assembling.\nIn the first decades of computing, it was commonplace for both systems programming and application programming to take place entirely in assembly language. While still irreplaceable for some purposes, the majority of programming is now conducted in higher-level interpreted and compiled languages. In \"No Silver Bullet\", Fred Brooks summarised the effects of the switch away from assembly language programming: \"Surely the most powerful stroke for software productivity, reliability, and simplicity has been the progressive use of high-level languages for programming. Most observers credit that development with at least a factor of five in productivity, and with concomitant gains in reliability, simplicity, and comprehensibility.\"\nToday, it is typical to use small amounts of assembly language code within larger systems implemented in a higher-level language, for performance reasons or to interact directly with hardware in ways unsupported by the higher-level language. For instance, just under 2% of version 4.9 of the Linux kernel source code is written in assembly; more than 97% is written in C.\nAssembly language syntax.\nAssembly language uses a mnemonic to represent, e.g., each low-level machine instruction or opcode, each directive, typically also each architectural register, flag, etc. Some of the mnemonics may be built-in and some user-defined. Many operations require one or more operands in order to form a complete instruction. Most assemblers permit named constants, registers, and labels for program and memory locations, and can calculate expressions for operands. Thus, programmers are freed from tedious repetitive calculations and assembler programs are much more readable than machine code. Depending on the architecture, these elements may also be combined for specific instructions or addressing modes using offsets or other data as well as fixed addresses. Many assemblers offer additional mechanisms to facilitate program development, to control the assembly process, and to aid debugging.\nSome are column oriented, with specific fields in specific columns; this was very common for machines using punched cards in the 1950s and early 1960s. Some assemblers have free-form syntax, with fields separated by delimiters, e.g., punctuation, white space. Some assemblers are hybrid, with, e.g., labels, in a specific column and other fields separated by delimiters; this became more common than column-oriented syntax in the 1960s.\nKey concepts.\nAssembler.\nAn assembler program creates object code by translating combinations of mnemonics and syntax for operations and addressing modes into their numerical equivalents. This representation typically includes an \"operation code\" (\"opcode\") as well as other control bits and data. The assembler also calculates constant expressions and resolves symbolic names for memory locations and other entities. The use of symbolic references is a key feature of assemblers, saving tedious calculations and manual address updates after program modifications. Most assemblers also include macro facilities for performing textual substitution \u2013 e.g., to generate common short sequences of instructions as inline, instead of \"called\" subroutines.\nSome assemblers may also be able to perform some simple types of instruction set-specific optimizations. One concrete example of this may be the ubiquitous x86 assemblers from various vendors. Called jump-sizing, most of them are able to perform jump-instruction replacements (long jumps replaced by short or relative jumps) in any number of passes, on request. Others may even do simple rearrangement or insertion of instructions, such as some assemblers for RISC architectures that can help optimize a sensible instruction scheduling to exploit the CPU pipeline as efficiently as possible.\nAssemblers have been available since the 1950s, as the first step above machine language and before high-level programming languages such as Fortran, Algol, COBOL and Lisp. There have also been several classes of translators and semi-automatic code generators with properties similar to both assembly and high-level languages, with Speedcode as perhaps one of the better-known examples.\nThere may be several assemblers with different syntax for a particular CPU or instruction set architecture. For instance, an instruction to add memory data to a register in a x86-family processor might be codice_1, in original \"Intel syntax\", whereas this would be written codice_2 in the \"AT&amp;T syntax\" used by the GNU Assembler. Despite different appearances, different syntactic forms generally generate the same numeric machine code. A single assembler may also have different modes in order to support variations in syntactic forms as well as their exact semantic interpretations (such as FASM-syntax, TASM-syntax, ideal mode, etc., in the special case of x86 assembly programming).\nNumber of passes.\nThere are two types of assemblers based on how many passes through the source are needed (how many times the assembler reads the source) to produce the object file.\nIn both cases, the assembler must be able to determine the size of each instruction on the initial passes in order to calculate the addresses of subsequent symbols. This means that if the size of an operation referring to an operand defined later depends on the type or distance of the operand, the assembler will make a pessimistic estimate when first encountering the operation, and if necessary, pad it with one or more\n\"no-operation\" instructions in a later pass or the errata. In an assembler with peephole optimization, addresses may be recalculated between passes to allow replacing pessimistic code with code tailored to the exact distance from the target.\nThe original reason for the use of one-pass assemblers was memory size and speed of assembly \u2013 often a second pass would require storing the symbol table in memory (to handle forward references), rewinding and rereading the program source on tape, or rereading a deck of cards or punched paper tape. Later computers with much larger memories (especially disc storage), had the space to perform all necessary processing without such re-reading. The advantage of the multi-pass assembler is that the absence of errata makes the linking process (or the program load if the assembler directly produces executable code) faster.\nExample: in the following code snippet, a one-pass assembler would be able to determine the address of the backward reference BKWD when assembling statement S2, but would not be able to determine the address of the forward reference FWD when assembling the branch statement S1; indeed, FWD may be undefined. A two-pass assembler would determine both addresses in pass 1, so they would be known when generating code in pass 2.\n B \n EQU *\n EQU *\n B \nHigh-level assemblers.\nMore sophisticated high-level assemblers provide language abstractions such as:\nSee Language design below for more details.\nAssembly language.\nA program written in assembly language consists of a series of mnemonic processor instructions and meta-statements (known variously as declarative operations, directives, pseudo-instructions, pseudo-operations and pseudo-ops), comments and data. Assembly language instructions usually consist of an opcode mnemonic followed by an operand, which might be a list of data, arguments or parameters. Some instructions may be \"implied\", which means the data upon which the instruction operates is implicitly defined by the instruction itself\u2014such an instruction does not take an operand. The resulting statement is translated by an assembler into machine language instructions that can be loaded into memory and executed.\nFor example, the instruction below tells an x86/IA-32 processor to move an immediate 8-bit value into a register. The binary code for this instruction is 10110 followed by a 3-bit identifier for which register to use. The identifier for the \"AL\" register is 000, so the following machine code loads the \"AL\" register with the data 01100001.\n 10110000 01100001\nThis binary computer code can be made more human-readable by expressing it in hexadecimal as follows.\n B0 61\nHere, codice_3 means \"Move a copy of the following value into \"AL\"\", and codice_4 is a hexadecimal representation of the value 01100001, which is 97 in decimal. Assembly language for the 8086 family provides the mnemonic MOV (an abbreviation of \"move\") for instructions such as this, so the machine code above can be written as follows in assembly language, complete with an explanatory comment if required, after the semicolon. This is much easier to read and to remember.\nMOV AL, 61h ; Load AL with 97 decimal (61 hex)\nIn some assembly languages (including this one) the same mnemonic, such as MOV, may be used for a family of related instructions for loading, copying and moving data, whether these are immediate values, values in registers, or memory locations pointed to by values in registers or by immediate (a.k.a. direct) addresses. Other assemblers may use separate opcode mnemonics such as L for \"move memory to register\", ST for \"move register to memory\", LR for \"move register to register\", MVI for \"move immediate operand to memory\", etc.\nIf the same mnemonic is used for different instructions, that means that the mnemonic corresponds to several different binary instruction codes, excluding data (e.g. the codice_5 in this example), depending on the operands that follow the mnemonic. For example, for the x86/IA-32 CPUs, the Intel assembly language syntax codice_6 represents an instruction that moves the contents of register \"AH\" into register \"AL\". The hexadecimal form of this instruction is:\n 88 E0\nThe first byte, 88h, identifies a move between a byte-sized register and either another register or memory, and the second byte, E0h, is encoded (with three bit-fields) to specify that both operands are registers, the source is \"AH\", and the destination is \"AL\".\nIn a case like this where the same mnemonic can represent more than one binary instruction, the assembler determines which instruction to generate by examining the operands. In the first example, the operand codice_5 is a valid hexadecimal numeric constant and is not a valid register name, so only the codice_3 instruction can be applicable. In the second example, the operand codice_9 is a valid register name and not a valid numeric constant (hexadecimal, decimal, octal, or binary), so only the codice_10 instruction can be applicable.\nAssembly languages are always designed so that this sort of lack of ambiguity is universally enforced by their syntax. For example, in the Intel x86 assembly language, a hexadecimal constant must start with a numeral digit, so that the hexadecimal number 'A' (equal to decimal ten) would be written as codice_11 or codice_12, not codice_9, specifically so that it cannot appear to be the name of register \"AH\". (The same rule also prevents ambiguity with the names of registers \"BH\", \"CH\", and \"DH\", as well as with any user-defined symbol that ends with the letter \"H\" and otherwise contains only characters that are hexadecimal digits, such as the word \"BEACH\".)\nReturning to the original example, while the x86 opcode 10110000 (codice_3) copies an 8-bit value into the \"AL\" register, 10110001 (codice_15) moves it into \"CL\" and 10110010 (codice_16) does so into \"DL\". Assembly language examples for these follow.\nMOV AL, 1h ; Load AL with immediate value 1\nMOV CL, 2h ; Load CL with immediate value 2\nMOV DL, 3h ; Load DL with immediate value 3\nThe syntax of MOV can also be more complex as the following examples show.\nMOV EAX, [EBX] ; Move the 4 bytes in memory at the address contained in EBX into EAX\nMOV [ESI+EAX], CL ; Move the contents of CL into the byte at address ESI+EAX\nMOV DS, DX ; Move the contents of DX into segment register DS\nIn each case, the MOV mnemonic is translated directly into one of the opcodes 88-8C, 8E, A0-A3, B0-BF, C6 or C7 by an assembler, and the programmer normally does not have to know or remember which.\nTransforming assembly language into machine code is the job of an assembler, and the reverse can at least partially be achieved by a disassembler. Unlike high-level languages, there is a one-to-one correspondence between many simple assembly statements and machine language instructions. However, in some cases, an assembler may provide \"pseudoinstructions\" (essentially macros) which expand into several machine language instructions to provide commonly needed functionality. For example, for a machine that lacks a \"branch if greater or equal\" instruction, an assembler may provide a pseudoinstruction that expands to the machine's \"set if less than\" and \"branch if zero (on the result of the set instruction)\". Most full-featured assemblers also provide a rich macro language (discussed below) which is used by vendors and programmers to generate more complex code and data sequences. Since the information about pseudoinstructions and macros defined in the assembler environment is not present in the object program, a disassembler cannot reconstruct the macro and pseudoinstruction invocations but can only disassemble the actual machine instructions that the assembler generated from those abstract assembly-language entities. Likewise, since comments in the assembly language source file are ignored by the assembler and have no effect on the object code it generates, a disassembler is always completely unable to recover source comments.\nEach computer architecture has its own machine language. Computers differ in the number and type of operations they support, in the different sizes and numbers of registers, and in the representations of data in storage. While most general-purpose computers are able to carry out essentially the same functionality, the ways they do so differ; the corresponding assembly languages reflect these differences.\nMultiple sets of mnemonics or assembly-language syntax may exist for a single instruction set, typically instantiated in different assembler programs. In these cases, the most popular one is usually that supplied by the CPU manufacturer and used in its documentation.\nTwo examples of CPUs that have two different sets of mnemonics are the Intel 8080 family and the Intel 8086/8088. Because Intel claimed copyright on its assembly language mnemonics (on each page of their documentation published in the 1970s and early 1980s, at least), some companies that independently produced CPUs compatible with Intel instruction sets invented their own mnemonics. The Zilog Z80 CPU, an enhancement of the Intel 8080A, supports all the 8080A instructions plus many more; Zilog invented an entirely new assembly language, not only for the new instructions but also for all of the 8080A instructions. For example, where Intel uses the mnemonics \"MOV\", \"MVI\", \"LDA\", \"STA\", \"LXI\", \"LDAX\", \"STAX\", \"LHLD\", and \"SHLD\" for various data transfer instructions, the Z80 assembly language uses the mnemonic \"LD\" for all of them. A similar case is the NEC V20 and V30 CPUs, enhanced copies of the Intel 8086 and 8088, respectively. Like Zilog with the Z80, NEC invented new mnemonics for all of the 8086 and 8088 instructions, to avoid accusations of infringement of Intel's copyright. (It is questionable whether such copyrights can be valid, and later CPU companies such as AMD and Cyrix republished Intel's x86/IA-32 instruction mnemonics exactly with neither permission nor legal penalty.) It is doubtful whether in practice many people who programmed the V20 and V30 actually wrote in NEC's assembly language rather than Intel's; since any two assembly languages for the same instruction set architecture are isomorphic (somewhat like English and Pig Latin), there is no requirement to use a manufacturer's own published assembly language with that manufacturer's products.\n\"Hello, world!\" on x86 Linux.\nIn 32-bit assembly language for Linux on an x86 processor, \"Hello, world!\" can be printed like this.\nsection .text\n global _start\n_start: \n mov edx,len ; length of string, third argument to write()\n mov ecx,msg ; address of string, second argument to write()\n mov ebx,1 ; file descriptor (standard output), first argument to write()\n mov eax,4 ; system call number for write()\n int 0x80 ; system call trap\n mov ebx,0 ; exit code, first argument to exit()\n mov eax,1 ; system call number for exit()\n int 0x80 ; system call trap\nsection .data\nmsg db 'Hello, world!', 0xa \nlen equ $ - msg\nLanguage design.\nBasic elements.\nThere is a large degree of diversity in the way the authors of assemblers categorize statements and in the nomenclature that they use. In particular, some describe anything other than a machine mnemonic or extended mnemonic as a pseudo-operation (pseudo-op). A typical assembly language consists of 3 types of instruction statements that are used to define program operations:\nOpcode mnemonics and extended mnemonics.\nInstructions (statements) in assembly language are generally very simple, unlike those in high-level languages. Generally, a mnemonic is a symbolic name for a single executable machine language instruction (an opcode), and there is at least one opcode mnemonic defined for each machine language instruction. Each instruction typically consists of an \"operation\" or \"opcode\" plus zero or more \"operands\". Most instructions refer to a single value or a pair of values. Operands can be immediate (value coded in the instruction itself), registers specified in the instruction or implied, or the addresses of data located elsewhere in storage. This is determined by the underlying processor architecture: the assembler merely reflects how this architecture works. \"Extended mnemonics\" are often used to specify a combination of an opcode with a specific operand, e.g., the System/360 assemblers use as an extended mnemonic for with a mask of 15 and (\"NO OPeration\" \u2013 do nothing for one step) for with a mask of 0.\n\"Extended mnemonics\" are often used to support specialized uses of instructions, often for purposes not obvious from the instruction name. For example, many CPU's do not have an explicit NOP instruction, but do have instructions that can be used for the purpose. In 8086 CPUs the instruction is used for , with being a pseudo-opcode to encode the instruction . Some disassemblers recognize this and will decode the instruction as . Similarly, IBM assemblers for System/360 and System/370 use the extended mnemonics and for and with zero masks. For the SPARC architecture, these are known as \"synthetic instructions\".\nSome assemblers also support simple built-in macro-instructions that generate two or more machine instructions. For instance, with some Z80 assemblers the instruction is recognized to generate followed by . These are sometimes known as \"pseudo-opcodes\".\nMnemonics are arbitrary symbols; in 1985 the IEEE published Standard 694 for a uniform set of mnemonics to be used by all assemblers. The standard has since been withdrawn.\nData directives.\nThere are instructions used to define data elements to hold data and variables. They define the type of data, the length and the alignment of data. These instructions can also define whether the data is available to outside programs (programs assembled separately) or only to the program in which the data section is defined. Some assemblers classify these as pseudo-ops.\nAssembly directives.\nAssembly directives, also called pseudo-opcodes, pseudo-operations or pseudo-ops, are commands given to an assembler \"directing it to perform operations other than assembling instructions\". Directives affect how the assembler operates and \"may affect the object code, the symbol table, the listing file, and the values of internal assembler parameters\". Sometimes the term \"pseudo-opcode\" is reserved for directives that generate object code, such as those that generate data.\nThe names of pseudo-ops often start with a dot to distinguish them from machine instructions. Pseudo-ops can make the assembly of the program dependent on parameters input by a programmer, so that one program can be assembled in different ways, perhaps for different applications. Or, a pseudo-op can be used to manipulate presentation of a program to make it easier to read and maintain. Another common use of pseudo-ops is to reserve storage areas for run-time data and optionally initialize their contents to known values.\nSymbolic assemblers let programmers associate arbitrary names (\"labels\" or \"symbols\") with memory locations and various constants. Usually, every constant and variable is given a name so instructions can reference those locations by name, thus promoting self-documenting code. In executable code, the name of each subroutine is associated with its entry point, so any calls to a subroutine can use its name. Inside subroutines, GOTO destinations are given labels. Some assemblers support \"local symbols\" which are often lexically distinct from normal symbols (e.g., the use of \"10$\" as a GOTO destination).\nSome assemblers, such as NASM, provide flexible symbol management, letting programmers manage different namespaces, automatically calculate offsets within data structures, and assign labels that refer to literal values or the result of simple computations performed by the assembler. Labels can also be used to initialize constants and variables with relocatable addresses.\nAssembly languages, like most other computer languages, allow comments to be added to program source code that will be ignored during assembly. Judicious commenting is essential in assembly language programs, as the meaning and purpose of a sequence of binary machine instructions can be difficult to determine. The \"raw\" (uncommented) assembly language generated by compilers or disassemblers is quite difficult to read when changes must be made.\nMacros.\nMany assemblers support \"predefined macros\", and others support \"programmer-defined\" (and repeatedly re-definable) macros involving sequences of text lines in which variables and constants are embedded. The macro definition is most commonly a mixture of assembler statements, e.g., directives, symbolic machine instructions, and templates for assembler statements. This sequence of text lines may include opcodes or directives. Once a macro has been defined its name may be used in place of a mnemonic. When the assembler processes such a statement, it replaces the statement with the text lines associated with that macro, then processes them as if they existed in the source code file (including, in some assemblers, expansion of any macros existing in the replacement text). Macros in this sense date to IBM autocoders of the 1950s.\nMacro assemblers typically have directives to, e.g., define macros, define variables, set variables to the result of an arithmetic, logical or string expression, iterate, conditionally generate code. Some of those directives may be restricted to use within a macro definition, e.g., MEXIT in HLASM, while others may be permitted within open code (outside macro definitions), e.g., AIF and COPY in HLASM.\nIn assembly language, the term \"macro\" represents a more comprehensive concept than it does in some other contexts, such as the pre-processor in the C programming language, where its #define directive typically is used to create short single line macros. Assembler macro instructions, like macros in PL/I and some other languages, can be lengthy \"programs\" by themselves, executed by interpretation by the assembler during assembly.\nSince macros can have 'short' names but expand to several or indeed many lines of code, they can be used to make assembly language programs appear to be far shorter, requiring fewer lines of source code, as with higher level languages. They can also be used to add higher levels of structure to assembly programs, optionally introduce embedded debugging code via parameters and other similar features.\nMacro assemblers often allow macros to take parameters. Some assemblers include quite sophisticated macro languages, incorporating such high-level language elements as optional parameters, symbolic variables, conditionals, string manipulation, and arithmetic operations, all usable during the execution of a given macro, and allowing macros to save context or exchange information. Thus a macro might generate numerous assembly language instructions or data definitions, based on the macro arguments. This could be used to generate record-style data structures or \"unrolled\" loops, for example, or could generate entire algorithms based on complex parameters. For instance, a \"sort\" macro could accept the specification of a complex sort key and generate code crafted for that specific key, not needing the run-time tests that would be required for a general procedure interpreting the specification. An organization using assembly language that has been heavily extended using such a macro suite can be considered to be working in a higher-level language since such programmers are not working with a computer's lowest-level conceptual elements. Underlining this point, macros were used to implement an early virtual machine in SNOBOL4 (1967), which was written in the SNOBOL Implementation Language (SIL), an assembly language for a virtual machine. The target machine would translate this to its native code using a macro assembler. This allowed a high degree of portability for the time.\nMacros were used to customize large scale software systems for specific customers in the mainframe era and were also used by customer personnel to satisfy their employers' needs by making specific versions of manufacturer operating systems. This was done, for example, by systems programmers working with IBM's Conversational Monitor System / Virtual Machine (VM/CMS) and with IBM's \"real time transaction processing\" add-ons, Customer Information Control System CICS, and ACP/TPF, the airline/financial system that began in the 1970s and still runs many large computer reservation systems (CRS) and credit card systems today.\nIt is also possible to use solely the macro processing abilities of an assembler to generate code written in completely different languages, for example, to generate a version of a program in COBOL using a pure macro assembler program containing lines of COBOL code inside assembly time operators instructing the assembler to generate arbitrary code. IBM OS/360 uses macros to perform system generation. The user specifies options by coding a series of assembler macros. Assembling these macros generates a job stream to build the system, including job control language and utility control statements.\nThis is because, as was realized in the 1960s, the concept of \"macro processing\" is independent of the concept of \"assembly\", the former being in modern terms more word processing, text processing, than generating object code. The concept of macro processing appeared, and appears, in the C programming language, which supports \"preprocessor instructions\" to set variables, and make conditional tests on their values. Unlike certain previous macro processors inside assemblers, the C preprocessor is not Turing-complete because it lacks the ability to either loop or \"go to\", the latter allowing programs to loop.\nDespite the power of macro processing, it fell into disuse in many high level languages (major exceptions being C, C++ and PL/I) while remaining a perennial for assemblers.\nMacro parameter substitution is strictly by name: at macro processing time, the value of a parameter is textually substituted for its name. The most famous class of bugs resulting was the use of a parameter that itself was an expression and not a simple name when the macro writer expected a name. In the macro:\n foo: macro a\n load a*b\nthe intention was that the caller would provide the name of a variable, and the \"global\" variable or constant b would be used to multiply \"a\". If foo is called with the parameter codice_17, the macro expansion of codice_18 occurs. To avoid any possible ambiguity, users of macro processors can parenthesize formal parameters inside macro definitions, or callers can parenthesize the input parameters.\nSupport for structured programming.\nPackages of macros have been written providing structured programming elements to encode execution flow. The earliest example of this approach was in the Concept-14 macro set, originally proposed by Harlan Mills (March 1970), and implemented by Marvin Kessler at IBM's Federal Systems Division, which provided IF/ELSE/ENDIF and similar control flow blocks for OS/360 assembler programs. This was a way to reduce or eliminate the use of GOTO operations in assembly code, one of the main factors causing spaghetti code in assembly language. This approach was widely accepted in the early 1980s (the latter days of large-scale assembly language use). IBM's High Level Assembler Toolkit includes such a macro package.\nAnother design was A-Natural, a \"stream-oriented\" assembler for 8080/Z80 processors from Whitesmiths Ltd. (developers of the Unix-like Idris operating system, and what was reported to be the first commercial C compiler). The language was classified as an assembler because it worked with raw machine elements such as opcodes, registers, and memory references; but it incorporated an expression syntax to indicate execution order. Parentheses and other special symbols, along with block-oriented structured programming constructs, controlled the sequence of the generated instructions. A-natural was built as the object language of a C compiler, rather than for hand-coding, but its logical syntax won some fans.\nThere has been little apparent demand for more sophisticated assemblers since the decline of large-scale assembly language development. In spite of that, they are still being developed and applied in cases where resource constraints or peculiarities in the target system's architecture prevent the effective use of higher-level languages.\nAssemblers with a strong macro engine allow structured programming via macros, such as the switch macro provided with the Masm32 package (this code is a complete program):\ninclude \\masm32\\include\\masm32rt.inc ; use the Masm32 library\n.code\ndemomain:\n REPEAT 20\n switch rv(nrandom, 9) ; generate a number between 0 and 8\n mov ecx, 7\n case 0\n print \"case 0\"\n case ecx ; in contrast to most other programming languages,\n print \"case 7\" ; the Masm32 switch allows \"variable cases\"\n case 1 .. 3\n .if eax==1\n print \"case 1\"\n .elseif eax==2\n print \"case 2\"\n .else\n print \"cases 1 to 3: other\"\n .endif\n case 4, 6, 8\n print \"cases 4, 6 or 8\"\n default\n mov ebx, 19 ; print 20 stars\n .Repeat\n print \"*\"\n dec ebx\n .Until Sign? ; loop until the sign flag is set\n endsw\n print chr$(13, 10)\n ENDM\n exit\nend demomain\nUse of assembly language.\nWhen the stored-program computer was introduced programs were written in machine code, and loaded into the computer from punched paper tape or toggled directly into memory from console switches. Kathleen Booth \"is credited with inventing assembly language\" based on theoretical work she began in 1947, while working on the ARC2 at Birkbeck, University of London following consultation by Andrew Booth (later her husband) with mathematician John von Neumann and physicist Herman Goldstine at the Institute for Advanced Study.\nIn late 1948, the Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator (EDSAC) had an assembler (named \"initial orders\") integrated into its bootstrap program. It used one-letter mnemonics developed by David Wheeler, who is credited by the IEEE Computer Society as the creator of the first \"assembler\". Reports on the EDSAC introduced the term \"assembly\" for the process of combining fields into an instruction word. SOAP (Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program) was an assembly language for the IBM 650 computer written by Stan Poley in 1955.\nAssembly languages eliminated much of the error-prone, tedious, and time-consuming first-generation programming needed with the earliest computers, freeing programmers from tedium such as remembering numeric codes and calculating addresses. They were once widely used for all sorts of programming. By the late 1950s their use had largely been supplanted by higher-level languages in the search for improved programming productivity. Today, assembly language is still used for direct hardware manipulation, access to specialized processor instructions, or to address critical performance issues. Typical uses are device drivers, low-level embedded systems, and real-time systems (see ).\nNumerous programs were written entirely in assembly language. The Burroughs MCP (1961) was the first computer for which an operating system was not developed entirely in assembly language; it was written in Executive Systems Problem Oriented Language (ESPOL), an Algol dialect. Many commercial applications were written in assembly language as well, including a large amount of the IBM mainframe software developed by large corporations. COBOL, FORTRAN and some PL/I eventually displaced assembly language, although a number of large organizations retained assembly-language application infrastructures well into the 1990s.\nAssembly language was the primary development language for 8-bit home computers such as the Apple II, Atari 8-bit computers, ZX Spectrum, and Commodore 64. Interpreted BASIC on these systems did not offer maximum execution speed and full use of facilities to take full advantage of the available hardware. Assembly language was the default choice for programming 8-bit consoles such as the Atari 2600 and Nintendo Entertainment System.\nKey software for IBM PC compatibles such as MS-DOS, Turbo Pascal, and the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet was written in assembly language. As computer speed grew exponentially, assembly language became a tool for speeding up parts of programs, such as the rendering of \"Doom\", rather than a dominant development language. In the 1990s, assembly language was used to maximise performance from systems such as the Sega Saturn, and as the primary language for arcade hardware using the TMS34010 integrated CPU/GPU such as \"Mortal Kombat\" and \"NBA Jam\".\nCurrent usage.\nThere has been debate over the usefulness and performance of assembly language relative to high-level languages.\nAlthough assembly language has specific niche uses where it is important (see below), there are other tools for optimization.\n, the TIOBE index of programming language popularity ranks assembly language at 11, ahead of Visual Basic, for example. Assembler can be used to optimize for speed or optimize for size. In the case of speed optimization, modern optimizing compilers are claimed to render high-level languages into code that can run as fast as hand-written assembly, despite some counter-examples. The complexity of modern processors and memory sub-systems makes effective optimization increasingly difficult for compilers and assembly programmers alike. Increasing processor performance has meant that most CPUs sit idle most of the time, with delays caused by predictable bottlenecks such as cache misses, I/O operations and paging, making raw code execution speed a non-issue for many programmers.\nThere are still certain computer programming domains in which the use of assembly programming is more common:\nAssembly language is still taught in most computer science and electronic engineering programs. Although few programmers today regularly work with assembly language as a tool, the underlying concepts remain important. Such fundamental topics as binary arithmetic, memory allocation, stack processing, character set encoding, interrupt processing, and compiler design would be hard to study in detail without a grasp of how a computer operates at the hardware level. Since a computer's behaviour is fundamentally defined by its instruction set, the logical way to learn such concepts is to study an assembly language. Most modern computers have similar instruction sets. Therefore, studying a single assembly language is sufficient to learn the basic concepts, recognize situations where the use of assembly language might be appropriate, and to see how efficient executable code can be created from high-level languages."}
{"id": "1369", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1369", "title": "Ambrosia", "text": "In the ancient Greek myths, ambrosia (, ) is the food or drink of the Greek gods, and is often depicted as conferring longevity or immortality upon whoever consumed it. It was brought to the gods in Olympus by doves and served either by Hebe or by Ganymede at the heavenly feast.\nAncient art sometimes depicted ambrosia as distributed by the nymph named Ambrosia, a nurse of Dionysus.\nDefinition.\nAmbrosia is very closely related to the gods' other form of sustenance, \"nectar\". The two terms may not have originally been distinguished; though in Homer's poems nectar is usually the drink and ambrosia the food of the gods; it was with ambrosia that Hera \"cleansed all defilement from her lovely flesh\", and with ambrosia Athena prepared Penelope in her sleep, so that when she appeared for the final time before her suitors, the effects of years had been stripped away, and they were inflamed with passion at the sight of her. On the other hand, in Alcman, nectar is the food, and in Sappho and Anaxandrides, ambrosia is the drink. A character in Aristophanes' \"Knights\" says, \"I dreamed the goddess poured ambrosia over your head\u2014out of a ladle.\" Both descriptions could be correct, as ambrosia could be a liquid considered a food (such as honey).\nThe consumption of ambrosia was typically reserved for divine beings. Upon his assumption into immortality on Olympus, Heracles is given ambrosia by Athena, while the hero Tydeus is denied the same thing when the goddess discovers him eating human brains. In one version of the myth of Tantalus, part of Tantalus' crime is that after tasting ambrosia himself, he attempts to steal some to give to other mortals. Those who consume ambrosia typically have ichor, not blood, in their veins.\nBoth nectar and ambrosia are fragrant, and may be used as perfume: in the \"Odyssey\" Menelaus and his men are disguised as seals in untanned seal skins, \"and the deadly smell of the seal skins vexed us sore; but the goddess saved us; she brought ambrosia and put it under our nostrils.\" Homer speaks of ambrosial raiment, ambrosial locks of hair, even the gods' ambrosial sandals.\nAmong later writers, ambrosia has been so often used with generic meanings of \"delightful liquid\" that such late writers as Athenaeus, Paulus and Dioscurides employ it as a technical term in contexts of cookery, medicine, and botany. Pliny used the term in connection with different plants, as did early herbalists.\nAdditionally, some modern ethnomycologists, such as Danny Staples, identify ambrosia with the hallucinogenic mushroom \"Amanita muscaria\": \"it was the food of the gods, their ambrosia, and nectar was the pressed sap of its juices\", Staples asserts.\nW. H. Roscher thinks that both nectar and ambrosia were kinds of honey, in which case their power of conferring immortality would be due to the supposed healing and cleansing powers of honey, and because fermented honey (mead) preceded wine as an entheogen in the Aegean world; on some Minoan seals, goddesses were represented with bee faces (compare Merope and Melissa).\nEtymology.\nThe concept of an immortality drink is attested in at least two ancient Indo-European languages: Greek and Sanskrit. The Greek \u1f00\u03bc\u03b2\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 (\"ambrosia\") is semantically linked to the Sanskrit (\"am\u1e5bta\") as both words denote a drink or food that gods use to achieve immortality. The two words appear to be derived from the same Indo-European form *\"\u1e47-m\u1e5b-t\u00f3s\", \"un-dying\" (\"n-\": negative prefix from which the prefix \"a-\" in both Greek and Sanskrit are derived; \"m\u1e5b\": zero grade of *\"mer-\", \"to die\"; and \"-to-\": adjectival suffix). A semantically similar etymology exists for nectar, the beverage of the gods (Greek: \u03bd\u03ad\u03ba\u03c4\u03b1\u03c1 \"n\u00e9ktar\") presumed to be a compound of the PIE roots \"*nek-\", \"death\", and \"-*tar\", \"overcoming\".\nAmbrosia (nymph).\nLycurgus, king of Thrace, forbade the cult of Dionysus, whom he drove from Thrace, and attacked the gods' entourage when they celebrated the god. Among them was Ambrosia, who turned herself into a grapevine to hide from his wrath. Dionysus, enraged by the king's actions, drove him mad. In his fit of insanity he killed his son, whom he mistook for a stock of ivy, and then himself."}
{"id": "1370", "revid": "19366016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1370", "title": "Ambrose", "text": "Ambrose of Milan (; 4 April 397), venerated as Saint Ambrose, was a theologian and statesman who served as Bishop of Milan from 374 to 397. He expressed himself prominently as a public figure, fiercely promoting Roman Christianity against Arianism and paganism. He left a substantial collection of writings, of which the best known include the ethical commentary \"De officiis ministrorum\" (377\u2013391), and the exegetical (386\u2013390). His preaching, his actions and his literary works, in addition to his innovative musical hymnography, made him one of the most influential ecclesiastical figures of the 4th century.\nAmbrose was serving as the Roman governor of Aemilia-Liguria in Milan when he was unexpectedly made Bishop of Milan in 374 by popular acclamation. As bishop, he took a firm position against Arianism and attempted to mediate the conflict between the emperors Theodosius I and Magnus Maximus. Tradition credits Ambrose with developing an antiphonal chant, known as Ambrosian chant, and for composing the \"Te Deum\" hymn, though modern scholars now reject both of these attributions. Ambrose's authorship on at least four hymns, including the well-known \"Veni redemptor gentium\", is secure; they form the core of the Ambrosian hymns, which includes others that are sometimes attributed to him. He also had a notable influence on Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430), whom he helped convert to Christianity.\nWestern Christianity identified Ambrose, along with Augustine, Jerome and pope Gregory the Great, as one of the four Great Latin Church Fathers, declared Doctors of the Church in 1298. He is considered a saint by the Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, Anglican Communion, and various Lutheran denominations, and venerated as the patron saint of Milan and beekeepers.\nBackground and career.\nLegends about Ambrose had spread through the empire long before his biography was written, making it difficult for modern historians to understand his true character and fairly place his behaviour within the context of antiquity. Most agree he was the personification of his era. This would make Ambrose a genuinely spiritual man who spoke up and defended his faith against opponents, an aristocrat who retained many of the attitudes and practices of a Roman governor, and also an ascetic who served the poor.\nEarly life.\nAmbrose was born into a Roman Christian family in the year 339. Ambrose himself wrote that he was 53 years old in his letter number 49, which has been dated to 392. He began life in Augusta Treverorum (modern Trier) the capital of the Roman province of Gallia Belgica in what was then northeastern Gaul and is now in the Rhineland-Palatinate in Germany. Scholars disagree on who exactly his father was. His father is sometimes identified with Aurelius Ambrosius, a praetorian prefect of Gaul; but some scholars identify his father as an official named Uranius who received an imperial constitution dated 3 February 339 (addressed in a brief extract from one of the three emperors ruling in 339, Constantine II, Constantius II, or Constans, in the \"Codex Theodosianus\", book XI.5). What does seem certain is that Ambrose was born in Trier and his father was either the praetorian prefect or part of his administration.\nA legend about Ambrose as an infant recounts that a swarm of bees settled on his face while he lay in his cradle, leaving behind a drop of honey. His father is said to have considered this a sign of his future eloquence and honeyed tongue. Bees and beehives often appear in the saint's symbology.\nAmbrose's mother was a woman of intellect and piety. It was probable that she was a member of the Roman family \"Aurelii Symmachi\", which would make Ambrose a cousin of the orator Quintus Aurelius Symmachus. The family had produced one martyr (the virgin Soteris) in its history. Ambrose was the youngest of three children. His siblings were Satyrus, the subject of Ambrose's \"De excessu fratris Satyri\", and Marcellina, who made a profession of virginity sometime between 352 and 355; Pope Liberius himself conferred the veil upon her. Both Ambrose's siblings also became venerated as saints.\nSometime early in the life of Ambrose, his father died. At an unknown later date, his mother left Trier with her three children, and the family moved to Rome. There Ambrose studied literature, law, and rhetoric. He then followed in his father's footsteps and entered public service. Praetorian Prefect Sextus Claudius Petronius Probus first gave him a place as a judicial councillor, and then in about 372 made him governor of the province of Liguria and Emilia, with headquarters in Milan.\nBishop of Milan.\nIn 374 the bishop of Milan, Auxentius, an Arian, died, and the Arians challenged the succession. Ambrose went to the church where the election was to take place to prevent an uproar which seemed probable in this crisis. His address was interrupted by a call, \"Ambrose, bishop!\", which was taken up by the whole assembly.\nAmbrose, though known to be Nicene Christian in belief, was considered acceptable to Arians due to the charity he had shown concerning their beliefs. At first, he energetically refused the office of bishop, for which he felt he was in no way prepared: Ambrose was a relatively new Christian who was not yet baptized nor formally trained in theology. Ambrose fled to a colleague's home, seeking to hide. Upon receiving a letter from the Emperor Gratian praising the appropriateness of Rome appointing individuals worthy of holy positions, Ambrose's host gave him up. Within a week, he was baptized, ordained and duly consecrated as the new bishop of Milan. This was the first time in the West that a member of the upper class of high officials had accepted the office of bishop.\nAs bishop, he immediately adopted an ascetic lifestyle, apportioned his money to the poor, donating all of his land, making only provision for his sister Marcellina. This raised his standing even further; it was his popularity with the people that gave him considerable political leverage throughout his career. Upon the unexpected appointment of Ambrose to the episcopate, his brother Satyrus resigned a prefecture in order to move to Milan, where he took over managing the diocese's temporal affairs.\nArianism.\nArius (died 336) was a Christian priest who around the year 300 asserted that God the Father must have created the Son, indicating that the Son was a lesser being who was not eternal and of a different \"essence\" from God the Father. This Christology, though contrary to tradition, quickly spread through Egypt, Libya and other Roman provinces. Bishops engaged in the dispute, and the people divided into parties, sometimes demonstrating in the streets in support of one side or the other.\nArianism appealed to many high-level leaders and clergy in both the Western and Eastern empires. Although the western Emperor Gratian () supported orthodoxy, his younger half brother Valentinian II, who became his colleague in the empire in 375, adhered to the Arian creed. Ambrose sought to refute Arian propositions theologically, but Ambrose did not sway the young prince's position. In the East, Emperor Theodosius I () likewise professed the Nicene creed; but there were many adherents of Arianism throughout his dominions, especially among the higher clergy.\nIn this state of religious ferment, two leaders of the Arians, bishops Palladius of Ratiaria and Secundianus of Singidunum, confident of numbers, prevailed upon Gratian to call a general council from all parts of the empire. This request appeared so equitable that Gratian complied without hesitation. However, Ambrose feared the consequences and prevailed upon the emperor to have the matter determined by a council of the Western bishops. Accordingly, a synod composed of thirty-two bishops was held at Aquileia in the year 381. Ambrose was elected president and Palladius, being called upon to defend his opinions, declined. A vote was then taken and Palladius and his associate Secundianus were deposed from their episcopal offices.\nAmbrose struggled with Arianism for over half of his term in the episcopate. Ecclesiastical unity was important to the church, but it was no less important to the state, and as a Roman, Ambrose felt strongly about that. Conflict over heresies loomed large in an age of religious ferment comparable to the Reformation of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Orthodox Christianity was determining how to define itself as it faced multiple challenges on both a theological and a practical level, and Ambrose exercised crucial influence at a crucial time.\nImperial relations.\nAmbrose had good relations and varying levels of influence with the Roman emperors Gratian, Valentinian II and Theodosius I, but exactly how much influence, what kind of influence, and in what ways, when, has been debated in the scholarship of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.\nGratian.\nIt has long been convention to see Gratian and Ambrose as having a personal friendship, putting Ambrose in the dominant role of spiritual guide, but modern scholars now find this view hard to support from the sources. The ancient Christian historian Sozomen () is the only ancient source that shows Ambrose and Gratian together in any personal interaction. In that interaction, Sozomen relates that, in the last year of Gratian's reign, Ambrose intruded on Gratian's private hunting party in order to appeal on behalf of a pagan senator sentenced to die. After years of acquaintance, according to professor Neil B. McLynn, this indicates that Ambrose could not take for granted that Gratian would see him, so instead, Ambrose had to resort to such manoeuvrings to make his appeal.\nGratian was personally devout long before meeting Ambrose. Modern scholarship indicates Gratian's religious policies do not evidence capitulation to Ambrose more than they evidence Gratian's own views. Gratian's devotion did lead Ambrose to write a large number of books and letters of theology and spiritual commentary dedicated to the emperor. The sheer volume of these writings and the effusive praise they contain has led many historians to conclude that Gratian was dominated by Ambrose, and it was that dominance that produced Gratian's anti-pagan actions. McLynn asserts that effusive praises were common in everyone's correspondence with the crown. He adds that Gratian's actions were determined by the constraints of the system as much as \"by his own initiatives or Ambrose's influence\".\nMcLynn asserts that the largest influence on Gratian's policy was the profound change in political circumstances produced by the Battle of Adrianople in 378. Gratian had become involved in fighting the Goths the previous year and had been on his way to the Balkans when his uncle and the \"cream of the eastern army\" were destroyed at Adrianople. Gratian withdrew to Sirmium and set up his court there. Several rival groups, including the Arians, sought to secure benefits from the government at Sirmium. In an Arian attempt to undermine Ambrose, whom Gratian had not yet met, Gratian was \"warned\" that Ambrose's faith was suspect. Gratian took steps to investigate by writing to Ambrose and asking him to explain his faith.\nAmbrose and Gratian first met, after this, in 379 during a visit to Milan. The bishop made a good impression on Gratian and his court, which was pervasively Christian and aristocratic \u2013 much like Ambrose himself. The emperor returned to Milan in 380 to find that Ambrose had complied with his request for a statement of his faith \u2013 in two volumes \u2013 known as \"De Fide\": a statement of orthodoxy and of Ambrose' political theology, as well as a polemic against the Arian heresy \u2013 intended for public discussion. The emperor had not asked to be instructed by Ambrose, and in \"De Fide\" Ambrose states this clearly. Nor was he asked to refute the Arians. He was asked to justify his own position, but in the end, he did all three.\nIt seems that by 382 Ambrose had replaced Ausonius to become a major influence in Gratian's court. Ambrose had not yet become the \"conscience\" of kings he would in the later 380s, but he did speak out against reinstating the Altar of Victory. In 382, Gratian was the first to divert public financial subsidies that had previously supported Rome's cults. Before that year, contributions in support of the ancient customs had continued unchallenged by the state.\nValentinian II.\nThe childless Gratian had treated his younger brother Valentinian II like a son. Ambrose, on the other hand, had incurred the lasting enmity of Valentinian II's mother, the Empress Justina, in the winter of 379 by helping to appoint a Nicene bishop in Sirmium. Not long after this, Valentinian II, his mother, and the court left Sirmium; Sirmium had come under Theodosius' control, so they went to Milan which was ruled by Gratian.\nIn 383 Gratian was assassinated at Lyon, in Gaul (France) by Magnus Maximus. Valentinian was twelve years old, and the assassination left his mother, Justina, in a position of something akin to a regent. In 385 (or 386) the emperor Valentinian II and his mother Justina, along with a considerable number of clergy, the laity, and the military, professed Arianism. Conflict between Ambrose and Justina soon followed.\nThe Arians demanded that Valentinian allocate to them two churches in Milan: one in the city (the Basilica of the Apostles), the other in the suburbs (St Victor's). Ambrose refused to surrender the churches. He answered by saying that \"What belongs to God, is outside the emperor's power.\" In this, Ambrose called on an ancient Roman principle: a temple set apart to a god became the property of that god. Ambrose now applied this ancient legal principle to the Christian churches, seeing the bishop, as a divine representative, as guardian of his god's property.\nSubsequently, while Ambrose was performing the Liturgy of the Hours in the basilica, the prefect of the city came to persuade him to give it up to the Arians. Ambrose again refused. Certain deans (officers of the court) were sent to take possession of the basilica by hanging upon it imperial escutcheons. Instead, soldiers from the ranks the emperor had placed around the basilica began pouring into the church, assuring Ambrose of their fidelity. The escutcheons outside the church were removed, and legend says the children tore them to shreds.\nAmbrose refused to surrender the basilica, and sent sharp answers back to his emperor: \"If you demand my person, I am ready to submit: carry me to prison or to death, I will not resist; but I will never betray the church of Christ. I will not call upon the people to succour me; I will die at the foot of the altar rather than desert it. The tumult of the people I will not encourage: but God alone can appease it.\" By Thursday, the emperor gave in, bitterly responding: \"Soon, if Ambrose gives the orders, you will be sending me to him in chains.\"\nIn 386, Justina and Valentinian II received the Arian bishop Auxentius the younger, and Ambrose was again ordered to hand over a church in Milan for Arian usage. Ambrose and his congregation barricaded themselves inside the church, and again the imperial order was rescinded. There was an attempted kidnapping, and another attempt to arrest him and to force him to leave the city. Several accusations were made, but unlike in the case of John Chrysostom, no formal charges were brought. The emperor certainly had the power to do so, and probably did not solely because of Ambrose's popularity with the people and what they might do.\nWhen Magnus Maximus usurped power in Gaul (383) and was considering a descent upon Italy, Valentinian sent Ambrose to dissuade him, and the embassy was successful (384). A second, later embassy was unsuccessful. Magnus Maximus entered Italy (386\u2013387) and Milan was taken. Justina and her son fled, but Ambrose remained and had the plate of the church melted for the relief of the poor.\nTheodosius.\nWhile Ambrose was writing \"De Fide\", Theodosius published his own statement of faith in 381 in an edict establishing Nicene Christianity as the only legitimate version of the Christian faith. There is unanimity amongst scholars that this represents the emperor's own beliefs. The aftermath of the death (378) of Valens (Emperor in the East from 364 to 378) had left many questions for the church unresolved, and Theodosius' edict can be seen as an effort to begin addressing those questions. Theodosius' natural generosity was tempered by his pressing need to establish himself and to publicly assert his personal piety.\nOn 28 February 380, Theodosius issued the Edict of Thessalonica, a decree addressed to the city of Constantinople, determining that only Christians who did not support Arian views were catholic and could have their places of worship officially recognized as \"churches\". The Edict opposed Arianism, and attempted to establish unity in Christianity and to suppress heresy. German ancient historian writes that the Edict of Thessalonica was neither anti-pagan nor antisemitic; it did not declare Christianity to be the official religion of the empire; and it gave no advantage to Christians over other faiths.\nLiebeschuetz and Hill indicate that it was not until after 388, during Theodosius' stay in Milan following the defeat of Maximus in 388, that Theodosius and Ambrose first met. \nAfter the Massacre of Thessalonica in 390, Theodosius made an act of public penance at Ambrose's behest. Ambrose was away from court during the events at Thessalonica, but after being informed of them, he wrote Theodosius a letter. In that still-existing letter, Ambrose presses for a semi-public demonstration of penitence from the emperor, telling him that, as his bishop, he will not give Theodosius communion until it is done. Wolf Liebeschuetz says \"Theodosius duly complied and came to church without his imperial robes, until Christmas, when Ambrose openly admitted him to communion\".\nFormerly, some scholars credited Ambrose with having an undue influence over Emperor Theodosius I, from this period forward, prompting him toward major anti-pagan legislation beginning in February of 391. However, this interpretation has been heavily disputed since the late-twentieth century. McLynn argues that Theodosius's anti-pagan legislation was too limited in scope for it to be of interest to the bishop. The fabled encounter at the door of the cathedral in Milan, with Ambrose as the mitred prelate braced, blocking Theodosius from entering, which has sometimes been seen as evidence of Ambrose' dominance over Theodosius, has been debunked by modern historians as \"a pious fiction\". There was no encounter at the church door. The story is a product of the imagination of Theodoret, a historian of the fifth century who wrote of the events of 390 \"using his own ideology to fill the gaps in the historical record\".\nThe twenty-first-century view is that Ambrose was \"not a power behind the throne\". The two men did not meet each other frequently, and documents that reveal the relationship between the two are less about personal friendship than they are about negotiations between two formidable leaders of the powerful institutions they represent: the Roman State and the Italian Church. Cameron says there is no evidence that Ambrose was a significant influence on the emperor.\nFor centuries after his death, Theodosius was regarded as a champion of Christian orthodoxy who decisively stamped out paganism. This view was recorded by Theodoret, who is recognized as an unreliable historian, in the century following their deaths. Theodosius's predecessors Constantine (), Constantius (), and Valens had all been semi-Arians. Therefore, it fell to the orthodox Theodosius to receive from Christian literary tradition most of the credit for the final triumph of Christianity. Modern scholars see this as an interpretation of history by orthodox Christian writers more than as a representation of actual history. The view of a pious Theodosius submitting meekly to the authority of the church, represented by Ambrose, is part of the myth that evolved within a generation of their deaths.\nLater years and death.\nIn April 393 Arbogast (\"magister militum\" of the West) and his puppet Emperor Eugenius marched into Italy to consolidate their position against Theodosius I and his son, Honorius, now appointed Augustus to govern the western portion of the empire. Arbogast and Eugenius courted Ambrose's support by very obliging letters; but before they arrived at Milan, he had retired to Bologna, where he assisted at the translation of the relics of Saints Vitalis and Agricola. From there he went to Florence, where he remained until Eugenius withdrew from Milan to meet Theodosius in the Battle of the Frigidus in early September 394.\nSoon after acquiring the undisputed possession of the Roman Empire, Theodosius died at Milan in 395, and Ambrose gave the eulogy. Two years later (4 April 397) Ambrose also died. He was succeeded as bishop of Milan by Simplician. Ambrose's body may still be viewed in the church of Saint Ambrogio in Milan, where it has been continuously venerated\u00a0\u2013 along with the bodies identified in his time as being those of Saints Gervase and Protase.\nAmbrose is remembered in the calendar of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church on 7 December, and is also honoured in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 7 December.\nCharacter.\nIn 1994, Neil B. McLynn wrote a complex study of Ambrose that focused on his politics and was intended to \"demonstrate that Ambrose viewed community as a means to acquire personal political power\". Subsequent studies of how Ambrose handled his episcopal responsibilities, his Nicene theology and his dealings with the Arians in his episcopate, his pastoral care, his commitment to community, and his personal asceticism, have mitigated this view. \nAll of Ambrose's writings are works of advocacy for Nicene Christianity, and even his political views and actions were closely related to his religion. He was rarely, if ever, concerned about simply recording what had happened; he did not write to reveal his inner thoughts and struggles; he wrote to advocate for his God. Boniface Ramsey writes that it is difficult \"not to posit a deep spirituality in a man\" who wrote on the mystical meanings of the \"Song of Songs\" and wrote many extraordinary hymns. Despite an abiding spirituality, Ambrose had a generally straightforward manner, and a practical rather than a speculative tendency in his thinking. \"De Officiis\" is a utilitarian guide for his clergy in their daily ministry in the Milanese church rather than \"an intellectual \"tour de force\"\".\nChristian faith in the third century developed the monastic lifestyle which subsequently spread into the rest of Roman society in a general practice of virginity, voluntary poverty and self-denial for religious reasons. This lifestyle was embraced by many new converts, including Ambrose, even though they did not become actual monks.\nThe bishops of this era had heavy administrative responsibilities, and Ambrose was also sometimes occupied with imperial affairs, but he still fulfilled his primary responsibility to care for the well-being of his flock. He preached and celebrated the Eucharist multiple times a week, sometimes daily, and dealt directly with the needs of the poor, as well as widows and orphans, \"virgins\" (nuns), and his own clergy. He replied to letters personally, practised hospitality, and made himself available to the people. \nAmbrose had the ability to maintain good relationships with all kinds of people. Local church practices varied quite a bit from place to place at this time, and as the bishop, Ambrose could have required that everyone adapt to his way of doing things. It was his place to keep the churches as united as possible in both ritual and belief. Instead, he respected local customs, adapting himself to whatever practices prevailed, instructing his mother to do the same. As bishop, Ambrose undertook many different labours in an effort to unite people and \"provide some stability during a period of religious, political, military, and social upheavals and transformations\".\nBrown says Ambrose \"had the makings of a faction fighter\". While he got along well with most people, Ambrose was not averse to conflict and even opposed emperors with a fearlessness born of self-confidence and a clear conscience and not from any belief he would not suffer for his decisions. Having begun his life as a Roman aristocrat and a governor, it is clear that Ambrose retained the attitudes and practices of Roman governance even after becoming a bishop.\nHis acts and writings show he was quite clear about the limits of imperial power over the church's internal affairs including doctrine, moral teaching, and governance. He wrote to Valentinian: \"In matters of faith bishops are the judges of Christian emperors, not emperors of bishops.\" (\"Epistle\" 21.4). He also famously said to an Arian bishop chosen by the emperor, \"The emperor is in the church, not over the church.\" (\"Sermon Against Auxentius\", 36). Ambrose's acts and writings \"created a sort of model which was to remain valid in the Latin West for the relations of the Church and the Christian State. Both powers stood in a basically positive relationship to each other, but the innermost sphere of the Church's life--faith, the moral order, ecclesiastical discipline--remained withdrawn from the State's influence.\"\nAmbrose was also well aware of the limits of his power. At the height of his career as a venerable, respected and well-loved bishop in 396, imperial agents marched into his church, pushing past him and his clergy who had crowded the altar to protect a political suspect from arrest, and dragged the man from the church in front of Ambrose who could do nothing to stop them. \"When it came to the central functions of the Roman state, even the vivid Ambrose was a lightweight\".\nAttitude towards Jews.\nAmbrose is recorded on occasions as taking a hostile attitude towards Jews, for example in 388, when the Emperor Theodosius I was informed that a crowd of Christians had retaliated against the local Jewish community by destroying the synagogue at Callinicum on the Euphrates. The synagogue most probably existed within the fortified town to serve the soldiers stationed there, and Theodosius ordered that the offenders be punished and that the synagogue be rebuilt at the expense of the bishop. Ambrose wrote to the emperor arguing against this, basing his argument on two assertions: first, if the bishop obeyed the order, it would be a betrayal of his faith, and second, if the bishop instead refused to obey the order, he would become a martyr and create a scandal embarrassing the emperor. Ambrose, referring to a prior incident where Magnus Maximus issued an edict censuring Christians in Rome for burning down a Jewish synagogue, warned Theodosius that the people, in turn, exclaimed \"the emperor has become a Jew\", implying that Theodosius would receive the same lack of support from the people. Theodosius rescinded the order concerning the bishop.\nThat was not enough for Ambrose, however, and when Theodosius next visited Milan Ambrose confronted him directly in an effort to get him to drop the entire case. McLynn argues that Ambrose failed to win the emperor's sympathy and was mostly excluded from his counsels thereafter. The Callinicum affair was not an isolated incident. Generally speaking, however, while McLynn says it makes Ambrose look like a bully and a bigot to modern eyes, scholars also agree that Ambrose's attitudes toward the Jews cannot be fairly summarized in one sentence, as not all of Ambrose's attitudes toward Jews were negative.\nFor example, Ambrose makes extensive and appreciative use of the works of a Jew, Philo of Alexandria, in his own writings, treating Philo as one of the \"faithful interpreters of the Scriptures\". Philo was an educated man of some standing and a prolific writer during the era of Second Temple Judaism. Forty\u2013three of his treatises have been preserved, and these by Christians, rather than Jews. Philo became foundational in forming the Christian literary view on the six days of creation through Basil's \"Hexaemeron\". Eusebius, the Cappadocian Fathers, and Didymus the Blind appropriated material from Philo as well, but none did so more than Ambrose. As a result of these extensive references, Philo was accepted into the Christian tradition as an honorary Church Father. \"In fact, one Byzantine catena even refers to him as 'Bishop Philo'. This high regard for Philo even led to a number of legends of his conversion to Christianity, although this assertion stands on very dubious evidence\". Ambrose also used Josephus, Maccabees, and other Jewish sources for his writings. He praises some individual Jews. Ambrose tended to write negatively of all non-Nicenes as if they were all in one category. This served a rhetorical purpose in his writing and should be considered accordingly.\nAttitude towards pagans.\nModern scholarship indicates that paganism was a lesser concern than heresy for Christians in the fourth and fifth centuries, including Ambrose, but it was still a concern. Writings of this period were commonly hostile and often contemptuous toward paganism which Christianity saw as already defeated in Heaven. The great Christian writers of the third to fifth centuries attempted to discredit the continuation of these \"defeated practices\" by searching pagan writings, \"particularly those of Varro, for everything that could be regarded by Christian standards as repulsive and irreligious.\" Ambrose' work reflects this triumphalism.\nThroughout his time in the episcopate, Ambrose was active in his opposition to any state sponsorship of pagan cults. When Gratian ordered the Altar of Victory to be removed, it roused the aristocracy of Rome to send a delegation to the emperor to appeal against the decision, but Pope Damasus I induced Christian senators to petition against it, and Ambrose blocked the delegates from obtaining an audience with the emperor. Under Valentinian II, an effort was made to restore the Altar of Victory to its ancient station in the hall of the Roman Senate and to again provide support for the seven Vestal Virgins. The pagan party was led by the refined senator Quintus Aurelius Symmachus, who used all his prodigious skill and artistry to create a marvellous document full of the \"maiestas populi Romani\". Hans Lietzmann writes that \"Pagans and Christians alike were stirred by the solemn earnestness of an admonition which called all men of goodwill to the aid of a glorious history, to render all worthy honour to a world that was fading away\".\nThen Ambrose wrote to Valentinian asserting that the emperor was a soldier of God \u2013 not simply a personal believer, but one bound by his position to serve the faith; under no circumstances could he agree to something that would promote the worship of idols. Ambrose held up the example of Valentinian's brother, Gratian, reminding Valentinian that the commandment of God must take precedence. The bishop's intervention led to the failure of Symmachus' appeal.\nIn 389, Ambrose stepped in against a pagan senatorial delegation who wished to see the emperor Theodosius I. Although Theodosius refused their requests, he was irritated at the bishop's presumption and refused to see him for several days. Later, Ambrose wrote a letter to the emperor Eugenius complaining that some gifts the latter had bestowed on pagan senators could be used for funding pagan cults.\nTheology.\nAmbrose joins Augustine, Jerome, and Gregory the Great as one of the Latin Doctors of the Church. Theologians compare him with Hilary, who they claim fell short of Ambrose's administrative excellence but demonstrated greater theological ability. He succeeded as a theologian despite his juridical training and his comparatively late handling of biblical and doctrinal subjects.\nAmbrose's intense episcopal consciousness furthered the growing doctrine of the Church and its sacerdotal ministry, while the prevalent asceticism of the day, continuing the Stoic and Ciceronian training of his youth, enabled him to promulgate a lofty standard of Christian ethics. Thus we have the \"De officiis ministrorum\", \"De viduis\", \"De virginitate\" and \"De paenitentia\".\nAmbrose displayed a kind of liturgical flexibility that kept in mind that liturgy was a tool to serve people in worshiping God, and ought not to become a rigid entity that is invariable from place to place. His advice to Augustine of Hippo on this point was to follow local liturgical custom. \"When I am at Rome, I fast on a Saturday; when I am at Milan, I do not. Follow the custom of the church where you are.\" Thus Ambrose refused to be drawn into a false conflict over which particular local church had the \"right\" liturgical form where there was no substantial problem. His advice has remained in the English language as the saying, \"When in Rome, do as the Romans do.\"\nEschatology.\nSome scholars argue that Ambrose was a Christian universalist. It has been noted that Ambrose's theology was significantly influenced by that of Origen and Didymus the Blind, two other early Christian universalists. One quotation cited in favour of this belief is:\nOne could interpret this passage as being another example of the Christian belief in a general resurrection (that both those in Heaven and in Hell undergo a bodily resurrection), or an allusion to purgatory (that some destined for Heaven must first undergo a phase of purification). Some other works by Ambrose could potentially be seen as teaching the mainstream view of salvation. For example: \nThis could be interpreted as something which is not eschatological but rather rhetorical or conditional on the state of repentance. The passage most often cited in support of Ambrose supposed belief in apokatastasis is his commentary on 1 Corinthians 15, it reads:\nOther scholars interpret Ambrose's soteriology to be in agreement with Jerome of Stridon and the anonymous individuals whom Augustine criticized in his treatise \"on faith and works\", who argued that while the unbelievers would experience eternal judgement, all Christians who have believed in Jesus will be reunited to God at some point, even if they have sinned and fallen away.\nGiving to the poor.\nIn \"De Officiis\", the most influential of his surviving works, and one of the most important texts of patristic literature, he reveals his views connecting justice and generosity by asserting these practices are of mutual benefit to the participants. Ambrose draws heavily on Cicero and the biblical book of Genesis for this concept of mutual inter-dependence in society. In the bishop's view, it is concern for one another's interests that binds society together. Ambrose asserts that avarice leads to a breakdown in this mutuality, therefore avarice leads to a breakdown in society itself. In the late 380s, the bishop took the lead in opposing the greed of the elite landowners in Milan by starting a series of pointed sermons directed at his wealthy constituents on the need for the rich to care for the poor.\nSome scholars have suggested Ambrose's endeavours to lead his people as both a Roman and a Christian caused him to strive for what a modern context would describe as a type of communism or socialism. He was not just interested in the church but was also interested in the condition of contemporary Italian society. Ambrose considered the poor not a distinct group of outsiders, but a part of a united people to be stood with in solidarity. Giving to the poor was not to be considered an act of generosity towards the fringes of society but a repayment of resources that God had originally bestowed on everyone equally and that the rich had usurped. He defines justice as providing for the poor whom he describes as our \"brothers and sisters\" because they \"share our common humanity\".\nMariology.\nThe theological treatises of Ambrose of Milan would come to influence Popes Damasus, Siricius and Leo XIII. Central to Ambrose is the virginity of Mary and her role as Mother of God.\nAmbrose viewed celibacy as superior to marriage and saw Mary as the model of virginity.\nAugustine.\nAmbrose studied theology with Simplician, a presbyter of Rome. Using his excellent knowledge of Greek, which was then rare in the West, Ambrose studied the Old Testament and Greek authors like Philo, Origen, Athanasius, and Basil of Caesarea, with whom he was also exchanging letters. Ambrose became a famous rhetorician whom Augustine came to hear speak. Augustine wrote in his \"Confessions\" that Faustus, the Manichean rhetorician, was a more impressive speaker, but the content of Ambrose's sermons began to affect Augustine's faith. Augustine sought guidance from Ambrose and again records in his \"Confessions\" that Ambrose was too busy to answer his questions. In a passage of Augustine's \"Confessions\" in which Augustine wonders why he could not share his burden with Ambrose, he comments: \"Ambrose himself I esteemed a happy man, as the world counted happiness, because great personages held him in honour. Only his celibacy appeared to me a painful burden.\" Simplician regularly met with Augustine, however, and Augustine writes of Simplician's \"fatherly affection\" for him. It was Simplician who introduced Augustine to Christian Neoplatonism. It is commonly understood in the Christian tradition that Ambrose baptized Augustine.\nIn this same passage of Augustine's \"Confessions\" is an anecdote which bears on the history of reading:\nThis is a celebrated passage in modern scholarly discussion. The practice of reading to oneself without vocalizing the text was less common in antiquity than it has since become. In a culture that set a high value on oratory and public performances of all kinds, in which the production of books was very labour-intensive, the majority of the population was illiterate, and where those with the leisure to enjoy literary works also had slaves to read for them, written texts were more likely to be seen as scripts for recitation than as vehicles of silent reflection. However, there is also evidence that silent reading did occur in antiquity and that it was not generally regarded as unusual.\nMusic.\nAmbrose's writings extend past literature and into music, where he was an important innovator in early Christian hymnography. His contributions include the \"successful invention of Christian Latin hymnody\", while the hymnologist Guido Maria Dreves designated him to be \"The Father of church hymnody\". He was not the first to write Latin hymns; the Bishop Hilary of Poitiers had done so a few decades before. However, the hymns of Hilary are thought to have been largely inaccessible because of their complexity and length. Only fragments of hymns from Hilary's \"Liber hymnorum\" exist, making those of Ambrose the earliest extant complete Latin hymns. The assembling of Ambrose's surviving \"oeuvre\" remains controversial; the almost immediate popularity of his style quickly prompted imitations, some which may even date from his lifetime. There are four hymns for which Ambrose's authorship is universally accepted, as they are attributed to him by Augustine:\nEach of these hymns has eight four-line stanzas and is written in strict iambic tetrameter (that is 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02 syllables, each iamb being two syllables). Marked by dignified simplicity, they served as a fruitful model for later times. Scholars such as the theologian Brian P. Dunkle have argued for the authenticity of as many as thirteen other hymns, while the musicologist James McKinnon contends that further attributions could include \"perhaps some ten others\". Ambrose is traditionally credited but not actually known to have composed any of the repertory of Ambrosian chant also known simply as \"antiphonal chant\", a method of chanting where one side of the choir alternately responds to the other. Although Ambrosian chant was named in his honour, no Ambrosian-chant melodies can be attributed to Ambrose. With Augustine, Ambrose was traditionally credited with composing the hymn \"Te Deum\". Since the hymnologist Guido Maria Dreves in 1893, however, scholars have dismissed this attribution.\nWritings.\nSource: All works are originally in Latin. Following each is where it may be found in a standard compilation of Ambrose's writings. His first work was probably \"De paradiso\" (377\u2013378). Most have approximate dates, and works such as \"De Helia et ieiunio\" (377\u2013391), \"Expositio evangelii secundum Lucam\" (377\u2013389) and \"De officiis ministrorum\" (377\u2013391) have been given a wide variety of datings by scholars. His best known work is probably \"De officiis ministrorum\" (377\u2013391), while the (386\u2013390) and \"De obitu Theodosii\" (395) are among his most noted works. In matters of exegesis he is, like Hilary, an Alexandrian. In dogma he follows Basil of Caesarea and other Greek authors, but nevertheless gives a distinctly Western cast to the speculations of which he treats. This is particularly manifest in the weightier emphasis which he lays upon human sin and divine grace, and in the place which he assigns to faith in the individual Christian life. There has been debate on the attribution of some writings: for example \"De mysteriis\" is usually attributed to Ambrose, while the related \"De sacramentis\" is written in a different style with some silent disagreements, so there is less consensus over its author. This latter work was occasionally identified as being by St. Augustine, though this is erroneous.\nEditions.\nThe history of the editions of the works of St. Ambrose is a long one. Erasmus edited them in four tomes at Basle (1527). A valuable Roman edition was brought out in 1580, in five volumes, the result of many years' labour; it was begun by Sixtus V, while yet the monk Felice Peretti. Prefixed to it is the life of St. Ambrose composed by Baronius for his \"Annales Ecclesiastici\". The excellent Maurist edition of du Frische and Le Nourry appeared at Paris (1686\u201390) in two folio volumes; it was twice reprinted at Venice (1748\u201351, and 1781\u201382). The latest edition of the writings of St. Ambrose is that of Paolo Angelo Ballerini (Milan, 1878) in six folio volumes.\nEnglish.\nSeveral of Ambrose's works have recently been published in the bilingual Latin-German \"Fontes Christiani\" series (currently edited by Brepols)."}
{"id": "1371", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1371", "title": "Ambracia", "text": "Ambracia (; , occasionally , \"Ampracia\") was a city of ancient Greece on the site of modern Arta. It was founded by the Corinthians in 625 BC and was situated about from the Ambracian Gulf, on a bend of the navigable river Arachthos (or Aratthus), in the midst of a fertile wooded plain.\nName.\nIt was named after Ambracia, who according to some myths was Augeas daughter, while others describe her as Apollo's granddaughter and the daughter of Melaneus, king of the Dryope.\nAccording to a different story, the town was named after Ambrax, Thesprotus son and Lycaon's grandson.\nHistory.\nAmbracia was founded between 650 and 625 BC by Gorgus, son of the Corinthian tyrant Cypselus, at which time its economy was based on farmlands, fishing, timber for shipbuilding, and the exportation of the produce of Epirus. After the expulsion of Gorgus's son Periander its government developed into a strong democracy. The early policy of Ambracia was determined by its loyalty to Corinth (for which it probably served as an entrepot in the Epirus trade), and its consequent aversion to Corcyra (as Ambracia participated on the Corinthian side at the Battle of Sybota, which took place in 433 BC between the rebellious Corinthian colony of Corcyra (modern Corfu) and Corinth).\nAmbraciot politics featured many frontier disputes with the Amphilochians and Acarnanians. Hence it took a prominent part in the Peloponnesian War until the crushing defeat at Idomene (426), which crippled its resources.\nIn the 4th century BC, it continued its traditional policy but in 338 was besieged by Philip II of Macedon. With the assistance of Corinth and Athens, it escaped complete domination at Philip's hands but was nevertheless forced to accept a Macedonian garrison. In 294 BC, after forty-three years of semi-autonomy under Macedonian suzerainty, Ambracia was given by the son of Cassander to Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, who made it his capital and adorned it with palaces, temples, and theatres. In the wars of Philip V of Macedon and the Epirotes against the Aetolian League (220\u2013205), Ambracia passed from one alliance to the other but ultimately joined the latter confederacy. During the struggle of the Aetolians against Rome, it withstood a stubborn siege, including the first known use of poison gas against the Romans' siege tunnels. There was an ancient book, titled \"Ambrakika\" (\u1f08\u03bc\u03b2\u03c1\u03b1\u03ba\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac), by the writer Athanadas, that detailed the history of Ambracia. No copies of the work survive, but it was referred to by later writers such as Antoninus Liberalis as an authority on the subject.\nAmbracia was captured and plundered by Marcus Fulvius Nobilior in 189 BC, after which it was declared by Rome a \"free city\" and gradually fell into insignificance. The foundation by Augustus of Nicopolis, into which the remaining inhabitants were drafted, left the site desolate. In Byzantine times a new settlement took its place under the name of Arta. Some fragmentary walls of large, well-dressed blocks near this latter town indicate the early prosperity of Ambracia.\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "1372", "revid": "2563820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1372", "title": "Amber", "text": "Amber is fossilized tree resin. Examples of it have been appreciated for its color and natural beauty since the Neolithic times, and worked as a gemstone since antiquity. Amber is used in jewelry and as a healing agent in folk medicine.\nThere are five classes of amber, defined on the basis of their chemical constituents. Because it originates as a soft, sticky tree resin, amber sometimes contains animal and plant material as inclusions. Amber occurring in coal seams is also called resinite, and the term \"ambrite\" is applied to that found specifically within New Zealand coal seams.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"amber\" derives from Arabic via Middle Latin \"ambar\" and Middle French \"ambre\". The word referred to what is now known as \"ambergris\" (\"ambre gris\" or \"gray amber\"), a solid waxy substance derived from the sperm whale. The word, in its sense of \"ambergris,\" was adopted in Middle English in the 14th century.\nIn the Romance languages, the sense of the word was extended to Baltic amber (fossil resin) from as early as the late 13th century. At first called white or yellow amber (\"ambre jaune\"), this meaning was adopted in English by the early 15th century. As the use of ambergris waned, this became the main sense of the word.\nThe two substances (\"yellow amber\" and \"gray amber\") conceivably became associated or confused because they both were found washed up on beaches. Ambergris is less dense than water and floats, whereas amber is too dense to float, though less dense than stone.\nThe classical names for amber, Ancient Greek (\"\u0113lektron\") and one of its Latin names, \"electrum,\" are connected to a term \u1f20\u03bb\u03ad\u03ba\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1 (\"\u0113lekt\u014dr\") meaning \"beaming Sun\". According to myth, when Pha\u00ebton son of Helios (the Sun) was killed, his mourning sisters became poplar trees, and their tears became \"elektron\", amber. The word \"elektron\" gave rise to the words \"electric, electricity\", and their relatives because of amber's ability to bear a charge of static electricity.\nVarietal names.\nA number of regional and varietal names have been applied to ambers over the centuries, including Allingite, Beckerite, Gedanite, Kochenite, Krantzite, and Stantienite.\nHistory.\nTheophrastus discussed amber in the 4th century BCE, as did Pytheas (), whose work \"On the Ocean\" is lost, but was referenced by Pliny, according to whose \"Natural History\":\nEarlier Pliny says that Pytheas refers to a large island\u2014three days' sail from the Scythian coast and called Balcia by Xenophon of Lampsacus (author of a fanciful travel book in Greek)\u2014as \"Basilia\"\u2014a name generally equated with \"Abalus\". Given the presence of amber, the island could have been Heligoland, Zealand, the shores of Gda\u0144sk Bay, the Sambia Peninsula or the Curonian Lagoon, which were historically the richest sources of amber in northern Europe. There were well-established trade routes for amber connecting the Baltic with the Mediterranean (known as the \"Amber Road\"). Pliny states explicitly that the Germans exported amber to Pannonia, from where the Veneti distributed it onwards.\nThe ancient Italic peoples of southern Italy used to work amber; the National Archaeological Museum of Siritide (Museo Archeologico Nazionale della Siritide) at Policoro in the province of Matera (Basilicata) displays important surviving examples. It has been suggested that amber used in antiquity, as at Mycenae and in the prehistory of the Mediterranean, came from deposits in Sicily.\nPliny also cites the opinion of Nicias ( 470\u2013413 BCE), according to whom amber Besides the fanciful explanations according to which amber is \"produced by the Sun\", Pliny cites opinions that are well aware of its origin in tree resin, citing the native Latin name of \"succinum\" (\"s\u016bcinum\", from \"sucus\" \"juice\"). In Book 37, section XI of \"Natural History\", Pliny wrote:\nHe also states that amber is also found in Egypt and India, and he even refers to the electrostatic properties of amber, by saying that \"in Syria the women make the whorls of their spindles of this substance, and give it the name of \"harpax\" [from \u1f01\u03c1\u03c0\u03ac\u03b6\u03c9, \"to drag\"] from the circumstance that it attracts leaves towards it, chaff, and the light fringe of tissues\".\nThe Romans traded for amber from the shores of the southern Baltic at least as far back as the time of Nero.\nAmber has a long history of use in China, with the first written record from 200 BCE. Early in the 19th century, the first reports of amber found in North America came from discoveries in New Jersey along Crosswicks Creek near Trenton, at Camden, and near Woodbury.\nComposition and formation.\nAmber is heterogeneous in composition, but consists of several resinous more or less soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroform, associated with an insoluble bituminous substance. Amber is a macromolecule formed by free radical polymerization of several precursors in the labdane family, for example, communic acid, communol, and biformene. These labdanes are diterpenes (C20H32) and trienes, equipping the organic skeleton with three alkene groups for polymerization. As amber matures over the years, more polymerization takes place as well as isomerization reactions, crosslinking and cyclization.\nMost amber has a hardness between 2.0 and 2.5 on the Mohs scale, a refractive index of 1.5\u20131.6, a specific gravity between 1.06 and 1.10, and a melting point of 250\u2013300\u00a0\u00b0C. Heated above , amber decomposes, yielding an oil of amber, and leaves a black residue which is known as \"amber colophony\", or \"amber pitch\"; when dissolved in oil of turpentine or in linseed oil this forms \"amber varnish\" or \"amber lac\".\nMolecular polymerization, resulting from high pressures and temperatures produced by overlying sediment, transforms the resin first into copal. Sustained heat and pressure drives off terpenes and results in the formation of amber. For this to happen, the resin must be resistant to decay. Many trees produce resin, but in the majority of cases this deposit is broken down by physical and biological processes. Exposure to sunlight, rain, microorganisms, and extreme temperatures tends to disintegrate the resin. For the resin to survive long enough to become amber, it must be resistant to such forces or be produced under conditions that exclude them. Fossil resins from Europe fall into two categories, the Baltic ambers and another that resembles the \"Agathis\" group. Fossil resins from the Americas and Africa are closely related to the modern genus \"Hymenaea\", while Baltic ambers are thought to be fossil resins from plants of the family Sciadopityaceae that once lived in north Europe.\nThe abnormal development of resin in living trees (\"succinosis\") can result in the formation of amber. Impurities are quite often present, especially when the resin has dropped onto the ground, so the material may be useless except for varnish-making. Such impure amber is called \"firniss\". Such inclusion of other substances can cause the amber to have an unexpected color. Pyrites may give a bluish color. \"Bony amber\" owes its cloudy opacity to numerous tiny bubbles inside the resin. However, so-called \"black amber\" is really a kind of jet. In darkly clouded and even opaque amber, inclusions can be imaged using high-energy, high-contrast, high-resolution X-rays.\nExtraction and processing.\nDistribution and mining.\nAmber is globally distributed in or around all continents, mainly in rocks of Cretaceous age or younger. Historically, the coast west of K\u00f6nigsberg in Prussia was the world's leading source of amber. The first mentions of amber deposits there date back to the 12th century. Juodkrant\u0117 in Lithuania was established in the mid-19th century as a mining town of amber. About 90% of the world's extractable amber is still located in that area, which was transferred to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic of the USSR in 1946, becoming the Kaliningrad Oblast.\nPieces of amber torn from the seafloor are cast up by the waves and collected by hand, dredging, or diving. Elsewhere, amber is mined, both in open works and underground galleries. Then nodules of \"blue earth\" have to be removed and an opaque crust must be cleaned off, which can be done in revolving barrels containing sand and water. Erosion removes this crust from sea-worn amber. Dominican amber is mined through bell pitting, which is dangerous because of the risk of tunnel collapse.\nAn important source of amber is Kachin State in northern Myanmar, which has been a major source of amber in China for at least 1,800 years. Contemporary mining of this deposit has attracted attention for unsafe working conditions and its role in funding internal conflict in the country. Amber from the Rivne Oblast of Ukraine, referred to as Rivne amber, is mined illegally by organised crime groups, who deforest the surrounding areas and pump water into the sediments to extract the amber, causing severe environmental deterioration.\nTreatment.\nThe Vienna amber factories, which use pale amber to manufacture pipes and other smoking tools, turn it on a lathe and polish it with whitening and water or with rotten stone and oil. The final luster is given by polishing with flannel.\nWhen gradually heated in an oil bath, amber \"becomes soft and flexible. Two pieces of amber may be united by smearing the surfaces with linseed oil, heating them, and then pressing them together while hot. Cloudy amber may be clarified in an oil bath, as the oil fills the numerous pores that cause the turbidity. Small fragments, formerly thrown away or used only for varnish are now used on a large scale in the formation of \"ambroid\" or \"pressed amber\". The pieces are carefully heated with exclusion of air and then compressed into a uniform mass by intense hydraulic pressure, the softened amber being forced through holes in a metal plate. The product is extensively used for the production of cheap jewelry and articles for smoking. This pressed amber yields brilliant interference colors in polarized light.\"\nAmber has often been imitated by other resins like copal and kauri gum, as well as by celluloid and even glass. Baltic amber is sometimes colored artificially but also called \"true amber\".\nAppearance.\nAmber occurs in a range of different colors. As well as the usual yellow-orange-brown that is associated with the color \"amber\", amber can range from a whitish color through a pale lemon yellow, to brown and almost black. Other uncommon colors include red amber (sometimes known as \"cherry amber\"), green amber, and even blue amber, which is rare and highly sought after.\nYellow amber is a hard fossil resin from evergreen trees, and despite the name it can be translucent, yellow, orange, or brown colored. Known to the Iranians by the Pahlavi compound word kah-ruba (from \"kah\" \"straw\" plus \"rubay\" \"attract, snatch\", referring to its electrical properties), which entered Arabic as kahraba' or kahraba (which later became the Arabic word for electricity, \u0643\u0647\u0631\u0628\u0627\u0621 \"kahrab\u0101\"), it too was called amber in Europe (Old French and Middle English ambre). Found along the southern shore of the Baltic Sea, yellow amber reached the Middle East and western Europe via trade. Its coastal acquisition may have been one reason yellow amber came to be designated by the same term as ambergris. Moreover, like ambergris, the resin could be burned as an incense. The resin's most popular use was, however, for ornamentation\u2014easily cut and polished, it could be transformed into beautiful jewelry. Much of the most highly prized amber is transparent, in contrast to the very common cloudy amber and opaque amber. Opaque amber contains numerous minute bubbles. This kind of amber is known as \"bony amber\".\nAlthough all Dominican amber is fluorescent, the rarest Dominican amber is blue amber. It turns blue in natural sunlight and any other partially or wholly ultraviolet light source. In long-wave UV light it has a very strong reflection, almost white. Only about is found per year, which makes it valuable and expensive.\nSometimes amber retains the form of drops and stalactites, just as it exuded from the ducts and receptacles of the injured trees. It is thought that, in addition to exuding onto the surface of the tree, amber resin also originally flowed into hollow cavities or cracks within trees, thereby leading to the development of large lumps of amber of irregular form.\nClassification.\nAmber can be classified into several forms. Most fundamentally, there are two types of plant resin with the potential for fossilization. Terpenoids, produced by conifers and angiosperms, consist of ring structures formed of isoprene (C5H8) units. Phenolic resins are today only produced by angiosperms, and tend to serve functional uses. The extinct medullosans produced a third type of resin, which is often found as amber within their veins. The composition of resins is highly variable; each species produces a unique blend of chemicals which can be identified by the use of pyrolysis\u2013gas chromatography\u2013mass spectrometry. The overall chemical and structural composition is used to divide ambers into five classes. There is also a separate classification of amber gemstones, according to the way of production.\nClass I.\nThis class is by far the most abundant. It comprises labdatriene carboxylic acids such as communic or ozic acids. It is further split into three sub-classes. Classes Ia and Ib utilize regular labdanoid diterpenes (e.g. communic acid, communol, biformenes), while Ic uses \"enantio\" labdanoids (ozic acid, ozol, \"enantio\" biformenes).\nClass Ia includes \"Succinite\" (= 'normal' Baltic amber) and \"Glessite\". They have a communic acid base, and they also include much succinic acid. Baltic amber yields on dry distillation succinic acid, the proportion varying from about 3% to 8%, and being greatest in the pale opaque or \"bony\" varieties. The aromatic and irritating fumes emitted by burning amber are mainly from this acid. Baltic amber is distinguished by its yield of succinic acid, hence the name \"succinite\". Succinite has a hardness between 2 and 3, which is greater than many other fossil resins. Its specific gravity varies from 1.05 to 1.10. It can be distinguished from other ambers via infrared spectroscopy through a specific carbonyl absorption peak. Infrared spectroscopy can detect the relative age of an amber sample. Succinic acid may not be an original component of amber but rather a degradation product of abietic acid.\nClass Ib ambers are based on communic acid; however, they lack succinic acid.\nClass Ic is mainly based on \"enantio\"-labdatrienonic acids, such as ozic and zanzibaric acids. Its most familiar representative is Dominican amber. which is mostly transparent and often contains a higher number of fossil inclusions. This has enabled the detailed reconstruction of the ecosystem of a long-vanished tropical forest. Resin from the extinct species \"Hymenaea protera\" is the source of Dominican amber and probably of most amber found in the tropics. It is not \"succinite\" but \"retinite\".\nClass II.\nThese ambers are formed from resins with a sesquiterpenoid base, such as cadinene.\nClass III.\nThese ambers are polystyrenes.\nClass IV.\nClass IV is something of a catch-all: its ambers are not polymerized, but mainly consist of cedrene-based sesquiterpenoids.\nClass V.\nClass V resins are considered to be produced by a pine or pine relative. They comprise a mixture of diterpinoid resins and \"n\"-alkyl compounds. Their main variety is \"Highgate copalite\".\nGeological record.\nThe oldest amber recovered dates to the late Carboniferous period (). Its chemical composition makes it difficult to match the amber to its producers \u2013 it is most similar to the resins produced by flowering plants; however, the first flowering plants appeared in the Early Cretaceous, about 200 million years after the oldest amber known to date, and they were not common until the Late Cretaceous. Amber becomes abundant long after the Carboniferous, in the Early Cretaceous, when it is found in association with insects. The oldest amber with arthropod inclusions comes from the Late Triassic (late Carnian 230\u00a0Ma) of Italy, where four microscopic (0.2\u20130.1\u00a0mm) mites, \"Triasacarus,\" \"Ampezzoa, Minyacarus\" and \"Cheirolepidoptus,\" and a poorly preserved nematoceran fly were found in millimetre-sized droplets of amber. The oldest amber with significant numbers of arthropod inclusions comes from Lebanon. This amber, referred to as Lebanese amber, is roughly 125\u2013135\u00a0million years old, is considered of high scientific value, providing evidence of some of the oldest sampled ecosystems.\nIn Lebanon, more than 450 outcrops of Lower Cretaceous amber were discovered by Dany Azar, a Lebanese paleontologist and entomologist. Among these outcrops, 20 have yielded biological inclusions comprising the oldest representatives of several recent families of terrestrial arthropods. Even older Jurassic amber has been found recently in Lebanon as well. Many remarkable insects and spiders were recently discovered in the amber of Jordan including the oldest zorapterans, clerid beetles, umenocoleid roaches, and achiliid planthoppers.\nBurmese amber from the Hukawng Valley in northern Myanmar is the only commercially exploited Cretaceous amber. Uranium\u2013lead dating of zircon crystals associated with the deposit have given an estimated depositional age of approximately 99 million years ago. Over 1,300 species have been described from the amber, with over 300 in 2019 alone.\nBaltic amber is found as irregular nodules in marine glauconitic sand, known as \"blue earth\", occurring in Upper Eocene strata of Sambia in Prussia. It appears to have been partly derived from older Eocene deposits and it occurs also as a derivative phase in later formations, such as glacial drift. Relics of an abundant flora occur as inclusions trapped within the amber while the resin was yet fresh, suggesting relations with the flora of eastern Asia and the southern part of North America. Heinrich G\u00f6ppert named the common amber-yielding pine of the Baltic forests \"Pinites succiniter\", but as the wood does not seem to differ from that of the existing genus it has been also called \"Pinus succinifera\". It is improbable that the production of amber was limited to a single species; and indeed a large number of conifers belonging to different genera are represented in the amber-flora.\nPaleontological significance.\nAmber is a unique preservational mode, preserving otherwise unfossilizable parts of organisms; as such it is helpful in the reconstruction of ecosystems as well as organisms; the chemical composition of the resin, however, is of limited utility in reconstructing the phylogenetic affinity of the resin producer. Amber sometimes contains animals or plant matter that became caught in the resin as it was secreted. Insects, spiders and even their webs, annelids, frogs, crustaceans, bacteria and amoebae, marine microfossils, wood, flowers and fruit, hair, feathers and other small organisms have been recovered in Cretaceous ambers (deposited c. ). There is even an ammonite \"Puzosia (Bhimaites)\" and marine gastropods found in Burmese amber.\nThe preservation of prehistoric organisms in amber forms a key plot point in Michael Crichton's 1990 novel \"Jurassic Park\" and the 1993 movie adaptation by Steven Spielberg. In the story, scientists are able to extract the preserved blood of dinosaurs from prehistoric mosquitoes trapped in amber, from which they genetically clone living dinosaurs. Scientifically this is as yet impossible, since no amber with fossilized mosquitoes has ever yielded preserved blood. Amber is, however, conducive to preserving DNA, since it dehydrates and thus stabilizes organisms trapped inside. One projection in 1999 estimated that DNA trapped in amber could last up to 100\u00a0million years, far beyond most estimates of around 1\u00a0million years in the most ideal conditions, although a later 2013 study was unable to extract DNA from insects trapped in much more recent Holocene copal. In 1938, 12-year-old David Attenborough (brother of Richard who played John Hammond in \"Jurassic Park\") was given a piece of amber containing prehistoric creatures from his adoptive sister; it would be the focus of his 2004 BBC documentary \"The Amber Time Machine.\"\nUse.\nAmber has been used since prehistory (Solutrean) in the manufacture of jewelry and ornaments, and also in folk medicine.\nJewelry.\nAmber has been used as jewelry since the Stone Age, from 13,000 years ago. Amber ornaments have been found in Mycenaean tombs and elsewhere across Europe. To this day it is used in the manufacture of smoking and glassblowing mouthpieces. Amber's place in culture and tradition lends it a tourism value; Palanga Amber Museum is dedicated to the fossilized resin.\nHistorical medicinal uses.\nAmber has long been used in folk medicine for its purported healing properties. Amber and extracts were used from the time of Hippocrates in ancient Greece for a wide variety of treatments through the Middle Ages and up until the early twentieth century. Traditional Chinese medicine uses amber to \"tranquilize the mind\".\nAmber necklaces are a traditional European remedy for colic or teething pain with purported analgesic properties of succinic acid, although there is no evidence that this is an effective remedy or delivery method. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the FDA have warned strongly against their use, as they present both a choking and a strangulation hazard.\nScent of amber and amber perfumery.\nIn ancient China, it was customary to burn amber during large festivities. If amber is heated under the right conditions, oil of amber is produced, and in past times this was combined carefully with nitric acid to create \"artificial musk\" \u2013 a resin with a peculiar musky odor. Although when burned, amber does give off a characteristic \"pinewood\" fragrance, modern products, such as perfume, do not normally use actual amber because fossilized amber produces very little scent. In perfumery, scents referred to as \"amber\" are often created and patented to emulate the opulent golden warmth of the fossil.\nThe scent of amber was originally derived from emulating the scent of ambergris and/or the plant resin labdanum, but since sperm whales are endangered, the scent of amber is now largely derived from labdanum. The term \"amber\" is loosely used to describe a scent that is warm, musky, rich and honey-like, and also somewhat earthy. Benzoin is usually part of the recipe. Vanilla and cloves are sometimes used to enhance the aroma. \"Amber\" perfumes may be created using combinations of labdanum, benzoin resin, copal (a type of tree resin used in incense manufacture), vanilla, Dammara resin and/or synthetic materials.\nIn Arab Muslim tradition, popular scents include amber, jasmine, musk and oud (agarwood).\nImitation substances.\nYoung resins used as imitations:\nPlastics used as imitations:"}
{"id": "1373", "revid": "46469005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1373", "title": "Amalaric", "text": "Amalaric (; Spanish and Portuguese: \"Amalarico\"; 502\u2013531) was king of the Visigoths from 522 until his assassination. He was a son of king Alaric II and his first wife Theodegotha, daughter of Theodoric the Great.\nBiography.\nWhen Alaric II was killed while fighting Clovis I, king of the Franks, in the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 (507), his kingdom fell into disarray. \"More serious than the destruction of the Gothic army,\" writes Herwig Wolfram, \"than the loss of both Aquitanian provinces and the capital of Toulose, was the death of the king.\" Alaric had made no provision for a successor, and although he had two sons, one was of age but illegitimate and the other, Amalaric, the offspring of a legal marriage but still a child. Amalaric was carried for safety into Spain, which country and Provence were thenceforth ruled by his maternal grandfather, Theodoric the Great, acting through his vice-regent, an Ostrogothic nobleman named Theudis. The older son, Gesalec, was chosen as king but his reign was disastrous. King Theodoric of the Ostrogoths sent an army, led by his sword-bearer Theudis, against Gesalec, ostensibly on behalf of Amalaric; Gesalec fled to Africa. The Ostrogoths then drove back the Franks and their Burgundian allies, regaining possession of \"the south of Novempopulana, Rodez, probably even Albi, and even Toulose\". Following the 511 death of Clovis, Theodoric negotiated a peace with Clovis' successors, securing Visigothic control of the southernmost portion of Gaul for the rest of the existence of their kingdom.\nIn 522, the young Amalaric was proclaimed king, and four years later, on Theodoric's death, he assumed full royal power, although relinquishing Provence to his cousin Athalaric. His kingdom was faced with a Frankish threat from the north; according to Peter Heather, this was his motivation for marrying Chrotilda, the daughter of Clovis. However, this was not successful, for according to Gregory of Tours, Amalaric pressured her to forsake Orthodoxy and convert to Arian Christianity, at one point beating her until she bled; she sent to her brother Childebert I, king of Paris, a towel stained with her own blood. Ian Wood noted that although Gregory provides the fullest information for this period, where it touches Merovingian affairs, he often \"allowed his religious bias to determine his interpretation of the events.\" Peter Heather agrees with Wood's implication in this instance: \"I doubt that this is the full story, but the effects of Frankish intervention are clear enough.\"\nChildebert defeated the Visigothic army and took Narbonne. Amalaric fled south to Barcelona, where according to Isidore of Seville, he was assassinated by his own men. According to Peter Heather, Theodoric's former governor Theudis was implicated in Amalaric's murder, \"and was certainly its prime beneficiary.\" As for Chrotilda, in Gregory's words, she died on the journey home \"by some ill chance\". Childebert had her body brought to Paris where she was buried alongside her father Clovis."}
{"id": "1374", "revid": "1272923700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1374", "title": "Alphorn", "text": "The alphorn (; ; ) is a traditional lip-reed wind instrument originating from the European Alps. It consists of a very long straight wooden natural horn, with a length of , a conical bore and a wooden cup-shaped mouthpiece. Traditionally the alphorn was made in one piece from the trunk of a young pine. Modern alphorns are usually made in three detachable sections for easier transport and handling, carved from blocks of spruce. The alphorn is used by rural communities in the Alps, particularly in Switzerland. Similar wooden horns were used for communication in most mountainous regions of Europe, from the Alps to the Carpathians.\nHistory.\nThe alphorn may have developed from instruments like the , a similarly shaped Etruscan instrument of classical antiquity, although there is little documented evidence of a continuous connection between them. A 2nd century Roman mosaic, found in Bosc\u00e9az near Orbe in Switzerland, depicts a shepherd using a similar straight horn. The use of long signal horns in mountainous areas throughout Europe and Asia may indicate a long history of cultural cross-influences regarding their construction and usage.\nThe first documented use of the German word is in a payment recorded in the 1527 accounts ledger of Saint Urban's Abbey in Pfaffnau. Swiss naturalist Conrad Gessner used the words for the first known detailed description of the alphorn, in his \"De raris et admirandis herbis\" (1555); in his time, the word \"lituus\" was used for several other wind instruments, like the horn, crumhorn, or cornett.\nIn the early 17th century, music scholar Michael Praetorius in his treatise \"Syntagma Musicum\" (1614-1620) depicts an alphorn-like instrument he called a (\"wooden trumpet\"), noting they are used by Vogtlandian and Swiss shepherds.\nFrom the 17th to 19th century, alphorns were used in rural areas of the Alps, for signalling between high pastures across the valleys and to communities on the valley floor. The alphorn sounds can carry for several kilometres, and were even used to collect together dispersed herds. Although use by herdsmen had waned by the early 19th century, a revival of interest in the musical qualities of the instrument followed by the end of the century, and the alphorn became important in Swiss tourism, and inspired Romantic composers such as Beethoven and Gustav Mahler to add alphorn, or traditional alphorn melodies, to their pieces.\nConstruction and qualities.\nThe alphorn is carved from solid softwood, usually pine or spruce. Traditionally, the alphorn maker would find a tree growing on a slope and bent at the base providing the curved shape for the bell. The long trunk would be cut in half longways, the bore hollowed out, then glued and bound back together with outer layers of stripped bark. Modern instruments are made in several sections for more convenient handling and transport, each turned and bored from solid blocks of spruce. An integrated cup-shaped mouthpiece was traditionally carved into the narrow end, while modern instruments have a separate removable mouthpiece carved from hard wood.\nAn alphorn made at Rigi-Kulm, Schwyz, and now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, measures in length and has a straight tube. The Swiss alphorn varies in shape according to the locality, being curved near the bell in the Bernese Oberland.\nThe alphorn is a simple tube with no lateral openings or means of adjusting the pitch, so only the notes of the natural harmonic series are available. As with other natural labrosones, some of the notes do not correspond to the Western equal tempered chromatic scale, particularly the 7th and 11th partials.\nAccomplished alphornists can command a range of nearly three octaves, consisting of the 2nd through the 16th partials. The availability of the higher tones is due in part to the relatively small diameter of the bore of the mouthpiece and tubing in relation to the overall length of the horn.\nThe well-known \"Ranz des Vaches\" (score; audio) is a traditional Swiss melody often heard on the alphorn. The song describes the time of bringing the cows to the high country at milk making time. Rossini introduced the \"Ranz des Vaches\" into his masterpiece \"William Tell\", along with many other melodies scattered throughout the opera in vocal and instrumental parts that are well-suited to the alphorn. Brahms wrote to Clara Schumann that the inspiration for the dramatic entry of the horn in the introduction to the last movement of his First Symphony was an alphorn melody he heard while vacationing in the Rigi area of Switzerland. For Clara's birthday in 1868 Brahms sent her a greeting that was to be sung with the melody.\nRepertoire.\nAmong music composed for the alphorn:"}
{"id": "1376", "revid": "39170300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1376", "title": "Army", "text": "An army, ground force or land force is an armed force that fights primarily on land. In the broadest sense, it is the land-based military branch, service branch or armed service of a nation or country. It may also include aviation assets by possessing an army aviation component. Within a national military force, the word army may also mean a field army.\nIn some countries, such as France and China, the term \"army\", especially in its plural form \"armies\", has the broader meaning of armed forces as a whole, while retaining the colloquial sense of land forces. To differentiate the colloquial army from the formal concept of military force, the term is qualified, for example in France the land force is called , meaning Land Army, and the air and space force is called , meaning Air and Space Army. The naval force, although not using the term \"army\", is also included in the broad sense of the term \"armies\" \u2014 thus the French Navy is an integral component of the collective French Armies (French Armed Forces) under the Ministry of the Armies. A similar pattern is seen in China, with the People's Liberation Army (PLA) being the overall military, the land force being the PLA Ground Force, and so forth for the PLA Air Force, the PLA Navy, and other branches.\nThough by convention, irregular military is understood in contrast to regular armies which grew slowly from personal bodyguards or elite militia. Regular in this case refers to standardized doctrines, uniforms, organizations, etc. Regular military can also refer to full-time status (standing army), versus reserve or part-time personnel. Other distinctions may separate statutory forces (established under laws such as the National Defence Act), from de facto \"non-statutory\" forces such as some guerrilla and revolutionary armies.\nStructure.\nArmies are always divided into various specialties, according to the mission, role, and training of individual units, and sometimes individual soldiers within a unit. \nSome of the groupings common to all armies include the following:\nHistory.\nIndia.\nThe Battle of the Ten Kings, a Hindu Aryan king named Sudas defeated an alliance of ten kings and their supportive chieftains. During the Iron Age, the Maurya and Nanda Empires had one of the largest armies in the world, the peak being approximately over 600,000 Infantry, 30,000 Cavalry, 8,000 War-Chariots and 9,000 War Elephants not including tributary state allies. In the Gupta age, large armies of longbowmen were recruited to fight off invading horse archer armies. Elephants, pikemen, and cavalry were other featured troops.\nChina.\nThe states of China raised armies for at least 1000 years before the Spring and Autumn Annals. By the Warring States period, the crossbow had been perfected enough to become a military secret, with bronze bolts that could pierce any armor. Thus any political power of a state rested on the armies and their organization. China underwent political consolidation of the states of Han (\u97d3), Wei (\u9b4f), Chu (\u695a), Yan (\u71d5), Zhao (\u8d99) and Qi (\u9f4a), until by 221 BCE, Qin Shi Huang (\u79e6\u59cb\u7687\u5e1d), the first emperor of the Qin dynasty, attained absolute power. This first emperor of China could command the creation of a Terracotta Army to guard his tomb in the city of Xi'an (\u897f\u5b89). in addition to a realignment of the Great Wall of China to strengthen his empire against insurrection, invasion and incursion.\nSun Tzu's \"The Art of War\" remains one of China's Seven Military Classics, even though it is two thousand years old. Since no political figure could exist without an army, measures were taken to ensure only the most capable leaders could control the armies. Civil bureaucracies (\u58eb\u5927\u592b) arose to control the productive power of the states, and their military power.\nSparta.\nThe Spartan Army was one of the earliest known professional armies. Boys were sent to a barracks at the age of seven or eight to train for becoming a soldier. At the age of thirty, they were released from the barracks and allowed to marry and have a family. After that, men devoted their lives to war until their retirement at the age of 60. The Spartan Army was largely composed of hoplites, equipped with arms and armor nearly identical to each other. Each hoplite bore the Spartan emblem and a scarlet uniform. The main pieces of this armor were a round shield, a spear and a helmet.\nAncient Rome.\nThe Roman Army had its origins in the citizen army of the Republic, which was staffed by citizens serving mandatory duty for Rome. Conscription remained the main method through which Rome mustered forces until the end of the Republic. The army eventually became a professional organization largely of citizens, who would served continuously for 25 years before being discharged.\nThe Romans were also noted for making use of auxiliary troops, non-Romans who served with the legions and filled roles that the traditional Roman military could not fill effectively, such as light skirmish troops and heavy cavalry. After their service in the army they were made citizens of Rome and then their children were citizens also. They were also given land and money to settle in Rome. In the Late Roman Empire, these auxiliary troops, along with foreign mercenaries, became the core of the Roman Army; moreover, by the time of the Late Roman Empire tribes such as the Visigoths were paid to serve as mercenaries.\nMedieval Europe.\nIn the earliest Middle Ages it was the obligation of every aristocrat to respond to the call to battle with his own equipment, archers, and infantry. This decentralized system was necessary due to the social order of the time, but could lead to motley forces with variable training, equipment and abilities. The more resources the noble had access to, the better his troops would be.\nInitially, the words \"knight\" and \"noble\" were used interchangeably as there was not generally a distinction between them. While the nobility did fight upon horseback, they were also supported by lower class citizens \u2013 and mercenaries and criminals \u2013 whose only purpose was participating in warfare because, most often than not, they held brief employment during their lord's engagement. As the Middle Ages progressed and feudalism developed in a legitimate social and economic system, knights started to develop into their own class with a minor caveat: they were still in debt to their lord. No longer primarily driven by economic need, the newly established vassal class were, instead, driven by fealty and chivalry.\nAs central governments grew in power, a return to the citizen armies of the classical period also began, as central levies of the peasantry began to be the central recruiting tool. England was one of the most centralized states in the Middle Ages, and the armies that fought in the Hundred Years' War were, predominantly, composed of paid professionals.\nIn theory, every Englishman had an obligation to serve for forty days. Forty days was not long enough for a campaign, especially one on the continent.\nThus the scutage was introduced, whereby most Englishmen paid to escape their service and this money was used to create a permanent army. However, almost all high medieval armies in Europe were composed of a great deal of paid core troops, and there was a large mercenary market in Europe from at least the early 12th century.\nAs the Middle Ages progressed in Italy, Italian cities began to rely mostly on mercenaries to do their fighting rather than the militias that had dominated the early and high medieval period in this region. These would be groups of career soldiers who would be paid a set rate. Mercenaries tended to be effective soldiers, especially in combination with standing forces, but in Italy they came to dominate the armies of the city states. This made them considerably less reliable than a standing army. Mercenary-on-mercenary warfare in Italy also led to relatively bloodless campaigns which relied as much on maneuver as on battles.\nIn 1439 the French legislature, known as the Estates General (French: \"\u00e9tats g\u00e9n\u00e9raux\"), passed laws that restricted military recruitment and training to the king alone. There was a new tax to be raised known as the \"taille\" that was to provide funding for a new Royal army. The mercenary companies were given a choice of either joining the Royal army as \"compagnies d'ordonnance\" on a permanent basis, or being hunted down and destroyed if they refused. France gained a total standing army of around 6,000 men, which was sent out to gradually eliminate the remaining mercenaries who insisted on operating on their own. The new standing army had a more disciplined and professional approach to warfare than its predecessors. The reforms of the 1440s, eventually led to the French victory at Castillon in 1453, and the conclusion of the Hundred Years' War. By 1450 the companies were divided into the field army, known as the \"grande ordonnance\" and the garrison force known as the \"petite ordonnance\".\nEarly modern.\nFirst nation states lacked the funds needed to maintain standing forces, so they tended to hire mercenaries to serve in their armies during wartime. Such mercenaries typically formed at the ends of periods of conflict, when men-at-arms were no longer needed by their respective governments.\nThe veteran soldiers thus looked for other forms of employment, often becoming mercenaries. Free Companies would often specialize in forms of combat that required longer periods of training that was not available in the form of a mobilized militia.\nAs late as the 1650s, most troops were mercenaries. However, after the 17th century, most states invested in better disciplined and more politically reliable permanent troops. For a time mercenaries became important as trainers and administrators, but soon these tasks were also taken by the state. The massive size of these armies required a large supporting force of administrators.\nThe newly centralized states were forced to set up vast organized bureaucracies to manage these armies, which some historians argue is the basis of the modern bureaucratic state. The combination of increased taxes and increased centralization of government functions caused a series of revolts across Europe such as the Fronde in France and the English Civil War.\nIn many countries, the resolution of this conflict was the rise of absolute monarchy. Only in England and the Netherlands did representative government evolve as an alternative. From the late 17th century, states learned how to finance wars through long term low interest loans from national banking institutions. The first state to master this process was the Dutch Republic. This transformation in the armies of Europe had great social impact. The defense of the state now rested on the commoners, not on the aristocrats. However, aristocrats continued to monopolize the officer corps of almost all early modern armies, including their high command. Moreover, popular revolts almost always failed unless they had the support and patronage of the noble or gentry classes. The new armies, because of their vast expense, were also dependent on taxation and the commercial classes who also began to demand a greater role in society. The great commercial powers of the Dutch and English matched much larger states in military might.\nAs any man could be quickly trained in the use of a musket, it became far easier to form massive armies. The inaccuracy of the weapons necessitated large groups of massed soldiers. This led to a rapid swelling of the size of armies. For the first time huge masses of the population could enter combat, rather than just the highly skilled professionals.\nIt has been argued that the drawing of men from across the nation into an organized corps helped breed national unity and patriotism, and during this period the modern notion of the nation state was born. However, this would only become apparent after the French Revolutionary Wars. At this time, the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\" and conscription would become the defining paradigm of modern warfare.\nBefore then, however, most national armies were in fact composed of many nationalities. In Spain armies were recruited from all the Spanish European territories including Spain, Italy, Wallonia (Walloon Guards) and Germany. The French recruited some soldiers from Germany, Switzerland as well as from Piedmont. Britain recruited Hessian and Hanovrian troops until the late 18th century. Irish Catholics made careers for themselves in the armies of many Catholic European states.\nPrior to the English Civil War in England, the monarch maintained a personal bodyguard of Yeomen of the Guard and the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms, or \"gentlemen pensioners\", and a few locally raised companies to garrison important places such as Berwick on Tweed or Portsmouth (or Calais before it was recaptured by France in 1558).\nTroops for foreign expeditions were raised upon an \"ad hoc\" basis. Noblemen and professional regular soldiers were commissioned by the monarch to supply troops, raising their quotas by indenture from a variety of sources. On January 26, 1661 Charles II issued the Royal Warrant that created the genesis of what would become the British Army, although the Scottish and English Armies would remain two separate organizations until the unification of England and Scotland in 1707. The small force was represented by only a few regiments.\nAfter the American Revolutionary War the Continental Army was quickly disbanded as part of the Americans' distrust of standing armies, and irregular state militias became the sole ground army of the United States, with the exception of one battery of artillery guarding West Point's arsenal. Then First American Regiment was established in 1784. However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The first of these, the Legion of the United States, was established in 1791.\nUntil 1733 the common soldiers of Prussian Army consisted largely of peasantry recruited or impressed from Brandenburg\u2013Prussia, leading many to flee to neighboring countries. To halt this trend, Frederick William I divided Prussia into regimental cantons. Every youth was required to serve as a soldier in these recruitment districts for three months each year; this met agrarian needs and added extra troops to bolster the regular ranks.\nRussian tsars before Peter I of Russia maintained professional hereditary musketeer corps (streltsy in Russian) that were highly unreliable and undisciplined. In times of war the armed forces were augmented by peasants. Peter I introduced a modern regular army built on German model, but with a new aspect: officers not necessarily from nobility, as talented commoners were given promotions that eventually included a noble title at the attainment of an officer's rank. Conscription of peasants and townspeople was based on quota system, per settlement. Initially it was based on the number of households, later it was based on the population numbers. The term of service in the 18th century was for life. In 1793 it was reduced to 25 years. In 1834 it was reduced to 20 years plus 5 years in reserve and in 1855 to 12 years plus 3 years of reserve.\nThe first Ottoman standing army were Janissaries. They replaced forces that mostly comprised tribal warriors (\"ghazis\") whose loyalty and morale could not always be trusted. The first Janissary units were formed from prisoners of war and slaves, probably as a result of the sultan taking his traditional one-fifth share of his army's treasure they looted in kind rather than cash.\nFrom the 1380s onwards, their ranks were filled under the \"dev\u015firme\" system, where feudal dues were paid by service to the sultan. The \"recruits\" were mostly Christian youths, reminiscent of mamluks.\nChina organized the Manchu people into the Eight Banner system in the early 17th century. Defected Ming armies formed the Green Standard Army. These troops enlisted voluntarily and for long terms of service.\nLate modern.\nConscription allowed the French Republic to form the \"Grande Arm\u00e9e\", what Napoleon Bonaparte called \"the nation in arms\", which successfully battled European professional armies.\nConscription, particularly when the conscripts are being sent to foreign wars that do not directly affect the security of the nation, has historically been highly politically contentious in democracies.\nIn developed nations, the increasing emphasis on technological firepower and better-trained fighting forces, make mass conscription unlikely in the foreseeable future.\nRussia, as well as many other nations, retains mainly a conscript army. There is also a very rare \"citizen army\" as used in Switzerland (see Military of Switzerland).\nField army.\nA particular army can be named or numbered to distinguish it from military land forces in general. For example, the First United States Army and the Army of Northern Virginia. In the British Army it is normal to spell out the ordinal number of an army (e.g. First Army), whereas lower formations use figures (e.g. 1st Division).\nArmies (as well as army groups and theaters) are large formations which vary significantly between armed forces in size, composition, and scope of responsibility.\nIn the Soviet Red Army and the Soviet Air Force, \"Armies\" could vary in size, but were subordinate to an Army Group-sized \"front\" in wartime. In peacetime, a Soviet army was usually subordinate to a military district. Viktor Suvorov's \"Inside the Soviet Army\" describes how Cold War era Soviet military districts were actually composed of a front headquarters and a military district headquarters co-located for administration and deception ('maskirovika') reasons.\nFormations.\nIn many countries, especially in Europe or North America, armies are often subdivided as follows:"}
{"id": "1380", "revid": "4904587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1380", "title": "Alligatoridae", "text": "The family Alligatoridae of crocodylians includes alligators, caimans and their extinct relatives.\nPhylogeny.\nThe superfamily Alligatoroidea includes all crocodilians (fossil and extant) that are more closely related to the American alligator than to either the Nile crocodile or the gharial. This is a stem-based definition for alligators, and is more inclusive than the crown group Alligatoridae. As a crown group, Alligatoridae only includes the last common ancestor of all extant (living) alligators, caimans, and their descendants (living or extinct), whereas Alligatoroidea, as a stem-based group, also includes more basal extinct alligator ancestors that are more closely related to living alligators than to crocodiles or gavialids. When considering only living taxa (neontology), Alligatoroidea and Alligatoridae contain the same species.\nThe simplified cladogram below shows Alligatoridae's relationships to other extant (living) crocodilians.\nAlligatoridae contains eight living species: two alligators within Alligatorinae, and the six caimans of Caimaninae. Phylogenetic studies using molecular DNA consistently resolve their relationships as follows:\nThe below detailed cladogram shows one proposal for the internal relationships within Alligatoridae including fossil species, based on morphological analysis (although the exact alligatoroid phylogeny is still disputed).\nEvolution.\nThe superfamily Alligatoroidea is thought to have split from the crocodile-gharial lineage in the late Cretaceous, about 87 million years ago. \"Leidyosuchus\" of Alberta is among the earliest known genera. Fossil alligatoroids have been found throughout Eurasia as land bridges across both the North Atlantic and the Bering Strait have connected North America to Eurasia during the Cretaceous, Paleogene, and Neogene periods. Alligators and caimans split in North America during the early Tertiary or late Cretaceous (about 53 million to about 65 million years ago) and the latter reached South America by the Paleogene, before the closure of the Isthmus of Panama during the Neogene period. The Chinese alligator split from the American alligator about 33 million years ago and likely descended from a lineage that crossed the Bering land bridge during the Neogene. The modern American alligator is well represented in the fossil record of the Pleistocene. The alligator's full mitochondrial genome was sequenced in the 1990s. The full genome, published in 2014, suggests that the alligator evolved much more slowly than mammals and birds.\nTrue alligators.\nThe lineage including alligators proper (Alligatorinae) occurs in the fluvial deposits of the age of the Upper Chalk in Europe, where they did not die out until the Pliocene age. The true alligators are today represented by two species, \"A. mississippiensis\" in the southeastern United States, which can grow to 15.6\u00a0ft (4.6\u00a0m) and weigh 1000\u00a0lbs(453\u00a0kg), with unverified sizes of up to 19.2\u00a0ft(5.9 m). And the small \"A. sinensis\" in the Yangtze River, China, which grows to an average of 5\u00a0ft (1.5\u00a0m). Their name derives from the Spanish \"el lagarto\", which means \"the lizard\".\nCaimans.\nIn Central and South America, the alligator family is represented by six species of the subfamily Caimaninae, which differ from the alligator by the absence of a bony septum between the nostrils, and having ventral armour composed of overlapping bony scutes, each of which is formed of two parts united by a suture. Besides the three species in \"Caiman\", the smooth-fronted caimans in genus \"Paleosuchus\" and the black caiman in \"Melanosuchus\" are described. Caimans tend to be more agile and crocodile-like in their movements, and have longer, sharper teeth than alligators.\n\"C. crocodilus\", the spectacled caiman, has the widest distribution, from southern Mexico to the northern half of Argentina, and grows to a modest size of about . The largest is the near-threatened \"Melanosuchus niger\", the \"jacar\u00e9-a\u00e7u\" or large or black caiman of the Amazon River basin. Black caimans grow to , with the unverified size of up to . The black caiman and American alligator are the only members of the alligator family that pose the same danger to humans as the larger species of the crocodile family.\nAlthough caimans have not been studied in depth, scientists have learned their mating cycles (previously thought to be spontaneous or year-round) are linked to the rainfall cycles and the river levels, which increases chances of survival for their offspring.\nTaxonomy.\n\u2020 = extinct"}
{"id": "1383", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1383", "title": "Alder", "text": "Alders are trees of the genus Alnus in the birch family Betulaceae. The genus includes about 35 species of monoecious trees and shrubs, a few reaching a large size, distributed throughout the north temperate zone with a few species extending into Central America, as well as the northern and southern Andes.\nDescription.\nWith a few exceptions, alders are deciduous, and the leaves are alternate, simple, and serrated. The flowers are catkins with elongate male catkins on the same plant as shorter female catkins, often before leaves appear; they are mainly wind-pollinated, but also visited by bees to a small extent. These trees differ from the birches (\"Betula\", another genus in the family) in that the female catkins are woody and do not disintegrate at maturity, opening to release the seeds in a similar manner to many conifer cones.\nThe largest species are red alder (\"A. rubra\") on the west coast of North America, and black alder (\"A. glutinosa\"), native to most of Europe and widely introduced elsewhere, both reaching over . By contrast, the widespread \"Alnus alnobetula\" (green alder) is rarely more than a shrub.\nPhylogeny.\nClassification.\nThe genus is divided into three subgenera:\nSubgenus \"Alnus\".\nTrees with stalked shoot buds, male and female catkins produced in autumn (fall) but stay closed over winter, pollinating in late winter or early spring, about 15\u201325 species, including:\nSubgenus \"Clethropsis\".\nTrees or shrubs with stalked shoot buds, male and female catkins produced in autumn (fall) and expanding and pollinating then, three species:\nSubgenus \"Alnobetula\".\nShrubs with shoot buds not stalked, male and female catkins produced in late spring (after leaves appear) and expanding and pollinating then, one to four species:\nSpecies names with uncertain taxonomic status.\nThe status of the following species is unresolved:\nHybrids.\nThe following hybrids have been described:\nThe status of the following hybrids is unresolved:\nFossil record.\nThe oldest fossil pollen that can be identified as \"Alnus\" is from northern Bohemia, dating to the late Paleocene, around 58 million years ago.\nEtymology.\nThe common name \"alder\" evolved from the Old English word \"alor\", which in turn is derived from Proto-Germanic root \"aliso\". The generic name \"Alnus\" is the equivalent Latin name, from whence French \"aulne\" and Spanish \"Alamo\" (Spanish term for \"poplar\").\nEcology.\nAlders are commonly found near streams, rivers, and wetlands. Sometimes where the prevalence of alders is particularly prominent these are called alder carrs. In the Pacific Northwest of North America, the white alder (\"Alnus rhombifolia\") unlike other northwest alders, has an affinity for warm, dry climates, where it grows along watercourses, such as along the lower Columbia River east of the Cascades and the Snake River, including Hells Canyon.\nAlder leaves and sometimes catkins are used as food by numerous butterflies and moths.\n\"A. glutinosa\" and \"A. viridis\" are classed as environmental weeds in New Zealand. Alder leaves and especially the roots are important to the ecosystem because they enrich the soil with nitrogen and other nutrients.\nNitrogen fixation and succession of woodland species.\nAlder is particularly noted for its important symbiotic relationship with \"Frankia alni\", an actinomycete, filamentous, nitrogen-fixing bacterium. This bacterium is found in root nodules, which may be as large as a human fist, with many small lobes, and light brown in colour. The bacterium absorbs nitrogen from the air and makes it available to the tree. Alder, in turn, provides the bacterium with sugars, which it produces through photosynthesis. As a result of this mutually beneficial relationship, alder improves the fertility of the soil where it grows, and as a pioneer species, it helps provide additional nitrogen for the successional species to follow.\nBecause of its abundance, red alder delivers large amounts of nitrogen to enrich forest soils. Red alder stands have been found to supply between of nitrogen annually to the soil. From Alaska to Oregon, \"Alnus viridis\" subsp. \"sinuata\" (\"A. sinuata\", Sitka Alder or Slide Alder), characteristically pioneer fresh, gravelly sites at the foot of retreating glaciers. Studies show that Sitka alder, a more shrubby variety of alder, adds nitrogen to the soil at an average rate of per year, helping convert the sterile glacial terrain to soil capable of supporting a conifer forest. Alders are common among the first species to colonize disturbed areas from floods, windstorms, fires, landslides, etc. Alder groves often serve as natural firebreaks since these broad-leaved trees are much less flammable than conifers. Their foliage and leaf litter does not carry a fire well, and their thin bark is sufficiently resistant to protect them from light surface fires. In addition, the light weight of alder seedsnumbering allows for easy dispersal by the wind. Although it outgrows coastal Douglas-fir for the first 25 years, it is very shade intolerant and seldom lives more than 100 years. Red alder is the Pacific Northwest's largest alder and the most plentiful and commercially important broad-leaved tree in the coastal Northwest. Groves of red alder in diameter intermingle with young Douglas-fir forests west of the Cascades, attaining a maximum height of in about sixty years and then are afflicted by heart rot. Alders largely help create conditions favorable for giant conifers that replace them.\nParasites.\nAlder roots are parasitized by northern groundcone.\nUses.\nThe catkins of some alder species have a degree of edibility, and may be rich in protein. Reported to have a bitter and unpleasant taste, they are more useful for survival purposes. The wood of certain alder species is often used to smoke various food items such as coffee, salmon, and other seafood.\nAlder is notably stable when immersed, and has been used for millennia as a material for pilings for piers and wharves. Most of the pilings that form the foundation of Venice were made from alder trees.\nAlder bark contains the anti-inflammatory salicin, which is metabolized into salicylic acid in the body. Some Native American cultures use red alder bark (\"Alnus rubra\") to treat poison oak, insect bites, and skin irritations. Blackfeet Indians have traditionally used an infusion made from the bark of red alder to treat lymphatic disorders and tuberculosis. Recent clinical studies have verified that red alder contains betulin and lupeol, compounds shown to be effective against a variety of tumors.\nThe inner bark of the alder, as well as red osier dogwood, or chokecherry, is used by some Indigenous peoples of the Americas in smoking mixtures, known as \"kinnikinnick\", to improve the taste of the bearberry leaf.\nAlder is illustrated in the coat of arms for the Austrian town of Grossarl.\nElectric guitars, most notably those manufactured by the Fender Musical Instruments Corporation, have been built with alder bodies since the 1950s. Alder is appreciated for its tone that is claimed to be tight and evenly balanced, especially when compared to mahogany, and has been adopted by many electric guitar manufacturers. It usually is finished in opaque lacquer (nitrocellulose, polyurethane, or polyester), as it does not have a prominent grain.\nAs a hardwood, alder is used in making furniture, cabinets, and other woodworking products. In these applications, its aforementioned lack of prominent grain means that it is often veneered, either by stained light woods such as oak, ash, or figured maple, or by darker woods such as teak or walnut.\nAlder bark and wood (like oak and sweet chestnut) contain tannin and are traditionally used to tan leather.\nA red dye can also be extracted from the outer bark, and a yellow dye from the inner bark.\nCulture.\nErmanno Olmi's movie \"The Tree of Wooden Clogs\" (\"L' Albero Degli Zoccoli\", 1978) refers in its title to alder, typically used to make clogs as in this movie's plot."}
