{"id": "8837", "revid": "1739907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8837", "title": "David Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty", "text": "Admiral of the Fleet David Richard Beatty, 1st Earl Beatty, (17 January 1871 \u2013 12 March 1936) was a Royal Navy officer. After serving in the Mahdist War and then the response to the Boxer Rebellion, he commanded the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland in 1916, a tactically indecisive engagement after which his aggressive approach was contrasted with the caution of his commander Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. He is remembered for his comment at Jutland that \"There seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today\", after two of them exploded. Later in the war he succeeded Jellicoe as Commander in Chief of the Grand Fleet, in which capacity he received the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet at the end of the war. He then followed Jellicoe's path a second time, serving as First Sea Lord\u2014a position that Beatty held longer (7 years 9 months) than any other First Sea Lord. While First Sea Lord, he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller ratio fleets of 1.75 each.\nFamily and childhood.\nBeatty was born into an Anglo-Irish family at Howbeck Lodge in the parish of Stapeley, near Nantwich, Cheshire, on 17 January 1871. He was the second son of five children born to Captain David Longfield Beatty and Katherine (or Katrine) Edith Beatty (n\u00e9e Sadleir), both from Ireland: David Longfield had been an officer in the Fourth Hussars where he formed a relationship with Katrine, the wife of another officer.\nAfter the affair between David Longfield and Katrine became known, David Longfield's father (Beatty's grandfather), David Vandeleur Beatty (1815\u20131881), arranged for his son to be posted to India in the hope that the scandalous relationship might end. David Longfield resigned from the regiment on 21 November 1865, with the honorary rank of Captain. He took up residence with Katrine in Cheshire and in 1869 sold his commission. David Longfield was unable to marry Katrine until Katrine had obtained a divorce on 21 February 1871, after the birth of their first two sons. Beatty's birth certificate recorded his mother's surname as Beatty, and his parents' eventual marriage at St Michael's Church in Liverpool was kept secret.\nBeatty's early education concentrated on horsemanship, hunting and learning to be a gentleman. Beatty had a close relationship with his elder brother Charles, who became his ally against their oppressive and overbearing father. They remained close throughout life, so much so that the only time Beatty felt despair was at his brother's death. Beatty later wrote to his wife about Charles, \"we lived together, played together, rode together, fought together.\" His brothers would later join the British Army, but early on young David developed an interest in ships and the sea and expressed a desire to join the Royal Navy. In 1881 Beatty's grandfather died and David Longfield succeeded to the 18th century mansion, 'Borodale', outside Enniscorthy, in County Wexford. After retiring from the army David Longfield established a business training horses first in Cheshire and then at 'The Mount', near Rugby, Warwickshire. On inheriting and following the death of his wife at 'The Mount', David Longfield returned to Ireland abandoning the training business.\nBeatty was educated at Kilkenny College and in 1882 entered Burney's Naval Academy at Gosport, which was a 'crammer' for boys wishing to take the entrance examinations for the Royal Navy.\nEarly career.\nBeatty joined the Royal Navy as a cadet passing into the training ship HMS \"Britannia\" tenth out of ninety-nine candidates in January 1884. During his two years at \"Britannia\", moored at Dartmouth, he was beaten three times for various infractions. He passed out of \"Britannia\" eighteenth out of the thirty-three remaining cadets at the end of 1885. Beatty's letters home made no complaint about the poor living conditions in \"Britannia\", and generally he was extrovert, even aggressive, and resented discipline. However, he understood how far he could transgress without serious consequences, and this approach continued throughout his career.\nBeatty was given orders to join the China Station in January 1886, but the posting did not appeal to his mother, who wrote to Lord Charles Beresford, then a senior naval officer, member of parliament and personal friend, to use his influence to obtain something better. Beatty was, in February 1886, instead appointed to , flagship of Admiral the Duke of Edinburgh, Queen Victoria's second son, who was Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Squadron. This proved an excellent social opening for Beatty, who established a longstanding relationship with the Duke's eldest daughter, Marie, and with other members of the court. \"Alexandra\" was a three-masted sailing ship with auxiliary steam power, nonetheless, remaining flagship in a navy which was steadily transitioning from sail to steam. Life in the Mediterranean fleet was considerably easier than cadet life, with visits to friendly ports all around the Mediterranean, but Beatty was concerned to work diligently towards naval examinations, which would determine seniority and future promotion prospects. Beatty was promoted to midshipman on 15 May 1886 and assigned to assist Lieutenant Stanley Colville on watchkeeping duties: Colville was to play an important part in Beatty's future career.\nBeatty left HMS \"Alexandra\" in March 1889 and joined the cruiser in July 1889 for manoeuvres before joining the sailing corvette in September 1889, in which he was promoted to sub-lieutenant on 14 May 1890. Next he attended courses at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich during which he was somewhat distracted from his naval career by the delights of London. Beatty scored a first-class examination pass in Torpedoes, but only seconds in Seamanship, Gunnery and Pilotage, and a third in Navigation. A biography states that \"his cabin at Greenwich was full of photographs of actresses, some of which were signed in the most endearing terms\". After attending the gunnery school, , he undertook a posting to a torpedo boat in July 1891 and then a tour in from 19 January 1892.\nBeatty joined the Royal Yacht \"Victoria and Albert\" in July 1892 while Queen Victoria was holidaying in the Mediterranean: Victoria was in mourning for her grandson, Albert Duke of Clarence, who had died January 1892. Promoted to lieutenant on 25 August 1892, he rejoined HMS \"Ruby\" in August 1892 and then transferred to the battleship in September 1893 (which had only recently been involved in the fleet accident where she had rammed and sunk the battleship ). He transferred to the battleship in September 1895.\nSudan Campaign.\nBeatty gained recognition during the Mahdist War for his actions in the campaign to recapture the Sudan. Stanley Colville was placed in command of the gunboats attached to the British expeditionary force in Egypt and as Beatty's former commander in HMS \"Trafalgar\" and superior in HMS \"Alexandra\" he requested that Beatty join him. Control of the river Nile was considered vitally important for any expedition into Egypt and the Sudan. Beatty was seconded to the Egyptian government on 3 June 1896 and appointed second in command of the river flotilla. Colville was wounded during the operation, leaving Beatty in command of the gunboats for the successful attack on Dongola. The campaign halted at Dongola to regroup and Beatty returned to Britain on leave. He was commended by Kitchener for his part in the campaign and as a result was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.\nBeatty was again seconded to the Egyptian government for the next phase of the campaign. This was now at Lord Kitchener's specific request, for the Khartoum expedition. Beatty first commanded the gunboat \"El Teb\" but this was capsized attempting to ascend the Fourth Cataract. Beatty then took command of gunboat \"Fateh\" between October 1897 and August 1898: the gunboats were frequently in action advancing along the Nile ahead of the army and saw action at the Battle of Omdurman, where Beatty made the acquaintance of Winston Churchill who had become a cavalry officer in Beatty's father's old regiment, the 4th Hussars, and had there learnt his family history. In a few hours 10,000 Dervishes were killed by rifle and machine gun fire without any of them getting within 600 yards of the British force. This battle marked the effective end of resistance to the expeditionary force, but the gunboats were called into service to transport troops to Fashoda, south along the White Nile, where a small force of French troops had made a difficult land crossing and staked a claim to the area. Despite the ensuing crisis, the French were persuaded to withdraw without incident. Kitchener commended Beatty for his efforts in the campaign and as a result Beatty was promoted to commander, ahead of 400 other lieutenants, on 15 November 1898.\nBoxer Rebellion.\nBeatty was appointed executive officer of the small battleship , flagship of the China Station, on 20 April 1899. The first year of his tour of duty was uneventful, but unrest against foreigners was growing in China. The Boxer movement was a secret Chinese peasant society committed to resisting oppression both from foreigners and from the Chinese government. The Empress Dowager Tzu-hsi partly encouraged the Boxer's opposition to foreigners in an attempt to turn their attention away from herself. The name was derived from ritual exercises supposed to make their users immune to bullets, which resembled boxing.\nIn the summer of 1900 the rebellion reached Peking, where the German legation was attacked and foreign nationals withdrew to the relative safety of the Legation Quarter. Government troops joined forces with the rebels and the railway to the Treaty Port of Tientsin was interrupted. Admiral Sir Edward Seymour, then the Commander-in-Chief of the China Station, sent reinforcements to Peking, but they were insufficient to defend the legation. An attempt was therefore made to send more troops from Tientsin, where British ships had been joined by French, German, Russian, American, Austrian, Italian and Japanese. The international naval brigade force of naval marines placed itself under the senior officer present, which was Seymour. After an urgent call for help from the legation, Seymour set out on 10 June 1900 with 2,000 troops to attempt to break through to Peking in the Seymour Expedition. The force got about halfway before abandoning the attempt because the railway line had been torn up. By now rebels had begun destroying the track behind the force, cutting it off from Tientsin.\nOn 11 June 1900, Beatty and 150 men from HMS \"Barfleur\" landed as part of a force of 2,400 defending Tientsin from 15,000 Chinese troops plus Boxers. On 16 June 1900 the Taku forts were bombarded and captured to ensure ships could still reach the port. Fierce fighting broke out throughout the foreign areas and railway station, and Beatty was injured. He later took part in the successful relief of the naval brigade and was promoted to captain on 8 November 1900. Beatty returned to Britain, where he required an operation to restore proper use of his left arm.\nMarriage.\nBeatty had returned from leave after the Sudan campaign, but finding life in Ireland at the family home not to his taste, stayed instead with his brother at Newmarket, Suffolk. The location allowed him good hunting, and access to aristocratic houses where his recent heroic reputation from the campaign made him an honoured guest. Out hunting one day he chanced to meet Ethel Tree, daughter of Chicago department store founder Marshall Field. Beatty was immediately taken with her, for her good looks and her ability to hunt. The immediate difficulty with the match was that Ethel was married already to Arthur Tree, with a son, Ronald Tree.\nAfter the Boxer Campaign, the couple had at first exchanged letters, which Beatty signed 'Jack', as Ethel was still a married woman and discretion was advised. Ethel became involved with another man and the exchange of letters ceased but on Beatty's return she sent him a telegram and letter inviting him to resume their friendship. Beatty did not respond until after surgery on his arm in September 1900 when he wrote, \"I landed from China with my heart full of rage, and swore I did not care if I ever saw you again, or if I were killed or not. And now I have arrived with the firm determination not to see you at all in my own mind... Unfortunately I shall go on loving you to the bitter end... To me always a Queen, if not always mine, Good-bye.\"\nDespite this estrangement, the couple again met foxhunting and resumed a discreet relationship. Marshall Field was at first unimpressed by the impecunious Beatty as a future son-in-law, but was persuaded by his heroic reputation, impressive record of promotion and future prospects. There was the possibility that Field might revoke the settlement he had made on his daughter at the time of her first marriage and the new couple would have no means of support. Beatty's father was also unhappy about the match, fearing a repeat of the difficulties he had faced with his own relationship with a married woman, but with the added risk of publicity because both Beatty and Ethel were famous and the risk that Beatty's illegitimacy might be exposed. Beatty went so far as to consult a fortune teller, Mrs. Roberts, who predicted a fine outcome to the match. Ethel wrote to Arthur, telling him that it was her firm intention never to live with him again as his wife, though not naming any particular person or reason. Arthur agreed to co-operate, and filed for divorce in America on the grounds of desertion, which was granted 9 May 1901. Beatty and Ethel married on 22 May 1901 at the registry office, St. George's, Hanover Square, London, with no family attending. Although Arthur Tree was himself from a wealthy American family, he now had to adjust to reduced circumstances without Ethel's support. He elected to remain in Britain and their son Ronald remained with him. Ronald and his mother were never reconciled from his perception that she had deserted his father, but he visited in later life and became friendly with Beatty. Ronald later became a member of parliament and, during the Second World War became a link between the British and United States governments, lending his country house, Ditchley Park near Oxford, to Winston Churchill for weekend visits when the official residences were considered unsafe. Beatty and Ethel set up home at Hanover Lodge in Regent's Park, London.\nThe couple had two sons, David Field Beatty, 2nd Earl Beatty (1905\u20131972) born at the Capua Palace in Malta, and the Hon. Peter Randolph Louis Beatty (1910\u20131949). His marriage to a very wealthy heiress allowed Beatty an independence that most other officers lacked. She is reputed to have commented after he was threatened with disciplinary action following the straining of his ship's engines, \"What? Court-martial my David? I'll buy them a new ship.\"\nAdvancement.\nIn May 1902 Beatty was passed fit for sea duty and was appointed captain of the cruiser on 2 June, spending two months in exercises with the Channel Fleet under Admiral Sir Arthur Wilson before joining the Mediterranean Fleet. Beatty worked hard to raise efficiency so that she was highly rated in gunnery and other competitions by the time he left the ship 19 December 1902. Ethel decided not to be left behind so rented the Capua Palace on Malta, home port of the Mediterranean Fleet, where she became part of the island's high society.\nBeatty took command of the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet in November 1903 and then commanded the cruiser in the Mediterranean Fleet from October 1904. He then became the naval advisor to the Army Council in 1906 and, after having been appointed a naval Aide-de-Camp to the King on 5 November 1908, he became captain of the battleship in the Atlantic Fleet in December 1908. At the request of Alfred Winsloe, the Fourth Sea Lord, he was promoted to rear-admiral on 1 January 1910 by a special order in council since he had not completed the requisite time as a captain. He was offered the post of second-in-command of the Atlantic Fleet, but declined it and asked for one in the Home Fleet. As the Atlantic Fleet post was a major command, the Admiralty were very unimpressed and his attitude nearly ruined his career. Beatty, as a rapidly promoted war hero, with no financial worries and with a degree of support in Royal circles, felt more confident than most naval officers in standing firm on requesting a posting nearer home. He was approaching two years on half pay (which would trigger automatic retirement from the navy) when on 8 January 1912 his career was saved by the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Churchill had met Beatty when Beatty was commander of a gunboat on the Nile supporting the army at the Battle of Omdurman, in which Churchill took part as a cavalry officer. A \"probably apocryphal\" story relates that as Beatty walked into Churchill's office at the Admiralty, Churchill looked him over and said, \"You seem very young to be an Admiral.\" Unfazed, Beatty replied, \"And you seem very young to be First Lord.\" Churchill \u2013 who was himself only thirty-eight years old in 1912 \u2013 took to him immediately and he was appointed Naval Secretary.\nBeatty became Rear-Admiral Commanding the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron on 1 March 1913. Beatty was late taking up his new post, choosing not to cut short a holiday in Monte Carlo. On his eventual arrival, he set about drafting standing orders regarding how the squadron was to operate. He noted, \"Captains...to be successful must possess, in a marked degree, initiative, resource, determination, and no fear of accepting responsibility\". He went on \"...as a rule instructions will be of a very general character so as to avoid interfering with the judgement and initiative of captains...The admiral will rely on captains to use all the information at their disposal to grasp the situation quickly and anticipate his wishes, using their own discretion as to how to act in unforeseen circumstances...\" The approach outlined by Beatty contradicted the views of many within the navy, who felt that ships should always be closely controlled by their commanding admiral, and harked back to reforms attempted by Admiral George Tryon. It is argued that Tryon had attempted to introduce greater independence and initiative amongst his captains, which he believed would be essential in the confusion of a real war situation, but had ironically been killed in an accident caused by captains rigorously obeying incorrect but precise orders issued by Tryon himself.\nBeatty chose Lieutenant Ralph Seymour as his flag lieutenant, despite Seymour being unknown to him. Seymour had aristocratic connections, which may have appealed to Beatty since he sought connections in society, but it was also the case that Seymour's sister was a longstanding close friend of Churchill's wife. Appointments by influence were common in the navy at this time, but the significance of Beatty's choice lay in Seymour's relative inexperience as a signals officer, which later resulted in difficulties in battle.\nFirst World War.\nOn the eve of the First World War in 1914, Beatty was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath and promoted to acting vice-admiral in February 1915 and given command of the Battle Cruiser Fleet a month later. He was confirmed in the rank of vice-admiral on 9 August 1915. He led the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron at the actions at Heligoland Bight (1914), Dogger Bank (1915) and Jutland (1916).\nJutland proved to be decisive in Beatty's career, despite the loss of two of his battlecruisers. Beatty is reported to have remarked (to his Flag Captain, Ernle Chatfield, later First Sea Lord in the early 1930s), \"there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today,\" after two of them had exploded within half an hour during the battle. In any case Beatty's actions succeeded in drawing the German High Seas Fleet into action against the British Grand Fleet.\nBeatty succeeded Admiral John Jellicoe as commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet and received promotion to the acting rank of admiral in December 1916. With his dashing style, he was the antithesis of his predecessor. Beatty's marriage was failing disastrously at the time, and the result was to be a decade-long love affair between Beatty and Eug\u00e9nie Godfrey-Faussett, wife of Captain Bryan Godfrey-Faussett. Under Beatty's command the Grand Fleet maintained its dominance of the North Sea until the end of the War.\nBeatty escorted the German High Seas Fleet to internment at Scapa Flow in November 1918 giving the order from his flagship that \"the German Flag will be hauled down at sunset and will not be raised again without permission\". This was not a lawful order, as the fleet remained the property of the German Government having been interned rather than having surrendered, but nevertheless Beatty enforced it.\nFirst Sea Lord.\nBeatty was promoted to substantive full admiral on 1 January 1919 and to Admiral of the Fleet on 1 May 1919. He was created 1st Earl Beatty, Viscount Borodale and Baron Beatty of the North Sea and Brooksby on 18 October 1919. He became First Sea Lord on 1 November 1919. In this capacity he was involved in negotiating the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the United States, Britain and Japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with France and Italy maintaining smaller fleets.\nDuring the First Labour Government of 1924, with Japan increasingly hostile to the UK, Beatty lobbied the Clynes Committee for construction of the Singapore Naval Base to continue. Beatty wrote out, but did not send, a threat of resignation. The government were trying to cut back on the numbers of cruisers constructed; the other Sea Lords attributed the building of the \"Kent\" class to Beatty's lobbying, but government desire to alleviate shipyard unemployment was probably a more important factor.\nDespite further rumours that he would resign, Beatty remained in office when the Conservatives took power in the autumn of 1924. Supported by the First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman, he clashed with the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Winston Churchill, once again over the number of cruisers required by the Royal Navy. At this stage of his career Churchill was opposed to what he saw as excessive defence spending. This may seem odd in light of his previous and subsequent reputation, but in the 1920s no major war seemed to be on the horizon. Beatty also at this time pressed hard for the return of responsibility for naval aviation from the newly formed Royal Air Force to the Royal Navy.\nIn 1926 Beatty was considered for the post of Governor General of Canada but was rejected by the Colonial Secretary Leo Amery as he had \"no manners and an impossible American wife\".\nBy the time of his retirement from the Royal Navy in July 1927 a great deal of time was being spent preparing for the Coolidge Conference in Geneva, although Beatty did not himself attend as he had to remain in London to supervise the deployment of naval and marine forces against nationalist unrest in China and Egypt. On his last day in office (30 July) he attended a Cabinet at which Bridgeman reported the breakdown of the Geneva Conference as the Americans refused to accept any gun smaller than 8-inch for their cruisers, and after leaving office he congratulated Bridgeman that the Americans had not been able to achieve \"command of the sea at any cost\". Beatty was appointed a member of the Privy Council on 25 July 1927. Stephen Roskill wrote that whilst Beatty and his disciple Chatfield deserve some praise for the Royal Navy's comparative readiness in 1939, his main achievement was to maintain the morale of the Navy at a time of serious defence cuts, and that without his strong leadership the Royal Navy might have suffered more events like the Invergordon Mutiny of 1931.\nRetirement and death.\nBeatty spent much of his life (when not at sea) in Leicestershire, and lived at Brooksby Hall and Dingley Hall. In July 1930 he denounced the London Naval Treaty in the House of Lords as \"a great and deplorable blunder to which we are about to be committed by signing away the sea power by which the British Empire came into being\". Beatty also claimed: \"If any sane man erects an edifice, or has great possessions, he protects them by insurance. The Navy is the insurance company of the economic unity of the Empire. Under the Naval Treaty of London the Navy will be totally and entirely inadequate to provide that insurance\".\nBeatty's old commander Admiral John Jellicoe died on 19 November 1935. Already suffering from heart failure, and sick with influenza, Beatty defied doctors' orders and left his bed to act as a pallbearer, saying, \"What will the Navy say if I fail to attend Jellicoe's funeral?\" He was so obviously ill that, as the funeral procession passed up Fleet Street, a bystander sent a glass of brandy out to him. He also insisted on attending the funeral of King George V in January 1936. These acts hastened his own death.\nBeatty died at around 1\u00a0am on 12 March 1936.\nAt Beatty's funeral his coffin was draped in the Union Flag flown by his flagship in 1919. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Lang, said \"In him something of the spirit of Nelson seemed to have come back\". The Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, called in the House of Commons for a public memorial to Beatty to be erected, but no action was taken until after the Second World War, when busts of Beatty and Jellicoe were unveiled in Trafalgar Square on 21 October (Trafalgar Day) 1948.\nBeatty had requested in his will that he would like to be buried next to his wife Ethel at Dingley: however he was actually buried at St Paul's Cathedral and therefore the double grave at Dingley Church contains only his wife's body.\nAssessment.\nThe outcome of the Battle of Jutland was inconclusive, leading to controversy and a search for someone to blame, especially since the British lost more ships. Beatty was particularly unhappy with the official account of the battle and other historians took sides in support of him or Jellicoe. Beatty did not publish his analysis of the battle, while Jellicoe wrote two memoirs.\nA number of serious errors have been identified in Beatty's handling of the Battle Cruiser Fleet at the Battle of Jutland:\nAfter the war a report of the battle was prepared by the Admiralty under First Sea Lord Rosslyn Wemyss. Before the report was published, Beatty was himself appointed First Sea Lord, and immediately requested amendments to the report. When the authors refused to comply, he ordered it to be destroyed and instead had prepared an alternative report, which proved highly critical of Jellicoe. Considerable argument broke out as a result, with significant numbers of servicemen disputing the published version, including Admiral Reginald Bacon, who wrote his own book about the battle, criticising the version sponsored by Beatty and highly critical of Beatty's own part in the battle.\nBesides encouraging the publication of books and articles designed to praise his role at the Battle of Jutland and denigrate Jellicoe's, after his retirement Beatty assisted with the preparation of a 5,200 line poem \"The Epic of Jutland\" by Shane Leslie.\nIn 2022 U.S. Air Force Academy military historian Chuck Steele found Beatty's failures to improve communications between vessels before Jutland more glaring in light of his own personal awareness of how that had kept earlier victories at Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank from being as overwhelming as they could have been. Gordon Moore, Steele writes, was transferred to the Canary Islands after the latter engagement not for his failures in it but for complaining about Beatty's poor communications to Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty and a strong supporter of Beatty's. Steele also argues that Beatty should also have known how to effectively use his battle cruisers due to the role they had played in smashing the German East Asia Squadron at the Falkland Islands. He faults Beatty for having learned too much from his earlier experience leading troops on land, and Churchill and others for being too impressed with Beatty as the supposed second coming of Horatio Nelson to see that unlike Nelson Beatty did not appreciate the value of newer naval technology.\nHonours and awards.\nBritish.\nBeatty was granted the Freedom of the City of London on 16 June 1919 at the same ceremony as Lord Haig. In June 1920, the Great Central Railway gave the name \"Earl Beatty\" to one of their newly built 4-6-0 express passenger locomotives, no. 1164 of class 9P (LNER class B3). It carried the name until withdrawal in September 1947. In 1925, he became the President of the Society for Nautical Research.\nExternal links.\n \n \n \n \n "}
{"id": "8838", "revid": "1256652336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8838", "title": "Dictum of Kenilworth", "text": "The Dictum of Kenilworth (), issued on 31 October 1266, was a pronouncement designed to reconcile the rebels of the Second Barons' War with the royal government of England. After the baronial victory at the Battle of Lewes in 1264, Simon de Montfort took control of royal government, but at the Battle of Evesham the next year Montfort was killed, and King Henry III restored to power. A group of rebels held out in the stronghold of Kenilworth Castle, however, and their resistance proved difficult to crush.\nA siege of the castle was started, but through papal intervention King Henry later entered on a more conciliatory path. A commission was appointed to draw up an arrangement that would be acceptable to both sides. The resulting Dictum of Kenilworth offered the rebels the right to buy back forfeited estates, at prices depending on their level of involvement in the rebellion. After initial resistance, the terms were eventually accepted. By the summer of 1267, the country was pacified, and this spirit of reconciliation would last until the 1290s. The Dictum of Kenilworth was later incorporated into the Statute of Marlborough.\nBackground.\nAt the Battle of Lewes in 1264, the rebellious barons, led by Simon de Montfort, had defeated the royal army and taken King Henry III captive. For the next year, the reins of government were in Montfort's hands, but his support soon began to crumble. On 4 August 1265, Montfort faced an army led by Prince Edward (later King Edward I) and the powerful Earl of Gloucester, who had recently defected to the royalist side, at the Battle of Evesham. The battle resulted in a complete royal victory; Montfort was killed, and King Henry III was restored to full power.\nPart of the rebellious forces held out, however, and their stronghold was the virtually impregnable Kenilworth Castle. In the summer of 1266, a siege of the castle was initiated, but the effort proved futile. There were rumours that Montfort's son Simon the Younger was planning an invasion of England from Normandy, and this was the hope that the rebels hung on to. It was in this situation that the papal legate Ottobuono Fieschi exerted his influence, to make the king pursue a more conciliatory policy. In August, the king summoned a parliament at Kenilworth, where the siege was ongoing. He commissioned a number of earls, barons and bishops to draft a treaty of reconciliation.\nThe Dictum of Kenilworth.\nThe commission was created by parliament appointing three bishops and three barons, who then selected one more bishop, two earls, and three more barons.\nThe final committee consisted of the bishops of Exeter, Bath and Wells, Worcester and St. David's, the earls of Gloucester and Hereford, and six barons (Philip Basset, John Balliol, Robert Walerand, Alan la Zouche, Roger de Somery and Warin Basingbourne). This committee was given until All Saints Day (1 November) to come up with provisions for a settlement. The result, known as the Dictum of Kenilworth, was made public on 31 October 1266.\nThe primary point of the Dictum was the re-establishment of royal authority. The Provisions of Oxford, that had been forced on the king were repudiated, and it was made clear that the appointment of ministers was entirely a royal prerogative. King Henry in turn reconfirmed Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest. At the same time, Henry was faced with the increasing veneration of the fallen Simon de Montfort, whom some were already starting to consider a martyr and a possible saint.\nThe rebels had previously been completely disinherited, and their land taken into the king's hands. The Dictum instead extended a pardon, and restored land to their previous owners, contingent on payment of certain penalties that were proportional to the level of involvement in the rebellion. It was traditional to value land at ten times its annual yield, and most of the rebels were subsequently fined at half of this amount: five times the annual yield of their lands.\nRobert Ferrers, Earl of Derby, was singled out in particular for his central involvement in the rebellion, and for him the multiple was seven rather than five. The same was the case for Henry de Hastings, who was the commander of Kenilworth Castle. Those who had not taken part in the fighting themselves, but had incited others to rise up against the king, were fined at two years' value, while those who had been compelled to fight, or played only a minor part, had to pay one year's value of their land. The proceedings from the fines were awarded to royal supporters, some of whom had already been awarded parts of the rebels' land, and now had to give it back.\nAftermath.\nHostilities did not end with the publication of the Dictum. The garrison at Kenilworth refused to accept the terms given, and held out until 14 December, when deprivation forced them to surrender. In April 1267, the earl of Gloucesterwho had been central both to the royal victory at Evesham and to the drafting of the Dictumturned against the king. He occupied the city of London, and set himself up as the champion of the disinherited. After negotiations involving both Edward and Ottobuono, Gloucester relented, and by June a settlement was reached. Gloucester had forced a change to the conditions of the Dictum, whereby the disinherited were allowed to recover their lands before they had paid their fines rather than after; an arrangement that made repayment much easier. In the summer of that year, Prince Edward moved at the Isle of Ely, where the last of the rebels still held out, and forced them into submission under terms favourable to the rebels.\nIn November 1267, parliament met at Marlborough in Wiltshire. Here an important provision was issued that would become known to history as the Statute of Marlborough. This statute incorporated the clauses of the Dictum of Kenilworth that dealt with the restoration of royal power, and reconciliation between the loyalists and the rebels. The Statute of Marlborough became a basis for royal government, and the relationship between the king and his subjects, and as such the Dictum lived on in English constitutional history.\nThe spirit of peace and reconciliation established by the Dictum of Kenilworth lasted for the remainder of Henry III's reign and into the 1290s. In 1270, Prince Edward left the country to go on crusade in the Holy Land. When his father died in 1272, Edward felt in a safe enough position to wait until 1274 before returning home to claim the throne."}
{"id": "8839", "revid": "1272617595", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8839", "title": "London Docklands", "text": "London Docklands is former docks in London. It is located in inner east and southeast London, in the boroughs of Southwark, Tower Hamlets, Lewisham, Newham and Greenwich. The docks were formerly part of the Port of London, at one time the world's largest port. The Docklands' regeneration began later that decade; it has been redeveloped principally for commercial and residential use. The name \"London Docklands\" was used for the first time in a government report on redevelopment plans in 1971 and has since been almost universally adopted. The redevelopment created wealth, but also led to some conflict between the new and old communities in the area.\nEstablishment.\nIn Roman and medieval times, ships arriving in the River Thames tended to dock at small quays in the present-day City of London or Southwark, an area known as the Pool of London. However, these gave no protection against the elements, were vulnerable to thieves and suffered from a lack of space at the quayside. The Howland Great Dock in Rotherhithe (built in 1696, and later to form the core of the Surrey Commercial Docks) was designed to address these problems, providing a large, secure and sheltered anchorage with room for 120 large vessels. It was a major commercial success, and provided for two phases of expansion during the Georgian and Victorian eras.\nThe first of the Georgian docks was the West India (opened in 1802), followed by the London (1805), the East India (also 1805), the Surrey (1807), the Regent's Canal Dock (1820), St Katharine (1828) and the West India South (1829). The Victorian docks were mostly further east, comprising the Royal Victoria (1855), Millwall (1868) and Royal Albert (1880). The King George V Dock (1921) was a late addition.\nDevelopment.\nThree principal kinds of docks existed. Wet docks were where ships were laid up at anchor and loaded or unloaded. Dry docks, which were far smaller, took individual ships for repairing. Ships were built at dockyards along the riverside. In addition, the river was lined with innumerable warehouses, piers, jetties and dolphins (mooring points). The various docks tended to specialise in different forms of produce. The Surrey Docks concentrated on timber, for instance; Millwall took grain; St Katharine took wool, sugar and rubber; and so on.\nThe docks required an army of workers, chiefly lightermen (who carried loads between ships and quays aboard small barges called lighters) and quayside workers, who dealt with the goods once they were ashore. Some of the workers were highly skilled: the lightermen had their own livery company or guild, while the deal porters (workers who carried timber) were famous for their acrobatic skills. Most were unskilled and worked as casual labourers. They assembled at certain points, such as pubs, each morning, where they were selected more or less at random by foremen. For these workers, it was effectively a lottery whether they would get work on any particular day. This arrangement continued until as late as 1965, although it was somewhat regularised after the creation of the National Dock Labour Scheme in 1947.\nThe main dockland areas were originally low-lying marshes, mostly unsuitable for agriculture and lightly populated. With the establishment of the docks, the dock workers formed a number of tight-knit local communities with their own distinctive cultures and slang. Due to poor communications with other parts of London, they tended to develop in some isolation. Road access to the Isle of Dogs, for example, was only via two swing bridges. Local sentiment there was so strong that Ted Johns, a local community campaigner, and his supporters, in protest at the lack of social provision from the state, unilaterally declared independence for the area, set up a so-called \"Island Council\" with Johns himself as its elected leader, and blocked off the two access roads.\n20th century.\nThe docks were originally built and managed by a number of competing private companies. From 1909, they were managed by the Port of London Authority (PLA) which amalgamated the companies in a bid to make the docks more efficient and improve labour relations. The PLA constructed the last of the docks, the King George V, in 1921, as well as greatly expanding the Tilbury docks.\nGerman bombing during the Second World War caused massive damage to the docks, with 380,000 tons of timber destroyed in the Surrey Docks in a single night. Nonetheless, following post-war rebuilding they experienced a resurgence of prosperity in the 1950s.\nBefore the later Docklands' redevelopment and gentrification, the dock workers often made ends meet with petty and not so petty criminality, such as theft from the not yet containerized cargo, smuggling and fencing. As a result, the docks became \"centres of excellence for criminal practice\". Many of Britain's most proficient criminals learnt their trade here, including those behind the Hatton Garden heist, the Great Train Robbery, the Brink's-Mat robbery, the Security Express robbery and the Tonbridge cash depot robbery.\nThe end came suddenly, between approximately 1960 and 1970, when the shipping industry adopted the newly invented container system of cargo transportation. London's docks were unable to accommodate the much larger vessels needed by containerization, and the shipping industry moved to deep-water ports such as Tilbury and Felixstowe. Between 1960 and 1980, all of London's docks were closed, leaving around eight square miles (21\u00a0km2) of derelict land in East London.\nRedevelopment.\nEfforts to redevelop the docks began almost as soon as they were closed, although it took a decade for most plans to move beyond the drawing board and another decade for redevelopment to take full effect. The situation was greatly complicated by the large number of landowners involved: the PLA, the Greater London Council (GLC), the British Gas Corporation, five borough councils, British Rail and the Central Electricity Generating Board.\nTo address this problem, in 1981 the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, formed the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) to redevelop the area. This was a statutory body appointed and funded by central government (a quango), with wide powers to acquire and dispose of land in the Docklands. It also served as the development planning authority for the area.\nAnother important government intervention was the designation in 1982 of an enterprise zone, an area in which businesses were exempt from property taxes and had other incentives, including simplified planning and capital allowances. This made investing in the Docklands a significantly more attractive proposition and was instrumental in starting a property boom in the area.\nThe LDDC was controversial; it was accused of favouring elitist luxury developments rather than affordable housing, and it was unpopular with the local communities, who felt that their needs were not being addressed. Nonetheless, the LDDC was central to a remarkable transformation in the area, although how far it was in control of events is debatable. It was wound up in 1998 when control of the Docklands area was handed back to the respective local authorities.\nThe massive development programme managed by the LDDC during the 1980s and 1990s saw a huge area of the Docklands converted into a mixture of residential, commercial and light industrial space. The clearest symbol of the whole effort was the ambitious Canary Wharf project that constructed Britain's tallest building at the time and established a second business district (CBD) in London. However, there is no evidence that the LDDC foresaw this scale of development; nearby Heron Quays had already been developed as low-density offices when Canary Wharf was proposed, and similar development was already underway on Canary Wharf itself, Limehouse Studios being the most famous occupant.\nCanary Wharf was far from trouble-free; the property slump of the early 1990s halted further development for several years. Developers found themselves, for a time, saddled with property that they were unable to sell or let.\nTransport.\nThe Docklands historically had poor transport connections. This was addressed by the LDDC with the construction of the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), which connected the Docklands with the city. According to Transport for London, the owner of the project, it was a remarkably inexpensive development, costing only \u00a377 million in its first phase, as it relied on reusing disused railway infrastructure and derelict land for much of its length. The LDDC originally requested a full London Underground line, but the Government refused to fund it.\nThe LDDC also built the Limehouse Link tunnel, a cut and cover road tunnel linking the Isle of Dogs to The Highway (the A1203 road) at a cost of over \u00a3150 million per kilometre, one of the most expensive stretches of road ever built.\nThe LDDC also contributed to the development of London City Airport (IATA airport code LCY), opened in October 1987 on the spine of the Royal Docks.\nThe London Underground's Jubilee line was extended eastwards in 1999; it now serves Rotherhithe/Surrey Quays at Canada Water station, the Isle of Dogs at Canary Wharf tube station, Greenwich at North Greenwich tube station and the nearby Royal Docks at Canning Town station. The DLR was extended in 1994 to serve much of the Royal Docks area when the Beckton branch was opened. The Isle of Dogs branch was extended further south, and in 1999 it began serving Greenwich town centre\u2014including the Cutty Sark museum\u2014Deptford and finally Lewisham. In 2005, a new branch of the DLR opened from Canning Town to serve what used to be the eastern terminus of the North London Line, including a station at London City Airport. It was then further extended to Woolwich Arsenal in 2009.\nFuture developments.\nFurther development projects are being proposed and put into practice within the London Dockland area, such as:\nIn the early 21st century, redevelopment is spreading into the more suburban parts of east and southeast London, and into the parts of the counties of Kent and Essex that abut the Thames Estuary. See Thames Gateway and Lower Lea Valley for further information on this trend.\nDocklands series buses.\nHistory.\nThe numbers of several London Buses routes are prefixed \"D\" for Docklands; all run on the north bank of the River Thames as part of the London bus network, and act as feeder buses to the DLR. The \"D\" network was developed in the early stages of Docklands redevelopment; it was originally much larger, but as transport rapidly improved across east London, the need for the \"D\" routes reduced. Today only four remain, running primarily in Tower Hamlets and briefly into Newham and Hackney. Stagecoach London operate routes D6, D7 and D8, and Blue Triangle operate route D3.\n21st century.\nThe population of the Docklands has more than doubled during the last 30 years, and the area has become a major business centre. Canary Wharf has emerged as one of Europe's biggest clusters of skyscrapers and a major extension to the financial services district of the City of London.\nAlthough most of the old wharfs and warehouses have been demolished, some have been restored and converted into flats. Many of the docks themselves have survived and are now used as marinas or watersports centres; a major exception is the Surrey Commercial Docks, which are now largely filled in. Although large ships can\u2014and occasionally still do\u2014visit the old docks, all of the commercial traffic has moved downriver further east.\nThe revival of the Docklands has had major effects in other run-down surrounding areas. Greenwich and Deptford are undergoing large-scale redevelopment, chiefly as a result of the improved transport links making them more attractive to commuters.\nThe Docklands' redevelopment has, however, had some less beneficial aspects. The massive property boom and consequent rise in house prices has led to friction between the new arrivals and the old Docklands communities, who have complained of being squeezed out. It has also made for some of the most striking disparities to be seen anywhere in Britain: luxury executive flats constructed alongside run-down public housing estates.\nThe Docklands' status as a symbol of Margaret Thatcher's Britain has also made it a target for terrorists. After a failed attempt to bomb Canary Wharf in 1992, a large IRA bomb exploded at South Quay on 9 February 1996. Two people died in the explosion, forty people were injured and an estimated \u00a3150 million of damage was caused. This bombing ended an IRA ceasefire. James McArdle was sentenced to 25 years of jail time but released in 2000 under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement and royal prerogative of mercy officially signed by Queen Elizabeth II.\nIn a further sign of regeneration in the area, the Docklands now has its own symphony orchestra, Docklands Sinfonia; which was formed in January 2009 and is based at St Anne's Limehouse.\nEconomy.\nThe offices of \"The Independent\" group of publications were at one time situated in the Docklands. In 2008, Independent News &amp; Media announced that \"The Independent\" would be moving its offices to Northcliffe House in Kensington.\nLondon's Docklands has become one of the world's leading global internet hubs since the opening in 1990 of the carrier-neutral Telehouse campus, which hosts the vast majority of LINX's internet peering traffic, occupying over 73,000 square metres. In August 2016, Telehouse Europe opened the $177 million North Two data centre of 24,000 square metres that became the only UK data centre to own a 132 kV on-campus grid substation that is directly connected to the National Grid, reducing transmission losses and improving power density and service continuity."}
{"id": "8840", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8840", "title": "Diesel multiple unit", "text": "A diesel multiple unit or DMU is a multiple-unit train powered by on-board diesel engines. A DMU requires no separate locomotive, as the engines are incorporated into one or more of the carriages. Diesel-powered single-unit railcars are also generally classed as DMUs. Diesel-powered units may be further classified by their transmission type: diesel\u2013mechanical DMMU, diesel\u2013hydraulic DHMU, or diesel\u2013electric DEMU.\nDesign.\nThe diesel engine may be located above the frame in an engine bay or under the floor. Driving controls can be at both ends, on one end, or in a separate car.\nTypes by transmission.\nDMUs are usually classified by the method of transmitting motive power to their wheels.\nDiesel\u2013mechanical.\nIn a diesel\u2013mechanical multiple unit (DMMU), the rotating energy of the engine is transmitted via a gearbox and driveshaft directly to the wheels of the train, like a car. The transmissions can be shifted manually by the driver, as in the great majority of first-generation British Rail DMUs, but in most applications, gears are changed automatically.\nDiesel\u2013hydraulic.\nIn a diesel\u2013hydraulic multiple unit (DHMU), a hydraulic torque converter, a type of fluid coupling, acts as the transmission medium for the motive power of the diesel engine to turn the wheels. Some units feature a hybrid mix of hydraulic and mechanical transmissions, usually reverting to the latter at higher operating speeds as this decreases engine RPM and noise.\nDiesel\u2013electric.\nIn a diesel\u2013electric multiple unit (DEMU), a diesel engine drives an electrical generator or an alternator which produces electrical energy. The generated current is then fed to electric traction motors on the wheels or bogies in the same way as a conventional diesel\u2013electric locomotive.\nOn some DEMUs, such as the Bombardier Voyager, each car is entirely self-contained and has its own engine, generator and electric motors. In other designs, such as the British Rail Class 207 or the Stadler GTW and Stadler FLIRT DMU, some cars within the consist may be entirely unpowered or only feature electric motors, obtaining electric current from other cars in the consist which have a generator and engine.\nWith diesel\u2013electric transmission, some DMU can be no other than an EMU without pantograph or contact shoes (for use on the former British Rail Southern Region), which \"is substituted\" by one or more on-board diesel generators; this kind of DEMU can be potentially upgraded to electro-diesel multiple unit (EDMU), becoming a bi-mode multiple units train (BMU), just adding one or two pantographs or contact shoes (with opportune converters, if necessary) and related modifications on the electric system.\nAround the world.\nEurope.\nBelgium.\nNMBS/SNCB uses its NMBS/SNCB Class 41 DMUs on the few remaining unelectrified lines. As electrification progresses, the DMUs become less and less important.\nCroatia.\nDiesel multiple units cover large number of passenger lines in Croatia which are operated by the national passenger service operator H\u017d Putni\u010dki Prijevoz. On Croatian Railways, DMUs have important role since they cover local, regional and distant lines all across the country. The country's two largest towns, Zagreb and Split, are connected with an inter-city service that is provided by DMU tilting trains \"RegioSwinger\" (Croatian series 7123) since 2004. Those trains may also cover other lines in the country depending on need and availability.\nLuxury DMU series 7021, built in France, started to operate for Yugoslav Railways in 1972 and after 1991 still remained in service of Croatian Railways until 2005. Units 7121 and 7122 (which came as a replacement for 7221 units), together with the newest series 7022 and 7023 built in 2010s Croatia, cover many of the country's local and regional services on unelectrified or partly electrified lines.\nCzech Republic.\nDiesel multiple units also cover large number of passenger lines in the Czech Republic which are operated by the national operator \u010cesk\u00e9 dr\u00e1hy. They have important role since they cover local, regional and distant lines all across the country. Those trains may also cover other lines in the country depending on need and availability too.\nAlso, the DMUs were manufactured for foreign carriers. The tables of cars and units are divided into vehicles operated until 1987, when the \u010cSD used the series designations proposed by Vojt\u011bch Kry\u0161p\u00edn, and vehicles created after this date, which no longer have Kry\u0161p\u00edn's designations (with some exceptions). In addition, these new cars are the new vehicles are already different in both countries.\nEstonia.\nElron has since 2015 a Stadler FLIRT fleet, with 20 trains DEMU version.\nGermany.\nGermany has employed DMUs for both commuter and express services for many decades. The SVT 877 \"Fliegender Hamburger\" DMU, introduced in 1933, made the run from Berlin to Hamburg in an astonishing 138 minutes, and its derivative SVT 137 broke the land speed record in 1936. After World War 2, the VT 11.5 DMU was the flagship of the glamorous Trans Europ Express.\nSince 1968, DB has designated DMUs with class numbers beginning in 6. While DB and regional transport authorities generally prefer electric power for commuter rail, many local and rural lines remain un-electrified, and DMUs are invaluable in providing services to those areas. DMUs in service as of 2021 include the Adtranz Class 612 tilting train (\"Regio Swinger\"), the Alstom Coradia LINT (Classes 620\u2013623, 640 and 648), the Siemens Desiro (Class 642) and the Bombardier Talent (Class 643/644). From 2001 to 2016 there was even a DMU version of DB's high-speed Intercity Express, the Class 605 ICE TD.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland the C\u00f3ras Iompair \u00c9ireann (CI\u00c9), which controlled the republic's railways between 1945 and 1986, introduced DMUs in the mid-1950s and they were the first diesel trains on many main lines.\nRomania.\nDMUs are used mostly on shorter or less frequently travelled routes in remote areas. The national railway company CFR still uses, along with other DMU models, Class 77 and 78 DMUs, locally built by Malaxa between the 1930s and 50s and refurbished in the 70s. The main DMU in use is the Class 96 Siemens Desiro aka S\u0103geata Albastr\u0103 (The Blue Arrow). Private operators also largely use DMU units, mainly purchased from various French and German operators.\nSlovakia.\nIn the present, several types of DMUs operate in Slovakia. Was the most common type in Slovakia is a Class 812 ZSSK based on the \u010cD Class 810. These are used almost exclusively for hauling passenger trains on non-electrified regional lines and these trains often excel in low travel speeds. In the past, however, in Slovakia there were a number of express trains driven by motor coaches, which often overcame heavier trains driven by steam locomotives at cruising speed, and classic sets. A typical example can be, for example, the Slovensk\u00e1 strela motor express train led on the Bratislava-Prague route by a motor car of the same name, or the Tatran express from Bratislava to Ko\u0161ice. Representatives of high-speed motor wagons were, for example, motor wagons of the M262 or M286 series, which, however, lost their application in high-speed wagons due to the gradual electrification of main lines and were, like the current wagons currently used for passenger trains.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe first significant use of DMUs in the United Kingdom was by the Great Western Railway, which introduced its small but successful series of diesel\u2013mechanical GWR railcars in 1934. The London &amp; North Eastern Railway and London, Midland &amp; Scottish Railway also experimented with DMUs in the 1930s, the LMS both on its own system, and on that of its Northern Irish subsidiary, but development was curtailed by World War II.\nAfter nationalisation, British Railways (BR) revived the concept in the early 1950s. At that time there was an urgent need to move away from expensive steam traction which led to many experimental designs using diesel propulsion and multiple units. The early DMUs proved successful, and under BR's 1955 Modernisation Plan the building of a large fleet was authorised. These BR \"First Generation\" DMUs were built between 1956 and 1963.\nBR required that contracts for the design and manufacture of new locomotives and rolling stock be split between numerous private firms as well as BR's own workshops, while different BR Regions laid down different specifications. The result was a multitude of different types, one of which was:\nIn 1960, British Railways introduced its Blue Pullman high-speed DEMUs.\nThese were few in number and relatively short-lived, but they paved the way for the very successful InterCity 125 or High Speed Train (HST) units, which were built between 1975 and 1982 to take over most principal express services on non-electrified routes.\nThese trains run with a streamlined power car at each end and (typically) seven to nine intermediate trailer cars. Although originally classified as DEMUs, the trailer cars are very similar to loco-hauled stock, and the power cars were later reclassified as locomotives under Class 43. HSTs started being replaced in 2017, but as of October 2022 some are still in use.\nBy the early 1980s, many of the surviving First Generation units were reaching the end of their design life, leading to spiralling maintenance costs, poor reliability and a poor public image for the railway. A stopgap solution was to convert some services back to locomotive haulage, as spare locomotives and hauled coaching stock were available, but this also increased operating costs. Commencing in the mid '80s, British Rail embarked upon its so called \"Sprinterisation\" programme, to replace most of the first generation DMUs and many locomotive-hauled trains with three new families of DMU:\nFollowing the impact of the privatisation of British Rail in the late 1990s, several other DMU families have been introduced:\nIn 2018, the first bi and tri-mode electro-diesel multiple units were introduced:\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nCanada generally follows similar buffer strength requirements to the US, but new services are evaluated on a case-by-case basis. As a result, several types of lightweight DMUs have been used:\nCosta Rica.\nCosta Rica has purchased several Apolo 2400 series DMU railcars from the former narrow gauge operator in Spain, which are run in commuter service.\nMexico.\n42 X'Trapolis Ts\u00edimin K'\u00e1ak train sets have been ordered for Tren Maya, 10 of which are DMU and 32 are EDMU.\nUnited States.\nA type of diesel multiple units in the U.S. was the Budd Rail Diesel Car (RDC). The RDC was a single passenger car with two diesel engines and two sets of controls.\nIn the United States, DMU systems must be FRA-compliant to be permitted on freight rail corridors. The Federal Railway Administration has mandated higher coupling strength requirements than European regulators, effectively prohibiting the use of lighter weight European-style inter-city rail DMUs on U.S. main line railways without timesharing with freight operations or special waivers from the FRA. This has greatly restricted the development of DMUs within the U.S. as no other country requires the much heavier FRA compliant vehicles, and no export market for them exists.\nOperations using FRA-compliant vehicles:\nOperations using non FRA-compliant vehicles:\nProposed operations:\nAsia/Australasia.\nAustralia.\nDMUs were first introduced to Australia in the late mid-20th century for use on quiet branch lines that could not justify a locomotive hauled service. Today, DMUs are widely used throughout Australia's southern states:\nIn Queensland, heritage DMUs are used on the \"Savannahlander\" and \"Gulflander\" tourist trains.\nBangladesh.\nChinese manufactured (CNR Tangshan) DEMU was introduced in Bangladesh from 25 May 2013. DEMU is the country's first-ever commuter train service starting its journey on the Chittagong\u2013Faujdarhat line. These DEMUs also operate on the Chittagong Circular Railway and on the Bangladesh Railway's service between Dhaka and Narayanganj. However, these trains faced reliability issues soon after the final delivery in 2015, with all 20 trains becoming inoperable past 2018. In 2020, technicians from Bangladesh Railway were able to repair one of the inoperative trains to working condition. However, the proposed project to repair the rest of the trains were deemed to be too expensive in the long run. By January 2025, after 10 years of service, Bangladesh Railway announced its intention to sell the DEMU trains as scrap.\nCambodia.\nMexican manufacturer Ferrovias Del Bajio supplied in 2019, three DSUs (Diesel Single Unit) to Royal Railway in Cambodia for their airport shuttle service from Phnom Penh international airport to the city central station. The other two units were assigned to long-distance services from the central station to Sihanoukville and to Poipet. Royal Railways Cambodia have now acquired eleven carriages DMU from Japan. Model: \" Kiha 183 heavy snow \". (\u30ad\u30cf183\u7cfb\u30aa\u30db\u30fc\u30c4\u30af\u30fb\u5927\u96ea)\nSpeed: 110 km/h (max)\nType: \u7279\u6025\u3000(Limited Express)\nStarted: 1986 ... End of Service in Japan 17 March 2023\nIndia.\nDMUs (DEMUs) are widely used in India. DEMUs in India are used in both the eight-coach format and the four-coach format. These trains replaced many (up to 10 car) trains with a WDM-2 or WDM-3A locomotive in the middle. These old trains had the loco controls duplicated in the Driving Trailer coach and all the actuation information reaching the locomotive through thin communication lines. This was called 'push-pull train'. The longest running such push-pull service operated between Diva \u2013 Bhiwandi Road and Vasai Road and was recently converted into an MEMU train service in 2018.\nIndia's first and largest DMU shed at Jalandhar, Punjab, holds more than 90 units placed in service all over Punjab.\nFirst generation DMU:\nRated power was 700 HP and had three or six coaches, made first by ICF. \nTransmission was Voith-hydraulic. \nMax speed 100\u00a0km/h.\nSecond generation DMU:\nRated power is 1400 HP and have eight coaches. \nMax speed is 105\u00a0km/h. \nTransmission is DC electric. \nMade at ICF and RCF.\nThird generation DMU:\nRated power is 1,600 HP and have ten coaches. \nMax speed is 110\u00a0km/h. \nTransmission is AC electric. \nMade at ICF.\nIndonesia.\nState-owned company PT.INKA builds several type of DMU, some of which operate in urban and suburban areas.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, where gasoline-driven railbuses (on small private lines) and railmotors (Kihani 5000 of the national railways) had been built since the 1920s, the first two streamlined DMUs came in service in 1937, class Kiha 43000 (\u30ad\u30cf43000\u7cfb).\nThe service of several hundreds (in sum even thousands) of diesel railcars and DMUs started in 1950s following the improvement of fuel supply that was critical during World War II.\nKenya.\nIn 2021, Kenya acquired DMUs from France to operate in the Nairobi Metropolitan Area. These trains connect the city with settlements outside Nairobi, Jomo Kenyatta International Airport and the Nairobi Terminus.\nMalaysia.\nThe Keretapi Tanah Melayu (KTM) has a total of 13 DMU KTM Class 61 ordered from CRRC for the West Coast Line and are assembled locally at CRRCs Batu Gajah factory from 2016 to 2020. The first scheduled service is expected from 1 September along the Gemas-Johor Bahru route, replacing old non-automotive stock.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippine National Railways (PNR) was one of the first adopters of diesel multiple unit trains in Asia. Initially built as gasoline-powered railmotors, the locally assembled Manila Railroad RMC class of 1929 was the first to be powered by diesel traction. Some units were also converted to streamliner units by 1932 for first-class services on the South Main Line between Manila and Legazpi, Albay. Since then, generations of DMUs were used chiefly for short-distance commuter services by the PNR in the island of Luzon.\nEven without active inter-city rail services in the present-day, DMUs are still used on the PNR Metro Commuter Line in Metro Manila and the Bicol Commuter service in the Bicol Region. Three generations of DMUs are in use: second-hand DMUs handed over by JR East such as the KiHa 35, 52 and 59 series originally built in the 1960s and acquired in the early 2010s, the Rotem DMUs of 2009 built by Korean manufacturer Hyundai Rotem, and the 8000 and 8100 classes built by Indonesian firm PT INKA.\nFrom 2022 onwards, the PNR will purchase standard gauge DMUs for its upcoming inter-city rail network in Luzon and Mindanao. This is compared to the 3 ft 6 in gauge of the rolling stock that is currently in active service. This move should allow access to better technology and increase line speeds.\nChina.\nOn 14 January 2014, CRRC Changchun Railway Vehicles announced that hybrid electric multiple units were put into production. At the end of 2014, the first batch of hybrid EMUs, one train each with battery-catenary power supply (EEMU) and catenary power supply-internal combustion engine (DEMU), rolled off the assembly line in Changchun. From 2016 to 2020, the vehicles were tested in Hohhot and Beijing Academy of Railway Sciences.\nIn September 2022, the first CJ-5 train used by the Xi'an-Huxian Railway arrived in Xi'an. The No. 0506 train, which uses an internal combustion engine and a battery hybrid, was used as a vehicle during the initial operation of the Xi'an-Huxian Railway. During the operation period, it will be temporarily managed by Xi'an Metro.\nSouth Korea.\nKorail used to operates many DMUs. The DHC (Diesel Hydraulic Car), which made its debut for the 1988 Seoul Olympics, was able to reach speeds up to and served Saemaul-ho trains. These train have retired on 2008.\nSri Lanka.\nDMUs were first introduced to Sri Lanka in 1940. The aim of this was connecting minor railway stations and stops on the main line where most express trains don't have a halt.\nTaiwan.\nThe DMUs are now usually used on the Taiwan Railway Administration Hualien\u2013Taitung Line, North-Link Line, South-Link Line. DMUs in Taiwan are classified as Class DR.\nThailand\nThe State Railway of Thailand ASR class is a diesel multiple unit operated by the State Railway of Thailand. Built by British Rail Engineering Limited at Derby Litchurch Lane Works in England, it is based on the British Rail Class 158. Twenty carriages were built in 1990/91. All were painted in the same Regional Railways livery as the Class 158s.\nManufacturers.\nDMU manufacturers include:"}
{"id": "8843", "revid": "4851336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8843", "title": "Donald A. Wollheim", "text": "Donald Allen Wollheim (October 1, 1914 \u2013 November 2, 1990) was an American science fiction editor, publisher, writer, and fan. As an author, he published under his own name as well as under pseudonyms, including David Grinnell, Martin Pearson, and Darrell G. Raynor. A founding member of the Futurians, he was a leading influence on science fiction development and fandom in the 20th-century United States. Ursula K. Le Guin called Wollheim \"the tough, reliable editor of Ace Books, in the Late Pulpalignean Era, 1966 and '67\", which is when he published her first two novels in Ace Double editions.\nProfile.\nInvolvement in science fiction fandom.\nThe 1979 first edition of \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" calls Wollheim \"one of the first and most vociferous SF fans.\" He published numerous fanzines and co-edited the early \"Fanciful Tales of Time and Space\". His importance to early fandom is chronicled in the 1974 book \"The Immortal Storm\" by Sam Moskowitz and in the 1977 book \"The Futurians\" by Damon Knight.\nWollheim organized an event later considered the first American science fiction convention, when a group from New York met with a group from Philadelphia on October 22, 1936, in Philadelphia. The modern Philcon convention claims descent from this event. Out of this meeting, plans were formed for regional and national meetings, including the first-ever Worldcon.\nWollheim was a member of the New York Science Fiction League, one of the clubs established by Hugo Gernsback to promote science fiction. When payment was not forthcoming for the first story he sold to Gernsback, Wollheim formed a group with several other authors, and successfully sued for payment. He was expelled from the Science Fiction League as \"a disruptive influence\" but was later reinstated. From the September 1935 issue of Gernsback's \"Wonder Stories\":\nIn 1937 Wollheim founded the Fantasy Amateur Press Association, whose first mailing (July 1937) included this statement from him: \"There are many fans desiring to put out a voice who dare not, for fear of being obliged to keep it up, and for the worry and time taken by subscriptions and advertising. It is for them and for the fan who admits it is his hobby and not his business that we formed the FAPA.\" In 1938, with several friends, he formed the Futurians\u2014arguably the best-known of the science fiction clubs. At one time or another, the membership included Isaac Asimov, Frederik Pohl, Cyril Kornbluth, James Blish, John Michel, Judith Merril, Robert A. W. Lowndes, Richard Wilson, Damon Knight, Virginia Kidd, and Larry T. Shaw. In 1943 Wollheim married fellow Futurian Elsie Balter (1910\u20131996). It proved to be a lasting marriage and publishing partnership.\nThe Futurians became less fan-oriented and more professional after 1940. Its conferences and workshops focused on writing, editing, and publishing, with many of its members interested in all three.\nWork as author.\nWollheim's first story, \"The Man from Ariel\", was published in the January 1934 issue of \"Wonder Stories\" when he was nineteen. \nHe was not paid for the story, and when he learned that other authors had not been paid either, he said so in the \"Bulletin\" of the Terrestrial Fantascience Guild. Publisher Hugo Gernsback eventually settled with Wollheim and the other authors out of court for $75. However, when Wollheim submitted another story (\"The Space Lens\") under the pseudonym Millard Verne Gordon, he was once again cheated by Gernsback who published it in the September 1935 issue. His third known story was published in \"Fanciful Tales of Time and Space\", Fall 1936, a fanzine that he edited himself. That year he also published and edited another short-lived fanzine, \"Phantagraph\".\nWollheim's stories were published regularly from 1940; at the same time he was becoming an important editor. In the 1950s and 60s he wrote chiefly novels. He usually used pseudonyms for works aimed at grownups, and wrote children's novels under his own name. Notable and popular were the eight \"Mike Mars\" books for children, which explored different facets of the NASA space program. Also well-received were the \"Secret\" books for young readers: \"The Secret of Saturn's Rings\" (1954), \"Secret of the Martian Moons\" (1955), and \"The Secret of the Ninth Planet\" (1959). As Martin Pearson he published the \"Ajax Calkins\" series, which became the basis for his novel \"Destiny's Orbit\" (1962). A sequel, \"Destination: Saturn\" was published in 1967 in collaboration with Lin Carter. \"The Universe Makers\" (1971) is a discussion of themes and philosophy in science fiction.\nOne of Wollheim's short stories, \"Mimic\", was made into the film of the same name by director and co-writer Guillermo del Toro, released in 1997.\nHis daughter Betsy declared: \"In true editorial fashion, he was honest about the quality of his own writing. He felt it was fair to middling at best. He always knew that his great talent was as an editor.\"\nCareer as editor and publisher.\nRobert Silverberg said that Wollheim was \"one of the most significant figures in 20th century American science fiction publishing,\" adding, \"A plausible case could be made that he was \"the\" most significant figure\u2014responsible in large measure for the development of the science fiction paperback, the science fiction anthology, and the whole post-Tolkien boom in fantasy fiction.\"\nIn late 1940, Wollheim noticed a new magazine titled \"Stirring Detective and Western Stories\" on the newsstands. He wrote to the publishers, Albing Publications, to see if they were interested in adding a science fiction title to their list, and he was invited to meet them. They did not have capital, however, and only guaranteed him a salary if the magazines were successful. He approached some of his fellow Futurians for free stories (some published under pseudonyms to protect their reputations with paying editors). It resulted in Wollheim's editing two of the earliest periodicals devoted to science fiction, the \"Cosmic Stories\" and \"Stirring Science Stories\" magazines starting in February 1941. After the magazines were cancelled later in 1941, Wollheim was able to find another publisher, Manhattan Fiction Publications, and a fourth issue of \"Stirring\" appeared, dated March 1942. Wartime constraints prevented ongoing publication, and there were no more issues of either title.\nWollheim edited the first science fiction anthology to be mass-marketed, \"The Pocket Book of Science Fiction\" (1943). It was also the first book containing the words \"science fiction\" in the title. It included works by Robert A. Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, T. S. Stribling, Stephen Vincent Ben\u00e9t, Ambrose Bierce, and H. G. Wells. In 1945 Wollheim edited the first hardcover anthology from a major publisher and the first omnibus, \"The Viking Portable Novels of Science\". He also edited the first anthology of original science fiction, \"The Girl With the Hungry Eyes\" (1947), although there is evidence that this last was originally intended to be the first issue of a new magazine.\nBetween 1947 and 1951 he was editor at the pioneering paperback publisher Avon Books, where he made available highly affordable editions of the works of A. Merritt, H. P. Lovecraft, and C. S. Lewis' \"Silent Planet\" space trilogy, bringing these previously little known authors a wide readership. During this period he also edited eighteen issues of the influential \"Avon Fantasy Reader\" as well as three of the \"Avon Science Fiction Reader\". These periodicals contained mostly reprints and a few original stories.\nIn 1952 Wollheim left Avon to work for A. A. Wyn at the Ace Magazine Company and spearheaded a new paperback book list, Ace Books. In 1953 he introduced science fiction to the Ace lineup, and for 20 years as editor-in-chief was responsible for their multi-genre list and, most important to him, their renowned sf list. Wollheim invented the \"Ace Doubles\" series which consisted of pairs of books, usually by different authors, bound back-to-back with two \"front\" covers. Because these paired books had to fit a fixed total page length, one or both were usually abridged to fit, and Wollheim often made other editorial alterations\u2014as witness the differences between Poul Anderson's Ace novel \"War of the Wing-Men\" and its definitive revised edition, \"The Man Who Counts\". Among the authors who made their paperback debuts in Ace Doubles were Philip K. Dick, Samuel R. Delany, Leigh Brackett, Ursula K. Le Guin, and John Brunner. William S. Burroughs' first book, \"Junkie\", was published as an Ace Double. Wollheim also helped develop Marion Zimmer Bradley, Robert Silverberg, Avram Davidson, Fritz Leiber, Andre Norton, Thomas Burnett Swann, Jack Vance, and Roger Zelazny, among others. While at Ace, he and co-editor Terry Carr began an annual anthology series, \"The World's Best Science Fiction\", the first collection of what they considered the best of the prior year's short stories, from magazines, hardcovers, paperback collections and other anthologies.\nIn the early 1960s Ace reintroduced Edgar Rice Burroughs' work, which had long been out of print, and in 1965, Ace bought the paperback rights to \"Dune\" (Herbert's title worried Wollheim, who feared it would be mistaken for a western). Eventually, Ace introduced single paperback books and became one of the preeminent genre publishers. Ace and Ballantine dominated sf in the 1960s and built the genre by publishing original material as well as reprints.\nTolkien controversy.\nPrior to the 1960s, no large American paperback publisher would publish fantasy. It was believed that there was no public demand for it and that it would not sell. Wollheim published an unauthorized paperback edition of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" in three volumes. It was the first mass-market paperback edition of Tolkien's epic. Wollheim did not consider himself a fantasy fan. In a 2006 interview his daughter, Betsy Wollheim, said:\nThis account was disputed by Tolkien, who claimed that he never received any communication from Ace prior to publication of their version. In any case, Tolkien had previously authorized paperback editions of \"The Hobbit\" and \"Tree and Leaf\". The authorized Ballantine paperback edition of \"The Lord of the Rings\" was then published in November, 1965. Ace subsequently agreed to cease publishing the unauthorized edition and to pay Tolkien for their sales following a grassroots campaign by Tolkien's U.S. fans. A 1993 court determined that the copyright loophole suggested by Ace Books was invalid and its paperback edition was found to have been a violation of copyright under U.S. law (at this time, the U.S. had yet to join the International Copyright Convention, and most laws on the books existed to protect domestic creations from foreign infringement. Houghton Mifflin was technically in violation of the law when they exceeded their import limits and failed to renew their interim copyright). In the \"Locus\" obituary for Donald Wollheim, however, more details emerge:\nFoundation of DAW Books.\nWollheim left Ace in 1971. Frederik Pohl describes the circumstances:\nUnfortunately, when Wyn died [in 1968] the company was sold to a consortium headed by a bank.\u00a0... Few of them had any publishing experience before they found themselves running Ace. It showed. Before long, bills weren't being paid, authors' advances and royalties were delayed, budgets were cut back, and most of Donald's time was spent trying to soothe authors and agents who were indignant, and had every right to be, at the way they were treated.\nUpon leaving Ace, he and his wife, Elsie Balter Wollheim, founded DAW Books, which he named for his initials. DAW can claim to be the first mass market specialist science fiction and fantasy fiction publishing house. DAW issued its first four titles in April 1972. Most of the writers whom he had developed at Ace went with him to DAW: Marion Zimmer Bradley, Andre Norton, Philip K. Dick, John Brunner, A. Bertram Chandler, Kenneth Bulmer, Gordon R. Dickson, A. E. van Vogt, and Jack Vance. In later years, when his distributor, New American Library, threatened to withhold Thomas Burnett Swann's Biblical historical fantasy \"How Are the Mighty Fallen\" (1974), owing to its homosexual content, Wollheim fought vigorously against their decision, and they relented.\nHis later author discoveries included Tanith Lee, Jennifer Roberson, Michael Shea, Tad Williams, Celia S. Friedman, and C. J. Cherryh, whose \"Downbelow Station\" (1982) was the first DAW book to win the Hugo Award for best novel. He was also able to give a number of British writers, including E. C. Tubb, Brian Stableford, Barrington Bayley, and Michael Coney, a new American audience. He published translations of international sf as well as anthologies of translated stories, \"Best From the Rest of the World.\" With the help of Arthur W. Saha, Wollheim also edited and published the popular \"Annual World's Best Science Fiction\" anthology from 1971 until his death.\nRecognition.\nAlgis Budrys in 1966 gave Wollheim a Galaxy Bookshelf award \"for doing his job\". Upon Wollheim's death in 1990, the prolific editor Robert Silverberg argued (above) that he may have been \"\"the\" most significant figure\" in American SF publishing.\nRobert Jordan credited Wollheim for helping to launch Jordan's career. Wollheim made an offer for Jordan's first novel, \"Warriors of the Ataii\", though he withdrew the offer when Jordan requested some minor changes to the contract. Jordan claimed that Wollheim's first, 'laudatory' letter convinced him that he could write, and so he chose to remember the first letter and forget about the second. The novel was never published, but Jordan went on to write the immensely successful \"The Wheel of Time\" series for a different publisher.\nMarion Zimmer Bradley referred to him as \"a second father\", Frederick Pohl called him \"a founder\", and Robert Silverberg says he was \"seriously underrated\" and \"one of the great shapers of science-fiction publishing in the United States\". In 1977 scholar Robert Scholes named Wollheim \"one of the most important editors and publishers of science fiction.\"\nFrom 1975 on, Wollheim received several special awards for his contributions to science fiction and to fantasy, including one at the 1975 World SF Convention and runner-up to Ian &amp; Betty Ballantine at the 1975 World Fantasy Convention.\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2002, its seventh class of two deceased and two living persons. He is the third person inducted primarily for his work as editor or publisher, after the inaugural 1996 pair Hugo Gernsback and John W. Campbell.\nSelected works.\nAs writer.\nMike Mars series.\nSource:\nPersonal life.\nWollheim also actively practiced cross-dressing as a woman throughout his life, and he regularly attended events at Casa Susanna in the Catskills of upstate New York."}
{"id": "8844", "revid": "1273204961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8844", "title": "Digital cinema", "text": "Digital cinema is the digital technology used within the film industry to distribute or project motion pictures as opposed to the historical use of reels of motion picture film, such as 35 mm film. Whereas film reels have to be shipped to movie theaters, a digital movie can be distributed to theaters in a number of ways: over the Internet or dedicated satellite links, or by sending hard drives or optical discs such as Blu-ray discs.\nDigital movies are projected using a digital video projector instead of a film projector, are shot using digital movie cameras or in animation transferred from a file and are edited using a non-linear editing system (NLE). The NLE is often a video editing application installed in one or more computers that may be networked to access the original footage from a remote server, share or gain access to computing resources for rendering the final video, and allow several editors to work on the same timeline or project.\nAlternatively a digital movie could be a film reel that has been digitized using a motion picture film scanner and then restored, or, a digital movie could be recorded using a film recorder onto film stock for projection using a traditional film projector.\nDigital cinema is distinct from high-definition television and does not necessarily use traditional television or other traditional high-definition video standards, aspect ratios, or frame rates. In digital cinema, resolutions are represented by the horizontal pixel count, usually 2K (2048\u00d71080 or 2.2 megapixels) or 4K (4096\u00d72160 or 8.8 megapixels). The 2K and 4K resolutions used in digital cinema projection are often referred to as DCI 2K and DCI 4K. DCI stands for Digital Cinema Initiatives.\nAs digital cinema technology improved in the early 2010s, most theaters across the world converted to digital video projection. Digital cinema technology has continued to develop over the years with 3D, RPX, 4DX and ScreenX, allowing moviegoers with more immersive experiences.\nHistory.\nThe transition from film to digital video was preceded by cinema's transition from analog to digital audio, with the release of the Dolby Digital (AC-3) audio coding standard in 1991. Its main basis is the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT), a lossy audio compression algorithm. It is a modification of the discrete cosine transform (DCT) algorithm, which was first proposed by Nasir Ahmed in 1972 and was originally intended for image compression. The DCT was adapted into the MDCT by J.P. Princen, A.W. Johnson and Alan B. Bradley at the University of Surrey in 1987, and then Dolby Laboratories adapted the MDCT algorithm along with perceptual coding principles to develop the AC-3 audio format for cinema needs. Cinema in the 1990s typically combined analog photochemical images with digital audio.\nDigital media playback of high-resolution 2K files has at least a 20-year history. Early video data storage units (RAIDs) fed custom frame buffer systems with large memories. In early digital video units, the content was usually restricted to several minutes of material. Transfer of content between remote locations was slow and had limited capacity. It was not until the late 1990s that feature-length films could be sent over the \"wire\" (Internet or dedicated fiber links). On October 23, 1998, Digital light processing (DLP) projector technology was publicly demonstrated with the release of \"The Last Broadcast\", the first feature-length movie, shot, edited and distributed digitally. In conjunction with Texas Instruments, the movie was publicly demonstrated in five theaters across the United States (Philadelphia, Portland (Oregon), Minneapolis, Providence, and Orlando).\nFoundations.\nIn the United States, on June 18, 1999, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated on two screens in Los Angeles and New York for the release of Lucasfilm's \"\". In Europe, on February 2, 2000, Texas Instruments' \"DLP Cinema\" projector technology was publicly demonstrated, by Philippe Binant, on one screen in Paris for the release of \"Toy Story 2\".\nFrom 1997 to 2000, the JPEG 2000 image compression standard was developed by a Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) committee chaired by Touradj Ebrahimi (later the JPEG president). In contrast to the original 1992 JPEG standard, which is a DCT-based lossy compression format for static digital images, JPEG 2000 is a discrete wavelet transform (DWT) based compression standard that could be adapted for motion imaging video compression with the Motion JPEG 2000 extension. JPEG 2000 technology was later selected as the video coding standard for digital cinema in 2004.\nInitiatives.\nOn January 19, 2000, the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, in the United States, initiated the first standards group dedicated towards developing digital cinema. By December 2000, there were 15 digital cinema screens in the United States and Canada, 11 in Western Europe, 4 in Asia, and 1 in South America. Digital Cinema Initiatives (DCI) was formed in March 2002 as a joint project of many motion picture studios (Disney, Fox, MGM, Paramount, Sony Pictures, Universal and Warner Bros.) to develop a system specification for digital cinema. The same month it was reported that the number of cinemas equipped with digital projectors had increased to about 50 in the US and 30 more in the rest of the world.\nIn April 2004, in cooperation with the American Society of Cinematographers, DCI created standard evaluation material (the ASC/DCI StEM material) for testing of 2K and 4K playback and compression technologies. DCI selected JPEG 2000 as the basis for the compression in the system the same year. Initial tests with JPEG 2000 produced bit rates of around 75125\u00a0Mbit/s for 2K resolution and 100200\u00a0Mbit/s for 4K resolution.\nWorldwide deployment.\nIn China, in June 2005, an e-cinema system called \"dMs\" was established and was used in over 15,000 screens spread across China's 30 provinces. dMs estimated that the system would expand to 40,000 screens in 2009. In 2005 the UK Film Council Digital Screen Network launched in the UK by Arts Alliance Media creating a chain of 250 2K digital cinema systems. The roll-out was completed in 2006. This was the first mass roll-out in Europe. AccessIT/Christie Digital also started a roll-out in the United States and Canada. By mid 2006, about 400 theaters were equipped with 2K digital projectors with the number increasing every month. In August 2006, the Malayalam digital movie \"Moonnamathoral\", produced by Benzy Martin, was distributed via satellite to cinemas, thus becoming the first Indian digital cinema. This was done by Emil and Eric Digital Films, a company based at Thrissur using the end-to-end digital cinema system developed by Singapore-based DG2L Technologies.\nIn January 2007, \"Guru\" became the first Indian film mastered in the DCI-compliant JPEG 2000 Interop format and also the first Indian film to be previewed digitally, internationally, at the Elgin Winter Garden in Toronto. This film was digitally mastered at Real Image Media Technologies in India. In 2007, the UK became home to Europe's first DCI-compliant fully digital multiplex cinemas; Odeon Hatfield and Odeon Surrey Quays (in London), with a total of 18 digital screens, were launched on 9 February 2007. By March 2007, with the release of Disney's \"Meet the Robinsons\", about 600 screens had been equipped with digital projectors. In June 2007, Arts Alliance Media announced the first European commercial digital cinema Virtual Print Fee (VPF) agreements (with 20th Century Fox and Universal Pictures). In March 2009 AMC Theatres announced that it closed a $315 million deal with Sony to replace all of its movie projectors with 4K digital projectors starting in the second quarter of 2009; it was anticipated that this replacement would be finished by 2012.\nAs digital cinema technology improved in the early 2010s, most theaters across the world converted to digital video projection. In January 2011, the total number of digital screens worldwide was 36,242, up from 16,339 at end 2009 or a growth rate of 121.8 percent during the year. There were 10,083 d-screens in Europe as a whole (28.2 percent of global figure), 16,522 in the United States and Canada (46.2 percent of global figure) and 7,703 in Asia (21.6 percent of global figure). Worldwide progress was slower as in some territories, particularly Latin America and Africa. As of 31 March 2015, 38,719 screens (out of a total of 39,789 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital, 3,007 screens in Canada have been converted, and 93,147 screens internationally have been converted. By the end of 2017, virtually all of the world's cinema screens were digital (98%). Digital cinema technology has continued to develop over the years with 3D, RPX, 4DX and ScreenX, allowing moviegoers with more immersive experiences.\nDespite the fact that today, virtually all global movie theaters have converted their screens to digital cinemas, some major motion pictures even as of 2019 are shot on film. For example, Quentin Tarantino released his latest film \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" in 70\u00a0mm and 35\u00a0mm in selected theaters across the United States and Canada.\nElements.\nIn addition to the equipment already found in a film-based movie theatre (e.g., a sound reinforcement system, screen, etc.), a DCI-compliant digital cinema requires a DCI-compliant digital projector and a powerful computer known as a \"server\". Movies are supplied to the theatre as a set of digital files called a Digital Cinema Package (DCP). For a typical feature film, these files will be anywhere between 90 GB and 300 GB of data (roughly two to six times the information of a Blu-ray disc) and may arrive as a physical delivery on a conventional computer hard drive or via satellite or fibre-optic broadband Internet. As of 2013, physical deliveries of hard drives were most common in the industry. Promotional trailers arrive on a separate hard drive and range between 200 GB and 400 GB in size.\nRegardless of how the DCP arrives, it first needs to be copied onto the internal hard drives of the server, either via an eSATA connection, or via a closed network, a process known as \"ingesting.\" DCPs can be, and in the case of feature films almost always are, encrypted, to prevent illegal copying and piracy. The necessary decryption keys are supplied separately, usually as email attachments or via download, and then \"ingested\" via USB. Keys are time-limited and will expire after the end of the period for which the title has been booked. They are also locked to the hardware (server and projector) that is to screen the film, so if the theatre wishes to move the title to another screen or extend the run, a new key must be obtained from the distributor. Several versions of the same feature can be sent together. The original version (OV) is used as the basis of all the other playback options. Version files (VF) may have a different sound format (e.g. 7.1 as opposed to 5.1 surround sound) or subtitles. 2D and 3D versions are often distributed on the same hard drive.\nThe playback of the content is controlled by the server using a \"playlist\". As the name implies, this is a list of all the content that is to be played as part of the performance. The playlist will be created by a member of the theatre's staff using proprietary software that runs on the server. In addition to listing the content to be played the playlist also includes automation cues that allow the playlist to control the projector, the sound system, auditorium lighting, tab curtains and screen masking (if present), etc. The playlist can be started manually, by clicking the \"play\" button on the server's monitor screen, or automatically at pre-set times.\nTechnology and standards.\nDigital Cinema Initiatives.\nDigital Cinema Initiatives (DCI), a joint venture of the six major studios, published the first version (V1.0) of a system specification for digital cinema in July 2005. The main declared objectives of the specification were to define a digital cinema system that would \"present a theatrical experience that is better than what one could achieve now with a traditional 35mm Answer Print\", to provide global standards for interoperability such that any DCI-compliant content could play on any DCI-compliant hardware anywhere in the world and to provide robust protection for the intellectual property of the content providers.\nThe DCI specification calls for picture encoding using the ISO/IEC 15444-1 \"JPEG2000\" (.j2c) standard and use of the CIE XYZ color space at 12 bits per component encoded with a 2.6 gamma applied at projection. Two levels of resolution for both content and projectors are supported: 2K (2048\u00d71080) or 2.2 MP at 24 or 48 frames per second, and 4K (4096\u00d72160) or 8.85 MP at 24 frames per second. The specification ensures that 2K content can play on 4K projectors and vice versa. Smaller resolutions in one direction are also supported (the image gets automatically centered). Later versions of the standard added additional playback rates (like 25 fps in SMPTE mode). For the sound component of the content the specification provides for up to 16 channels of uncompressed audio using the \"Broadcast Wave\" (.wav) format at 24 bits and 48\u00a0kHz or 96\u00a0kHz sampling.\nPlayback is controlled by an XML-format Composition Playlist, into an MXF-compliant file at a maximum data rate of 250\u00a0Mbit/s. Details about encryption, key management, and logging are all discussed in the specification as are the minimum specifications for the projectors employed including the color gamut, the contrast ratio and the brightness of the image. While much of the specification codifies work that had already been ongoing in the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE), the specification is important in establishing a content owner framework for the distribution and security of first-release motion-picture content.\nNational Association of Theatre Owners.\nIn addition to DCI's work, the National Association of Theatre Owners (NATO) released its Digital Cinema System Requirements. The document addresses the requirements of digital cinema systems from the operational needs of the exhibitor, focusing on areas not addressed by DCI, including access for the visually impaired and hearing impaired, workflow inside the cinema, and equipment interoperability. In particular, NATO's document details requirements for the Theatre Management System (TMS), the governing software for digital cinema systems within a theatre complex, and provides direction for the development of security key management systems. As with DCI's document, NATO's document is also important to the SMPTE standards effort.\nE-Cinema.\nThe Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) began work on standards for digital cinema in 2000. It was clear by that point in time that HDTV did not provide a sufficient technological basis for the foundation of digital cinema playback. In Europe, India and Japan however, there is still a significant presence of HDTV for theatrical presentations. Agreements within the ISO standards body have led to these non-compliant systems being referred to as Electronic Cinema Systems (E-Cinema).\nProjectors.\nOnly three manufacturers make DCI-approved digital cinema projectors; these are Barco, Christie and Sharp/NEC. Except for Sony, who used to use their own SXRD technology, all use the Digital light processing (DLP) technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI). D-Cinema projectors are similar in principle to digital projectors used in industry, education, and domestic home cinemas, but differ in two important respects. First, projectors must conform to the strict performance requirements of the DCI specification. Second, projectors must incorporate anti-piracy devices intended to enforce copyright compliance such as licensing limits. For these reasons all projectors intended to be sold to theaters for screening current release movies \"must\" be approved by the DCI before being put on sale. They now pass through a process called CTP (compliance test plan). Because feature films in digital form are encrypted and the decryption keys (KDMs) are locked to the serial number of the server used (linking to both the projector serial number and server is planned in the future), a system will allow playback of a protected feature only with the required KDM.\nDLP Cinema.\nThree manufacturers have licensed the DLP Cinema technology developed by Texas Instruments (TI): Christie Digital Systems, Barco, and NEC. While NEC is a relative newcomer to Digital Cinema, Christie is the main player in the U.S. and Barco takes the lead in Europe and Asia. Initially DCI-compliant DLP projectors were available in 2K only, but from early 2012, when TI's 4K DLP chip went into full production, DLP projectors have been available in both 2K and 4K versions. Manufacturers of DLP-based cinema projectors can now also offer 4K upgrades to some of the more recent 2K models. Early DLP Cinema projectors, which were deployed primarily in the United States, used limited 1280\u00d71024 resolution or the equivalent of 1.3 MP (megapixels). Digital Projection Incorporated (DPI) designed and sold a few DLP Cinema units (is8-2K) when TI's 2K technology debuted but then abandoned the D-Cinema market while continuing to offer DLP-based projectors for non-cinema purposes. Although based on the same 2K TI \"light engine\" as those of the major players they are so rare as to be virtually unknown in the industry. They are still widely used for pre-show advertising but not usually for feature presentations.\nTI's technology is based on the use of digital micromirror devices (DMDs). These are MEMS devices that are manufactured from silicon using similar technology to that of computer chips. The surface of these devices is covered by a very large number of microscopic mirrors, one for each pixel, so a 2K device has about 2.2 million mirrors and a 4K device about 8.8 million. Each mirror vibrates several thousand times a second between two positions: In one, light from the projector's lamp is reflected towards the screen, in the other away from it. The proportion of the time the mirror is in each position varies according to the required brightness of each pixel. Three DMD devices are used, one for each of the primary colors. Light from the lamp, usually a Xenon arc lamp similar to those used in film projectors with a power between 1\u00a0kW and 7\u00a0kW, is split by colored filters into red, green and blue beams which are directed at the appropriate DMD. The 'forward' reflected beam from the three DMDs is then re-combined and focused by the lens onto the cinema screen. Later projectors may use lasers instead of xenon lamps.\nSony SXRD.\nAlone amongst the manufacturers of DCI-compliant cinema projectors Sony decided to develop its own technology rather than use TI's DLP technology. SXRD (Silicon X-tal (Crystal) Reflective Display) projectors have only ever been manufactured in 4K form and, until the launch of the 4K DLP chip by TI, Sony SXRD projectors were the only 4K DCI-compatible projectors on the market. Unlike DLP projectors, however, SXRD projectors do not present the left and right eye images of stereoscopic movies sequentially, instead they use half the available area on the SXRD chip for each eye image. Thus during stereoscopic presentations the SXRD projector functions as a sub 2K projector, the same for HFR 3D Content.\nHowever, Sony decided in late April, 2020 that they would no longer manufacture digital cinema projectors.\nStereo 3D images.\nIn late 2005, interest in digital 3D stereoscopic projection led to a new willingness on the part of theaters to co-operate in installing 2K stereo installations to show Disney's \"Chicken Little\" in 3D film. Six more digital 3D movies were released in 2006 and 2007 (including \"Beowulf\", \"Monster House\" and \"Meet the Robinsons\"). The technology combines a single digital projector fitted with either a polarizing filter (for use with polarized glasses and silver screens), a filter wheel or an emitter for LCD glasses. \"RealD\" uses a \"ZScreen\" for polarisation and MasterImage uses a filter wheel that changes the polarity of projector's light output several times per second to alternate quickly the left-and-right-eye views. Another system that uses a filter wheel is Dolby 3D. The wheel changes the wavelengths of the colours being displayed, and tinted glasses filter these changes so the incorrect wavelength cannot enter the wrong eye. \"XpanD\" makes use of an external emitter that sends a signal to the 3D glasses to block out the wrong image from the wrong eye.\nLaser.\nRGB laser projection produces the purest BT.2020 colors and the brightest images.\nLED screens.\nIn Asia, on July 13, 2017, an LED screen for digital cinema developed by Samsung Electronics was publicly demonstrated on one screen at Lotte Cinema World Tower in Seoul. The first installation in Europe is in Arena Sihlcity Cinema in Z\u00fcrich. These displays do not use a projector; instead they use a LED video wall, and can offer higher contrast ratios, higher resolutions, and overall improvements in image quality. Sony already sells MicroLED displays as a replacement for conventional cinema screens.\nEffect on distribution.\nDigital distribution of movies has the potential to save money for film distributors. Making thousands of prints for a wide-release movie can be expensive. In contrast, at the maximum 250 megabit-per-second data rate (as defined by DCI for digital cinema), a feature-length movie can be stored on an off-the-shelf 300\u00a0GB hard drive for $50 and a broad release of 4000 'digital prints' might cost $200,000. In addition hard drives can be returned to distributors for reuse. With several hundred movies distributed every year, the industry saves billions of dollars. The digital-cinema roll-out was stalled by the slow pace at which exhibitors acquired digital projectors, since the savings would be seen not by themselves but by distribution companies. The Virtual Print Fee model was created to address this by passing some of the saving on to the cinemas. As a consequence of the rapid conversion to digital projection, the number of theatrical releases exhibited on film is dwindling. As of 4 May 2014, 37,711 screens (out of a total of 40,048 screens) in the United States have been converted to digital, 3,013 screens in Canada have been converted, and 79,043 screens internationally have been converted.\nTelecommunication.\nRealization and demonstration, on October 29, 2001, of the first digital cinema transmission by satellite in Europe of a feature film by Bernard Pauchon, Alain Lorentz, Raymond Melwig and Philippe Binant.\nLive broadcasting to cinemas or event cinema.\nDigital cinemas can deliver live broadcasts from performances or events. This began initially with live broadcasts from the New York Metropolitan Opera delivering regular live broadcasts into cinemas and has been widely imitated ever since. Leading territories providing the content are the UK, the US, France and Germany. The Royal Opera House, Sydney Opera House, English National Opera and others have found new and returning audiences captivated by the detail offered by a live digital broadcast featuring handheld and cameras on cranes positioned throughout the venue to capture the emotion that might be missed in a live venue situation. In addition these providers all offer additional value during the intervals e.g. interviews with choreographers, cast members, a backstage tour which would not be on offer at the live event itself. Other live events in this field include live theatre from NT Live, Branagh Live, Royal Shakespeare Company, Shakespeare's Globe, the Royal Ballet, Mariinsky Ballet, the Bolshoi Ballet and the Berlin Philharmoniker.\nIn the last ten years this initial offering of the arts has also expanded to include live and recorded music events such as Take That Live, One Direction Live, Andre Rieu, live musicals such as the recent Miss Saigon and a record-breaking Billy Elliot Live In Cinemas. Live sport, documentary with a live question and answer element such as the recent Oasis documentary, lectures, faith broadcasts, stand-up comedy, museum and gallery exhibitions, TV specials such as the record-breaking \"Doctor Who\" fiftieth anniversary special \"The Day Of The Doctor\", have all contributed to creating a valuable revenue stream for cinemas large and small all over the world. Subsequently, live broadcasting, formerly known as Alternative Content, has become known as Event Cinema and a trade association now exists to that end. Ten years on the sector has become a sizeable revenue stream in its own right, earning a loyal following amongst fans of the arts, and the content limited only by the imagination of the producers it would seem. Theatre, ballet, sport, exhibitions, TV specials and documentaries are now established forms of Event Cinema. Worldwide estimations put the likely value of the Event Cinema industry at $1bn by 2019.\nEvent Cinema currently accounts for on average between 1-3% of overall box office for cinemas worldwide but anecdotally it's been reported that some cinemas attribute as much as 25%, 48% and even 51% (the Rio Bio cinema in Stockholm) of their overall box office. It is envisaged ultimately that Event Cinema will account for around 5% of the overall box office globally. Event Cinema saw six worldwide records set and broken over from 2013 to 2015 with notable successes Dr Who ($10.2m in three days at the box office \u2013 event was also broadcast on terrestrial TV simultaneously), Pompeii Live by the British Museum, Billy Elliot, Andre Rieu, One Direction, Richard III by the Royal Shakespeare Company.\nEvent Cinema is defined more by the frequency of events rather than by the content itself. Event Cinema events typically appear in cinemas during traditionally quieter times in the cinema week such as the Monday-Thursday daytime/evening slot and are characterised by the One Night Only release, followed by one or possibly more 'Encore' releases a few days or weeks later if the event is successful and sold out. On occasion more successful events have returned to cinemas some months or even years later in the case of NT Live where the audience loyalty and company branding is so strong the content owner can be assured of a good showing at the box office.\nPros and cons.\nPros.\nThe digital formation of sets and locations, especially in the time of growing film series and sequels, is that virtual sets, once computer generated and stored, can be easily revived for future films.\nConsidering digital film images are documented as data files on hard disk or flash memory, varying systems of edits can be executed with the alteration of a few settings on the editing console with the structure being composed virtually in the computer's memory. A broad choice of effects can be sampled simply and rapidly, without the physical constraints posed by traditional cut-and-stick editing. Digital cinema allows national cinemas to construct films specific to their cultures in ways that the more constricting configurations and economics of customary film-making prevented. Low-cost cameras and computer-based editing software have gradually enabled films to be produced for minimal cost. The ability of digital cameras to allow film-makers to shoot limitless footage without wasting costly film has transformed film production in some Third World countries. From consumers' perspective digital prints do not deteriorate with the number of showings. Unlike film, there is no projection mechanism or manual handling to add scratches or other physically generated artefacts. Provincial cinemas that would have received old prints can give consumers the same cinematographic experience (all other things being equal) as those attending the premiere.\nThe use of NLEs in movies allows for edits and cuts to be made non-destructively, without actually discarding any footage.\nCons.\nA number of high-profile film directors, including Christopher Nolan, Paul Thomas Anderson, David O. Russell and Quentin Tarantino have publicly criticized digital cinema and advocated the use of film and film prints. Most famously, Tarantino has suggested he may retire because, though he can still shoot on film, because of the rapid conversion to digital, he cannot project from 35\u00a0mm prints in the majority of American cinemas. Steven Spielberg has stated that though digital projection produces a much better image than film if originally shot in digital, it is \"inferior\" when it has been converted to digital. He attempted at one stage to release \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" solely on film. Paul Thomas Anderson recently was able to create 70-mm film prints for his film \"The Master\".\nFilm critic Roger Ebert criticized the use of DCPs after a cancelled film festival screening of Brian DePalma's film \"Passion\" at New York Film Festival as a result of a lockup due to the coding system.\nThe theoretical resolution of 35\u00a0mm film is greater than that of 2K digital cinema. 2K resolution (2048\u00d71080) is also only slightly greater than that of consumer based 1080p HD (1920x1080). However, since digital post-production techniques became the standard in the early 2000s, the majority of movies, whether photographed digitally or on 35\u00a0mm film, have been mastered and edited at the 2K resolution. Moreover, 4K post production was becoming more common as of 2013. As projectors are replaced with 4K models the difference in resolution between digital and 35\u00a0mm film is somewhat reduced. Digital cinema servers utilize far greater bandwidth over domestic \"HD\", allowing for a difference in quality (e.g., Blu-ray colour encoding 4:2:0 48\u00a0Mbit/s MAX datarate, DCI D-Cinema 4:4:4 250\u00a0Mbit/s 2D/3D, 500\u00a0Mbit/s HFR3D). Each frame has greater detail.\nOwing to the smaller dynamic range of digital cameras, correcting poor digital exposures is more difficult than correcting poor film exposures during post-production. A partial solution to this problem is to add complex video-assist technology during the shooting process. However, such technologies are typically available only to high-budget production companies. Digital cinemas' efficiency of storing images has a downside. The speed and ease of modern digital editing processes threatens to give editors and their directors, if not an embarrassment of choice then at least a confusion of options, potentially making the editing process, with this 'try it and see' philosophy, lengthier rather than shorter. Because the equipment needed to produce digital feature films can be obtained more easily than film projectors, producers could inundate the market with cheap productions and potentially dominate the efforts of serious directors. Because of the quick speed in which they are filmed, these stories sometimes lack essential narrative structure.\nCosts.\nPros.\nThe electronic transferring of digital film, from central servers to servers in cinema projection booths, is an inexpensive process of supplying copies of newest releases to the vast number of cinema screens demanded by prevailing saturation-release strategies. There is a significant saving on print expenses in such cases: at a minimum cost per print of $1200\u20132000, the cost of film print production is between $5\u20138 million per movie. With several thousand releases a year, the probable savings offered by digital distribution and projection are over $1 billion. The cost savings and ease, together with the ability to store film rather than having to send a print on to the next cinema, allows a larger scope of films to be screened and watched by the public; minority and small-budget films that would not otherwise get such a chance.\nCons.\nThe initial costs for converting theaters to digital are high: $100,000 per screen, on average. Theaters have been reluctant to switch without a cost-sharing arrangement with film distributors. A solution is a temporary \"Virtual Print Fee\" system, where the distributor (who saves the money of producing and transporting a film print) pays a fee per copy to help finance the digital systems of the theaters. A theater can purchase a film projector for as little as $10,000 (though projectors intended for commercial cinemas cost two to three times that; to which must be added the cost of a long-play system, which also costs around $10,000, making a total of around $30,000\u2013$40,000) from which they could expect an average life of 30\u201340 years. By contrast, a digital cinema playback system\u2014including server, media block, and projector\u2014can cost two to three times as much, and would have a greater risk of component failure and obsolescence. (In Britain the cost of an entry-level projector including server, installation, etc., would be \u00a331,000 [$50,000].)\nArchiving digital masters has also turned out to be both tricky and costly. In a 2007 study, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences found the cost of long-term storage of 4K digital masters to be \"enormously higher\u2014up to 11 times that of the cost of storing film masters.\" This is because of the limited or uncertain lifespan of digital storage: No current digital medium\u2014be it optical disc, magnetic hard drive or digital tape\u2014can reliably store a motion picture for as long as a hundred years or more (a timeframe for film properly stored). The short history of digital storage media has been one of innovation and, therefore, of obsolescence. Archived digital content must be periodically removed from obsolete physical media to up-to-date media. The expense of digital image capture is not necessarily less than the capture of images onto film; indeed, it is sometimes greater."}
{"id": "8845", "revid": "47653411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8845", "title": "Democratic Progressive Party", "text": "The Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) is a centre to centre-left Taiwanese nationalist political party in Taiwan. As the dominant party in the Pan-Green Coalition, one of the two main political camps in Taiwan, the DPP is currently the ruling party in Taiwan, leading a minority government that controls the presidency and the central government.\nFounded in 1986 by Hsu Hsin-liang, Hsieh Tsung-min and Lin Shui-chuan, a year prior to the end of martial law, the DPP is one of two major parties in Taiwan, the other being the Kuomintang (KMT), a Chinese nationalist party previously ruling the country as a one-party state, and its smaller allies in the Pan-Blue Coalition. It has traditionally been associated with a strong advocacy of human rights, emerging against the authoritarian White Terror that was initiated by the KMT, as well as the promotion of Taiwanese nationalism and identity. Lai Ching-te is the current chairperson of the DPP from 2023, who also serves as the incumbent President and is the third member of the DPP to hold the presidency; he succeeded fellow DPP member Tsai Ing-wen in May 2024.\nThe DPP is a longtime member of Liberal International and a founding member of the Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats. It represented Taiwan in the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO). The DPP is widely classified as socially liberal, having been founded as a party for human rights, including factions within the party supporting same-sex marriage and other LGBT rights. On foreign policy, the DPP is more willing to increase military expenditures to prevent military intimidation from the People's Republic of China (PRC) owing to the ambiguous political status of Taiwan. It favors closer ties with democratic nations such as Japan and the United States, as well as the nations of ASEAN as part of its New Southbound Policy.\nIn its policy on cross-strait relations, the DPP as a ruling party chooses to keep the \"status quo\" of Taiwan, instead of approaching \"de jure\" independence, despite being a pro-independence group in its party platform. The party considers that Taiwan is already a sovereign country under the name \"Republic of China\" and is never subordinate to the PRC. The DPP is frequently accused by the PRC government of being a primary force in Taiwan to \"prevent the Chinese nation from achieving complete reunification\" and \"halt the process of national rejuvenation\" due to the party's outspoken advocacy of the Taiwanese nationalism, its supportive attitude to Taiwanese enjoying the right to decide their own future, and its firm opposition to the notion of \"One China\", including the alleged \"1992 Consensus\" narratives by both the PRC and the KMT.\nHistory.\nThe DPP's roots were in the \"Tangwai\" movement, which formed in opposition to the Kuomintang's one-party authoritarian rule under the \"party-state\" system during martial law. This movement culminated in the formation of the DPP as an alternative, but still illegal, party on 28 September 1986 by eighteen organizing members at Grand Hotel Taipei, with a total of 132 people joining the party in attendance. The new party members contested the 1986 election as \"nonpartisan\" candidates since competing parties would remain illegal until the following year. These early members of the party, like the \"tangwai\", drew heavily from the ranks of family members and defense lawyers of political prisoners, as well as intellectuals and artists who had spent time abroad. These individuals were strongly committed to political change toward democracy and freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association.\nThe \"tangwai\" were not a unified political unit and consisted of factions which carried over into the early DPP. At its founding the DPP consisted of three factions: the Kang group, a moderate faction led by Kang Ning-hsiang, New Tide faction, consisting of intellectuals and social activists led by Wu Nai-ren and Chiou I-jen, and the Progress Faction led by Lin Cheng-chieh, a \"waishengren\" opposed to independence. Moderates would later coalesce around the Formosa faction, founded by those arrested during the Formosa Incident after their release from prison. In the early days of the party, the Formosa faction focused on winning elections by wielding the star power of its leaders, while New Tide would focus on ideological mobilization and developing grassroots support for social movements. As a result, the Formosa faction would become more moderate, often bending to public opinion, while New Tide would become more ideologically cohesive. By 1988 the Formosa Faction would dominate high-level positions within the party.\nThe party did not at the outset give explicit support to an independent Taiwanese national identity, partially because moderates such as Hsu Hsin-liang were concerned that such a move that could have invited a violent crackdown by the Kuomintang and alienate voters, but also because some members such as Lin Cheng-chieh supported unification. Partially due to their waning influence within the party and partially due to their ideological commitment, between 1988 and 1991 the New Tide Faction would push the independence issue, bolstered by the return of pro-independence activists from overseas who were previously barred from Taiwan. In 1991, in order to head off the New Tide, party chairman Hsu Hsin-liang of the moderate Formosa faction agreed to include language in the party charter which advocated for the drafting of a new constitution as well as declaration of a new Republic of Taiwan via referendum (which resulted in many pro-unification members leaving the party). However, the party would quickly begin to walk back on this language, and eventually in 1999 the party congress passed a resolution that Taiwan was already an independent country, under the official name \"Republic of China\", and that any constitutional changes should be approved by the people via referendum, while emphasizing the use of the name \"Taiwan\" in international settings.\nDespite its lack of electoral success, the pressure that the DPP created on the ruling KMT via its demands are widely credited in the political reforms of the 1990s, most notably the direct popular election of Republic of China's president and all representatives in the National Assembly and Legislative Yuan, as well the ability to open discuss events from the past such as the February 28 Incident and its long aftermath of martial law, and space for a greater variety of political views and advocacy. Once the DPP had representation in the Legislative Yuan, the party used the legislature as a forum to challenge the ruling KMT.\nIn 1996, DPP Chairman Shih Ming-teh united with the New Party to run for the President of the Legislative Yuan, but lost by one vote. The vote that was missing was legislator Chang Chin-cheng's failure to vote for Shih. As a result, Chang was expelled from the DPP.\nPost-democratization, the DPP shifted their focus to anti-corruption issues, in particular regarding KMT connections to organized crime as well as \"party assets\" illegally acquired from the government during martial law. Meanwhile, factions continued to form within the DPP as a mechanism for coalition-building within the party; notably, future President Chen Shui-bian would form the Justice Alliance faction.\n2000\u20132008: in minority government.\nThe DPP won the presidency with the election of Chen Shui-bian in March 2000 with a plurality, due to Pan-Blue voters splitting their vote between the Kuomintang and independent candidate James Soong, ending 91 years of KMT rule in the Republic of China. Chen softened the party's stance on independence to appeal to moderate voters, appease the United States, and placate China. He also promised not to change the ROC state symbols or declare formal independence as long as the People's Republic of China did not attack Taiwan. Further, he advocated for economic exchange with China as well as the establishment of transportation links.\nIn 2002, the DPP became the first party other than the KMT to reach a plurality in the Legislative Yuan following the 2001 legislative election. However, a majority coalition between the KMT, People First Party, and New Party prevented it from taking control of the chamber. This coalition was at odds with the presidency from the beginning, and led to President Chen's abandonment of the centrist positions that he ran his campaign on.\nIn 2003, Chen announced a campaign to draft a referendum law as well as a new constitution, a move which appealed to the fundamentalist wing of the DPP. By now, the New Tide faction had begun to favor pragmatic approaches to their pro-independence goals and dominated decision-making positions within the party. By contrast, grassroots support was divided largely between moderate and fundamentalist wings. Though Chen's plans for a referendum on a new constitution were scuttled by the legislature, he did manage to include a largely symbolic referendum on the PRC military threat to coincide with the 2004 presidential election. President Chen Shui-bian would be narrowly re-elected in 2004 after an assassination attempt the day before the election, and in the later legislative election, the pan-blue coalition opposition retained control of the chamber.\nPresident Chen's moves sparked a debate within the party between fundamentalists and moderates who were concerned that voters would abandon their party. The fundamentalists won out, and as a result the DPP would largely follow Chen's lead. The DPP suffered a significant election defeat in nationwide local and county elections in December 2005, while the pan-blue coalition captured 16 of 23 county and city government offices under the leadership of popular Taipei mayor and KMT Party Chairman Ma Ying-jeou. Moderates within the party would blame this loss on the party's fundamentalist turn.\nThe results led to a shake up of the party leadership. Su Tseng-chang resigned as DPP chairman soon after election results were announced. Su had pledged to step down if the DPP lost either Taipei County or failed to win 10 of the 23 mayor/magistrate positions. Vice President Annette Lu was appointed acting DPP leader. Presidential Office Secretary-General Yu Shyi-kun was elected in a three-way race against legislator Chai Trong-rong and Wong Chin-chu with 54.4% of the vote.\nPremier Frank Hsieh, DPP election organizer and former mayor of Kaohsiung twice tendered a verbal resignation immediately following the election, but his resignation was not accepted by President Chen until 17 January 2006 after the DPP chairmanship election had concluded. The former DPP Chairman Su Tseng-chang was appointed to replace Hsieh as premier. Hsieh and his cabinet resigned en masse on 24 January to make way for Su and his new cabinet. President Chen had offered the position of Presidential Office Secretary-General (vacated by Su) to the departing premier, but Hsieh declined and left office criticizing President Chen for his tough line on dealing with China.\nIn 2005, following the passage of the Anti-Secession Law, the Chen administration issued a statement asserting the position that Taiwan's future should be decided by the people on Taiwan only.\nSeparate identity from China.\nOn 30 September 2007, the DPP approved a resolution asserting a separate identity from China and called for the enactment of a new constitution for a \"normal nation\". It struck an accommodating tone by advocating general use of \"Taiwan\" as the country's name without calling for abandonment of the name Republic of China.\n2008\u20132016: return to opposition.\nIn the national elections held in early months of 2008, the DPP won less than 25% of the seats (38.2% vote share) in the new Legislative Yuan while its presidential candidate, former Kaohsiung mayor Frank Hsieh, lost to KMT candidate Ma Ying-jeou by a wide margin (41.55% vs. 58.45%). In May, the DPP elected moderate Tsai Ing-wen as their new leader over fundamentalist Koo Kwang-ming. Tsai became the first female leader of the DPP and the first female leader to lead a major party in Taiwan.\nThe first months since backed to the opposition were dominated by press coverage of the travails of Chen Shui-bian and his wife Wu Shu-jen. On 15 August 2008, Chen resigned from the DPP and apologized: \"Today I have to say sorry to all of the DPP members and supporters. I let everyone down, caused you humiliation and failed to meet your expectations. My acts have caused irreparable damage to the party. I love the DPP deeply and am proud of being a DPP member. To express my deepest regrets to all DPP members and supporters, I announce my withdrawal from the DPP immediately. My wife Wu Shu-jen is also withdrawing from the party.\" DPP Chairperson followed with a public statement on behalf of the party: \"In regard to Chen and his wife's decision to withdraw from the party and his desire to shoulder responsibility for his actions as well as to undergo an investigation by the party's anti-corruption committee, we respect his decision and accept it.\"\nThe DPP vowed to reflect on public misgivings towards the party. Chairperson Tsai insisted on the need for the party to remember its history, defend the Republic of China's sovereignty and national security, and maintain its confidence.\nThe party re-emerged as a voice in Taiwan's political debate when Ma's administration reached the end of its first year in office. The DPP marked the anniversary with massive rallies in Taipei and Kaohsiung. Tsai's address to the crowd in Taipei on 17 May proclaimed a \"citizens' movement to protect Republic of China\" seeking to \"protect our democracy and protect Republic of China.\"\n2016\u20132024: in majority government.\nOn 16 January 2016, Taiwan held a general election for its presidency and for the Legislative Yuan. The DPP gained the presidential seat, with the election of Tsai Ing-wen, who received 56.12% of the votes, while her opponent Eric Chu gained 31.2%. In addition, the DPP gained a majority of the Legislative Yuan, winning 68 seats in the 113-seat legislature, up from 40 in 2012 election, thus giving them the majority for the first time in its history.\nPresident Tsai won reelection in the 2020 Taiwanese presidential election on 11 January 2020, and the Democratic Progressive Party retained its legislative majority, winning 61 seats.\n2024\u2013present: return to minority government.\nThe 13 January 2024 presidential election and legislative elections led to the election of Lai Ching-te who won with 40.1% of the votes, while his opponents, Hou Yu-ih of the KMT had 33.5% of the votes, and Ko Wen-je of the Taiwan People's Party with 26.5% of the vote. In addition, this election made the DPP the first party to win three consecutive presidential terms since direct elections were introduced in 1996. The DPP was unable to retain its majority in the Legislative Yuan, losing ten seats.\nIdeology and policies.\nThe DPP is a centre to centre-left party generally described as progressive. It has also been described as liberal, as well as social democratic. The party takes a Taiwanese nationalist position, advocating for strengthening Taiwanese identity; the party opposes the KMT and mainland China's pan-Chinese nationalism, and criticizes China's claims of sovereignty over Taiwan as 'colonialism' or 'imperialism'. Programs supported by the party include moderate social welfare policies involving the rights of women, senior citizens, children, young people, labor, minorities, indigenous peoples, farmers, and other disadvantaged sectors of the society. Furthermore, its platform includes a legal and political order based on human rights and democracy; balanced economic and financial administration; fair and open social welfare; educational and cultural reform; and, independent defense and peaceful foreign policy with closer ties to United States and Japan. The party is socially liberal and has a progressive stance that includes support for gender equality and same-sex marriage under Tsai's leadership, and also has a conservative base that includes support from the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan.\nStance on Taiwanese independence.\nThe primary political axis in Taiwan involves the issue of Taiwan independence versus Chinese unification. Although the differences tend to be portrayed in polarized terms, both major coalitions have developed modified, nuanced and often complex positions. Though opposed in the philosophical origins, the practical differences between such positions can sometimes be subtle.\nThe current official position of the party is that Taiwan is an independent and sovereign country whose territory consists of Taiwan and its surrounding smaller islands and whose sovereignty derives only from the ROC citizens living in Taiwan (similar philosophy of self-determination), based on the 1999 \"Resolution on Taiwan's Future\". It considers Taiwan an independent nation under the name of Republic of China, making a formal declaration of independence unnecessary. Though calls for drafting a new constitution and a declaration of a Republic of Taiwan was written into the party charter in 1991, the 1999 resolution has practically superseded the earlier charter. The DPP rejects the so-called \"One China principle\" defined in 1992 as the basis for official diplomatic relations with the PRC and advocates a Taiwanese national identity which is separate from mainland China.\nBy contrast, the KMT or pan-blue coalition agrees that the Republic of China is an independent and sovereign country that is not part of the PRC, but argues that a one China principle (with different definitions across the strait) can be used as the basis for talks with China. The KMT also opposes Taiwan independence and argues that efforts to establish a Taiwanese national identity separated from the Chinese national identity are unnecessary and needlessly provocative. Some KMT conservative officials have called efforts from DPP \"anti-China\" (opposing migrants from mainland China, who DPP officials did not recognize as Taiwanese, but Chinese). At the other end of the political spectrum, the acceptance by the DPP of the symbols of the Republic of China is opposed by the Taiwan Solidarity Union.\nThe first years of the DPP as the ruling party drew accusations from the opposition as a self-styled Taiwanese nationalist party, the DPP was itself inadequately sensitive to the ethnographic diversity of Taiwan's population. Where the KMT had been guilty of Chinese chauvinism, the critics charged, the DPP might offer nothing more as a remedy than Hoklo chauvinism. The DPP argues that its efforts to promote a Taiwanese national identity are merely an effort to normalize a Taiwanese identity repressed during years of authoritarian Kuomintang rule.\nSupport.\nSince the democratization of Taiwan in the 1990s, the DPP has had its strongest performance in the Hokkien-speaking counties and cities of Taiwan, compared with the predominantly Hakka and Mandarin-speaking counties, that tend to support the Kuomintang.\nThe deep-rooted hostility between Taiwanese aborigines and (Taiwanese) Hoklo, and the effective KMT networks within aboriginal communities contribute to aboriginal skepticism against the DPP and the aboriginals' tendency to vote for the KMT. Aboriginals have criticized politicians for abusing the \"indigenization\" movement for political gains, such as aboriginal opposition to the DPP's \"rectification\" by recognizing the Truku for political reasons, where the Atayal and Seediq slammed the Truku for their name rectification. In 2008, the majority of mountain townships voted for Ma Ying-jeou. However, the DPP share of the aboriginal vote has been rising.\nCorruption.\nThe DPP has been plagued by frequent corruption scandals which has increased feeling amongst voters that fraud is an acceptable practice within the party. \nFormer DPP president of Taiwan Chen Shui-bian has also been involved in a raft of corruption scandals that continue to affect the party's reputation. Chen was sentenced to life imprisonment on corruption charges in 2009 that his supporters said were politically motivated. Chen was acquitted of embezzling millions of New Taiwan Dollars from a special presidential fund while he was in power, but was found guilty of money laundering and forging documents, and was given an additional two-year sentence. As Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen prepared to leave office in 2024, she declined to comment on whether or not she would pardon Chen of his corruption convictions.\nIn 2024, the former DPP Premier of the Republic of China Cheng Wen-tsan was detained on corruption charges relating to his time as Taoyuan mayor, former DPP Tainan Council speaker Lai Mei-hui received a 2-year suspended sentence for corruption, and prosecutors began an investigation into DPP Legislator Lin I-chin for allegedly fraudulently claiming public funds.\nStructure.\nThe DPP National Party Congress selects, for two-year terms, the 30 members of the Central Executive Committee and the 11 members of the Central Review Committee. The Central Executive Committee, in turn, chooses the 10 members of the Central Standing Committee. Since 2012, the DPP has had a \"China Affairs Committee\" to deal with Cross-Strait relations; the name caused some controversy within the party and in the Taiwan media, with critics suggesting that \"Mainland Affairs Committee\" or \"Cross-Strait Affairs Committee\" would show less of a hostile \"One Country on Each Side\" attitude.\nFactions.\nFor many years the DPP officially recognized several factions within its membership, such as the New Tide faction (), the Formosa faction (), the Justice Alliance faction () and Welfare State Alliance faction (). Different factions endorse slightly different policies and are often generationally identifiable, representing individuals who had entered the party at different times. In 2006, the party ended recognition of factions. The factions have since stated that they will comply with the resolution. However, the factions are still referred to by name in national media.\nAs of 2022, \"Taiwan News\" identified at least 7 factions within the party:"}
{"id": "8846", "revid": "27752372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8846", "title": "Datura", "text": "Datura is a genus of nine species of highly poisonous, vespertine-flowering plants belonging to the nightshade family (Solanaceae). They are commonly known as thornapples or jimsonweeds, but are also known as devil's trumpets or mad apple (not to be confused with angel's trumpets, which are placed in the closely related genus \"Brugmansia\"). Other English common names include moonflower, devil's weed, and hell's bells. All species of \"Datura\" are extremely poisonous and psychoactive, especially their seeds and flowers, which can cause respiratory depression, arrhythmias, fever, delirium, hallucinations, anticholinergic toxidrome, psychosis, and death if taken internally.\nDue to their effects and symptoms, \"Datura\" species have occasionally been used not only as poisons, but also as hallucinogens by various groups throughout history. Traditionally, their psychoactive administration has often been associated with witchcraft and sorcery or similar practices in many cultures, including the Western world. Certain common \"Datura\" species have also been used ritualistically as entheogens by some Native American groups.\nNon-psychoactive use of plants in the genus is usually done for medicinal purposes, and the alkaloids present in some species have long been considered traditional medicines in both the New and Old Worlds due to the presence of the alkaloids scopolamine and atropine, which are also produced by plants associated with Old World medicine such as \"Hyoscyamus niger\", \"Atropa belladonna\", and \"Mandragora officinarum\".\nEtymology.\nThe generic name \"Datura\" is taken from Hindi \u0927\u0924\u0942\u0930\u093e ' \"thorn-apple\", ultimately from Sanskrit \u0927\u0924\u094d\u0924\u0942\u0930 ' \"white thorn-apple\" (referring to \"Datura metel\" of Asia). In the Ayurvedic text \"Sushruta Samhita\", different species of \"Datura\" are also referred to as ' and '. \"Dhatura\" is offered to Shiva in Hinduism. Record of this name in English dates back to 1662. Nathaniel Hawthorne refers to one type in \"The Scarlet Letter\" as \"apple-Peru\". In Mexico, its common name is \"toloache\". The Mexican common name (also spelled ) derives from the Nahuatl , meaning \"the plant with the nodding head\" (in reference to the nodding seed capsules of \"Datura\" species belonging to section \"Dutra\" of the genus).\nDescription.\n\"Datura\" species are herbaceous, leafy annuals and short-lived perennials, which can reach up to 2\u00a0m in height. The leaves are alternate, 10\u201320\u00a0cm long, and 5\u201318\u00a0cm broad, with a lobed or toothed margin. The flowers are erect or spreading (not pendulous like those of \"Brugmansia\"), trumpet-shaped, 5\u201320\u00a0cm long, and 4\u201312\u00a0cm broad at the mouth; colours vary from white to yellow and pale purple. The fruit is a spiny capsule, 4\u201310\u00a0cm long and 2\u20136\u00a0cm broad, splitting open when ripe to release the numerous seeds. The seeds disperse freely over pastures, fields, and even wasteland locations.\n\"Datura\" belongs to the classic \"witches' weeds\", along with deadly nightshade, henbane, and mandrake. All parts of the plants are toxic, and the genus has a long history of use for causing delirious states and death. It was well known as an essential ingredient of magical ointments, potions, and witches' brews, most notably \"Datura stramonium\".\nIn India, \"D. metel\" has long been regarded as a poison and aphrodisiac, having been used in Ayurveda as a medicine since ancient times. It features in rituals and prayers to Shiva and also in Ganesh Chaturthi, a festival devoted to the deity Ganesha. The larvae of some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species, including \"Hypercompe indecisa\", eat some \"Datura\" species. It has been observed that while insects may prefer to feed on \"Datura\" leaves, other animals such as cows will generally avoid consuming them.\nSpecies and cultivars.\nClassifying \"Datura\" as to its species is difficult, and the descriptions of new species often are accepted prematurely. Later, these \"new species\" are found to be simply varieties that have evolved due to conditions at a specific location. They usually disappear in a few years. Contributing to the confusion is the fact that various species, such as \"D. wrightii\" and \"D. inoxia\", are very similar in appearance, and the variation within a species can be extreme. For example, \"Datura\" species can change size of plant, leaf, and flowers, all depending on location. The same species, when growing in a half-shady, damp location can develop into a flowering bush half as tall as an adult human of average height, but when growing in a very dry location, will only grow into a thin plant not much more than ankle high, with tiny flowers and a few miniature leaves. \"Datura\" species are native to dry, temperate, and subtropical regions. Most species are native to Mexico, which is considered the center of origin of the genus. Several species are considered to have extra-American native ranges: \"D. ferox\" (native to China), \"D. metel\" (native to India and Southeast Asia), and \"D. leichardthii\" (native to Australia), however these may be early introductions from Central America.\nA group of South American species formerly placed in the genus \"Datura\" are now placed in the distinct genus \"Brugmansia\" (\"Brugmansia\" differs from \"Datura\" in that it is woody (the species being shrubs or small trees) and has indehiscent fruits.) The solanaceous tribe Datureae, to which \"Datura\" and \"Brugmansia\" belong, has recently acquired a new, monotypic genus \"Trompettia\" , featuring the species \"Trompettia cardenasiana\", which had hitherto been misclassified as belonging to the genus \"Iochroma\".\n\"Datura\" specialists, the Preissels, accept only 9 species of \"Datura\", but Kew's Plants of the World Online currently lists the following 14 (out of which the current edition of The Plant List does not list \"D. arenicola\", \"D. lanosa\", and \"D. pruinosa\" as accepted spp.):\nOf the above, \"D. leichhardtii\" is close enough to \"D. pruinosa\" to merit demotion to a subspecies and likewise \"D. ferox\" and \"D. quercifolia\" are close enough in morphology to merit being subsumed in a single species. Furthermore, the Australian provenance of \"D. leichhardtii\", the Chinese provenance of \"D. ferox\", and the Afro-Asiatic provenance of \"D. metel\" have been cast into serious doubt, with the three species being almost certainly post-Columbian introductions to the regions to which they were originally thought native.\nThe case of \"D. metel\" is unique in that not only is the plant not a true species at all, but an assemblage of ancient pre-Columbian cultivars created from \"D. innoxia\" in the Greater Antilles, but evidence is mounting that it was introduced to the Indian subcontinent no later than the second century CE \u2013 whether by natural or human agency is, as yet, unknown \u2013 making it one of the most ancient plant introductions (if not the most ancient) from the New World to the Old World (see Columbian Exchange).\n\"D. arenicola\" is a remarkable new species, described only in 2013, of very restricted range, and so distinctive as to have merited the creation for it of the new section \"Discola\" [not to be confused with the species name \"D. discolor\"] within the genus. The specific name \"arenicola\" means \"loving (i.e. \"thriving in\") sand\".\nAmerican Brugmansia and Datura Society, Inc. (ABADS) is designated in the 2004 edition of the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants as the official International Cultivar Registration Authority for \"Datura\". This role was delegated to ABADS by the International Society for Horticultural Science in 2002.\nCultivation.\n\"Datura\" species are usually sown annually from the seed produced in the spiny capsules, but, with care, the tuberous-rooted perennial species may be overwintered. Most species are suited to being planted outside or in containers. As a rule, they need warm, sunny places and soil that will keep their roots dry. When grown outdoors in good locations, the plants tend to reseed themselves and may become invasive. In containers, they should have porous, aerated potting soil with adequate drainage. The plants are susceptible to fungi in the root area, so anaerobic organic enrichment such as anaerobically composted organic matter or manure, should be avoided.\nToxicity.\nAll \"Datura\" plants contain tropane alkaloids such as scopolamine and atropine, primarily in their seeds and flowers, as well as the roots of certain species such as \"D. wrightii\". Because of the presence of these substances, \"Datura\" has been used for centuries in some cultures as a poison. A given plant's toxicity depends on its age, where it is growing, and the local weather conditions. These variations make \"Datura\" exceptionally hazardous as a drug. Since datura directly causes the effects of anticholinergic syndrome, the symptoms of its toxicity are often cited by the traditional mnemonic: \"Blind as a bat, mad as a hatter, red as a beet, hot as a hare, dry as a bone, the bowel and bladder lose their tone, and the heart runs alone\". \"Datura\", as well as long-term psychoactive/toxic usage of other anticholinergic drugs, also appear to significantly increase the risk of developing dementia.\nIn traditional cultures, a great deal of experience with and detailed knowledge of \"Datura\" was critical to minimize harm. Many tragic incidents result from modern users ingesting or smoking \"Datura\". For example, in the 1990s and 2000s, the United States media reported stories of adolescents and young adults dying or becoming seriously ill from intentionally ingesting \"Datura\". Deliberate or inadvertent poisoning resulting from smoking jimsonweed and other related species has been reported as well. Although most poisonings occur with more common species of \"Datura\" such as \"D. stramonium\", several reports in the medical literature indicate deaths from \"D. ferox\" intoxication. Children are especially vulnerable to atropine poisoning.\nIn some parts of Europe and India, \"Datura\" has been a popular poison for suicide and murder. From 1950 to 1965, the State Chemical Laboratories in Agra, India, investigated 2,778 deaths caused by ingesting \"Datura.\" A group called Thugs \"(practicers of thuggee)\" were reportedly devotees of an Indian religious cult made up of robbers and assassins who strangled or poisoned their victims in rituals devoted to the Hindu goddess Kali. They were alleged to employ \"Datura\" in many such poisonings, using it also to induce drowsiness or stupefaction, making strangulation easier.\n\"Datura\" toxins may be ingested accidentally by consumption of honey produced by several wasp species, including \"Brachygastra lecheguana\", during the \"Datura\" blooming season. These semi-domesticated honey wasps apparently collect \"Datura\" nectar for honey production, which can lead to poisoning.\nThe U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported accidental poisoning resulting in hospitalization for a family of six who inadvertently ingested \"Datura\" used as an ingredient in stew.\nIn some places around the world, such as India due to the Drug &amp; Cosmetic Act 1940 &amp; Rule 1995, buying, selling, or cultivating \"Datura\" plants is prohibited. Solanaceous tribes with a similar chemistry (i.e. a similar tropane alkaloid content), include the Hyoscyameae, containing such well-known toxic species as \"Hyoscyamus niger\" and \"Atropa belladonna\", the Solandreae containing the genus \"Solandra\" (\"chalice vines\") and the Mandragoreae, named for the famous \"Mandragora officinarum\", most of which are considered traditional witches' herbs and poisons.\nEffects of ingestion.\n\"Datura\" is considered a deliriant. Due to the potent combination of anticholinergic substances it contains, \"Datura\" intoxication typically produces the effects of anticholinergic delirium (usually involving a complete or relative inability to differentiate reality from fantasy); bizarre thoughts, hyperthermia; tachycardia; bizarre, and possibly violent behavior; dry skin; dry mouth; illusions; and severe mydriasis (dilated pupils) with resultant painful photophobia that can last several days. Muscle stiffness, urinary retention, temporary paralysis, disrobing, emotional bluntness, dysphoria, and confusion are often reported, and pronounced amnesia is another commonly reported effect. The psychoactive alkaloids scopolamine and atropine are also both known for their characteristic hyperactive effects and ability to cause stark and dream-like hallucinations. The onset of symptoms generally occurs around 30 to 60 minutes after ingesting the herb. These symptoms generally last from 24 to 48 hours, but have been reported in some cases to last two weeks or longer.\nTreatment.\nDue to their agitated behavior and confused mental state, people with acute \"Datura\" poisoning or intoxication are typically hospitalized. Gastric lavage and the administration of activated charcoal can be used to reduce the stomach's absorption of the ingested material, and the drug physostigmine is used to reverse the effect of the poisons. Benzodiazepines can be given to calm the patient's agitation, and supportive care with oxygen, hydration, and symptomatic treatment is often provided. Observation of the patient is indicated until the symptoms resolve, usually from 24 to 36 hours after ingestion of the \"Datura\".\nPsychoactive use.\nIn \"Pharmacology and Abuse of Cocaine, Amphetamines, Ecstasy and Related Designer Drugs\", Freye asserts, \"Few substances have received as many severely negative recreational experience reports as has \"Datura\".\" The overwhelming majority of those who describe their use of \"Datura\" find their experiences extremely unpleasant \u2500 both mentally and often physically. However, anthropologists have found that indigenous groups, with a great deal of experience with and detailed knowledge of \"Datura\", have been known to use \"Datura\" spiritually (including the Navajo and especially the Havasupai). Adequate knowledge of \"Datura\" properties is necessary to facilitate a safe experience. The ancient inhabitants of what became central and southern California used to ingest \"Datura\" to \"commune with deities through visions\". The Southern Paiute believe \"Datura\" can help locate missing objects. In ancient Mexico, \"Datura\" also played an important role in the religion of the Aztecs and the practices of their medicine men and necromancers. It was reportedly used by the Aztecs for ritual sacrifice and malevolent purposes as well. In modern-day Mexico, some datura species are still used for sorcery and other occult practices, mostly in the southern region of Veracruz, specifically in the city of Catemaco.\nBernardino de Sahag\u00fan, in around 1569, called attention to \"Datura\" in these words: \n\"It is administered in potions in order to cause harm to those who are objects of hatred. Those who eat it have visions of fearful things. Magicians or those who wish to harm someone administer it in food or drink. This herb is medicinal and its seed is used as a remedy for gout, ground up and applied to the part affected.\"\nChristian R\u00e4tsch has said, \"A mild dosage produces medicinal and healing effects, a moderate dosage produces aphrodisiac effects, and high dosages are used for shamanic purposes\". Wade Davis, an ethnobotanist, also lists it as an essential ingredient of Haitian zombie potion. In Western culture, the same species (\"Datura stramonium\") has been said to have been commonly used by witches as an ingredient for their flying ointments and was regularly included in detailed recipes of magical ointments dating back as far as the early modern period, predominately in New England and Western Europe. During the anti-witchcraft hysteria of colonial times it was considered unlucky or inappropriate to grow \"D. stramonium\" in one's garden due to its supposed reputation for aiding in incantations."}
{"id": "8847", "revid": "1151535088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8847", "title": "Commutator subgroup", "text": "In mathematics, more specifically in abstract algebra, the commutator subgroup or derived subgroup of a group is the subgroup generated by all the commutators of the group.\nThe commutator subgroup is important because it is the smallest normal subgroup such that the quotient group of the original group by this subgroup is abelian. In other words, formula_1 is abelian if and only if formula_2 contains the commutator subgroup of formula_3. So in some sense it provides a measure of how far the group is from being abelian; the larger the commutator subgroup is, the \"less abelian\" the group is.\nCommutators.\nFor elements formula_4 and formula_5 of a group \"G\", the commutator of formula_4 and formula_5 is formula_8. The commutator formula_9 is equal to the identity element \"e\" if and only if formula_10 , that is, if and only if formula_4 and formula_5 commute. In general, formula_13.\nHowever, the notation is somewhat arbitrary and there is a non-equivalent variant definition for the commutator that has the inverses on the right hand side of the equation: formula_14 in which case formula_15 but instead formula_16.\nAn element of \"G\" of the form formula_9 for some \"g\" and \"h\" is called a commutator. The identity element \"e\" = [\"e\",\"e\"] is always a commutator, and it is the only commutator if and only if \"G\" is abelian.\nHere are some simple but useful commutator identities, true for any elements \"s\", \"g\", \"h\" of a group \"G\":\nThe first and second identities imply that the set of commutators in \"G\" is closed under inversion and conjugation. If in the third identity we take \"H\" = \"G\", we get that the set of commutators is stable under any endomorphism of \"G\". This is in fact a generalization of the second identity, since we can take \"f\" to be the conjugation automorphism on \"G\", formula_26, to get the second identity.\nHowever, the product of two or more commutators need not be a commutator. A generic example is [\"a\",\"b\"][\"c\",\"d\"] in the free group on \"a\",\"b\",\"c\",\"d\". It is known that the least order of a finite group for which there exists two commutators whose product is not a commutator is 96; in fact there are two nonisomorphic groups of order 96 with this property.\nDefinition.\nThis motivates the definition of the commutator subgroup formula_27 (also called the derived subgroup, and denoted formula_28 or formula_29) of \"G\": it is the subgroup generated by all the commutators.\nIt follows from this definition that any element of formula_27 is of the form\nfor some natural number formula_32, where the \"g\"\"i\" and \"h\"\"i\" are elements of \"G\". Moreover, since formula_33, the commutator subgroup is normal in \"G\". For any homomorphism \"f\": \"G\" \u2192 \"H\",\nso that formula_35.\nThis shows that the commutator subgroup can be viewed as a functor on the category of groups, some implications of which are explored below. Moreover, taking \"G\" = \"H\" it shows that the commutator subgroup is stable under every endomorphism of \"G\": that is, [\"G\",\"G\"] is a fully characteristic subgroup of \"G\", a property considerably stronger than normality.\nThe commutator subgroup can also be defined as the set of elements \"g\" of the group that have an expression as a product \"g\" = \"g\"1 \"g\"2 ... \"g\"\"k\" that can be rearranged to give the identity.\nDerived series.\nThis construction can be iterated:\nThe groups formula_38 are called the second derived subgroup, third derived subgroup, and so forth, and the descending normal series\nis called the derived series. This should not be confused with the lower central series, whose terms are formula_40.\nFor a finite group, the derived series terminates in a perfect group, which may or may not be trivial. For an infinite group, the derived series need not terminate at a finite stage, and one can continue it to infinite ordinal numbers via transfinite recursion, thereby obtaining the transfinite derived series, which eventually terminates at the perfect core of the group.\nAbelianization.\nGiven a group formula_3, a quotient group formula_1 is abelian if and only if formula_43.\nThe quotient formula_44 is an abelian group called the abelianization of formula_3 or formula_3 made abelian. It is usually denoted by formula_47 or formula_48.\nThere is a useful categorical interpretation of the map formula_49. Namely formula_50 is universal for homomorphisms from formula_3 to an abelian group formula_52: for any abelian group formula_52 and homomorphism of groups formula_54 there exists a unique homomorphism formula_55 such that formula_56. As usual for objects defined by universal mapping properties, this shows the uniqueness of the abelianization formula_47 up to canonical isomorphism, whereas the explicit construction formula_58 shows existence.\nThe abelianization functor is the left adjoint of the inclusion functor from the category of abelian groups to the category of groups. The existence of the abelianization functor Grp \u2192 Ab makes the category Ab a reflective subcategory of the category of groups, defined as a full subcategory whose inclusion functor has a left adjoint. \nAnother important interpretation of formula_47 is as formula_60, the first homology group of formula_3 with integral coefficients.\nClasses of groups.\nA group formula_3 is an abelian group if and only if the derived group is trivial: [\"G\",\"G\"] = {\"e\"}. Equivalently, if and only if the group equals its abelianization. See above for the definition of a group's abelianization.\nA group formula_3 is a perfect group if and only if the derived group equals the group itself: [\"G\",\"G\"] = \"G\". Equivalently, if and only if the abelianization of the group is trivial. This is \"opposite\" to abelian.\nA group with formula_64 for some \"n\" in N is called a solvable group; this is weaker than abelian, which is the case \"n\" = 1.\nA group with formula_65 for all \"n\" in N is called a non-solvable group.\nA group with formula_66 for some ordinal number, possibly infinite, is called a hypoabelian group; this is weaker than solvable, which is the case \"\u03b1\" is finite (a natural number).\nPerfect group.\nWhenever a group formula_3 has derived subgroup equal to itself, formula_68, it is called a perfect group. This includes non-abelian simple groups and the special linear groups formula_69 for a fixed field formula_70.\nExamples.\nMap from Out.\nSince the derived subgroup is characteristic, any automorphism of \"G\" induces an automorphism of the abelianization. Since the abelianization is abelian, inner automorphisms act trivially, hence this yields a map"}
{"id": "8848", "revid": "48396901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8848", "title": "December 19", "text": ""}
{"id": "8849", "revid": "48396901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8849", "title": "December 20", "text": ""}
{"id": "8850", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8850", "title": "December 21", "text": ""}
{"id": "8851", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8851", "title": "December 14", "text": ""}
{"id": "8852", "revid": "48396901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8852", "title": "December 13", "text": ""}
{"id": "8853", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8853", "title": "Dr Suess", "text": ""}
{"id": "8854", "revid": "602857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8854", "title": "Dr Seuss", "text": ""}
{"id": "8855", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8855", "title": "Dr. Seuss", "text": "Theodor Seuss Geisel ( ; March 2, 1904 \u2013 September 24, 1991) was an American children's author and cartoonist. He is known for his work writing and illustrating more than 60 books under the pen name Dr. Seuss ( ). His work includes many of the most popular children's books of all time, selling over 600 million copies and being translated into more than 20 languages by the time of his death.\nGeisel adopted the name \"Dr. Seuss\" as an undergraduate at Dartmouth College and as a graduate student at Lincoln College, Oxford. He left Oxford in 1927 to begin his career as an illustrator and cartoonist for \"Vanity Fair\", \"Life\", and various other publications. He also worked as an illustrator for advertising campaigns, including for FLIT and Standard Oil, and as a political cartoonist for the New York newspaper \"PM\". He published his first children's book \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\" in 1937. During World War II, he took a brief hiatus from children's literature to illustrate political cartoons, and he worked in the animation and film department of the United States Army.\nAfter the war, Geisel returned to writing children's books, writing acclaimed works such as \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950), \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1955), \"The Cat in the Hat\" (1957), \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), \"Green Eggs and Ham\" (1960), \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\" (1960), \"The Sneetches and Other Stories\" (1961), \"The Lorax\" (1971), \"The Butter Battle Book\" (1984), and \"Oh, the Places You'll Go!\" (1990). He published over 60 books during his career, which have spawned numerous adaptations, including eleven television specials, five feature films, a Broadway musical, and four television series.\nHe received two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Children's Special for \"Halloween Is Grinch Night\" (1978) and Outstanding Animated Program for \"The Grinch Grinches the Cat in the Hat\" (1982). In 1984, he won a Pulitzer Prize Special Citation. His birthday, March 2, has been adopted as the annual date for National Read Across America Day, an initiative focused on reading created by the National Education Association.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nGeisel was born and raised in Springfield, Massachusetts, the son of Henrietta (\"n\u00e9e\" Seuss) and Theodor Robert Geisel. His father managed the family brewery and was later appointed to supervise Springfield's public park system by Mayor John A. Denison after the brewery closed because of Prohibition. Mulberry Street in Springfield, made famous in his first children's book \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\", is near his boyhood home on Fairfield Street. The family was of German descent. Geisel was raised as a Missouri Synod Lutheran and remained in the denomination his entire life.\nGeisel attended Dartmouth College, graduating in 1925. At Dartmouth, he joined the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity and the humor magazine \"Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern\", eventually rising to the rank of editor-in-chief. While at Dartmouth, he was caught drinking gin with nine friends in his room. At the time, the possession and consumption of alcohol was illegal under Prohibition laws, which remained in place between 1920 and 1933. As a result of this infraction, Dean Craven Laycock insisted that Geisel resign from all extracurricular activities, including the \"Jack-O-Lantern\". To continue working on the magazine without the administration's knowledge, Geisel began signing his work with the pen name \"Seuss\". He was encouraged in his writing by professor of rhetoric W. Benfield Pressey, whom he described as his \"big inspiration for writing\" at Dartmouth.\nUpon graduating from Dartmouth, he entered Lincoln College, Oxford, intending to earn a Doctor of Philosophy (D.Phil.) in English literature. At Oxford, he met his future wife Helen Palmer, who encouraged him to give up becoming an English teacher in favor of pursuing drawing as a career. She later recalled that \"Ted's notebooks were always filled with these fabulous animals. So I set to work diverting him; here was a man who could draw such pictures; he should be earning a living doing that.\"\nEarly career.\nGeisel left Oxford without earning a degree and returned to the United States in February 1927, where he immediately began submitting writings and drawings to magazines, book publishers, and advertising agencies. Making use of his time in Europe, he pitched a series of cartoons called \"Eminent Europeans\" to \"Life\" magazine, but the magazine passed on it. His first nationally published cartoon appeared in the July 16, 1927, issue of \"The Saturday Evening Post\". This single $25 sale encouraged Geisel to move from Springfield to New York City. Later that year, Geisel accepted a job as writer and illustrator at the humor magazine \"Judge\", and he felt financially stable enough to marry Palmer. His first cartoon for \"Judge\" appeared on October 22, 1927, and Geisel and Palmer were married on November 29. Geisel's first work signed \"Dr. Seuss\" was published in \"Judge\" about six months after he started working there.\nIn early 1928, one of Geisel's cartoons for \"Judge\" mentioned Flit, a common bug spray at the time manufactured by Standard Oil of New Jersey. According to Geisel, the wife of an advertising executive in charge of advertising Flit saw Geisel's cartoon at a hairdresser's and urged her husband to sign him. Geisel's first Flit ad appeared on May 31, 1928, and the campaign continued sporadically until 1941. The campaign's catchphrase \"Quick, Henry, the Flit!\" became a part of popular culture. It spawned a song and was used as a punch line for comedians such as Fred Allen and Jack Benny. As Geisel gained fame for the Flit campaign, his work was in demand and began to appear regularly in magazines such as \"Life\", \"Liberty\" and \"Vanity Fair\".\nThe money Geisel earned from his advertising work and magazine submissions made him wealthier than even his most successful Dartmouth classmates. The increased income allowed the Geisels to move to better quarters and to socialize in higher social circles. They became friends with the wealthy family of banker Frank A. Vanderlip. They also traveled extensively: by 1936, Geisel and his wife had visited 30 countries together. They did not have children, neither kept regular office hours, and they had ample money. Geisel also felt that traveling helped his creativity.\nGeisel's success with the Flit campaign led to more advertising work, including for other Standard Oil products like Essomarine boat fuel and Essolube Motor Oil and for other companies like the Ford Motor Company, NBC Radio Network, and Holly Sugar. His first foray into books, \"Boners\", a collection of children's sayings that he illustrated, was published by Viking Press in 1931. It topped \"The New York Times\" non-fiction bestseller list and led to a sequel, \"More Boners\", published the same year. Encouraged by the books' sales and positive critical reception, Geisel wrote and illustrated an ABC book featuring \"very strange animals\" that failed to interest publishers.\nIn 1936, Geisel and his wife were returning from an ocean voyage to Europe when the rhythm of the ship's engines inspired the poem that became his first children's book: \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\". Based on Geisel's varied accounts, the book was rejected by between 20 and 43 publishers. According to Geisel, he was walking home to burn the manuscript when a chance encounter with an old Dartmouth classmate led to its publication by Vanguard Press. Geisel wrote four more books before the US entered World War II. This included \"The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins\" in 1938, as well as \"The King's Stilts\" and \"The Seven Lady Godivas\" in 1939, all of which were in prose, atypically for him. This was followed by \"Horton Hatches the Egg\" in 1940, in which Geisel returned to the use of verse.\nWorld War II\u2013era work.\nAs World War II began, Geisel turned to political cartoons, drawing over 400 in two years as editorial cartoonist for the left-leaning New York City daily newspaper, \"PM\". Geisel's political cartoons, later published in \"Dr. Seuss Goes to War\", denounced Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini and were highly critical of non-interventionists (\"isolationists\"), such as Charles Lindbergh, who opposed US entry into the war. One cartoon depicted Japanese Americans being handed TNT in anticipation of a \"signal from home\", while other cartoons deplored the racism at home against Jews and blacks that harmed the war effort. His cartoons were strongly supportive of President Roosevelt's handling of the war, combining the usual exhortations to ration and contribute to the war effort with frequent attacks on Congress (especially the Republican Party), parts of the press (such as the \"New York Daily News\", \"Chicago Tribune\" and \"Washington Times-Herald\"), and others for criticism of Roosevelt, criticism of aid to the Soviet Union, investigation of suspected Communists, and other offences that he depicted as leading to disunity and helping the Nazis, intentionally or inadvertently.\nIn 1942, Geisel turned his energies to direct support of the U.S. war effort. First, he worked drawing posters for the Treasury Department and the War Production Board. Then, in 1943, he joined the Army as a captain and was commander of the Animation Department of the First Motion Picture Unit of the United States Army Air Forces, where he wrote films that included \"Your Job in Germany\", a 1945 propaganda film about peace in Europe after World War II; \"Our Job in Japan\" and the \"Private Snafu\" series of adult army training films. While in the Army, he was awarded the Legion of Merit. \"Our Job in Japan\" became the basis for the commercially released film \"Design for Death\" (1947), a study of Japanese culture that won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature Film. \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\" (1950) was based on an original story by Seuss and won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film.\nLater years.\nAfter the war, Geisel and his wife moved to the La Jolla community of San Diego, California, where he returned to writing children's books. He published most of his books through Random House in North America and William Collins, Sons (later HarperCollins) internationally. He wrote many, including such favorites as \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950), \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1955), \"If I Ran the Circus\" (1956), \"The Cat in the Hat\" (1957), \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), and \"Green Eggs and Ham\" (1960). He received numerous awards throughout his career, but he won neither the Caldecott Medal nor the Newbery Medal. Three of his titles from this period were, however, chosen as Caldecott runners-up (now referred to as Caldecott Honor books): \"McElligot's Pool\" (1947), \"Bartholomew and the Oobleck\" (1949), and \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950). Dr. Seuss also wrote the musical and fantasy film \"The 5,000 Fingers of Dr. T.\", which was released in 1953. The movie was a critical and financial failure, and Geisel never attempted another feature film. During the 1950s, he also published a number of illustrated short stories, mostly in \"Redbook\" magazine. Some of these were later collected (in volumes such as \"The Sneetches and Other Stories\") or reworked into independent books (\"If I Ran the Zoo\"). A number have never been reprinted since their original appearances.\nIn May 1954, \"Life\" published a report on illiteracy among school children which concluded that children were not learning to read because their books were boring. William Ellsworth Spaulding was the director of the education division at Houghton Mifflin (he later became its chairman), and he compiled a list of 348 words that he felt were important for first-graders to recognize. He asked Geisel to cut the list to 250 words and to write a book using only those words. Spaulding challenged Geisel to \"bring back a book children can't put down\". Nine months later, Geisel completed \"The Cat in the Hat\", using 236 of the words given to him. It retained the drawing style, verse rhythms, and all the imaginative power of Geisel's earlier works but, because of its simplified vocabulary, it could be read by beginning readers. \"The Cat in the Hat\" and subsequent books written for young children achieved significant international success and they remain very popular today. For example, in 2009, \"Green Eggs and Ham\" sold 540,000 copies, \"The Cat in the Hat\" sold 452,000 copies, and \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\" (1960) sold 409,000 copies\u2014all outselling the majority of newly published children's books.\nGeisel went on to write many other children's books, both in his new simplified-vocabulary manner (sold as Beginner Books) and in his older, more elaborate style.\nIn 1955, Dartmouth awarded Geisel an honorary doctorate of Humane Letters, with the citation:\nGeisel joked that he would now have to sign \"Dr. Dr. Seuss\". His wife was ill at the time, so he delayed accepting it until June 1956.\nGeisel's wife Helen had a long struggle with illnesses. On October 23, 1967, Helen died by suicide. On August 5, 1968, Geisel married Audrey Dimond with whom he had reportedly been having an affair. Although he devoted most of his life to writing children's books, Geisel had no children of his own, saying of children: \"You have 'em; I'll entertain 'em.\" Audrey added that Geisel \"lived his whole life without children and he was very happy without children.\" Audrey oversaw Geisel's estate until her death on December 19, 2018, at the age of 97.\nGeisel was awarded an honorary doctorate of Humane Letters (L.H.D.) from Whittier College in 1980. He also received the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal from the professional children's librarians in 1980, recognizing his \"substantial and lasting contributions to children's literature\". At the time, it was awarded every five years. He won a special Pulitzer Prize in 1984 citing his \"contribution over nearly half a century to the education and enjoyment of America's children and their parents\".\nIllness, death, and posthumous honors.\nGeisel died of cancer on September 24, 1991, at his home in the La Jolla community of San Diego at the age of 87. His ashes were scattered in the Pacific Ocean. On December 1, 1995, four years after his death, University of California, San Diego's University Library Building was renamed Geisel Library in honor of Geisel and Audrey for the generous contributions that they made to the library and their devotion to improving literacy.\nIn 2002, the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden opened in Springfield, Massachusetts, featuring sculptures of Geisel and of many of his characters. In 2017, the Amazing World of Dr. Seuss Museum opened next to the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden in the Springfield Museums Quadrangle. In 2008, Dr. Seuss was inducted into the California Hall of Fame. In 2004, U.S. children's librarians established the annual Theodor Seuss Geisel Award to recognize \"the most distinguished American book for beginning readers published in English in the United States during the preceding year\". It should \"demonstrate creativity and imagination to engage children in reading\" from pre-kindergarten to second grade. At Dartmouth College, incoming first-year students participate in pre-matriculation trips run by the Dartmouth Outing Club, eating green eggs and ham for breakfast at the Moosilauke Ravine Lodge. On April 4, 2012, the Dartmouth Medical School was renamed the Audrey and Theodor Geisel School of Medicine in honor of their many years of generosity to the College. Dr. Seuss has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at the 6500 block of Hollywood Boulevard.\nIn 2012, a crater on the planet Mercury was named after Geisel.\nPen names.\nGeisel's most famous pen name is regularly pronounced , an anglicized pronunciation of his German name (the standard German pronunciation is ). He himself noted that it rhymed with \"voice\" (his own pronunciation being ). Alexander Laing, one of his collaborators on the \"Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern\", wrote of it:\nGeisel switched to the anglicized pronunciation because it \"evoked a figure advantageous for an author of children's books to be associated with\u2014Mother Goose\" and because most people used this pronunciation. He added the \"Doctor (abbreviated Dr.)\" to his pen name because his father had always wanted him to practice medicine.\nFor books that Geisel wrote and others illustrated, he used the pen name \"Theo LeSieg\", starting with \"I Wish That I Had Duck Feet\" published in 1965. \"LeSieg\" is \"Geisel\" spelled backward. Geisel also published one book under the name Rosetta Stone, 1975's \"Because a Little Bug Went Ka-Choo!!\", a collaboration with Michael K. Frith. Frith and Geisel chose the name in honor of Geisel's second wife Audrey, whose maiden name was Stone.\nPolitical views.\nGeisel was a liberal Democrat and a supporter of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal. His early political cartoons show a passionate opposition to fascism, and he urged action against it both before and after the U.S. entered World War\u00a0II. His cartoons portrayed the fear of communism as overstated, finding greater threats in the House Committee on Unamerican Activities and those who threatened to cut the U.S.'s \"life line\" to the USSR and Stalin, whom he once depicted as a porter carrying \"our war load\".\nGeisel supported the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II in order to prevent possible sabotage. Geisel explained his position:\nAfter the war, Geisel overcame his feelings of animosity and his view, using his book \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1954) as an allegory for the American post-war occupation of Japan, as well as dedicating the book to a Japanese friend.\nGeisel converted a copy of one of his famous children's books, \"Marvin K. Mooney Will You Please Go Now!\", into a polemic shortly before the end of the 1972\u20131974 Watergate scandal, in which U.S. president Richard Nixon resigned, by replacing the name of the main character everywhere that it occurred. \"Richard M. Nixon, Will You Please Go Now!\" was published in major newspapers through the column of his friend Art Buchwald.\nThe line \"a person's a person, no matter how small\" from \"Horton Hears a Who!\" has been used widely as a slogan by the pro-life movement in the United States. Geisel and later his widow Audrey objected to this use; according to her attorney, \"She doesn't like people to hijack Dr. Seuss characters or material to front their own points of view.\" In the 1980s, Geisel threatened to sue an anti-abortion group for using this phrase on their stationery, according to his biographer, causing them to remove it. The attorney says he never discussed abortion with either of them, and the biographer says Geisel never expressed a public opinion on the subject. After Seuss's death, Audrey gave financial support to Planned Parenthood.\nIn his children's books.\nGeisel made a point of not beginning to write his stories with a moral in mind, stating that \"kids can see a moral coming a mile off.\" He was not against writing about issues, however; he said that \"there's an inherent moral in any story\", and he remarked that he was \"subversive as hell.\"\nGeisel's books express his views on a wide variety of social and political issues: \"The Lorax\" (1971), about environmentalism and anti-consumerism; \"The Sneetches\" (1961), about racial equality; \"The Butter Battle Book\" (1984), about the arms race; \"Yertle the Turtle\" (1958), about Adolf Hitler and anti-authoritarianism; \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1957), criticizing the economic materialism and consumerism of the Christmas season; and \"Horton Hears a Who!\" (1954), about anti-isolationism and internationalism.\nRetired books.\nSeuss's work for children has been criticized for unconscious racist themes. Dr. Seuss Enterprises, the organization that owns the rights to the books, films, TV shows, stage productions, exhibitions, digital media, licensed merchandise, and other strategic partnerships, announced on March 2, 2021, that it will stop publishing and licensing six books. The publications include \"And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street\" (1937), \"If I Ran the Zoo\" (1950), \"McElligot's Pool\" (1947), \"On Beyond Zebra!\" (1955), \"Scrambled Eggs Super!\" (1953) and \"The Cat's Quizzer\" (1976). According to the organization, the books \"portray people in ways that are hurtful and wrong\" and are no longer being published.\nStyle.\nPoetic meters.\nGeisel wrote most of his books in anapestic tetrameter, a poetic meter employed by many poets of the English literary canon. This is often suggested as one of the reasons that Geisel's writing was so well received.\nArtwork.\nGeisel's early artwork often employed the shaded texture of pencil drawings or watercolors, but in his children's books of the postwar period, he generally made use of a starker medium\u2014pen and ink\u2014normally using just black, white, and one or two colors. His later books, such as \"The Lorax,\" used more colors.\nGeisel's style was unique\u2014his figures are often \"rounded\" and somewhat droopy. This is true, for instance, of the faces of the Grinch and the Cat in the Hat. Almost all his buildings and machinery were devoid of straight lines when they were drawn, even when he was representing real objects. For example, \"If I Ran the Circus\" shows a droopy hoisting crane and a droopy steam calliope.\nGeisel evidently enjoyed drawing architecturally elaborate objects, and a number of his motifs are identifiable with structures in his childhood home of Springfield, including examples such as the onion domes of its and his family's brewery. His endlessly varied but never rectilinear palaces, ramps, platforms, and free-standing stairways are among his most evocative creations. Geisel also drew complex imaginary machines, such as the \"Audio-Telly-O-Tally-O-Count\", from \"Dr. Seuss's Sleep Book\", or the \"most peculiar machine\" of Sylvester McMonkey McBean in \"The Sneetches\". Geisel also liked drawing outlandish arrangements of feathers or fur: for example, the 500th hat of \"Bartholomew Cubbins\", the tail of \"Gertrude McFuzz\", and the pet for girls who like to brush and comb, in \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\".\nGeisel's illustrations often convey motion vividly. He was fond of a sort of \"voil\u00e0\" gesture in which the hand flips outward and the fingers spread slightly backward with the thumb up. This motion is done by Ish in \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\" when he creates fish (who perform the gesture with their fins), in the introduction of the various acts of \"If I Ran the Circus\", and in the introduction of the \"Little Cats\" in \"The Cat in the Hat Comes Back\". He was also fond of drawing hands with interlocked fingers, making it look as though his characters were twiddling their thumbs.\nGeisel also follows the cartoon tradition of showing motion with lines, like in the sweeping lines that accompany Sneelock's final dive in \"If I Ran the Circus\". Cartoon lines are also used to illustrate the action of the senses\u2014sight, smell, and hearing\u2014in \"The Big Brag,\" and lines even illustrate \"thought\", as in the moment when the Grinch conceives his awful plan to ruin Christmas.\nAdaptations.\nFor most of his career, Geisel was reluctant to have his characters marketed in contexts outside of his own books. However, he did permit the creation of several animated cartoons, an art form in which he had gained experience during World War II, and he gradually relaxed his policy as he aged.\nThe first adaptation of one of Geisel's works was an animated short film based on \"Horton Hatches the Egg\", animated at Leon Schlesinger Productions in 1942 and directed by Bob Clampett. As part of George Pal's Puppetoons theatrical cartoon series for Paramount Pictures, two of Geisel's works were adapted into stop-motion films by George Pal. The first, \"The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins\", was released in 1943. The second, \"And to Think I Saw It on Mulberry Street\", with a title slightly altered from the book's, was released in 1944. Both were nominated for an Academy Award for \"Short Subject (Cartoon)\".\nIn 1966, Geisel authorized eminent cartoon artist Chuck Jones\u2014his friend and former colleague from the war\u2014to make a cartoon version of \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" The cartoon was narrated by Boris Karloff, who also provided the voice of the Grinch. It is often broadcast as an annual Christmas television special. Jones directed an adaptation of \"Horton Hears a Who!\" in 1970 and produced an adaptation of \"The Cat in the Hat\" in 1971.\nFrom 1972 to 1983, Geisel wrote six animated specials that were produced by DePatie-Freleng: \"The Lorax\" (1972); \"Dr. Seuss on the Loose\" (1973); \"The Hoober-Bloob Highway\" (1975); \"Halloween Is Grinch Night\" (1977); \"Pontoffel Pock, Where Are You?\" (1980); and \"The Grinch Grinches the Cat in the Hat\" (1982). Several of the specials won multiple Emmy Awards. A Soviet paint-on-glass-animated short film was made in 1986 called \"Welcome\", an adaptation of \"Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose\". The last adaptation of Geisel's work before he died was \"The Butter Battle Book\", a television special based on the book of the same name, directed by Ralph Bakshi. A television film titled \"In Search of Dr. Seuss\" was released in 1994, which adapted many of Seuss's stories.\nAfter Geisel died of cancer at the age of 87 in 1991, his widow Audrey Geisel took charge of licensing matters until her death in 2018. Since then, licensing is controlled by the nonprofit Dr. Seuss Enterprises. Audrey approved a live-action feature-film version of \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas\" starring Jim Carrey, as well as a Seuss-themed Broadway musical called \"Seussical\", and both premiered in 2000. In 2003, another live-action film was released, this time an adaptation of \"The Cat in the Hat\" that featured Mike Myers as the title character. Audrey Geisel spoke critically of the film, especially the casting of Myers as the Cat in the Hat, and stated that she would not allow any further live-action adaptations of Geisel's books. However, a first animated CGI feature film adaptation of \"Horton Hears a Who!\" was approved, and was eventually released on March 14, 2008, to positive reviews. A second CGI-animated feature film adaptation of \"The Lorax\" was released by Universal on March 2, 2012 (on what would have been Seuss's 108th birthday). The third adaptation of Seuss's story, the CGI-animated feature film, \"The Grinch\", was released by Universal on November 9, 2018.\nFive television series have been adapted from Geisel's work. The first, \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\", was an animated television adaptation of Geisel's 1951 cartoon of the same name and lasted three months between 1956 and 1957. The second, \"The Wubbulous World of Dr. Seuss\", was a mix of live-action and puppetry by Jim Henson Television, the producers of The Muppets. It aired for two seasons on Nickelodeon in the United States, from 1996 to 1998. The third, \"Gerald McBoing-Boing\", is a remake of the 1956 series. Produced in Canada by Cookie Jar Entertainment (now DHX Media) and North America by Classic Media (now DreamWorks Classics), it ran from 2005 to 2007. The fourth, \"The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That!\", produced by Portfolio Entertainment Inc., began on August 7, 2010, in Canada and September 6, 2010, in the United States and is producing new episodes . The fifth, \"Green Eggs and Ham\", is an animated streaming television adaptation of Geisel's 1960 book of the same title and premiered on November 8, 2019, on Netflix, and a second season by the title of \"Green Eggs and Ham: The Second Serving\" premiered in 2022.\nGeisel's books and characters are featured in Seuss Landing, one of many islands at the Islands of Adventure theme park in Orlando, Florida. In an attempt to match Geisel's visual style, there are reportedly \"no straight lines\" in Seuss Landing.\n\"The Hollywood Reporter\" has reported that Warner Animation Group and Dr. Seuss Enterprises have struck a deal to make new animated movies based on the stories of Dr. Seuss. Their first project will be a fully animated version of \"The Cat in the Hat\".\nBibliography.\nGeisel wrote more than 60 books over the course of his long career. Most were published under his well-known pseudonym Dr. Seuss, though he also authored more than a dozen books as Theo LeSieg and one as Rosetta Stone. His books have topped many bestseller lists, sold over 600 million copies, and been translated into more than 20 languages. In 2000, \"Publishers Weekly\" compiled a list of the best-selling children's books of all time; of the top 100 hardcover books, 16 were written by Geisel, including \"Green Eggs and Ham\", at number 4, \"The Cat in the Hat\", at number 9, and \"One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish\", at number 13. In the years after his death in 1991, two additional books were published based on his sketches and notes: \"Hooray for Diffendoofer Day!\" and \"Daisy-Head Mayzie\". \"My Many Colored Days\" was originally written in 1973 but was posthumously published in 1996. In September 2011, seven stories originally published in magazines during the 1950s were released in a collection titled \"The Bippolo Seed and Other Lost Stories\"."}
{"id": "8856", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8856", "title": "Dr. Suess", "text": ""}
{"id": "8858", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8858", "title": "Digital compositing", "text": "Digital compositing is the process of digitally assembling multiple images to make a final image, typically for print, motion pictures or screen display. It is the digital analogue of optical film compositing. It's part of VFX processing.\nMathematics.\nThe basic operation used in digital compositing is known as alpha blending, where an opacity value, '\u03b1', is used to control the proportions of two input pixel values that end up a single output pixel.\nAs a simple example, suppose two images of the same size are available and they are to be composited. The input images are referred to as the foreground image and the background image. Each image consists of the same number of pixels. Compositing is performed by mathematically combining information from the corresponding pixels from the two input images and recording the result in a third image, which is called the composited image.\nConsider three pixels;\nand \nThen, considering all three colour channels, and assuming that the colour channels are expressed in a \u03b3=1 colour space (that is to say, the measured values are proportional to light intensity), we have:\nNote that if the operations are performed in a colour space where \u03b3 is not equal to 1 then the operation will lead to non-linear effects which can potentially be seen as aliasing artifacts (or \"jaggies\") along sharp edges in the matte. More generally, nonlinear compositing can have effects such as \"halos\" around composited objects, because the influence of the alpha channel is non-linear. It is possible for a compositing artist to compensate for the effects of compositing in non-linear space.\nPerforming alpha blending is an expensive operation if performed on an entire image or 3D scene. If this operation has to be done in real time video games, there is an easy trick to boost performance.\nBy simply rewriting the mathematical expression, one can save 50% of the multiplications required.\nAlgebraic properties.\nWhen many partially transparent layers need to be composited together, it is worthwhile to consider the algebraic properties of compositing operators used. Specifically, the associativity and commutativity determine when repeated calculation can or cannot be avoided.\nConsider the case when we have four layers to blend to produce the final image: F=A*(B*(C*D)) where A, B, C, D are partially transparent image layers and \"*\" denotes a compositing operator (with the left layer on top of the right layer). If only layer C changes, we should find a way to avoid re-blending all of the layers when computing F. Without any special considerations, four full-image blends would need to occur. For compositing operators that are commutative, such as additive blending, it is safe to re-order the blending operations. In this case, we might compute T=A*(B*D) only once and simply blend T*C to produce F, a single operation. Unfortunately, most operators are not commutative. However, many are associative, suggesting it is safe to re-group operations to F=(A*B)*(C*D), i.e. without changing their order. In this case, we may compute S:=A*B once and save this result. To form F with an associative operator, we need only do two additional compositing operations to integrate the new layer S, by computing F:=S*(C*D). This expression indicates compositing C with all of the layers below it in one step, and then blending all of the layers on top of it with the previous result to produce the final image in the second step.\nIf all layers of an image change regularly but many layers still need to be composited (such as in distributed rendering), the commutativity of a compositing operator can still be exploited to speed up computation through parallelism even when there is no gain from pre-computation. Again, consider the image F=A*(B*(C*D)). Each compositing operation in this expression depends on the next, leading to serial computation. However, associativity can allow us to rewrite F=(A*B)*(C*D) where there are clearly two operations that do not depend on each other that may be executed in parallel. In general, we can build a tree of pair-wise compositing operations with a height that is logarithmic in the number of layers.\nSoftware.\nThe most historically significant nonlinear compositing system was the Cineon, which operated in a logarithmic color space, which more closely mimics the natural light response of film emulsions (the Cineon System, made by Kodak, is no longer in production). Due to the limitations of processing speed and memory, compositing artists did not usually have the luxury of having the system make intermediate conversions to linear space for the compositing steps. Over time, the limitations have become much less significant, and now most compositing is done in a linear color space, even in cases where the source imagery is in a logarithmic color space.\nCompositing often also includes scaling, retouching and colour correction of images.\nNode-based and layer-based compositing.\nThere are two radically different digital compositing workflows: node-based compositing and layer-based compositing.\nNode-based compositing represents an entire composite as a directed acyclic graph, linking media objects and effects in a procedural map, intuitively laying out the progression from source input to final output, and is in fact the way all compositing applications internally handle composites. This type of compositing interface allows great flexibility, including the ability to modify the parameters of an earlier image processing step \"in context\" (while viewing the final composite). Node-based compositing packages often handle keyframing and time effects poorly, as their workflow does not stem directly from a timeline, as do layer-based compositing packages. Software which incorporates a node based interface include Natron, Shake, Blender, Blackmagic Fusion, and Nuke. Nodes are a great way to organize the effects in a complex shot while maintaining a grip on the smaller details.\nLayer-based compositing represents each media object in a composite as a separate layer within a timeline, each with its own time bounds, effects, and keyframes. All the layers are stacked, one above the next, in any desired order; and the bottom layer is usually rendered as a base in the resultant image, with each higher layer being progressively rendered on top of the previously composited of layers, moving upward until all layers have been rendered into the final composite. Layer-based compositing is very well suited for rapid 2D and limited 3D effects, such as in motion graphics, but becomes awkward for more complex composites entailing numerous layers. A partial solution to this is some programs' ability to view the composite-order of elements (such as images, effects, or other attributes) with a visual diagram called a flowchart to nest compositions, or \"comps,\" directly into other compositions, thereby adding complexity to the render-order by first compositing layers in the beginning composition, then combining that resultant image with the layered images from the proceeding composition, and so on."}
{"id": "8859", "revid": "492987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8859", "title": "Dandy", "text": "A dandy is a man who places particular importance upon physical appearance and personal grooming, refined language and leisurely hobbies. A dandy could be a self-made man both in person and \"persona\", who emulated the aristocratic style of life regardless of his middle-class origin, birth, and background, especially during the late 18th and early 19th centuries in Britain.\nEarly manifestations of dandyism were \"Le petit-ma\u00eetre\" (the Little Master) and the musk-wearing Muscadin ruffians of the middle-class Thermidorean reaction (1794\u20131795). Modern dandyism, however, emerged in stratified societies of Europe during the 1790s revolution periods, especially in London and Paris. Within social settings, the dandy cultivated a persona characterized by extreme posed cynicism, or \"intellectual dandyism\" as defined by Victorian novelist George Meredith; whereas Thomas Carlyle, in his novel \"Sartor Resartus\" (1831), dismissed the dandy as \"a clothes-wearing man\"; Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's \"La fille aux yeux d'or\" (1835) chronicled the idle life of , a model French dandy whose downfall stemmed from his obsessive Romanticism in the pursuit of love, which led him to yield to sexual passion and murderous jealousy.\nIn the metaphysical phase of dandyism, the poet Charles Baudelaire portrayed the dandy as an existential reproach to the conformity of contemporary middle-class men, cultivating the idea of beauty and aesthetics akin to a living religion. The dandy lifestyle, in certain respects, \"comes close to spirituality and to stoicism\" as an approach to living daily life, while its followers \"have no other status, but that of cultivating the idea of beauty in their own persons, of satisfying their passions, of feeling and thinking \u2026 [because] Dandyism is a form of Romanticism. Contrary to what many thoughtless people seem to believe, dandyism is not even an excessive delight in clothes and material elegance. For the perfect dandy, these [material] things are no more than the symbol of the aristocratic superiority of mind.\"\nThe linkage of clothing and political protest was a particularly English characteristic in 18th-century Britain; the sociologic connotation was that dandyism embodied a reactionary form of protest against social equality and the leveling effects of egalitarian principles. Thus, the dandy represented a nostalgic yearning for feudal values and the ideals of \"the perfect gentleman\" as well as \"the autonomous aristocrat\"referring to men of self-made person and persona. The social existence of the dandy, paradoxically, required the gaze of spectators, an audience, and readers who consumed their \"successfully marketed lives\" in the public sphere. Figures such as playwright Oscar Wilde and poet Lord Byron personified the dual social roles of the dandy: the dandy-as-writer, and the dandy-as-\"persona\"; each role a source of gossip and scandal, confining each man to the realm of entertaining high society.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest record of the word \"dandy\" dates back to the late 1700s, in \"Scottish Song\" \".\" Since the late 18th century, the word \"dandy\" has been rumored to be an abbreviated usage of the 17th-century British \"jack-a-dandy\" used to described a conceited man. In British North America, prior to American Revolution (1765\u20131791), a British version of the song \"Yankee Doodle\" in its first verse: \"Yankee Doodle went to town, / Upon a little pony; / He stuck a feather in his hat, / And called it Macoroni \u2026 .\" and chorus: \"Yankee Doodle, keep it up, / Yankee Doodle Dandy, / Mind the music and the step, / And with the girls be handy \u2026 .\" derided the rustic manner and perceived poverty of colonial American. The lyrics, particularly the reference to \"stuck a feather in his hat\" and \"called it Macoroni,\" suggested that adorning fashionable attire (a fine horse and gold-braided clothing) was what set the dandy apart from colonial society. In other cultural contexts, an Anglo\u2013Scottish border ballad dated around 1780 utilized \"dandy\" in its Scottish connotation and not the derisive British usage populated in colonial North America. Since the 18th century, contemporary British usage has drawn a distinction between a dandy and a fop, with the former characterized by a more restrained and refined wardrobe compared to the flamboyant and ostentatious attire of the latter.\nBritish dandyism.\nBeau Brummell (George Bryan Brummell, 1778\u20131840) was the model British dandy since his days as an undergraduate at Oriel College, Oxford, and later as an associate of the Prince Regent (George IV)all despite not being an aristocrat. Always bathed and shaved, always powdered and perfumed, always groomed and immaculately dressed in a dark-blue coat of plain style. Sartorially, \"the look\" of Brummell's tailoring was perfectly fitted, clean, and displayed much linen; an elaborately knotted cravat completed the aesthetics of Brummell's suite of clothes. During the mid-1790s, the handsome Beau Brummell became a personable man-about-town in Regency London's high society, who was \"famous for being famous and\" celebrated \"based on nothing at all\" but personal charm and social connections.\nDuring the national politics of the Regency era (1795\u20131837), by the time that Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger had introduced the Duty on Hair Powder Act 1795 in order to fund the Britain's war efforts against France and discouraged the use of foodstuffs as hair powder, the dandy Brummell already had abandoned wearing a powdered wig and wore his hair cut \"\u00e0 la Brutus\", in the Roman fashion. Moreover, Brummell also led the sartorial transition from breeches to tailored \"pantaloons\", which eventually evolved into modern trousers.\nUpon coming of age in 1799, Brummell received a paternal inheritance of thirty thousand pounds sterling, which he squandered on a high life of gambling, lavish tailors, and visits to brothels. Eventually declaring bankruptcy in 1816, Brummell fled England to France, where he lived in destitution and pursued by creditors; in 1840, at the age of sixty-one years, Beau Brummell passed away in a lunatic asylum in Caen, marking the tragic end to his once-glamorous legacy. Nonetheless, despite his ignominious end, Brummell's influence on European fashion endured, with men across the continent seeking to emulate his dandyism. Among them was the poetical persona of Lord Byron (George Gordon Byron, 1788\u20131824), who wore a poet's shirt featuring a lace-collar, a lace-placket, and lace-cuffs in a portrait of himself in Albanian national costume in 1813; Count d'Orsay (Alfred Guillaume Gabriel Grimod d'Orsay, 1801\u20131852), himself a prominent figure in upper-class social circles and an acquaintance of Lord Byron, likewise embodied the spirit of dandyism within elite British society.\nIn chapter \"The Dandiacal Body\" of the novel \"Sartor Resartus\" (Carlyle, 1831), Thomas Carlyle described the dandy's symbolic social function as a man and a persona of refined masculinity:A Dandy is a Clothes-wearing Man, a Man whose trade, office, and existence consists in the wearing of Clothes. Every faculty of his soul, spirit, purse, and person is heroically consecrated to this one object, the wearing of Clothes wisely and well: so that as others dress to live, he lives to dress. . . . &lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;And now, for all this perennial Martyrdom, and Poesy, and even Prophecy, what is it that the Dandy asks in return? Solely, we may say, that you would recognise his existence; would admit him to be a living object; or even failing this, a visual object, or thing that will reflect rays of light.\nIn the mid-19th century, amidst the restricted palette of muted colors for men's clothing, the English dandy dedicated meticulous attention to the finer details of sartorial refinement (design, cut, and style), including: \"The quality of the fine woollen cloth, the slope of a pocket flap or coat revers, exactly the right colour for the gloves, the correct amount of shine on boots and shoes, and so on. It was an image of a well-dressed man who, while taking infinite pains about his appearance, affected indifference to it. This refined dandyism continued to be regarded as an essential strand of male Englishness.\"\nFrench dandyism.\nIn monarchic France, \"dandyism\" was ideologically bound to the egalitarian politics of the French Revolution (1789\u20131799); thus the dandyism of the \"jeunesse dor\u00e9e\" (the Gilded Youth) was their political statement of aristocratic style in effort to differentiate and distinguish themselves from the working-class \"sans-culottes\", from the poor men who owned no stylish knee-breeches made of silk.\nIn the late 18th century, British and French men abided Beau Brummell's dictates about fashion and etiquette, especially the French bohemians who closely imitated Brummell's habits of dress, manner, and style. In that time of political progress, French dandies were celebrated as social revolutionaries who were self-created men possessed of a consciously designed personality, men whose way of being broke with inflexible tradition that limited the social progress of greater French society; thus, with their elaborate dress and decadent styles of life, the French dandies conveyed their moral superiority to and political contempt for the conformist bourgeoisie.\nRegarding the social function of the dandy in a stratified society, like the British writer Carlyle, in \"Sartor Resartus\", the French poet Baudelaire said that dandies have \"no profession other than elegance \u2026 no other [social] status, but that of cultivating the idea of beauty in their own persons. \u2026 The dandy must aspire to be sublime without interruption; he must live and sleep before a mirror.\" Likewise, French intellectuals investigated the sociology of the dandies (\"fl\u00e2neurs\") who strolled Parisian boulevards; in the essay \"On Dandyism and George Brummell\" (1845) Jules Am\u00e9d\u00e9e Barbey d'Aurevilly analysed the personal and social career of Beau Brummell as a man-about-town who arbitrated what was fashionable and what was unfashionable in polite society.\nIn the late 19th century, dandified bohemianism was characteristic of the artists who were the Symbolist movement in French poetry and literature, wherein the \"Truth of Art\" included the artist to the work of art.\nBlack dandyism.\nBlack dandies have existed since the beginnings of dandyism and have been formative for its aesthetics in many ways. Maria Weilandt in \"The Black Dandy and Neo-Victorianism: Re-fashioning a Stereotype\" (2021) critiques the history of Western European dandyism as primarily centered around white individuals and the homogenization whiteness as the figurehead of the movement. It is important to acknowledge Black dandyism as distinct and a highly political effort at challenging stereotypes of race, class, gender, and nationality.\nBritish-Nigerian artist Yinka Shonibare (b. 1962) employs the neo-Victorian dandy stereotypes to illustrate the Black man experiences in Western European societies. Shonibare's photographic suite \"Dorian Gray\" (2001) refers to Oscar Wilde's literary creation of the same name,\"The Picture Of Dorian Gray\" (1890), but with the substitution of a disfigured Black protagonist. As the series progress, readers soon notice that there exists no real picture of \"Dorian Gray\" but only illustrations of other white protagonists. It is through this theme of isolation and Otherness that the Black Dorian Gray becomes Shonibare's comment on the absence of Black representation in Victorian Britain.\nShonibare's artwork \"Diary of a Victorian Dandy\" (1998) reimagines one day in the life of a dandy in Victorian England, through which the author challenges conventional Victorian depictions of race, class, and British identity by depicting the Victorian dandy as Black, surrounded by white servants.By reversing concepts of the Victorian master-servant relationship, by rewriting stereotypings of the Victorian dandy to include Black masculinities, and by positioning his dandy figure as a noble man who is the leader of his social circle, Shonibare uses neo-Victorianism as a genre to interrogate and counter normative historical narratives and the power hierarchies they produce(d).Black dandyism serves as a catalyst for contemporary Black identities to explore self-fashioning and expressions of neo-Victorian Blacks: The Black dandy's look is highly tailored \u2013 the antithesis of baggy wear. [...] Black dandyism rejects this. In fact, the Black dandy is often making a concerted effort to juxtapose himself against racist stereotyping seen in mass media and popular culture [...] For dandies, dress becomes a strategy for negotiating the complexities of Black male identity [...].\n\"Dandy Jim of Carolina\" is a minstrel song that originated in the United States during the 19th century. It tells the story of a character named Dandy Jim, who is depicted as a stylish and flamboyant individual from the state of Carolina. The song often highlights Dandy Jim's extravagant clothing, his charm, and his prowess with the ladies. While the song does not explicitly address race, Dandy Jim's stylish and flamboyant persona aligns with aspects of Black dandyism, a cultural phenomenon characterized by sharp dressing, self-assurance, and individuality within Black communities.\nAccording to the standards of the day, it was ludicrous and hilarious to see a person of perceived lower social standing donning fashionable attire and \"putting on airs.\" For most of racist 19th century America a well dressed African American was an odd thing, and naturally someone of that ilk would be seen as acting out of place. The representation of Dandy Jim, while potentially rooted in caricature or exaggeration, nonetheless contribute to the broader cultural landscape surrounding Black dandyism and its portrayal in American folk music.\nDandy sociology.\nRegarding the existence and the political and cultural functions of the dandy in a society, in the essay \"L'Homme r\u00e9volt\u00e9\" (1951), Albert Camus said that:\nThe dandy creates his own unity by aesthetic means. But it is an aesthetic of negation. \"To live and die before a mirror\": that, according to Baudelaire, was the dandy's slogan. It is indeed a coherent slogan. The dandy is, by occupation, always in opposition [to society]. He can only exist by defiance \u2026 The dandy, therefore, is always compelled to astonish. Singularity is his vocation, excess his way to perfection. Perpetually incomplete, always on the fringe of things, he compels others to create him, while denying their values. He plays at life because he is unable to live [life].\nFurther addressing that vein of male narcissism, in the book \"Simulacra and Simulation\" (1981), Jean Baudrillard said that dandyism is \"an aesthetic form of nihilism\" that is centred upon the Self as the centre of the world.\nElizabeth Amann's \"Dandyism in the Age of Revolution: The Art of the Cut\" (2015) quotes, \"Dandyism has always been a cross-cultural phenomenon\". Male self-fashioning carries socio-political implications beyond its superficiality and opulent external. Through the analysis of clothing, aesthetics, and societal norms, Amann examines how dandyism emerged as a means of asserting identity, power, and autonomy in the midst of revolutionary change. Male self-fashioning, in particular, was wielded as a resistance expression in denial of itself due to the influence of the French Revolution on British discussions of masculinity. British prime minister William Pitt proposed an unusual measure: the Duty on Hair Powder Act 1795, which aimed to levy a tax on from affluent consumers of hair powder to raise money for the war. Critics of the act expressed fear regarding the association between wearing hair powder and \"a tendency to produce a famine,\u201d and those who did so would \u201crun the further risque of being knocked on the head\u201d. In August 1975, journalists and new reports complained that \"the papers had misled the poor and encouraged them to consider powdered heads their enemies,\" a \u201ccalculated to excite riots.\u201d With the new legislation, the powdered look became a marker of class in English society and a much more exclusive one, polarizing those who used the products and those who did not. Those who feared making class boundaries too visible considered the distinctions to be deep and significant and therefore wished to protect them by making them less evident, by allowing a self-fashioning that created an illusion of mobility in a highly stratified society.\nIn the early discussion of the tax, the \"London Packet\" posed the question, \u201cIs an actor, who in his own private character uniformly appears in a scratch wig, or wears his hair without powder, liable to pay the tax imposed by the new act, for any of the parts which he is necessitated to dress with powder on the stage?\u201d This seemingly trivial inquiry unveils a profound aspect of the legislation: By paying the tax, citizens were essentially purchasing the right to craft a persona, akin to an actor who took on a stage role. Exaggerated self-fashioning was no longer an oppositional strategy and instead became the prevailing norm. To protest the tax and the war against France was to embrace a new aesthetic of invisibility, wherein individuals favored natural attire and simplicity in order to blend into the social fabric rather than stand out.\nDandyism and capitalism.\nDandyism is intricately linked with modern capitalism, embodying both a product of and a critique against it. According to Elisa Glick, the dandy's attention to their appearance and their engagement \"consumption and display of luxury goods\" can be read as an expression of capitalist commodification. However, interestingly, this meticulous attention to personal appearance can also be seen as an assertion of individuality and thus a revolt against capitalism's emphasis on mass production and utilitarianism.\nUnderscoring this somewhat paradoxical nature, philosopher Thorsten Botz-Bornstein describes the dandy as \"an anarchist who does not claim anarchy.\" He argues that this simultaneous abiding by and also ignorance of capitalist social pressures speaks to what he calls a \u201cplayful attitude towards life\u2019s conventions.\" Not only does the dandy play with traditional conceptions of gender, but also with the socioeconomic norms of the society they inhabit; he agrees the importance that dandyism places on uniquely personal style directly opposes capitalism's call for conformity.\nThomas Spence Smith highlights the function of style in maintaining social boundaries and individual status, particularly as traditional social structures have decrystallized in modernity. He notes that \"style becomes a crucial element in maintaining social boundaries and individual status.\" This process \"creates a market for new social models, with the dandy as a prime example of how individuals navigate and resist the pressures of a capitalist society.\" Here, another paradoxical relation between dandyism and capitalism emerges: dandyism's emphasis on individuality and on forming an idiomatic sense of style can be read as a sort of marketing or commodification of the self.\nQuaintrelle.\nThe counterpart to the dandy is the \"quaintrelle\", a woman whose life is dedicated to the passionate expression of personal charm and style, to enjoying leisurely pastimes, and the dedicated cultivation of the pleasures of life.\nIn the 12th century, \"cointerrels\" (male) and \"cointrelles\" (female) emerged, based upon \"coint\", a word applied to things skillfully made, later indicating a person of beautiful dress and refined speech. By the 18th century, \"coint\" became \"quaint\", indicating elegant speech and beauty. Middle English dictionaries note \"quaintrelle\" as a beautifully dressed woman (or overly dressed), but do not include the favorable personality elements of grace and charm. The notion of a quaintrelle sharing the major philosophical components of refinement with dandies is a modern development that returns quaintrelles to their historic roots.\nFemale dandies did overlap with male dandies for a brief period during the early 19th century when \"dandy\" had a derisive definition of \"fop\" or \"over-the-top fellow\"; the female equivalents were \"dandyess\" or \"dandizette\". Charles Dickens, in \"All the Year Around\" (1869) comments, \"The dandies and dandizettes of 1819\u201320 must have been a strange race. \"Dandizette\" was a term applied to the feminine devotees to dress, and their absurdities were fully equal to those of the dandies.\" In 1819, \"Charms of Dandyism\", in three volumes, was published by Olivia Moreland, Chief of the Female Dandies; most likely one of many pseudonyms used by Thomas Ashe. Olivia Moreland may have existed, as Ashe did write several novels about living persons. Throughout the novel, dandyism is associated with \"living in style\". Later, as the word \"dandy\" evolved to denote refinement, it became applied solely to men. \"Popular Culture and Performance in the Victorian City\" (2003) notes this evolution in the latter 19th century: \" \u2026 or \"dandizette\", although the term was increasingly reserved for men.\""}
{"id": "8860", "revid": "46047366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8860", "title": "Dubbing", "text": "Dubbing (also known as re-recording and mixing) is a post-production process used in filmmaking and the video production process where supplementary recordings (known as doubles) are lip-synced and \"mixed\" with original production audio to create the final product.\nOften this process is performed on films by replacing the original language to offer voiced-over translations. After sound editors edit and prepare all the necessary tracks\u2014dialogue, automated dialogue replacement (ADR), effects, foley, and music\u2014the dubbing mixers proceed to balance all of the elements and record the finished soundtrack.\nWhile dubbing and ADR are similar processes that focus on enhancing and replacing dialogue audio, ADR is a process in which the original actors re-record and synchronize audio segments. This allows filmmakers to replace unclear dialogue if there are issues with the script, background noise, or the original recording.\nThe term \"dubbing\" commonly refers to the replacement of actors' voices with those of different performers who recite their dialogue for international audiences, typically in a different language from the original dialogue.\nWhen a voice is created from scratch for animations, the term \"original voice\" is used, since these media are often partially finished before the voice is implemented. The voice work would still be part of the creation process, thus being considered the official voice.\nOrigins.\nFilms, videos, and sometimes video games are dubbed into the local language of a foreign market. In foreign distribution, dubbing is common in theatrically released films, television films, television series, cartoons, anime and telenovelas.\nIn many countries, dubbing was adopted, at least in part, for political reasons. In authoritarian states such as Fascist Italy and Francoist Spain, dubbing could be used to enforce particular ideological agendas, excising negative references to the nation and its leaders and promoting standardized national languages at the expense of local dialects and minority languages. In post-Nazi Germany, dubbing was used to downplay events in the country's recent past, as in the case of the dub of Alfred Hitchcock's \"Notorious\", where the Nazi organization upon which the film's plot centers was changed to a drug smuggling enterprise. The first post-WWII movie dub was \"Konstantin Zaslonov\" (1949) dubbed from Russian into the Czech language.\nIn Western Europe after World War II, dubbing was attractive to many film producers as it helped to enable co-production between companies in different countries, in turn allowing them to pool resources and benefit from financial support from multiple governments. The use of dubbing meant that multi-national casts could be assembled and were able to use their preferred language for their performances, with appropriate post-production dubs being carried out before distributing versions of the film.\nMethods.\nADR/post-sync.\nAutomated dialogue replacement (ADR) is the process of re-recording dialogue by the original actor (or a replacement actor) after the filming process to improve audio quality or make changes to the initially scripted dialog. In the early days of talkies, a loop of film would be cut and spliced together for each of the scenes that needed to be re-recorded, and then the loops would be loaded onto a projector one by one. For each scene, the loop would be played repeatedly while the voice actor performed the lines, trying to synchronize them to the filmed performance. This was known as \"looping\" or a \"looping session\". Loading and reloading the film loops while the talent and recording crew stood by was tedious. Later, videotape and then digital technology replaced the film loops, and the process became known as automated dialogue replacement (ADR).\nIn conventional film production, a production sound mixer records dialogue during filming. During post-production, a supervising sound editor, or ADR supervisor, reviews all of the dialogue in the film and decides which lines must be re-recorded. ADR is recorded during an ADR session, which takes place in a specialized sound studio. Multiple takes are recorded, and the most suitable take becomes the final version, or portions of various takes may be edited together. The ADR process does not always take place in a post-production studio. The process may be recorded on location with mobile equipment. ADR can also be recorded without showing the actor the image they must match, but by having them listen to the performance, since some actors believe that watching themselves act can degrade subsequent performances. The director may be present during ADR; alternatively, they may leave it up to a trusted sound editor, an ADR specialist, and the performers.\n the automated process includes various techniques, such as automatically displaying lines on-screen for the talent, automated cues, shifting the audio track for accurate synchronization, and time-fitting algorithms for stretching or compressing portions of a spoken line. There is software that can sort outspoken words from ambient sounds in the original filmed soundtrack, detect the peaks of the dialog, and automatically time-fit the new dubbed performance to the original to create accurate synchronization.\nSometimes, an actor other than the original actor is used during ADR. One example is the \"Star Wars\" character Darth Vader, portrayed by David Prowse; in post-production, James Earl Jones dubbed the voice of Vader.\nIn India, the process is simply known as \"dubbing\", while in the UK, it is also called \"post-synchronization\" or \"post-sync\". The insertion of voice actor performances for animation, such as computer generated imagery or animated cartoons, is often referred to as ADR although it generally does not replace existing dialogue.\nThe ADR process may be used to:\nOther examples include:\nRythmo band.\nAn alternative method to dubbing, called \"rythmo band\" (or \"lip-sync band\"), has historically been used in Canada and France. It provides a more precise guide for the actors, directors, and technicians, and can be used to complement the traditional ADR method. The \"band\" is actually a clear 35\u00a0mm film leader on which the dialogue is hand-written in India ink, together with numerous additional indications for the actor\u2014including laughs, cries, length of syllables, mouth sounds, breaths, and mouth openings and closings. The rythmo band is projected in the studio and scrolls in perfect synchronization with the picture.\nStudio time is used more efficiently, since with the aid of scrolling text, picture, and audio cues, actors can read more lines per hour than with ADR alone (only picture and audio). With ADR, actors can average 10\u201312 lines per hour, while rythmo band can facilitate the reading of 35-50 lines per hour.\nHowever, the preparation of a rythmo band is a time-consuming process involving a series of specialists organized in a production line. This has prevented the technique from being more widely adopted, but software emulations of rythmo band technology overcome the disadvantages of the traditional rythmo band process and significantly reduce the time needed to prepare a dubbing session.\nTranslation process.\nFor dubs into a language other than the original language, the dubbing process includes the following tasks:\nSometimes the translator performs all five tasks. In other cases, the translator just submits a rough translation, and a dialogue writer does the rest. However, the language expertise of translator and dialog writing is different; translators must be proficient in the source language, while dialog writers must be proficient in the target language.\nDialog writing.\nThe dialogue writer's role is to make the translation sound natural in the target language, and to make the translation sound like a credible dialogue instead of merely a translated text.\nAnother task of dialogue writers is to check whether a translation matches an on-screen character's mouth movements or not, by reading aloud simultaneously with the character. The dialogue writer often stays in the recording setting with the actors or the voice talents, to ensure that the dialogue is being spoken in the way that it was written to be, and to avoid any ambiguity in the way the dialogue is to be read (focusing on emphasis, intonation, pronunciation, articulation, pronouncing foreign words correctly, etc.). The overall goal is to make sure the script creates the illusion of authenticity of the spoken language. A successful localization product gives the impression that the original character is naturally speaking in the target language. Therefore, in the localization process, the position of the dialogue writing or song writing is important.\nGlobal use.\nLocalization.\nLocalization is the practice of adapting a film or television series from one region of the world for another. In contrast to pure translation, localization encompasses adapting the content to suit the target audience. For example, culture-specific references may be replaced, and footage may be removed or added.\nDub localization is a contentious issue in cinephilia among aficionados of foreign filmmaking and television programs, particularly anime fans. While some localization is virtually inevitable in translation, the controversy surrounding how much localization is \"too much\" is often discussed in such communities, especially when the final dub product is significantly different from the original. Some fans frown on any extensive localization, while others expect it, and to varying degrees, appreciate it.\nThe new voice track is usually spoken by a voice actor. In many countries, actors who regularly perform this duty remain little-known, with the exception of particular circles (such as anime fandom) or when their voices have become synonymous with roles or actors whose voices they usually dub. In the United States, many of these voice artists may employ pseudonyms or go uncredited due to Screen Actors Guild regulations or the desire to dissociate themselves from the role.\nAfrica.\nNorth Africa, Western Asia.\nIn Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia, most foreign movies (especially Hollywood productions) are shown dubbed in French. These movies are usually imported directly from French film distributors. The choice of movies dubbed into French can be explained by the widespread use of the French language. Another important factor is that local theaters and private media companies do not dub in local languages in order to avoid high costs, but also because of the lack of both expertise and demand.\nBeginning in the 1980s, dubbed series and movies for children in Modern Standard Arabic became a popular choice among most TV channels, cinemas and VHS/DVD stores. However, dubbed films are still imported, and dubbing is still performed in the Levant countries with a strong tradition of dubbing (mainly Syria, Lebanon and Jordan). Egypt was the first Arab country in charge of dubbing Disney movies in 1975 and used to do it exclusively in Egyptian Arabic rather than Modern Standard Arabic until 2011, and since then many other companies started dubbing their productions in this dialect. Beginning with \"Encanto\", Disney movies are now dubbed in both dialects.\nIn the Arabic-speaking countries, children's shows (mainly cartoons and kids sitcoms) are dubbed in Arabic, or Arabic subtitles are used. The only exception was telenovelas dubbed in Standard Arabic, or dialects, but also Turkish series, most notably G\u00fcm\u00fc\u015f, in Syrian Arabic.\nAn example of Arabic voice actors that dub for certain performers is Safi Mohammed for Elijah Wood.\nIn Tunisia, the Tunisia National Television (TNT), the public broadcaster of Tunisia, is not allowed to show content in any language other than Arabic, which forces it to broadcast only dubbed content (this restriction was recently removed for commercials). During the 1970s and 1980s, TNT (known as ERTT at the time) started dubbing famous cartoons in Tunisian and Standard Arabic. However, in the private sector, television channels are not subject to the language rule.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, many television programs were dubbed in Afrikaans, with the original soundtrack (usually in English, but sometimes Dutch or German) \"simulcast\" in FM stereo on Radio 2000. These included US series such as \"The Six Million Dollar Man\" \"(Steve Austin: Die Man van Staal)\", \"Miami Vice\" \"(Misdaad in Miami)\", \"Beverly Hills 90210\", and the German detective series \"Derrick\".\nAs a result of the boycott by the British actors' union Equity, which banned the sale of most British television programs, the puppet series \"The Adventures of Rupert Bear\" was dubbed into South African English, as the original voices had been recorded by Equity voice artists.\nThis practice has declined as a result of the reduction of airtime for the language on SABC TV, and the increase of locally produced material in Afrikaans on other channels like KykNet. Similarly, many programs, such as \"The Jeffersons\", were dubbed into Zulu, but this has also declined as local drama production has increased. However, some animated films, such as \"Maya the Bee\", have been dubbed in both Afrikaans and Zulu by local artists. In 2018, eExtra began showing the Turkish drama series \"Parampar\u00e7a\" dubbed in Afrikaans as \"Gebroke Harte\" or \"Broken Hearts\", the first foreign drama to be dubbed in the language for twenty years.\nUganda.\nUganda's own film industry is fairly small, and foreign movies are commonly watched. The English soundtrack is often accompanied by the Luganda translation and comments, provided by a Ugandan \"video jockey\" (VJ). VJ's interpreting and narration may be available in a recorded form or live.\nAsia.\nAzerbaijan.\nIn Azerbaijan, foreign movies are released in their original language with Azerbaijani subtitles in cinemas. Additionally, some theaters offer Russian and Turkish versions. According to the law, films intended for theatrical release must either be dubbed or subtitled. All television channels are required to broadcast movies and TV shows with dubbed audio. In the past, voice-over was commonly used, but in the last decade, channels have improved the quality by adopting full dubbing.\nDVD releases are typically imported from Russia or Turkey. The absence of detailed laws, limited regulations, monitoring, and industry interest contribute to ongoing debates on how movies and series should be released. However, certain series and movies (The Kingdom of Solomon, Mokhtarnameh, and Prophet Joseph etc.), have been fully dubbed and released, including availability in home media formats.\nChina.\nChina has a long tradition of dubbing foreign films into Mandarin Chinese, starting in the 1930s. While during the Republic of China era Western motion pictures may have been imported and dubbed into Chinese, since 1950 Soviet movies became the main import, sometimes even surpassing the local production. In Communist China, most European movies were dubbed in Shanghai, whereas Asian and Soviet films were usually dubbed in Changchun. During the Cultural Revolution, North Korean, Romanian and Albanian films became popular. Beginning in the late 1970s, in addition to films, popular TV series from the United States, Japan, Brazil, and Mexico were also dubbed. The Shanghai Film Dubbing Studio has been the most well-known studio in the film dubbing industry in China. In order to generate high-quality products, they divide each film into short segments, each one lasting only a few minutes, and then work on the segments one-by-one. In addition to the correct meaning in translation, they make an effort to match the lips of the actors to the dialogue. As a result, the dubbing in these films generally is not readily detected. The cast of dubbers is acknowledged at the end of a dubbed film. Several dubbing actors and actresses of the Shanghai Film Dubbing Studio have become well-known celebrities, such as Qiu Yuefeng, Bi Ke, Li Zi, and Liu Guangning. In recent years, however, especially in the larger cities on the east and south coasts, it has become increasingly common for movie theaters to show subtitled versions with the original soundtracks intact.\nMotion pictures are also dubbed into the languages of some of China's autonomous regions. Notably, the Translation Department of the Tibetan Autonomous Region Movie Company (\u897f\u85cf\u81ea\u6cbb\u533a\u7535\u5f71\u516c\u53f8\u8bd1\u5236\u79d1) has been dubbing movies into the Tibetan language since the 1960s. In the early decades, it would dub 25 to 30 movies each year, the number rising to 60\u201375 by the early 2010s.\nMotion pictures are dubbed for China's Mongol- and Uyghur-speaking markets as well.\nChinese television dramas are often dubbed in Standard Mandarin by professional voice actors to remove accents, improve poor performances, or change lines to comply with local censorship laws.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, foreign television programs, except for English-language and Mandarin television programs, are dubbed in Cantonese. English-language and Mandarin programs are generally shown in original with subtitles. Foreign films, such as most live-action and animated films (such as anime and Disney), are usually dubbed in Cantonese. However, most cinemas also offer subtitled versions of English-language films.\nFor the most part, foreign films and TV programs, both live-action and animated, are generally dubbed in both Mandarin and Cantonese. For example, in \"The Lord of the Rings\" film series, Elijah Wood's character Frodo Baggins was dubbed into Mandarin by Jiang Guangtao for China and Taiwan. For the Cantonese localization, there were actually two dubs for Hong Kong and Macau. In the first Cantonese dub, he was voiced by Leung Wai Tak, while in the second Cantonese dub, he was voiced by Bosco Tang.\nTaiwan.\nTaiwan dubs some foreign films and TV series in Mandarin Chinese. Until the mid-1990s, the major national terrestrial channels both dubbed and subtitled all foreign programs and films, and, for some popular programs, the original voices were offered in second audio program. Gradually, however, both terrestrial and cable channels stopped dubbing for prime time U.S. shows and films, while subtitling continued.\nIn the 2000s, the dubbing practice has differed depending on the nature and origin of the program. Animations, children's shows and some educational programs on PTS are mostly dubbed. English live-action movies and shows are not dubbed in theaters or on television. Japanese TV dramas are no longer dubbed, while Korean dramas, Hong Kong dramas and dramas from other Asian countries are still often dubbed. Korean variety shows are not dubbed. Japanese and Korean films on Asian movie channels are still dubbed. In theaters, most foreign films are not dubbed, while animated films and some films meant for children offer a dubbed version. Hong Kong live-action films have a long tradition of being dubbed into Mandarin, while more famous films offer a Cantonese version.\nGeorgia.\nIn Georgia, original soundtracks are kept in films and TV series, but with voice-over translation. There are exceptions, such as some children's cartoons.\nIndia.\nIn India, where \"foreign films\" are synonymous with \"Hollywood films\", dubbing is done mostly in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. Dubbing is rarely done with the other major Indian languages, namely Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, and Odia, due to lack of significant market size. Despite this, some Kannada and Malayalam dubs of children television programs can be seen on the Sun TV channel. The dubbed versions are released into the towns and lower tier settlements of the respective states (where English penetration is low), often with the English-language originals released in the metropolitan areas. In all other states, the English originals are released along with the dubbed versions, where often the dubbed version collections are more outstanding than the originals. \"Spider-Man 3\" was also done in the Bhojpuri language, a language popular in eastern India in addition to Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. \"A Good Day to Die Hard\", the most recent installment in the \"Die Hard\" franchise, was the first ever Hollywood film to receive a Punjabi language dub as well.\nMost TV channels mention neither the Indian-language dubbing credits, nor its staff, at the end of the original ending credits, since changing the credits casting for the original actors or voice actors involves a huge budget for modifying, making it somewhat difficult to find information for the dubbed versions. The same situation is encountered in films. Sometimes foreign programs and films receive more than one dub, such as for example, \"Jumanji\", \"Dragonheart\" and \"Van Helsing\" having two Hindi dubs. Information for the Hindi, Tamil and Telugu voice actors who have done the voices for specific actors and for their roles on foreign films and television programs are published in local Indian data magazines, for those that are involved in the dubbing industry in India. But on a few occasions, there are some foreign productions that do credit the dubbing cast, such as animated films like the \"Barbie\" films, and some Disney films. Disney Channel original series released on DVD with their Hindi dubs show a list of the artists in the Hindi dub credits, after the original ending credits. Theatrical releases and VCD releases of foreign films do not credit the dubbing cast or staff. The DVD releases, however, do have credits for the dubbing staff, if they are released multilingual. As of recently, information for the dubbing staff of foreign productions have been expanding due to high demands of people wanting to know the voice actors behind characters in foreign works.\nIndonesia.\nUnlike movie theaters in most Asian countries, those in Indonesia show foreign movies with subtitles. Then a few months or years later, those movies appear on TV either dubbed in Indonesian or subtitled. Kids shows are mostly dubbed, though even in cartoon series, songs typically are not dubbed, but in hit movies such as Disney movies, both speaking and singing voice are cast for the Indonesian dub. Adult films are mostly subtitled but sometimes they can be dubbed as well, and because there are not many Indonesian voice actors, multiple characters might have the exact same voice.\nWhen it comes to reality shows, whether the show is dubbed or not differs. For example, the Japanese competition show \"TV Champion\" is fully dubbed, while other reality shows are aired with Indonesian subtitles. All Malay language TV shows, including animated ones (mostly coming from neighbouring Malaysia), are subtitled instead, likely due to the language's mutual intelligibility with Indonesian.\nIran.\nIn Iran, International foreign films and television programs are dubbed in Persian. Dubbing began in 1946 with the advent of movies and cinemas in the country. Since then, foreign movies have always been dubbed for the cinema and TV foreign films and television programs are subtitled in Persian. Using various voice actors and adding local hints and witticisms to the original contents, dubbing played a major role in attracting people to the cinemas and developing an interest in other cultures. The dubbing art in Iran reached its apex during the 1960s and 1970s with the inflow of American, European and Hindi movies.\nThe most famous musicals of the time, such as \"My Fair Lady\" and \"The Sound of Music\", were translated, adjusted and performed in Persian by the voice artists. Since the 1990s, for political reasons and under pressure from the state, the dubbing industry has declined, with movies dubbed only for the state TV channels. During recent years, DVDs with Persian subtitles have found a market among viewers for the same reason, but most people still prefer the Persian-speaking dubbed versions. Recently, privately operated companies started dubbing TV series by hiring famous dubbers. However, the dubs which these companies make are often unauthorized and vary greatly in terms of quality.\nA list of Persian voice actors that associate with their actor counterparts are listed here.\nIsrael.\nIn Israel, only children's movies and TV programming are dubbed in Hebrew. In programs aimed at teenagers and adults, dubbing is never considered for translation, not only because of its high costs, but also because the audience is mainly multi-lingual. Most viewers in Israel speak at least one European language in addition to Hebrew, and a large part of the audience also speaks Arabic. Therefore, most viewers prefer to hear the original soundtrack, aided by Hebrew subtitles. Another problem is that dubbing does not allow for translation into two different languages simultaneously, as is often the case of Israeli television channels that use subtitles in Hebrew and another language (like Russian) simultaneously.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, many television programs appear on Japanese television subtitled or dubbed if they are intended for children. When the American film \"Morocco\" was released in Japan in 1931, subtitles became the mainstream method of translating TV programs and films in Japan. Later, around the 1950s, foreign television programs and films began to be shown dubbed in Japanese on television. The first ones to be dubbed into Japanese were the 1940s Superman cartoons in 1955.\nDue to the lack of video software for domestic television, video software was imported from abroad. When the television program was shown on television, it was mostly dubbed. There was a character limit for a small TV screen at a lower resolution, and this method was not suitable for the poor elderly and illiterate, as was audio dubbing. Presently, TV shows and movies (both those aimed at all ages and adults-only) are shown dubbed with the original language and Japanese subtitles, while providing the original language option when the same film is released on VHS, DVD and Blu-ray. Laserdisc releases of Hollywood films were almost always subtitled, films like \"\".\nAdult cartoons such as \"South Park\" and \"The Simpsons\" are shown dubbed in Japanese on the WOWOW TV channel. \"\" was dubbed in Japanese by different actors instead of the same Japanese dubbing-actors from the cartoon because it was handled by a different Japanese dubbing studio, and it was marketed for the Kansai market. In Japanese theaters, foreign-language movies, except those intended for children, are usually shown in their original version with Japanese subtitles. Foreign films usually contain multiple Japanese-dubbing versions, but with several different original Japanese-dubbing voice actors, depending upon which TV station they are aired. NHK, Nippon TV, Fuji TV, TV Asahi, and TBS usually follow this practice, as do software releases on VHS, Laserdisc, DVD and Blu-ray. As for recent foreign films being released, there are now some film theaters in Japan that show both dubbed and subtitled editions.\nOn 22 June 2009, 20th Century Fox's Japanese division has opened up a Blu-ray lineup known as \"Emperor of Dubbing\", dedicated at having multiple Japanese dubs of popular English-language films (mostly Hollywood films) as well as retaining the original scripts, releasing them altogether in special Blu-ray releases. These also feature a new dub created exclusively for that release as a director's cut, or a new dub made with a better surround sound mix to match that of the original English mix (as most of the older Japanese dubbings were made on mono mixes to be aired on TV). Other companies have followed practice, like Universal Pictures's Japanese division NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan opening up \"Reprint of Memories\", along with having \"Power of Dubbing\", which act in a similar way by re-packaging all the multiple Japanese dubs of popular films and putting them out as Special Blu-ray releases.\n\"Japanese dub-over artists\" provide the voices for certain performers, such as those listed in the following table:\nMalaysia.\nForeign-language programmes and films that air on TV2 and TVS are shown in their original language but have subtitles in Malay.\nNorth Korea.\nDespite the tight control on mass media the government of North Korea has, many foreign movies and TV shows have been officially distributed within the country by a state-run recording and distribution company named \"Mokran Video\". All dubbings produced by the company are unlicensed, given the many imposed sanctions against North Korea. Most movies are censored to remove mentions of foreign countries (although this is usually exclusive to western countries such as the United States of America).\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan \"foreign films\", and cartoons are not normally dubbed locally. Instead, foreign films, anime and cartoons, such as those shown on Nickelodeon Pakistan and Cartoon Network Pakistan, are dubbed in Hindi in India, as Hindi and Urdu, the national language of Pakistan, are mutually intelligible.\nHowever, soap operas from Turkey are now dubbed in Urdu and have gained increased popularity at the expense of Indian soap operas in Hindi. This has led to protests from local producers that these are a threat to Pakistan's television industry, with local productions being moved out of peak viewing time or dropped altogether. Similarly, politicians and leaders have expressed concerns over their content, given Turkey's less conservative culture.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, the media industry generally has mixed practices regarding whether to dub television programs or films, even within the same kind of medium. In general, the decision whether to dub a video production depends on a variety of factors such as the target audience of the channel or programming bloc on which the feature will be aired, its genre, and/or outlet of transmission (e.g. TV or cinema, free or pay-TV).\nFree-to-air TV.\nThe prevalence of media needing to be dubbed has resulted in a talent pool that is capable of syncing voice to lip, especially for shows broadcast by the country's three largest networks. It is not uncommon in the Filipino dub industry to have most of the voices in a series dubbing by only a handful of voice talents. Programs originally in English used to usually air in their original language on free-to-air television.\nSince the late 1990s/early 2000s, however, more originally English-language programs that air on major free-to-air networks or their affiliates (e.g. TV5, GMA, GTV, the defunct ABS-CBN) have been dubbed into Filipino. Even the former Studio 23 (now S+A), once known for its airing programs in English, had later adopted Filipino language dubbing for some of its foreign programs. Children's programs from cable networks Nickelodeon, Cartoon Network, and the former Disney Channel shown on ABS-CBN, TV5 and GMA have long been dubbed into Filipino or another Philippine regional language. Animated Disney films are often dubbed in Filipino except for the singing scenes, which are shown in their original language (though in recent years, there has been an increase in number of Disney musicals having their songs also translated such as \"Frozen\").\nDubbing has also been less common in smaller free-to-air networks such as the former RPN 9 (now RPTV) whereby the original-language version of the program is aired. Dramas from Asia and Latin America have always been dubbed into Filipino, and each program from these genres feature their unique set of Filipino-speaking voice actors.\nPay TV.\nThe original language-version of TV programs is also usually available on cable/satellite channels such as AXN, HBO, and Warner TV Philippines. However, some pay-TV channels do specialize in showing foreign shows and films dubbed into Filipino. Cinema One, ABS-CBN's cable movie channel, shows some films originally in languages other than English dubbed into Filipino. ABS-CBN's Kapamilya Channel also dubs its foreign language programmes. Nat Geo Wild airs most programs dubbed into Filipino for Philippine audiences, being one of the few cable channels to do so. Tagalized Movie Channel and Tag airs Hollywood and Asian movies dubbed in Filipino. The former Fox Filipino aired some English, Latin, and Asian series dubbed in Filipino such as \"The Walking Dead\", \"Devious Maids\", \"La Teniente\", \"Kdabra\", and some selected programs from Channel M. The defunct channel HERO TV, which focused on anime series, dubbed all its foreign programs into Filipino. This was in contrast to Animax, where their anime programs are dubbed in English.\nCinema.\nForeign films, especially English films shown in local cinemas, are almost always shown in their original language. Non-English foreign films make use of English subtitles. Unlike other countries, children's films originally in English are not dubbed in cinemas.\nA list of voice actors with their associates that they dub into Filipino are listed here:\nSingapore.\nIn multilingual Singapore, dubbing is rare for western programs. English-language programs on the free-to-air terrestrial channels are usually subtitled in Chinese or Malay. Chinese, Malay and Tamil programs (except for news bulletins and other live shows), usually have subtitles in English and the original language during the prime time hours. Dual sound programs, such as Korean, Japanese and Filipino dramas, offer sound in the original languages with subtitles, Mandarin-dubbed and subtitled, or English-dubbed. The deliberate policy to encourage Mandarin among citizens made it required by law for programs in other Chinese dialects (Hokkien, Cantonese and Teochew) to be dubbed into Mandarin, with the exception of traditional operas. Cantonese and Hokkien shows from Hong Kong and Taiwan, respectively, are available on VCD and DVD. In a recent development, news bulletins are subtitled into the language of the channel they air on.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, anime that are imported from Japan are generally shown dubbed in Korean on television. However, some anime is censored, such as Japanese letters or content being edited for a suitable Korean audience. Western cartoons are dubbed in Korean as well, such as Nickelodeon cartoons like \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" and \"Danny Phantom\". Several English-language (mostly American) live-action films are dubbed in Korean, but they are not shown in theaters. Instead, they are only broadcast on South Korean television networks (KBS, MBC, SBS, EBS), while DVD import releases of these films are shown with Korean subtitles, such as \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"Mary Poppins\", the \"Star Wars\" films, and \"Avatar\". This may be due to the fact that the six American major film studios may not own any rights to the Korean dubs of their live-action films that the Korean television networks have dubbed and aired. Even if they do not own the rights, Korean or non-Korean viewers can record from Korean-dubbed live-action films from television broadcasting onto DVDs with DVRs.\nSometimes, video games are dubbed in Korean. Examples would be the \"Halo\" series, the \"Jak &amp; Daxter\" series, and the \"God of War\" series. For the \"Halo\" games, Lee Jeong Gu provides his Korean voice to the main protagonist Master Chief (replacing Steve Downes's voice), while Kim So Hyeong voices Chieftain Tartarus, one of the main antagonists (replacing Kevin Michael Richardson's voice).\nThe following South Korean voice-over artists are usually identified with the following actors:\nThailand.\nIn Thailand, foreign television programs are dubbed in Thai, but the original soundtrack is often simultaneously carried on a NICAM audio track on terrestrial broadcast, and alternate audio tracks on satellite broadcast. Previously, terrestrial stations simulcasted the original soundtrack on the radio. On pay-TV, many channels carry foreign-language movies and television programs with subtitles. Movie theaters in Bangkok and some larger cities show both the subtitled version and the dubbed version of English-language movies. In big cities like Bangkok, Thai-language movies have English subtitles. \nThis list features a collection of Thai voice actors and actresses that have dubbed for these featured performers.\nVietnam.\nIn Vietnam, foreign-language films and programs are often subtitled or voice-overed on television in Vietnamese. They were not dubbed until 1985. \"Rio\" was considered to be the very first American Hollywood film to be entirely dubbed in Vietnamese. Since then, children's films that came out afterwards have been released dubbed in theaters. HTV3 has dubbed television programs for children, including \"Ben 10\", and \"Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide\", by using various voice actors to dub over the character roles.\nSooner afterwards, more programs started to get dubbed. Also dubbed into Vietnamese are most films and TV series produced in Asia-Pacific countries such as China and Japan, most notably HTV3 offers anime dubbed into Vietnamese. Pok\u00e9mon got a Vietnamese dub in early 2014 on HTV3 starting with the Best Wishes series. While characters kept their original names, due to a controversy regarding Pok\u00e9mon's cries being re-dubbed, it was switched to VTV2 in September 2015 when the XY series debuted. Sailor Moon also has been dubbed for HTV3 in early 2015.\nEurope.\nChildren's/family films and programming.\nIn North-West Europe, Poland, Portugal, Balkan, Baltic and Nordic countries, generally only movies and TV shows that are intended for children are dubbed, while TV shows and movies that are intended for teenagers or adults are subtitled, although adult-animated productions (e.g. South Park and The Simpsons) have a tradition of being dubbed. For movies in cinemas with clear target audiences (both below and above 10\u201311 years of age), both a dubbed and a subtitled version are usually available.\nBelgium.\nIn the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium (Flanders), movies and TV series are shown in their original language with subtitles, with the exception of most movies made for a young audience. In the latter case, sometimes separate versions are recorded in the Netherlands and in Flanders (for instance, several Walt Disney films and Harry Potter films). These dubbed versions only differ from each other in their use of different voice actors and different pronunciation, while the text is almost the same.\nIn the French-speaking part of Belgium (Wallonia), the movies shown in theaters and on TV are the French dubbed version (dubbed by French voice actors). Except for a few words, the French language spoken in France and in Belgium are similar. The amount of movies in original language with subtitles in theaters is extremely limited and most theaters only show movies dubbed in French.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nBosnia and Herzegovina usually uses Serbian and Croatian dubs (due to their mutual intelligibility), but they have dubbed some cartoons in Bosnian by themselves, for example \"\". Children's programs (both animated and live-action) are broadcast dubbed (in Serbian, Croatian or Bosnian), while every other program is subtitled (in Bosnian).\nBulgaria.\nAfter November 10, 1991, there was a large-scale influx of American animation production in Bulgaria, which can be classified as follows: \nA/ Films that in the years of the Iron Curtain either did not reach Bulgaria or were not dubbed according to the generally accepted world standard. For example: Sleeping Beauty /1959/, One Hundred and One Dalmatians /1961/, Jungle Book /1967/, The Aristocats /1970/, Robin Hood /1973/ and many others entered the Bulgarian market after 1991.\nB/ New first-run films created after 1991: Ice Age, Toy Story, Tangled, The Lion King, Mulan, etc.\nAfter 1991, BNT was the first to obtain the rights to voice and broadcast Disney series - 101 Dalmatians, Woody Woodpecker, Mickey Mouse, Tom and Jerry, etc. The first full-length animated films were dubbed at Boyana Film Studio, Dolly Media Studio (1992) and Ars Digital Studio (1994). In 1999, Alexandra Audio Studio took over the Disney production from BNT, which lost the rights to do the voice-overs due to a highly outdated technology park. In 2019 Andarta Studio joined the sound business, and in 2005 Profilms Studio, which are still working.\nIn Bulgaria, there are two forms of Bulgarian dubbing. The first is the so-called \"voiceover\" dubbing, typical of the Bulgarian television market, in which the voice-over is based on the back-camera technology of the 1970s, with the voice superimposed on the original phonogram. This inexpensive way of voice-over is preferred only because of its low cost. But unfortunately it is a rather outdated technological form that does not meet the technical requirements of the new times. The second, considered basic in many European countries and the only one acceptable today, is synchronous dubbing, a radically different technology with much higher sound quality and speech synchronisation capabilities. This new method is defined as post-synchronous /non-synchronous/ dubbing of the product, in which the dialogue component of the phonogram is completely produced in Bulgarian, similar to the process in film production, in order for it to completely replace the original. In this sense, dubbing is considered by the production companies as one of the final elements of the overall post-production process of their films, and therefore their control over all the activities performed is complete.\nCroatia.\nIn Croatia, foreign live-action films and television series are always subtitled, while most children's programs and animated movies are dubbed into Croatian. The practice of dubbing began in the 1980s in some animated shows and continued in 90's, 00's and forward in other shows and films, the latter ones being released in home media. Recently, more efforts have been made to introduce dubbing, but public reception has been poor in some exceptions. Regardless of language, Croatian audiences prefer subtitling to dubbing; however, dubbing is still popular in animated series and films. Some previously popular animated shows (such as \"Sailor Moon\") lost their appeal completely after the practice of dubbing began, and the dubbing was eventually removed from the programs, even though most animated shows shown on television and some on home media have been well received by people watching dubbed versions of them. This situation is similar with theater movies, with only those intended for children being dubbed. Also, there has been an effort to impose dubbing by Nova TV, with \"La Fea M\u00e1s Bella\" (2006\u20132007) translated as \"Ru\u017ena ljepotica\" (literally, \"The Ugly Beauty\"), a Mexican \"telenovela\", but it failed.\nOn 1 October 2008, Nova TV launched its sister channel Mini TV, the first Croatian television channel for children with programming entirely dubbed into Croatian. RTL followed suit with the launch of RTL Kockica in 2014.\nSince the 2010s, the dubbing of live-action television series and films aimed at children, teenagers and young adults has been on the rise. With the launch of Nickelodeon's Croatian audio track in 2011, Studio NET was the first in Croatia to focus on \"serious production of live-action dubbing,\" with most of Nickelodeon's major teen live-action titles such as \"iCarly\" (2007\u20132012), \"Sam &amp; Cat\" (2013\u20132014), \"The Thundermans\" (2013\u20132018) and \"Victorious\" (2010\u20132013) receiving a Croatian dub. With the rise of streaming television in the 2020s, NET and various other studios also began producing Croatian dubs for Netflix; although the focus is still on dubbing animated series and films, a notable amount of live-action programming aimed at younger audiences has also been dubbed for Netflix, such as \"Chupa\" (2023), \"Geek Girl\" (2024), \"Heartstopper\" (2022\u20132024), \"I Woke Up a Vampire\" (2023), \"Matilda the Musical\" (2022) and \"\" (2023). However, to this day, all television programming and theatre releases aimed at adult audiences are still released with subtitles.\nSome of Croatian dubbing is also broadcast in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nEstonia.\nIn Estonia, only foreign children's films are dubbed in cinemas and on Estonian broadcast TV channels. As a rule, all other foreign films are shown with their original \"pure\" language soundtrack along with subtitles. On TV, the subtitles are almost always available in the Estonian language by default settings, and sometimes also in Russian and English upon request. In the cinemas, the subtitles are usually presented in Estonian and Russian languages. Cartoons and animated series are voiced by dubbing or voiceover. Estonian-language television channels use subtitles for English, Russian, and other foreign language audio. However, Russian-language TV channels tend to use dubbing more often, since most of them are produced and broadcast from Russia (as opposed to the few Russian-language channels broadcast from Estonia).\nGreece.\nIn Greece, most cartoon films have dubs. Usually when a movie has a Greek dub the dub is shown in cinemas but subtitled versions are shown as well. Foreign TV shows for adults are shown in their original versions with subtitles. Some Japanese anime series and telenovelas are usually dubbed in Greek. However, when Skai TV was re-launched in April 2006, the network opted for dubbing almost all foreign shows in Greek, but eventually switched to subtitling after receiving criticism by the viewers. There has been an effort to revive Greek dubbing by streaming services. Regardless of language, Greek audiences prefer subtitling to dubbing; however, dubbing is still popular in animated series and films.\nIreland.\nIreland usually receives the same film versions as the UK. However, some films have been dubbed into Irish by TG4.\nChildren's cartoons on TV are also occasionally dubbed into Irish.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, for the most part, Dutch versions are only made for children's and family films. Animated movies are shown in theaters with Dutch subtitles or dubbing, but usually those cinemas with more screening rooms also provide the original subtitled version.\nNordic countries.\nIn the Nordic countries, dubbing is used only in animated features (except adult animated features which only use subtitles) and other films for younger audiences. Some cinemas in the major cities may also screen the original version, usually as the last showing of the day, or in a smaller auditorium in a multiplex.\nIn television programs with off-screen narration, both the original audio and on-screen voices are usually subtitled in their native languages.\nThe Nordic countries are often treated as a common market issuing DVD and Blu-ray releases with original audio and user choosable subtitle options in Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish. The covers often have text in all four languages as well, but are sometimes unique for each country. Some releases may include other European language audio and/or subtitles (i.e. German, Greek, Hungarian or Italian). as well as original audio in most cases.\nIn Finland, the dubbed version from Sweden may also be available at certain cinemas for children of the 5% Swedish-speaking minority, but only in cities or towns with a significant percentage of Swedish speakers. Most DVD and Blu-ray releases usually only have the original audio, except for animated television series telenovelas, which have both Finnish and Swedish language tracks, in addition to the original audio and subtitles in both languages.\nIn Finnish movie theaters, films for adult audiences have both Finnish and Swedish subtitles, the Finnish printed in basic font and the Swedish printed below the Finnish in a cursive font. In the early ages of television, foreign TV shows and movies were voiced by narrator in Finland. Later, Finnish subtitles became a practice on Finnish television. As in many other countries, dubbing is not preferred outside of children's programs. A good example of this is \"The Simpsons Movie\". While the original version was well-received, the Finnish-dubbed version received poor reviews, with some critics even calling it a disaster. On the other hand, many dubs of Disney's animated television series and movies have been well-received, both critically and by the public.\nIn Iceland, the dubbed version of film and TV was originally Danish with some translated into Icelandic but Icelandic has taken over. LazyTown, an Icelandic TV show originally filmed in English, was dubbed into Icelandic, amongst thirty-two other languages.\nNorth Macedonia.\nNorth Macedonia dubbed many cartoons in Macedonian, but they also air some Serbian dubs. Children's programs are airing dubbed (in Macedonian or Serbian), while every other program is subtitled (in Macedonian). They use Serbian dubs for Disney movies, because there are no Macedonian Disney dubs.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, dubbing was banned under a 1948 law as a way of protecting the domestic film industry and reducing access to culture as most of the population was illiterate. Until 1994, animated movies, as well as other TV series for children, were shown subtitled in Portugal along with imported Brazilian Portuguese dubs due to the lack of interest from Portuguese companies in the dubbing industry. This lack of interest was justified, since there were already quality dubbed copies of shows and movies in Portuguese made by Brazilians. \"The Lion King\" was the first feature film to be dubbed in European Portuguese. Currently, all movies for children are dubbed. Subtitles are preferred in Portugal, used in every foreign-language documentary, TV series and film. The exception to this preference is when children are the target audience.\nWhile on TV, children's shows and movies are always dubbed, in cinemas, films with a clear juvenile target can be found in two versions, one dubbed (identified by the letters V.P. for \"vers\u00e3o portuguesa\" - \"Portuguese version\") and another subtitled version (V.O. for \"vers\u00e3o original\" - \"original version\"). This duality applies only to juvenile films. Others use subtitles only. While the quality of these dubs is recognized (some have already received international recognition and prizes), original versions with subtitles are usually preferred by the adults. Presently, live action series and movies are always shown in their original language format with Portuguese subtitles. Streaming services also offer some content for adults dubbed in Portuguese, although there they provide an option to select the original language. There are also a few examples of Anime which were dubbed into European Portuguese (i.e. \"Dragon Ball\" and \"Naruto\") Netflix is now offering foreign language films aimed at older audiences and TV series (M/12, M/14 and M/16) dubbed into Portuguese in addition to offering the original version with subtitles.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, virtually all programs intended for children are dubbed in Romanian. Animated movies are shown in theaters with Romanian dubbing. However, cinemas with more screening rooms usually also provide the original subtitled version. Other foreign TV shows and movies are shown in the original language with Romanian subtitles. Subtitles are usually preferred in the Romanian market. According to \"Special Eurobarometer 243\" (graph QA11.8) of the European Commission (research carried out in November and December 2005), 62% of Romanians prefer to watch foreign films and programs with subtitles (rather than dubbed), 22% prefer dubbing, and 16% declined to answer. This is led by the assumption that watching movies in their original versions is very useful for learning foreign languages. However, according to the same Eurobarometer, virtually no Romanian found this method\u2014watching movies in their original version\u2014to be the most efficient way to learn foreign languages, compared to 53 percent who preferred language lessons at school.\nSome programmes that are broadcast on The Fishing &amp; Hunting Channel are subtitled. TV Paprika used to broadcast voice-overed programmes, but it was replaced with subtitles.\nSome promos for films shown on TV1000 use voice-overs; but the films are subtitled. Examples shown here, at 2:11, 4:25, 5:09 and 7:15. Kanal D tried in March 2023 to introduce the first Turkish series dubbed in Romanian, \"Kirmizi Oda\", but it failed after the criticism received on social media from viewers and low ratings. As result, the series went on a subtitled version after two episodes.\nSerbia.\nSerbian language dubs are made mainly for Serbia, but they also broadcast in Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Children's animated movies and some live-action movies and TV series are dubbed into Serbian, while live-action films and TV series for adults are always airing subtitled, because in the region of former Yugoslavia people prefer subtitling for live-action formats. An exception to this is the Turkish soap opera \"Lale Devri\" that was dubbed in 2011, and aired on RTV Pink, but because of negative reception, the rest of the TV series was aired subtitled.\nThe dubbing of cartoon series in former Yugoslavia during the 1980s had a twist of its own: famous Serbian actors, such as Nikola Simi\u0107, Mi\u0107a Tati\u0107, Nada Blam and others provided the voices for characters of Disney, Warner Bros., MGM and other companies, frequently using region-specific phrases and sentences and, thus, adding a dose of local humor to the translation of the original lines. These phrases became immensely popular and are still being used for tongue-in-cheek comments in specific situations. These dubs are today considered cult dubs. The only dub made after 1980s and 1990s ones that has a cult following is the \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" dub, broadcast by B92 between 2002 and 2017, because of the memorable translation with regional humor, akin to the translations seen in 1980s Yugoslavian dubs.\nSome Serbian dubs are also broadcast in North Macedonia, while cult dubs made during Yugoslavia were aired all over the country (today's Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Slovenia, North Macedonia and Serbia).\nIn the 21st-century, prominent dubbing/voice actors in Serbia include actors Marko Markovi\u0107, Vladislava \u0110or\u0111evi\u0107, Jelena Gavrilovi\u0107, Dragan Vuji\u0107, Milan Antoni\u0107, Boris Milivojevi\u0107, Radovan Vujovi\u0107, Goran Jevti\u0107, Ivan Bosilj\u010di\u0107, Gordan Ki\u010di\u0107, Slobodan Stefanovi\u0107, Dubravko Jovanovi\u0107, Dragan Mi\u0107anovi\u0107, Slobodan Ninkovi\u0107, Branislav Le\u010di\u0107, Jakov Jevtovi\u0107, Ivan Jevtovi\u0107, Katarina \u017duti\u0107, Anica Dobra, Voja Brajovi\u0107, Neboj\u0161a Glogovac and Dejan Lutki\u0107.\nSlovenia.\nIn Slovenia, all foreign films and television programs are subtitled with the exception of children's movies and TV shows (both animated or live-action). While dubbed versions are always shown in cinemas and later on TV channels, cinemas will sometimes play subtitled versions of children's movies as well.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the vast majority of foreign language films are subtitled, although mostly animated films are dubbed in English. These usually originate from North America, as opposed to being dubbed locally. Foreign language serials shown on BBC Four are subtitled into English (although open subtitles are dropped during dialogues with English language segments already). There have, however, been notable examples of films and TV programs successfully dubbed in the UK, such as the Japanese \"Monkey\" and French \"Magic Roundabout\" series. When airing films on television, channels in the UK often choose subtitling over dubbing, even if a dubbing in English exists. It is also a fairly common practice for animation aimed at preschool children to be re-dubbed with British voice actors replacing the original voices, such as Spin Master Entertainment's PAW Patrol series, although this is not done with shows aimed at older audiences. The off-screen narrated portions of some programs and reality shows that originate from North America are also redone with British English voices. The 2020 Bavarian show on Netflix, Freud, has also been dubbed to English.\nSome animated films and TV programs are also dubbed into Welsh and Scottish Gaelic.\nHinterland displays a not so common example of a bilingual production. Each scene is filmed twice, in the English and Welsh languages, apart from a few scenes where Welsh with subtitles is used for the English version.\nGeneral films and programming.\nIn the French-, Italian-, Spanish-, German-, Russian-, Polish-, Czech-, Slovak- and Hungarian-speaking markets of Europe, almost all foreign films and television shows are dubbed (with the main exception being the majority of theatrical releases of adult-audience movies in the Czech Republic and Slovakia). There are few opportunities to watch foreign movies in their original versions. In Spain, Italy, Germany and Austria, even in the largest cities, there are few cinemas that screen original versions with subtitles, or without any translation. However, digital pay-TV programming is often available in the original language, including the latest movies. Prior to the rise of DVDs (and later Video on Demand and Streaming), which in these countries are mostly issued with multi-language audio tracks, original-language films (those in languages other than the country's official language) were rare, whether in theaters, on TV, or on home video, and subtitled versions were considered a product for small niche markets such as intellectual or art films.\nAlbania.\nThe first movie dubbed in Albanian was \"The Great Warrior Skanderbeg\" in 1954 and since then, there have been thousands of popular titles dubbed in Albanian by different dubbing studios. All animated movies and children's programs are dubbed into Albanian (though typically, songs are left in English or the original language of the program with Albanian subtitles). Many live-action movies are dubbed as well. TV series nevertheless are usually not dubbed, they are subtitled except for a few Mexican, Brazilian and Turkish soap operas, like: \"Por Ti\", \"Celebridade\", \"A Casa das Sete Mulheres\", \"Parampar\u00e7a\", etc. As for documentaries, Albania usually uses voice-over.\nFrance.\nIn France, dubbing is the norm. Most movies with a theatrical release, including all those from major distributors, are dubbed. Those that are not, are foreign independent films whose budget for international distribution is limited, or foreign art films with a niche audience.\nAlmost all theaters show movies with their French dubbing (\"VF\", short for ). Some of them also offer screenings in the original language (\"VO\", short for ), generally accompanied with French subtitles (\"VOST\", short for ). A minority of theaters (usually small ones) screen exclusively in the original language. According to the CNC (National Centre for Cinematography), VOST screenings accounted for 16.9% of tickets sold in France.\nIn addition, dubbing is required for home entertainment and television screenings. However, since the advent of digital television, foreign programs are broadcast to television viewers in both languages (sometimes, French with audio description is also aired); while the French-language track is selected by default, viewers can switch to the original-language track and enable French subtitles. As a special case, the binational television channel Arte broadcasts both the French and German dubbing, in addition to the original-language version.\nSome voice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in the European French language are listed below.\nGermany, Austria, Switzerland.\nThe Germanophone dubbing market is the largest in Europe. Germany has the most foreign-movie-dubbing studios per capita and per given area in the world and according to the German newspaper Die Welt 52% of all voice actors currently work in the German dubbing industry. In Germany and Austria, practically all films, shows, television series and foreign soap operas are shown in dubbed versions created for the German market. Dubbing films is a traditional and common practice in German-speaking Europe, since subtitles are not accepted and used as much as in other European countries. According to a European study, Austria is the country with the highest rejection rate (more than 70 percent) of subtitles, followed by Italy, Spain and Germany.\nIn German-speaking markets, computer and video games feature German text menus and are generally dubbed into the German language if speaking parts exist.\nUnlike in Austria and Germany, cinemas in German-speaking Switzerland historically strongly preferred subtitled versions of foreign-language films. Swiss film distributors commissioned dual-language prints with both German and French subtitles as the primary version, with the dubbed version also shown. In recent years, however, there has been a shift towards dubbed versions, which now account for the majority of showings. Television broadcasts of foreign films and programming have historically been dubbed.\nSwiss and Austrian television stations have increasingly been broadcasting foreign-language movies and TV programs with multiple soundtracks, allowing the viewer to choose between the original language (e.g. English) and the channel's local language (German, French, or Italian, according to the location).\nAlthough German-speaking voice actors play only a secondary role, they are still notable for providing familiar voices to well-known actors. Famous foreign actors are known and recognized for their German voice, and the German audience is used to them, so dubbing is also a matter of authenticity. However, in larger cities, there are theaters where movies can be seen in their original versions, as English has become somewhat more popular among young educated viewers. On German mainstream television, films are never broadcast with subtitles, but pay-per-view programming is often available in the original language. Subtitled niche and art films are sometimes aired on smaller networks.\nGerman-dubbed versions sometimes diverge greatly from the original, especially in adding humorous elements absent from the original. In extreme cases, such as \"The Persuaders!\" or \"Erik the Viking\", the German-dubbed version was more successful than the English original. Often, translation adds sexually explicit gags the U.S. versions might not be allowed to use. For example, in \"Bewitched\", the translators changed \"The Do Not Disturb sign will hang on the door tonight\" to \"The only hanging thing tonight will be the Do Not Disturb sign\". This practice was the most prevalent from the 1960s to 80s, from the 1990s onwards it became much less common.\nSome movies dubbed in Austria diverge from the German Standard version in addressing other people but only when the movies are dubbed into certain Austrian dialect versions. (Mr. and Mrs. are translated into Herr and Frau which is usually not translated in order to be in lip-sync).\nSometimes even English pronounced first names are translated and are pronounced into the correct German equivalent (English name \"Bert\" became Southern German pronounced name \"Bertl\" which is an abbreviation for any name either beginning or even ending with \"bert\", e.g. \"Berthold\" or \"Albert\".)\nSome movies dubbed before reunification exist in different versions for the east and the west. They use different translations, and often differ in the style of dubbing.\nSome of the well-known German dubbing voice artists are listed below.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, dubbing is almost universally common. Almost every foreign movie or TV show released in Hungary is dubbed into Hungarian. The history of dubbing dates back to the 1950s, when the country was still under communist rule. One of the most iconic Hungarian dubs was of the American cartoon \"The Flintstones\", with a local translation by J\u00f3zsef Romh\u00e1nyi. The Internetes Szinkron Adatb\u00e1zis (ISzDB) is the largest Hungarian database for film dubs, with information for many live action and animated films. On page 59 of the Eurobarometer, 84% of Hungarians said that they prefer dubbing over subtitles.\nIn the socialist era, every film was dubbed with professional and mostly popular actors. Care was taken to make sure the same voice actor would lend their voice to the same original actor. In the early 1990s, as cinemas tried to keep up with showing newly released films, subtitling became dominant in the cinema. This, in turn, forced TV channels to make their own cheap versions of dubbed soundtracks for the movies they presented, resulting in a constant degrading of dubbing quality. Once this became customary, cinema distributors resumed the habit of dubbing for popular productions, presenting them in a below-average quality. However, every feature is presented with the original soundtrack in at least one cinema in large towns and cities.\nHowever, in Hungary, most documentary films and series (for example, those on Discovery Channel, National Geographic Channel) are made with voiceovers, as is the case with most other countries that favor dubbing. Some old movies and series, or ones that provide non-translatable jokes and conversations (for example, the \"Mr. Bean\" television series), are shown only with subtitles.\nThere is a more recent problem arising from dubbing included on DVD releases. Many generations have grown up with an original (and, by current technological standards, outdated) soundtrack, which is either technologically (mono or bad quality stereo sound) or legally (expired soundtrack license) unsuitable for a DVD release. Many original features are released on DVD with a new soundtrack, which in some cases proves to be extremely unpopular, thus forcing DVD producers to include the original soundtrack. In some rare cases, the Hungarian voicetrack is left out altogether. This happened notably with Warner Home Video Hungary, which ignored the existence of Hungarian voicetracks completely, as they did not want to pay the licenses for the voicetracks to be included on their new DVD releases, which appear with improved picture quality, but very poor subtitling.\nItaly.\nDubbing is systematic in Italy, with a tradition going back to 1930. In Mussolini's fascist Italy, the release of movies in foreign languages was banned in 1938 for political reasons. Rome is the main base of the dubbing industry, where major productions, such as movies, dramas, documentaries, and some animation films are dubbed. However, many animated works (especially anime products) are dubbed in Milan, as well as other minor productions. Virtually every foreign film of every genre and target audience\u2014as well as TV shows\u2014are dubbed into Italian. Some theatres in the bigger cities include original language shows in their schedules, even if this is an uncommon practice. Subtitles may be available on late-night programs on mainstream TV channels. Pay-TV and streaming services provide films in the dubbed version as well as in their original language.\nEarly in their careers, actors such as Alberto Sordi or Nino Manfredi worked extensively as dubbing actors. At a certain point, shooting scenes in MOS (motor-only sync or motor-only shot) was a common practice in Italian cinema; all dialogue was dubbed in post-production. A notable instance is \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\", in which all actors had to dub in their own voices.\nBecause many films would feature multinational casts, dubbing became necessary to ensure dialogue would be comprehensible regardless of the dub language. The presence of foreign actors also meant that some directors would have actors recite gibberish or otherwise unrelated words since the end goal was simply to have general lip movements over which to add dialogue.\nA typical example of this practice was \"La Strada\", which starred two Americans; Anthony Quinn and Richard Basehart, in leading roles. Rather than have dialogue spoken phonetically or have multiple languages at the same time (which would require lines to be translated multiple times), actors would instead count numbers corresponding to the number of lines. Liliana Betti, assistant to director Federico Fellini, described the system as such: \"Instead of lines, the actor has to count off numbers in their normal order. For instance, a line of fifteen words equals an enumeration of up to thirty. The actor merely counts till thirty: 1-2-3-4-5-6-7. etc.\" Fellini used this system, which he coined \"numerological diction,\" in many of his films. Other directors adopted similar systems.\nDubbing may also be used for artistic purposes. It was common for even Italian-speaking performers to have their dialogue dubbed by separate voice actors if their actual voice is thought to be unfitting or some otherwise unsuitable. Fellini, who was particularly fond of the dubbing process, heavily relied on dubbing Italian actors, whom he often chose among non-professionals based just on their appearance, employing voice actors to entirely dub and sometimes improvise the dialogue. Some voice actors, such as Carlo Croccolo, Oreste Lionello or Elio Pandolfi, were even cast to dub over the voices of multiple characters in the same film. A similar process was sometimes applied with professional actors: for example, in \"Django\", lead actor Franco Nero was dubbed by Nando Gazzolo because he was thought to sound too youthful for the grizzled character he portrayed. Claudia Cardinale, one of the major actresses of the 1960s and 70s, had a heavy accent from her Tunisian background, and was likewise dubbed for the first decade of her career. This practice was generally phased out in the 1990s, with the widespread adoption of sync sound.\nVideo games are generally either dubbed into Italian (for instance, the \"Assassin's Creed\", \"Halo\", , and \"Harry Potter\" series) or released with the original audio tracks providing Italian subtitles.\nAs for documentaries, Italy usually uses voice-over.\nThe most important Italian voice actors and actresses, as well as the main celebrities dubbed in their careers, are listed below.\nLatvia, Lithuania.\nIn Latvia and Lithuania, only children's movies get dubbed in the cinema, while many live-action movies for an older audience use voice-over. Most children's TV shows, like \"SpongeBob SquarePants\", use voice-overs, but in recent years, a few of them, mainly aimed at preschoolers, have been dubbed into Latvian and Lithuanian.\nPoland.\nIn the past, foreign movies were all subtitled in Polish. Poland's dubbing traditions began between the two world wars. In 1931, among the first movies dubbed into Polish were \"Dangerous Curves\" (1929), \"The Dance of Life\" (1929), \"Paramount on Parade\" (1930), and \"Darling of the Gods\" (1930). In 1949, the first dubbing studio opened in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. The first film dubbed that year was \"Russkiy Vopros\" (filmed 1948). Although quality was poor at first, the number of dubbed movies and the quality of dubbing improved, and between the 1960s and the 1980s around a third of foreign movies screened in cinemas were dubbed. The \"Polish dubbing school\" was known for its high quality. The person who initiated high-quality dubbing versions was director Zofia Dybowska-Aleksandrowicz.Polish television dubbed popular films and TV series such as \"Rich Man, Poor Man\"; \"Fawlty Towers\", \"Forsyte Saga\", \"Elizabeth R\", \"I, Claudius\", \"I'll Take Manhattan\", and \"Peter the Great\".\nIn the 1980s, due to budget cuts, state-run TV saved on tapes by voicing films over live during transmission. Overall, during 1948\u20131998, almost 1,000 films were dubbed in Polish. In the 1990s, dubbing films and TV series continued, although often also for one emission only. In 1995, Canal+ was launched in Poland. In its first years, it dubbed 30% of its schedule, including popular films and TV series such as \"Friends\", but this proved unsuccessful. It stopped dubbing films in 1999. From the 1990s until its closure in 2001, dubbing was done by Wizja Jeden TV channel, which mainly dubbed BBC Television productions such as \"The League of Gentlemen\", \"Absolutely Fabulous\", and \"Men Behaving Badly\".\nCurrently, dubbing of films and TV series for teenagers is done by Nickelodeon and Disney Channel. One of the major breakthroughs in dubbing was the Polish release of \"Shrek\" (2001), which contained many references to local culture and Polish humor. However live-action dubbing is still considered a bad practice. Since the theatrical release of \"The Avengers\" in May 2012, Walt Disney Company Polska has dubbed all films for cinema releases. However, when a dub is produced but the film's target audience is not exclusively children, both dubbed and subtitled versions are usually available in movie theaters at different times. Cinema releases for general audiences are almost exclusively subtitled, with the exception of children's movies, home media releases, television screenings of movies, and made-for-TV shows. These are usually shown with voice-over translation, where a voice talent reads a translation over the original soundtrack, similar to the Gavrilov translation used in Russia, with one difference\u2014all dialogues are voiced by one off-screen reader.\nRussia.\nRussian television is generally dubbed, but often uses the voice-over translation method with only a couple of voice actors, with the original speech still audible underneath. In the Soviet Union, most foreign movies to be officially released were dubbed. Voice-over dub was invented in the Soviet Union in the 1980s when with the fall of the regime, many popular foreign movies, previously forbidden, or at least questionable under communist rule, started to flood in, in the form of low-quality home-copied videos. Being unofficial releases, they were dubbed in a very primitive way. For example, the translator spoke the text directly over the audio of a video being copied, using primitive equipment. The quality of the resulting dub was very low: The translated phrases were off-sync (interfering with the original voices), background sounds leaked into the track, the translation was inaccurate, and, most importantly, all dub voices were made by a single person who usually lacked the intonation of the original, making comprehension of some scenes quite difficult. This method of translation exerted a strong influence on Russian pop culture. Voices of translators became recognizable for generations.\nIn modern Russia, the overdubbing technique is still used in many cases, although with vastly improved quality, and now with multiple voice actors dubbing different original voices. Video games are generally either dubbed into Russian (such as the \"Legend of Spyro\" trilogy, the \"Skylanders\" series, the \"Assassin's Creed\" saga, the \"Halo\" series, the \"Harry Potter\" series, etc.) or released with original-speaking tracks but with all the texts translated into Russian language. The technique of non-voiceover dubbing, without the original speech still audible underneath, has also gained traction in Russia in the 21st century.\nReleases of films in cinemas are almost always dubbed in the Russian language. Television series are typically shown as a dubbed or voiceovered translation. Subtitles are rarely used.\nSome of the well-known Russian dubbing voice artists are listed below.\nSlovakia.\nIn Slovakia, home media market, Czech dubbed versions are widely used, with only children's films and some few exceptions (for example Independence Day) that have been dubbed for cinema being released with Slovak dubbing. Czech dubbing was also extensively used in the broadcast of Slovak television channels, but since 2008 Slovak language laws require any newer shows (understood as the first television broadcast in Slovakia) to be provided with Slovak localization (dubbing or subtitles); since then, television broadcasts of films, TV series and cartoons have been dubbed into Slovak.\nTheatrical releases are generally subtitled, except for films with a young target audience.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, dubbing has been more widespread since 1932, when the Second Republic decided to introduce it in Madrid and Barcelona. The first film dubbed into Spanish to be known was \"Devil and the Deep\", in 1932. Dubbing, after the Spanish Civil War, was reinforced by the regulations promulgated by the Government of Francisco Franco on April 23, 1941, at its time based on Mussolini's Language Defense Law of 1938. This law had two political purposes: Nationalism through linguistic identity and, more subtly, control through censorship of foreign ideas that could be alien to national interests.\nIn Spain, practically all foreign television programs are shown dubbed in European Spanish, as are most films. Some dubbing actors have achieved popularity for their voices, such as Constantino Romero (who dubs Clint Eastwood, Darth Vader and Arnold Schwarzenegger's \"Terminator\", among others) and \u00d3scar Mu\u00f1oz (the official European Spanish dub-over voice artist for Elijah Wood and Hayden Christensen). Currently, with the spread of digital terrestrial television, viewers can choose between the original and the dubbed soundtracks for most movies and television.\nIn some regions such as Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country, some foreign programs are also often dubbed into Catalan, Galician, or Basque.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, since 2006 cinema releases are almost always dubbed into Ukrainian with the overdubbing technique and multiple voice actors dubbing different original voices with a small percent of art-house/documentaries shown in the original language with Ukrainian subtitles. For television, TV channels usually release movies and TV-shows with a Ukrainian voiceover, although certain high-profile films and TV shows are dubbed rather than voice-overed.\nIn the past Russian-language films, TV series, cartoons, animated series and TV programs were usually not dubbed but were shown with the original audio with Ukrainian subtitles. However, this practice has been slowly abandoned since the late 2010s: all children's films and cartoons regardless of the original language (including Russian) are always dubbed into Ukrainian; example of the first Russian cartoons dubbed into Ukrainian for the cinematic-release is \"The Snow Queen 2\" (2015), \"A Warrior's Tail\" (2015), \"Volki i Ovtsy: Be-e-e-zumnoe prevrashenie\" (2016), \"Ivan Tsarevich i Seryy Volk 3\" (2016), \"Bremenskie razboyniki\" (2016), \"\" (2017), \"Fantastic Journey to OZ\" (2017), \"Fixies: Top Secret\" (2017) etc.; the same trend is seen among Russian language feature films for adults, with the first such films dubbed into Ukrainian including \"Battle for Sevastopol\" (2015), \"Hardcore Henry\" (2016), \"The Duelist\" (2016).\nLatin America.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, foreign programs are invariably dubbed into Brazilian Portuguese on free-to-air TV, with only a few exceptions. Films shown at cinemas are generally offered with both subtitled and dubbed versions, with dubbing frequently being the only choice for children's movies. Subtitling was primarily for adult audience movies until 2012. Since then, dubbed versions also became available for all ages. As a result, in recent years, more cinemas have opened in Brazil, attracting new audiences to the cinema who prefer dubbing. According to a Datafolha survey, 56% of Brazilian movie theaters' audience prefer to watch dubbed movies. Most of the dubbing studios in Brazil are in the cities of Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo.\nThe first film to be dubbed in Brazil was the Disney animation \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" in 1938. By the end of the 1950s, most of the movies, TV series and cartoons on television in Brazil were shown in its original sound and subtitles. However, in 1961, a decree of President J\u00e2nio Quadros ruled that all foreign productions on television should be dubbed. This measure boosted the growth of dubbing in Brazil, and has led to several dubbing studios since then. The biggest dubbing studio in Brazil was Herbert Richers, headquartered in Rio de Janeiro and closed in 2009. At its peak in the 80s and 90s, the Herbert Richers studios dubbed about 70% of the productions shown in Brazilian cinemas.\nIn the 90s, with \"Saint Seiya\", \"Dragon Ball\" and other anime shows becoming popular in Brazilian TVs, the voice actors and the dubbing career gained a higher space in Brazilian culture. Actors like Hermes Baroli (Brazilian dubber of Pegasus Seiya, in \"Saint Seiya\" and actors like Ashton Kutcher), Marco Ribeiro (Brazilian dubber of many actors like Tom Hanks, Jim Carrey and Robert Downey Jr., and Yusuke Urameshi from the anime \"Yu Yu Hakusho\") and Wendel Bezerra (Brazilian dubber of Goku in \"Dragon Ball Z\" and SpongeBob in \"SpongeBob SquarePants\") are recognized for their most notable roles.\nPay TV commonly offers both dubbed and subtitled movies, with statistics showing that dubbed versions are becoming predominant. Most DVD and Blu-ray releases usually feature Portuguese, Spanish, and the original audio along with subtitles in native languages. Most video games are dubbed in Brazilian Portuguese rather than having European Portuguese dubs alone. Games such as \"Halo 3\", ', \"inFamous 2\", \"Assassin's Creed III\", ', \"World of Warcraft\" and others are dubbed in Brazilian Portuguese. This is because despite the dropping of the dubbing law in Portugal in 1994, most companies in that country use the Brazilian Portuguese because of traditional usage during the days of the dubbing rule, along with these dubbings being more marketable than European Portuguese.\nA list that showcases Brazilian Portuguese voice artists that dub for actors and actresses are displayed here. However, there can also be different official dub artists for certain regions within Brazil.\nApparently, for unknown reasons (probably technical), the Brazilian Portuguese dub credits from some shows or cartoons from channels from Viacom or Turner/Time Warner, are shown on Latin America (on Spanish-dubbed series).\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, by law, films shown in theaters must be shown in their original version. Films in languages other than Spanish are usually subtitled. Only educational documentaries and movies rated for children (some shows aired on PBS or PBS Kids), as well as some movies that are expected to have a wide audience (for example, \"\" or \"The Avengers\") may be dubbed, but this is not compulsory, and some animated films are shown in theaters in both dubbed and subtitled versions (for instance, some DreamWorks productions). Nonetheless, a recent trend in several cinemas is to offer the dubbed versions only, with a stark decrease in the showing of the original ones.\nDubbing must be made in Mexico by Mexican nationals or foreigners residing in Mexico. Still, several programs that are shown on pay TV are dubbed in other countries like Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela.\nMost movies released on DVD feature neutral Spanish as a language option, and sometimes feature a specific dub for Mexican audiences (for example, \"Rio\"). Foreign programs are dubbed on broadcast TV, while on pay TV most shows and movies are subtitled. In a similar way to cinemas, in the last few years, many channels on pay TV have begun to broadcast programs and films only in their dubbed version.\nDubbing became very popular in the 1990s with the rise in popularity of anime in Mexico. Some voice actors have become celebrities and are always identified with specific characters, such as Mario Casta\u00f1eda (who became popular by dubbing Goku in \"Dragon Ball Z\") or Humberto V\u00e9lez (who dubbed Homer Simpson in the first 15 seasons of \"The Simpsons\").\nThe popularity of pay TV has allowed people to view several series in their original language rather than dubbed. Dubbing has been criticized for the use of TV or movie stars as voice actors (such as Ricky Martin in Disney's \"Hercules\", or Eugenio Derbez in DreamWorks' \"Shrek\"), or for the incorrect use of local popular culture that sometimes creates unintentional jokes or breaks the feeling of the original work (such as translating Sheldon Cooper's \"Bazinga!\" to \"\u00a1Vacil\u00f3n!\").\nSeveral video games have been dubbed into neutral Spanish, rather than European Spanish, in Mexico (such as the \"Gears of War\" series, \"Halo 3\", \"Infamous 2\" and others). Sony recently announced that more games (such as \"God of War: Ascension\") will be dubbed into neutral Spanish.\nPeru.\nIn Peru, all foreign series, movies, and animated programming are shown dubbed in Latin American Spanish, with dubs imported from Argentina, Mexico, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela on terrestrial and pay-television. Most movies intended for kids are being offered as dub-only movies, while most films aimed at older audiences are being offered dubbed and subtitled in Spanish. Most subtitled Pay-TV channels show both dubbed and subtitled version of every film they broadcast, being offered with a separate subtitle track and a second audio track in English. There is an increase of people preferring subtitle films and series rather than dubbed starting the late-2000s, as Peruvians viewers tend to get used to their original version.\nPeru used to not produce their own dubs since dubbing studios never existed in that country until 2016, when the company \"Big Bang Films\" started to dub movies and series; however since 2014, a group of dubbing actors created a group called \"Torre A Doblaje\", which is a group of actors that gives dubbing and localization services.\nLatin American Spanish-speaking countries.\nFor Latin American Spanish-speaking countries, all foreign-language programs, films, cartoons and documentaries shown on free-to-air TV networks are dubbed into Standard Spanish, (mainly in Mexico, Venezuela or Argentina) while broadcasts on cable and satellite pan-regional channels (i.e. Discovery Kids) are either dubbed or subtitled. In theaters, children's movies and most blockbuster films are dubbed into Standard Spanish, and are sometimes further dubbed into regional dialects of Spanish where they are released.\nNorth America.\nFrench-speaking Canada.\nIn Quebec, Canada, most films and TV programs in English are dubbed into Standard French, occasionally with Quebec French idiosyncrasies. They speak with a mixed accent, they pronounce /\u025b\u0303/ with a Parisian accent, but they pronounce \"\u00e2\" and \"\u00ea\" with a Quebec accent: \"gr\u00e2ce\" [\u0261\u0281\u0251\u02d0s] and \"\u00eatre\" [\u025b\u02d0t\u0281\u0325]. Occasionally, the dubbing of a series or a movie, such as \"The Simpsons\", is made using the more widely spoken \"joual\" variety of Quebec French. Dubbing has the advantage of making children's films and TV series more comprehensible to younger audiences. However, many bilingual Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois prefer subtitling, since they would understand some or all of the original audio. In addition, all films are shown in English, as well in certain theaters (especially in major cities and English-speaking areas such as the West Island), and some theatres, such as the Scotiabank Cinema Montreal, show only movies in English. Most American television series are only available in English on DVD, or on English-language channels, but some of the more popular ones have French dubs shown on mainstream networks, and are released in French on DVD as well, sometimes separately from an English-only version.\nFormerly, all French-language dubbed films in Quebec were imported from France and some still are. Such a practice was criticized by former politician Mario Dumont after he took his children to see the Parisian French dub of \"Shrek the Third\", which Dumont found incomprehensible. After his complaints and a proposed bill, \"Bee Movie\", the film from DreamWorks Animation, was dubbed in Quebec, making it the studio's first animated film to have a Quebec French dub, as all DreamWorks Animation films had previously been dubbed in France. In terms of Disney, the first Disney animated movie to be dubbed in Quebec French was \"Oliver and Company.\" Afterwards, all the other Disney animated movies onward after Oliver and Company including the Pixar animated movies have also been dubbed in Quebec French except for \"\", \"The Rescuers Down Under\", \"Beauty and the Beast\", \"The Lion King\", \"A Goofy Movie\", and \"Luca\".\nIn addition, because Canadian viewers usually find Quebec French more comprehensible than other dialects of the language, some older film series that had the French-language versions of previous installments dubbed in France have had later ones dubbed in Quebec, often creating inconsistencies within the French version of the series' canon. Lucasfilm's \"Star Wars\" and \"Indiana Jones\" series are examples. Both series had films released in the 1970s and 1980s, with no Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois French dubbed versions; instead, the Parisian French versions, with altered character and object names and terms, were distributed in the province. However, later films in both series released 1999 and later were dubbed in Quebec, using different voice actors and \"reversing\" name changes made in France's dubbings due to the change in studio.\nUnited States and English-speaking Canada.\nIn the United States and English-speaking Canada, live-action foreign films are usually shown in theaters with their original languages and English subtitles. It is because live-action dubbed movies rarely did well in United States box office since the 1980s. The 1982 United States theatrical release of Wolfgang Petersen's \"Das Boot\" was the last major release to go out in both original and English-dubbed versions, and the film's original version actually grossed much higher than the English-dubbed version. Later on, English-dubbed versions of international hits like \"Un indien dans la ville\", \"Godzilla 2000\", \"Anatomy\", \"Pinocchio, The Return of Godzilla\" and \"High Tension\" flopped at United States box offices. When Miramax planned to release the English-dubbed versions of \"Shaolin Soccer\" and \"Hero\" in the United States cinemas, their English-dubbed versions scored badly in test screenings in the United States, so Miramax finally released the films in United States cinemas with their original language.\nStill, English-dubbed movies have much better commercial potential in ancillary markets; therefore, more distributors would release live-action foreign films in theaters with their original languages (with English subtitles), then release both original versions and English-dubbed versions in ancillary markets.\nOn the other hand, anime is almost always released in English-dubbed format, regardless of its content or target age group. The exceptions to this practice are either when an English dub has not been produced for the program (usually in the case of feature films) or when the program is being presented by a network that places importance on presenting it in its original format (as was the case when Turner Classic Movies aired several of Hayao Miyazaki's works, which were presented both dubbed and subtitled). Most anime DVDs contain options for original Japanese, Japanese with subtitles, and English-dubbed, except for a handful of series that have been heavily edited or Americanized. In addition, Disney has a policy that makes its directors undergo stages to perfect alignment of certain lip movements so the movie looks believable.\nIn addition, a small number of British films have been re-dubbed when released in the United States, due to the usage of dialects which Americans are not familiar with (for example, \"Kes\" and \"Trainspotting\"). However, British children's shows (such as \"Thomas and Friends\" and \"Bob the Builder\") have historically always been re-dubbed with American voice actors in order to make the series more understandable for American children. This slowly fell out of practice since the late 2000s. With the rising popularity of British children's shows such as \"Peppa Pig\", which airs undubbed on Nick Jr. Channel (even though Tickle-U aired the dubbed version), fewer and fewer British children's shows have been broadcast with American re-dubs. Conversely, British programs shown in Canada are typically not re-dubbed.\nSome live-action television shows shown in the US have Spanish dubs. These are accessible though the SAP (secondary audio program) function of the television unit.\nMany films have also been dubbed into indigenous languages of the United States and Canada. Disney's \"Moana\", set in Hawaii, was dubbed into the Hawaiian language in 2018. The Navajo language has also received dubs of many films, the first three being \"Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope\" (), \"Finding Nemo\" () and \"Fistful of Dollars\" (). The Navajo dubs of \"Star Wars\" and \"Finding Nemo\" are also available on Disney Plus.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nIn common with other English-speaking countries, there has traditionally been little dubbing in Australia, with foreign language television programs and films being shown (usually on SBS) with subtitles or English dubs produced in other countries.\nBecause over 25% of Australians speak a language other than English at home, some cinemas show foreign-language films, for example in Chinese (the most spoken language in Australia other than English). There are also Chinese-language cinemas in Australia, such as the Hoyts Mandarin cinema in Chatswood, Sydney.\nHowever, some TV commercials from foreign countries are dubbed, even if the original commercial came from another English-speaking country. Moreover, the off-screen narration portions of some non-fiction programs originating from the UK or North America are re-dubbed by Australian voice talents to relay information in expressions that Australians can understand more easily.\nThe first film to be dubbed into an Australian Aboriginal language was \"Fists of Fury\", a Hong Kong martial arts film, which was dubbed into the Nyungar language of the Perth region in 2021. The first Indigenous Australian cartoon, \"Little J &amp; Big Cuz\", is available in English and several indigenous languages, including Gija, Nyungar, Torres Strait Creole, Palawa Kani, Warlpiri, Yol\u014bu, Arrernte, Pitjantjatjara and Kriol.\nFrench Polynesia.\nFrench Polynesia almost exclusively shows films and television programs in either French or English. However, in 2016, Disney's \"Moana\" became the first film to be dubbed into the Tahitian language. However, the dub was only released in French Polynesia and is not available on any streaming services.\nNew Zealand.\nWhile New Zealand is an English-speaking country, a growing number of television programs and films have also been dubbed into the M\u0101ori language.\nMany episodes of \"SpongeBob SquarePants\" () and \"Dora the Explorer\" () were dubbed into M\u0101ori and shown on M\u0101ori Television to promote the M\u0101ori language among children.\nDisney has also started dubbing films into M\u0101ori. These films are shown in cinemas in New Zealand and some parts of Australia and then released globally on Disney Plus. In 2019, the film \"Moana\" was dubbed into M\u0101ori. In 2022, \"The Lion King\" () and \"Frozen\" were dubbed into M\u0101ori.\nAlternatives.\nSubtitles.\nSubtitles can be used instead of dubbing, as different countries have different traditions regarding the choice between dubbing and subtitling. On DVDs with higher translation budgets, the option for both types will often be provided to account for individual preferences; purists often demand subtitles. For small markets (small language area or films for a select audience), subtitling is more suitable, because it is cheaper. In the case of films for small children who cannot yet read, or do not read fast enough, dubbing is necessary.\nIn most English-speaking countries, dubbing is comparatively rare. In Israel, some programs need to be comprehensible to speakers of both Russian and Hebrew. This cannot be accomplished with dubbing, so subtitling is much more commonplace\u2014sometimes even with subtitles in multiple languages, with the soundtrack remaining in the original language, usually English. The same applies to certain television shows in Finland, where Swedish and Finnish are both official languages.\nIn the Netherlands, Flanders, Nordic countries, Estonia, Portugal and the Balkans, films and television programs are shown in the original language (usually English) with subtitles, and only cartoons and children's movies and programs are dubbed. Cinemas usually show both a dubbed version and one with subtitles for this kind of movie, with the subtitled version shown later in the evening.\nIn Portugal, one terrestrial channel, TVI, dubbed U.S. series like \"Dawson's Creek\" into Portuguese. RTP also transmitted \"Friends\" in a dubbed version, but it was poorly received and later re-aired in a subtitled version. Cartoons, on the other hand, are usually dubbed, sometimes by well-known actors, even on TV. Animated movies are usually released to the cinemas in both subtitled and dubbed versions.\nIn Argentina and Venezuela, terrestrial channels air films and TV series in a dubbed version, as demanded by law. However, those same series can be seen on cable channels at more accessible time-slots in their subtitled version and usually before they are shown on open TV. In contrast, the series \"The Simpsons\" is aired in its Mexican Spanish-dubbed version both on terrestrial television and on the cable station Fox, which broadcasts the series for the area. Although the first season of the series appeared with subtitles, this was not continued for the following seasons.\nDubbing and subtitling.\nIn Bulgaria, television series are dubbed, but most television channels use subtitles for action and drama movies. AXN uses subtitles for its series, but as of 2008 emphasizes dubbing. Only Diema channels dub all programs. Movies in theaters, with the exception of films for children, use dubbing and subtitles. Dubbing of television programs is usually done using voiceovers, but usually, voices professional actors, while trying to give each character a different voice by using appropriate intonations. Dubbing with synchronized voices is rarely used, mostly for animated films. \"Mrs. Doubtfire\" is a rare example of a feature film dubbed this way on BNT Channel 1, though a subtitled version is currently shown on other channels.\nWalt Disney Television's animated series (such as \"DuckTales\", \"Darkwing Duck\", and \"Timon &amp; Pumbaa\") were only aired with synchronized Bulgarian voices on BNT Channel 1 until 2005, but then the Disney shows were canceled. When airing of Disney series resumed on Nova Television and Jetix in 2008, voiceovers were used, but Disney animated-movie translations still use synchronized voices. Voiceover dubbing is not used in theatrical releases. The Bulgarian film industry law requires all children's films to be dubbed, not subtitled. Nova Television dubbed and aired the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime with synchronized voices. Now, the show is airing on Disney Channel, also in a synchronized form.\nNetflix provides both subtitles and dubbed audio with its foreign language shows, including Brazil's dystopian \"3%\" and the German thriller \"Dark\". Viewer testing indicates that its audience is more likely to finish watching a series if they select to view it with dubbed audio rather than translated subtitles. Netflix now streams its foreign language content with dubbed audio as default in an effort to increase viewer retention.\nGeneral use.\nDubbing is also used in applications and genres other than traditional film, including video games, television, and pornographic films.\nVideo games.\nMany video games originally produced in North America, Japan, and Europe or Australia countries are dubbed into foreign languages for international release, especially for video games that place a heavy emphasis on dialogue. Because characters' mouth movements can be part of the game's code, lip sync is sometimes achieved by re-coding the mouth movements to match the dialogue in the new language. The Source engine automatically generates lip-sync data, making it easier for games to be localized.\nTo achieve synchronization when animations are intended only for the source language, localized content is mostly recorded using techniques borrowed from movie dubbing (such as rythmo band) or, when images are not available, localized dubbing is done using source audios as a reference. Sound-synch is a method where localized audios are recorded matching the length and internal pauses of the source content.\nFor the European version of a video game, the on-screen text of the game is available in various languages and, in many cases, the dialogue is dubbed into each respective language, as well.\nThe North American version of any game is always available in English, with translated text and dubbed dialogue, if necessary, in other languages, especially if the North American version of the game contains the same data as the European version. Several Japanese games, such as those in the \"Dynasty Warriors\" and \"Soulcalibur\" series, are released with both the original Japanese audio and the English dub included.\nTelevision.\nDubbing is occasionally used on network television broadcasts of films that contain dialogue that the network executives or censors have decided to replace. This is usually done to remove profanity. In most cases, the original actor does not perform this duty, but an actor with a similar voice reads the changes. The results are sometimes seamless, but, in many cases, the voice of the replacement actor sounds nothing like the original performer, which becomes particularly noticeable when extensive dialogue must be replaced. Also, often easy to notice, is the sudden absence of background sounds in the movie during the dubbed dialogue. Among the films considered notorious for using substitute actors that sound very different from their theatrical counterparts are the \"Smokey and the Bandit\" and the \"Die Hard\" film series, as shown on broadcasters such as TBS. In the case of \"Smokey and the Bandit\", extensive dubbing was done for the first network airing on ABC Television in 1978, especially for Jackie Gleason's character, Buford T. Justice. The dubbing of his phrase \"sombitch\" (son of a bitch) became \"scum bum,\" which became a catchphrase of the time.\nDubbing is commonly used in science fiction television, as well. Sound generated by effects equipment such as animatronic puppets or by actors' movements on elaborate multi-level plywood sets (for example, starship bridges or other command centers) will quite often make the original character dialogue unusable. \"Stargate\" and \"Farscape\" are two prime examples where ADR is used heavily to produce usable audio.\nSince some anime series contain profanity, the studios recording the English dubs often re-record certain lines if a series or movie is going to be broadcast on Cartoon Network, removing references to death and hell as well. Some companies will offer both an edited and an uncut version of the series on DVD, so that there is an edited script available in case the series is broadcast. Other companies also edit the full-length version of a series, meaning that even on the uncut DVD characters say things like \"Blast!\" and \"Darn!\" in place of the original dialogue's profanity. Bandai Entertainment's English dub of \"G Gundam\" is infamous for this, among many other things, with such lines as \"Bartender, more milk\".\nDubbing has also been used for comedic purposes, replacing lines of dialogue to create comedies from footage that was originally another genre. Examples include the American television show \"Kung Faux\", comedically re-dubbed from 1970s kung fu films originally produced in Hong Kong, the Australian television shows \"The Olden Days\" and \"Bargearse\", re-dubbed from 1970s Australian drama and action series, respectively, the Irish show \"Soupy Norman\", re-dubbed from \"\", a Polish soap opera, and \"Most Extreme Elimination Challenge\", a comedic dub of the Japanese game show \"Takeshi's Castle\".\nDubbing into a foreign language does not always entail the deletion of the original language. In some countries, a performer may read the translated dialogue as a voice-over. This often occurs in Russia and Poland, where \"lektories\" or \"lektors\" read the translated dialogue into Russian and Polish. In Poland, one announcer read all text. However, this is done almost exclusively for the television and home video markets, while theatrical releases are usually subtitled. Recently, however, the number of high-quality, fully dubbed films has increased, especially for children's movies. If a quality dubbed version exists for a film, it is shown in theaters. However, some films, such as \"Harry Potter\" or \"Star Wars\", are shown in both dubbed and subtitled versions, varying with the time of the show. Such films are also shown on TV (although some channels drop them and do standard one-narrator translation) and VHS/DVD. \nIn Russia, the reading of all lines by a single person is referred to as a Gavrilov translation, and is generally found only in illegal copies of films and on cable television. Professional copies always include at least two actors of opposite gender translating the dialogue. Some titles in Poland have been dubbed this way, too, but this method lacks public appeal, so it is very rare now.\nOn special occasions, such as film festivals, live interpreting is often done by professionals.\nPornography.\nAs budgets for pornographic films are often small, compared to films made by major studios, and there is an inherent need to film without interrupting filming, it is common for sex scenes to be over-dubbed. The audio for such over-dubbing is generally referred to as \"the Ms and Gs\", or \"the moans and groans.\"\nDubbing into varieties.\nIn the case of languages with large communities (such as English, Chinese, Hindi, Portuguese, Italian, German, Spanish, or French), a single translation may sound foreign to native speakers in a given region. Therefore, a film may be translated into a certain variety of a certain language.\nHispanic America and Spain use different versions of dubbed films and series. Due to the variety of Spanish accents in Latin America, the dubbing for this region is made in Standard Spanish, which avoids colloquialisms and whose pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammatical features are not recognizable as belonging to any particular Latin American country. For this reason, it is made in different countries, mainly in Mexico, Argentina and Colombia, for the entire continent. In addition, some films have been dubbed to the accent of a certain region of Spanish-speaking Latin America, such as the animated movie \"The Incredibles,\" which in addition to being dubbed into European and Standard Spanish, was dubbed into the Rioplatense and Mexican varieties.\nAnother example is the French dubbing of \"The Simpsons\", which has two entirely different versions for Quebec and for France. The humor is very different for each audience (see Non-English versions of \"The Simpsons\"). Audiences in Quebec are generally critical of France's dubbing of \"The Simpsons\", which they often do not find amusing.\nQuebec-French dubbing of films is generally made in accent-free Standard French, but may sound peculiar to audiences in France because of the persistence of some regionally-neutral expressions and because Quebec-French performers pronounce Anglo-Saxon names with an American accent, unlike French performers. Occasionally, budget restraints cause American direct-to-video films, such as the 1995 film \"When the Bullet Hits the Bone\", to be released in France with a Quebec-French dubbing, sometimes resulting in what some members of French audiences perceive as unintentional humor.\nPortugal and Brazil also use different versions of dubbed films and series. Because dubbing has never been very popular in Portugal, for decades, children's films were distributed using the higher-quality Brazilian dub (unlike children's TV series, which are traditionally dubbed in European Portuguese). Only in the 1990s did dubbing begin to gain popularity in Portugal. \"The Lion King\" became the first Disney feature film to be completely dubbed into European Portuguese, and subsequently all major animation films gained European-Portuguese versions. In recent DVD releases, most Brazilian-Portuguese-dubbed classics were released with new European-Portuguese dubs, eliminating the predominance of Brazilian-Portuguese dubs in Portugal.\nSimilarly, in Flanders, the Dutch-speaking region of Belgium, cartoons are often dubbed locally by Flemish artists rather than using soundtracks produced in the Netherlands.\nThe German-speaking region, which includes Germany, Austria, part of Switzerland, and Liechtenstein, share a common German-dubbed version of films and shows. Although there are some differences in the three major German varieties, all films, shows, and series are dubbed into a single Standard German version that avoids regional variations in the German-speaking audience. Most voice actors are primarily German or Austrian. Switzerland, which has four official languages (German, French, Italian, and Romansh), generally uses dubbed versions made in each respective country (except for Romansh). Liechtenstein uses German-dubbed versions only.\nSometimes, films are also dubbed into several German dialects (Berlinerisch, K\u00f6lsch, Saxonian, Austro-Bavarian or Swiss German), especially animated films and Disney films. They are as an additional \"special feature\" to entice the audience into buying it. Popular animated films dubbed into German variety include \"Asterix\" films (in addition to its Standard German version, every film has a particular variety version), \"The Little Mermaid\", \"Shrek 2\", \"Cars\", (+ Austrian German) and \"Up\" (+ Austrian German).\nSome live-action films or TV series have an additional German variety dubbing: \"Babe\" and its sequel, \"\" (German German, Austrian German, Swiss German); and \"Rehearsal for Murder\", \"Framed\" (+ Austrian German); \"The Munsters\", \"Serpico\", \"Rumpole\" (+ Austrian German), and \"The Thorn Birds\"\n(only Austrian German dubbing).\nBefore German reunification, East Germany also made its own particular German version. For example, \"Olsen Gang\" and the Hungarian animated series \"The M\u00e9zga Family\" were dubbed in West Germany as well as East Germany.\nUsually, there are two dubbings produced in Serbo-Croatian: Serbian and Croatian. Serbian for Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina; Croatian for Croatia and parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina."}
{"id": "8864", "revid": "32978398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8864", "title": "Delaunay triangulation", "text": "In computational geometry, a Delaunay triangulation or Delone triangulation of a set of points in the plane subdivides their convex hull into triangles whose circumcircles do not contain any of the points. This maximizes the size of the smallest angle in any of the triangles, and tends to avoid sliver triangles.\nThe triangulation is named after Boris Delaunay for his work on it from 1934.\nIf the points all lie on a straight line, the notion of triangulation becomes degenerate and there is no Delaunay triangulation. For four or more points on the same circle (e.g., the vertices of a rectangle) the Delaunay triangulation is not unique: each of the two possible triangulations that split the quadrangle into two triangles satisfies the \"Delaunay condition\", i.e., the requirement that the circumcircles of all triangles have empty interiors.\nBy considering circumscribed spheres, the notion of Delaunay triangulation extends to three and higher dimensions. Generalizations are possible to metrics other than Euclidean distance. However, in these cases a Delaunay triangulation is not guaranteed to exist or be unique.\nRelationship with the Voronoi diagram.\nThe Delaunay triangulation of a discrete point set in general position corresponds to the dual graph of the Voronoi diagram for .\nThe circumcenters of Delaunay triangles are the vertices of the Voronoi diagram.\nIn the 2D case, the Voronoi vertices are connected via edges, that can be derived from adjacency-relationships of the Delaunay triangles: If two triangles share an edge in the Delaunay triangulation, their circumcenters are to be connected with an edge in the Voronoi tesselation.\nSpecial cases where this relationship does not hold, or is ambiguous, include cases like:\n\"d\"-dimensional Delaunay.\nFor a set of points in the (-dimensional) Euclidean space, a Delaunay triangulation is a triangulation such that no point in is inside the circum-hypersphere of any -simplex in . It is known that there exists a unique Delaunay triangulation for if is a set of points in \"general position\"; that is, the affine hull of is -dimensional and no set of points in lie on the boundary of a ball whose interior does not intersect .\nThe problem of finding the Delaunay triangulation of a set of points in -dimensional Euclidean space can be converted to the problem of finding the convex hull of a set of points in ()-dimensional space. This may be done by giving each point an extra coordinate equal to , thus turning it into a hyper-paraboloid (this is termed \"lifting\"); taking the bottom side of the convex hull (as the top end-cap faces upwards away from the origin, and must be discarded); and mapping back to -dimensional space by deleting the last coordinate. As the convex hull is unique, so is the triangulation, assuming all facets of the convex hull are simplices. Nonsimplicial facets only occur when of the original points lie on the same -hypersphere, i.e., the points are not in general position.\nProperties.\nLet be the number of points and the number of dimensions.\nVisual Delaunay definition: Flipping.\nFrom the above properties an important feature arises: Looking at two triangles with the common edge (see figures), if the sum of the angles , the triangles meet the Delaunay condition.\nThis is an important property because it allows the use of a \"flipping\" technique. If two triangles do not meet the Delaunay condition, switching the common edge for the common edge produces two triangles that do meet the Delaunay condition:\nThis operation is called a \"flip\", and can be generalised to three and higher dimensions.\nAlgorithms.\nMany algorithms for computing Delaunay triangulations rely on fast operations for detecting when a point is within a triangle's circumcircle and an efficient data structure for storing triangles and edges. In two dimensions, one way to detect if point lies in the circumcircle of is to evaluate the determinant:\nWhen are sorted in a counterclockwise order, this determinant is positive only if lies inside the circumcircle.\nFlip algorithms.\nAs mentioned above, if a triangle is non-Delaunay, we can flip one of its edges. This leads to a straightforward algorithm: construct any triangulation of the points, and then flip edges until no triangle is non-Delaunay. Unfortunately, this can take edge flips. While this algorithm can be generalised to three and higher dimensions, its convergence is not guaranteed in these cases, as it is conditioned to the connectedness of the underlying flip graph: this graph is connected for two-dimensional sets of points, but may be disconnected in higher dimensions.\nIncremental.\nThe most straightforward way of efficiently computing the Delaunay triangulation is to repeatedly add one vertex at a time, retriangulating the affected parts of the graph. When a vertex is added, we split in three the triangle that contains , then we apply the flip algorithm. Done na\u00efvely, this will take time: we search through all the triangles to find the one that contains , then we potentially flip away every triangle. Then the overall runtime is .\nIf we insert vertices in random order, it turns out (by a somewhat intricate proof) that each insertion will flip, on average, only triangles \u2013 although sometimes it will flip many more. This still leaves the point location time to improve. We can store the history of the splits and flips performed: each triangle stores a pointer to the two or three triangles that replaced it. To find the triangle that contains , we start at a root triangle, and follow the pointer that points to a triangle that contains , until we find a triangle that has not yet been replaced. On average, this will also take time. Over all vertices, then, this takes time. While the technique extends to higher dimension (as proved by Edelsbrunner and Shah), the runtime can be exponential in the dimension even if the final Delaunay triangulation is small.\nThe Bowyer\u2013Watson algorithm provides another approach for incremental construction. It gives an alternative to edge flipping for computing the Delaunay triangles containing a newly inserted vertex.\nUnfortunately the flipping-based algorithms are generally hard to parallelize, since adding some certain point (e.g. the center point of a wagon wheel) can lead to up to consecutive flips. Blelloch et al. proposed another version of incremental algorithm based on rip-and-tent, which is practical and highly parallelized with polylogarithmic span.\nDivide and conquer.\nA divide and conquer algorithm for triangulations in two dimensions was developed by Lee and Schachter and improved by Guibas and Stolfi and later by Dwyer. In this algorithm, one recursively draws a line to split the vertices into two sets. The Delaunay triangulation is computed for each set, and then the two sets are merged along the splitting line. Using some clever tricks, the merge operation can be done in time , so the total running time is .\nFor certain types of point sets, such as a uniform random distribution, by intelligently picking the splitting lines the expected time can be reduced to while still maintaining worst-case performance.\nA divide and conquer paradigm to performing a triangulation in dimensions is presented in \"DeWall: A fast divide and conquer Delaunay triangulation algorithm in E\"d\"\" by P. Cignoni, C. Montani, R. Scopigno.\nThe divide and conquer algorithm has been shown to be the fastest DT generation technique sequentially.\nSweephull.\nSweephull is a hybrid technique for 2D Delaunay triangulation that uses a radially propagating sweep-hull, and a flipping algorithm. The sweep-hull is created sequentially by iterating a radially-sorted set of 2D points, and connecting triangles to the visible part of the convex hull, which gives a non-overlapping triangulation. One can build a convex hull in this manner so long as the order of points guarantees no point would fall within the triangle. But, radially sorting should minimize flipping by being highly Delaunay to start. This is then paired with a final iterative triangle flipping step.\nApplications.\nThe Euclidean minimum spanning tree of a set of points is a subset of the Delaunay triangulation of the same points, and this can be exploited to compute it efficiently.\nFor modelling terrain or other objects given a point cloud, the Delaunay triangulation gives a nice set of triangles to use as polygons in the model. In particular, the Delaunay triangulation avoids narrow triangles (as they have large circumcircles compared to their area). See triangulated irregular network.\nDelaunay triangulations can be used to determine the density or intensity of points samplings by means of the Delaunay tessellation field estimator (DTFE).\nDelaunay triangulations are often used to generate meshes for space-discretised solvers such as the finite element method and the finite volume method of physics simulation, because of the angle guarantee and because fast triangulation algorithms have been developed. Typically, the domain to be meshed is specified as a coarse simplicial complex; for the mesh to be numerically stable, it must be refined, for instance by using Ruppert's algorithm.\nThe increasing popularity of finite element method and boundary element method techniques increases the incentive to improve automatic meshing algorithms. However, all of these algorithms can create distorted and even unusable grid elements. Fortunately, several techniques exist which can take an existing mesh and improve its quality. For example, smoothing (also referred to as mesh refinement) is one such method, which repositions nodes to minimize element distortion. The stretched grid method allows the generation of pseudo-regular meshes that meet the Delaunay criteria easily and quickly in a one-step solution. \nConstrained Delaunay triangulation has found applications in path planning in automated driving and topographic surveying. "}
{"id": "8865", "revid": "26937909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8865", "title": "Defendant", "text": "In court proceedings, a defendant is a person or object who is the party either accused of committing a crime in criminal prosecution or against whom some type of civil relief is being sought in a civil case.\nTerminology varies from one jurisdiction to another. In Scots law, the terms \"accused\" or \"panel\" are used instead in criminal proceedings and \"defender\" in civil proceedings. Another term in use is \"respondent\".\nCriminal defendants.\nIn a criminal trial, a defendant is a person accused (charged) of committing an offense (a crime; an act defined as punishable under criminal law). The other party to a criminal trial is usually a public prosecutor, but in some jurisdictions, private prosecutions are allowed.\nCriminal defendants are often taken into custody by police and brought before a court under an arrest warrant. Criminal defendants are usually obliged to post bail before being released from custody. For serious cases, such as murder, bail may be refused. Defendants must be present at every stage of the proceedings against them. (There is an exception for very minor cases such as traffic offenses in jurisdictions which treat them as crimes.)\nIf more than one person is accused, the people may be referred as \"co-defendant\" or \"co-conspirator\" in British and common law courts.\nIn some jurisdictions, vulnerable defendants may be able to get access of services of a non-registered intermediary to assist with communication at court.\nCivil defendants.\nIn a civil lawsuit, a defendant (or a respondent) is also the accused party, although not of an offense, but of a civil wrong (a tort or a breach of contract, for instance). The person who starts the civil action through filing a complaint is referred to as the plaintiff (also known as the appellant).\nDefendants in civil actions usually make their first court appearance voluntarily in response to a summons. Historically, civil defendants could be taken into custody under a writ of \"capias ad respondendum\". Modern-day civil defendants are usually able to avoid most (if not all) court appearances if represented by a lawyer.\nMost often and familiarly, defendants are persons: either natural persons (actual human beings) or juridical persons (\"persona fiction\") under the legal fiction of treating organizations as persons. But a defendant may be an object, in which case the object itself is the direct subject of the action. When a court has jurisdiction over an object, it is said to have jurisdiction \"in rem\". An example of an \"in rem\" case is \"United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola\" (1916), where the defendant was not the Coca-Cola Company itself, but rather \"Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola\". In current United States legal practice, \"in rem\" suits are primarily asset forfeiture cases, based on drug laws, as in \"USA v. $124,700\" (2006).\nDefendants can set up an account to pay for litigation costs and legal expenses. These legal defense funds can have large membership counts where members contribute to the fund. The fund can be public or private and is set up for individuals, organizations, or a particular purpose. These funds are often used by public officials, civil-rights organizations, and public-interest organizations.\nEngland and Wales.\nHistorically, \"defendant\" was a legal term for a person prosecuted for misdemeanour. It was not applicable to a person prosecuted for felony."}
{"id": "8867", "revid": "5490874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8867", "title": "Department of Defense", "text": ""}
{"id": "8872", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8872", "title": "District of Ajmere", "text": ""}
{"id": "8873", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8873", "title": "Gnaeus Domitius Afer", "text": "Gnaeus Domitius Afer (died 59) was a Roman orator and advocate, born at Nemausus (N\u00eemes) in Gallia Narbonensis. He flourished in the reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero. He was suffect consul in the \"nundinium\" of September to December 39 as the colleague of Aulus Didius Gallus.\nLife.\nAfer became praetor in 25 AD, and gained the favor of Tiberius by accusing Claudia Pulchra, the second cousin of Agrippina, of adultery and the use of magic arts against the emperor, in 26 AD. From this time he became one of the most celebrated orators in Rome, but sacrificed his character by conducting accusations for the government. In the following year, 27 AD, he is again mentioned by Tacitus as the accuser of Quinctilius Varus, the son of Claudia Pulchra. In consequence of the accusation of Claudia Pulchra, and of some offense which he had given to Caligula, he was accused by the emperor in the senate, but by concealing his own skill in speaking, and pretending to be overpowered by the eloquence of Caligula, Afer not only escaped the danger, but was made consul suffectus in 39 AD.\nIn his old age Afer lost much of his reputation by continuing to speak in public, when his powers were exhausted. During the reign of Nero he became \"curator aquarum\", or superintendent of the city's water supply, but died not long afterwards, in 59 AD, having eaten himself to death, according to Jerome in the Chronicon of Eusebius.\nQuintilian, when a young man, heard Afer, and frequently speaks of him as the most distinguished orator of his age. He says that Afer and Julius Africanus were the best orators he had heard, and that he prefers the former to the latter, Quintilian refers to a work of his \"On Testimony\", to one entitled \"Dicta\", and to some of his orations, of which those on behalf of Domitilla, or Cloantilla, and Lucius Volusenus Catulus seem to have been the most celebrated.\nAccording to Pliny the Younger, in his will Afer had made Titius Marcellus Curvius Lucanus and Titius Marcellus Curvius Tullus his heirs on the condition that they take on his name. He had prosecuted their father, Sextus Curvius Tullus, stripping him of his wealth and citizenship. Pliny comments that Afer's will had been drawn up 18 years previously, suggesting that Afer and Tullus the elder had once been friends."}
{"id": "8875", "revid": "44078518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8875", "title": "Dan Simmons", "text": "Dan Simmons (born April 4, 1948) is an American science fiction and horror writer. He is the author of the Hyperion Cantos and the Ilium/Olympos cycles, among other works that span the science fiction, horror, and fantasy genres, sometimes within a single novel. Simmons's genre-intermingling\" Song of Kali\" (1985) won the World Fantasy Award. He also writes mysteries and thrillers, some of which feature the continuing character Joe Kurtz.\nBiography.\nBorn in Peoria, Illinois, Simmons started writing stories as a child with the goal of mesmerizing his audience with his story telling. Simmons received a B.A. in English from Wabash College in 1970 and, in 1971, a Masters in Education from Washington University in St. Louis. \nHe soon started writing short stories, although his career did not take off until 1982, when, through Harlan Ellison's help, Simmons was invited to the Milford workshop, which Ellison considered to be \"the best SF writing workshop in the world\". Simmons considered Ellison as a mentor, friend, and the reason he pursued writing full-time. Simmons' short story \"The River Styx Runs Upstream\" was published and awarded first prize in a \"Twilight Zone Magazine\" story competition, and he was taken on as a client by Ellison's agent, Richard Curtis. Simmons's first novel, \"Song of Kali\", was released in 1985. \nHe worked in elementary education until 1989.\nHe lives in Longmont, Colorado .\nHorror fiction.\n\"Summer of Night\" (1991) recounts the childhood of a group of pre-teens who band together in the 1960s, to defeat a centuries-old evil that terrorizes their hometown of Elm Haven, Illinois. The novel, which was praised by Stephen King in a cover blurb, is similar to King's \"It\" (1986) in its focus on small-town life, the corruption of innocence, the return of an ancient evil, and the responsibility for others that emerges with the transition from youth to adulthood.\nIn the sequel to \"Summer of Night\", \"A Winter Haunting\" (2002), Dale Stewart (one of the first book's protagonists and now an adult), revisits his boyhood home to come to grips with mysteries that have disrupted his adult life.\nBetween the publication of \"Summer of Night\" (1991) and \"A Winter Haunting\" (2002), several additional characters from \"Summer of Night\" appeared in: \"Children of the Night\" (1992), a loose sequel to \"Summer of Night\", which features Mike O'Rourke, now much older and a Roman Catholic priest, who is sent on a mission to investigate bizarre events in a European city; \"Fires of Eden\" (1994), in which the adult Cordie Cooke appears; and \"Darwin's Blade\" (2000), a thriller in which Dale's younger brother, Lawrence Stewart, appears as a minor character.\nAfter \"Summer of Night\", Simmons focused on writing science fiction until the 2007 work of historical fiction and horror, \"The Terror\". His 2009 book \"Drood\" is based on the last years of Charles Dickens' life leading up to the writing of \"The Mystery of Edwin Drood\", which Dickens had partially completed at the time of his death.\nHistorical fiction.\n\"The Terror\" (2007) crosses the bridge between horror and historical fiction. It is a fictionalized account of Sir John Franklin and his expedition to find the Northwest Passage. The two ships, and , become icebound the first winter, and the captains and crew struggle to survive while being stalked across an Arctic landscape by a monster. The novel was adapted into a ten-part television series.\n\"The Abominable\" (2013) recounts a mid-1920s attempt on Mount Everest by five climbers\u2014two British, one French, one Sherpa, and one American (the narrator)\u2014to recover the body of a cousin of one the British characters.\nLiterary references.\nMany of Simmons's works have strong ties with classic literature. For example:\nAdaptations.\nIn January 2004, it was announced that the screenplay he wrote for his novels \"Ilium\" and \"Olympos\" would be made into a film by Digital Domain and Barnet Bain Films, with Simmons acting as executive producer. \"Ilium\" is described as an \"epic tale that spans 5,000 years and sweeps across the entire solar system, including themes and characters from Homer's \"Iliad\" and Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\".\"\nIn 2008, Guillermo del Toro was scheduled to direct a film adaptation of \"Drood\" for Universal Pictures. As of December 2017, the project is still listed as \"in development\".\nIn 2009, Scott Derrickson was set to direct \"Hyperion Cantos\" for Warner Bros. and Graham King, with Trevor Sands penning a script adapting \"Hyperion\" and \"The Fall of Hyperion\" into one film. In 2011, actor Bradley Cooper expressed interest in taking over the adaptation. In 2015, it was announced that TV channel Syfy would produce a miniseries based on the Hyperion Cantos with the involvement of Cooper and King. As of May 2017, the project was still \"in development\" at Syfy. On November 1, 2021, Cooper and King restarted the feature film adaptation at Warner Bros., with Tom Spezialy set to write the script.\n\"The Terror\" (2007) was adapted in 2018 as an AMC 10-episode miniseries and received generally positive reviews upon release.\nAwards.\nWins.\nLocus Award\nInternational Horror Guild Award\nNocte Award\nSeiun Award\nNominations.\nDan Simmons has been nominated on numerous occasions in a range of categories for his fiction, including the Arthur C. Clarke Award, Bram Stoker Award, British Fantasy Society Award, Hugo Award, Nebula Award, and World Fantasy Award.\nSelected nominations are listed below.\nLocus nominations:\n\"The Hollow Man\" (1992) \u2013 Locus Award nominee, 1993\n\"The Winter Haunting\" (2002) \u2013 Locus Award nominee, 2003\n\"Olympos\" (2005) \u2013 Locus Award shortlist, 2006"}
{"id": "8876", "revid": "26161718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8876", "title": "Denis Auguste Affre", "text": "Denis-Auguste Affre (; 27 September 179327 June 1848) was a French clergyman who served as Archbishop of Paris from 1840 to 1848. He was killed while trying to negotiate peace during the June Days uprising of 1848.\nHis cause for beatification has commenced and he is therefore titled a Servant of God.\nLife.\nEarly life and career.\nAffre was born at Saint-Rome-de-Tarn, in the department of Aveyron. At the age of 14, he began to study for the priesthood at the Seminary of Saint-Sulpice, Paris, which was under the direction of his uncle, the Abb\u00e9 Denis Boyer, S.S. He was an excellent student, and, while still a seminarian, soon became an instructor of dogmatic theology at the seminary in Nantes.\nIn 1818, he was ordained as a Catholic priest. From 1823 to 1833 he served as the Vicar General, first of the Diocese of Lu\u00e7on and then of Amiens. In 1839, he was appointed as coadjutor bishop of the Diocese of Strasbourg. This post, however, he never filled, being called on to act as Vicar-Capitular of Paris, conjointly with MM. Auger and Morel, at the death of Archbishop Qu\u00e9len.\nAffre was elevated to the post of Archbishop of Paris in 1840. Though opposed to the government of King Louis-Philippe I, he fully accepted the establishment of the French Second Republic in 1848; nevertheless he took no part in politics, but devoted himself to pastoral care. He opened new parishes in the working-class neighborhoods of the city. Among them were M\u00e9nilmontant, Plaisance, Petit-Montrouge, Maison-Blanche, Petit-Gentilly, Notre-Dame de la Gare, Billancourt, Gros-Caillou.\nAffre was passionate in his determination to improve the study of theology in order to form clergy needed in the challenges which the Catholic Church faced at the time. He also was insistent on education as a human right. He opened a new seminary in Paris, called the , on the site of a former Carmelite priory, and a school of theology at the Sorbonne.\nDeath.\nAffre's episcopate is chiefly remembered for its tragic close during the insurrection of June 1848.\nOn 23 June 1848, faced with starvation due to plans by the French government to close the National Workshops it had recently created in order to provide work to the poor, a large segment of the citizenry began rioting, setting up barricades in the streets of Paris. The crisis led to the government's handing dictatorial powers over the nation to General Louis Eug\u00e8ne Cavaignac, who was determined to use all force necessary to crush the rebellion and ordered the French National Guard into Paris. Seeing the carnage caused among the civilian population by this campaign, Frederic Ozanam, the founder of the Society of St. Vincent de Paul, begged Affre to intervene to stop the bloodshed. The archbishop was led to believe that by his personal involvement peace might be restored between the military and the insurgents.\nAccordingly, on 25 June, in spite of the warning of Cavaignac, Affre mounted the barricade at the entrance to the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, bearing a green branch as sign of peace, to address both sides. He had spoken only a few words when an exchange of fire began in which he was struck by a stray bullet. There have been conflicting claims as to whether the fatal bullet was fired by an insurgent or by the government forces. He was taken to his palace, where he died on 27 June.\nOn the next day, the National Assembly of France issued a decree expressing its great sorrow over Affre's death, and the public funeral held on 7 July was one of the most striking public spectacles of the period. The crowd following his cortege was estimated to have numbered about 200,000 people.\nAffre was buried in the Chapel of Saint-Denis in the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris. His heart was removed and preserved in the chapel of the Carmelite Seminary, which he had founded.\nLegacy.\nThe pectoral cross which he was wearing when he was shot\u2014seen in his portrait\u2014is preserved by the Archdiocese of Paris as a relic.\nIn 1856, the smallest of the four \"Benjamines,\" four new bells made for Notre-Dame, was named Denise David in honor of Affre and Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-David de Pastoret. Affre's niece by marriage, Marie Caroline Affre, served as godmother to the bell during the baptism ceremony.\nA street in the 18th arrondissement of Paris is named in his honor.\nWritings.\nAffre wrote several articles for a newspaper called \"La France chr\u00e9tienne\". Additionally he published two books to guide in the practical matters of handling Church property: \" Un Trait\u00e9 de l'administration temporelle des paroisses\" (Paris, 1827) and \"Un Trait\u00e9 de la propri\u00e9t\u00e9 des biens eccl\u00e9siastiques\" (Paris, 1837). He also wrote a guide to studying the Christian faith, \"Une Introduction philosophique \u00e0 l'\u00e9tude du christianisme\" (Paris, 5th edition, 1846).\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "8877", "revid": "30131208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8877", "title": "Dione", "text": "Dione may refer to:"}
{"id": "8878", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8878", "title": "Denis Leary", "text": "Denis Colin Leary (born August 18, 1957) is an American stand-up comedian and actor. Born in Massachusetts, Leary first came to prominence as a stand-up comedian, especially through appearances on MTV (including the comedic song \"Asshole\") and through the stand-up specials \"No Cure for Cancer\" (1993) and \"Lock 'n Load\" (1997). Leary began taking roles in film and television starting in the 1990s, including substantial roles in the films \"Judgment Night\" (1993), \"Gunmen\" (1994), \"Operation Dumbo Drop\" (1995) and \"Wag the Dog\" (1997).\nIn the 2000s, he developed and starred in the television show \"The Job\" (2001\u20132002) and was the star and co-creator of \"Rescue Me\" (2004\u20132011), for which he received three Primetime Emmy nominations, one for writing and two for acting. He has continued to take starring roles in films, including Captain George Stacy in \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" and Cleveland Browns head coach Vince Penn in \"Draft Day\". Leary has done voice work, including Francis in \"A Bug's Life\" and Diego in the \"Ice Age\" franchise.\nFrom 2015 to 2016, Leary wrote and starred in the comedy series \"Sex &amp; Drugs &amp; Rock &amp; Roll\" on FX.\nEarly life.\nDenis Colin Leary was born on August 18, 1957, in Worcester, Massachusetts, the son of Catholic immigrant parents from Killarney, County Kerry, Ireland. His mother, Nora (n\u00e9e Sullivan) (b. 1929), was a maid, and his father, John Leary (1924\u20131985), was an auto mechanic. Leary is a citizen of both the United States and Ireland. Leary is a third cousin of talk show host and fellow comedian Conan O'Brien.\nLeary attended Saint Peter's High School (now Saint Paul's) in Worcester and graduated from Emerson College in Boston. At Emerson, he befriended fellow comic Mario Cantone. While a student, Leary founded the Emerson Comedy Workshop, a troupe that continues on the campus today.\nAfter graduating from Emerson in 1981, Leary taught comedy-writing classes at the school for five years. In May 2005 he received an honorary doctorate and spoke at his alma mater's undergraduate commencement ceremony; and is credited as Dr. Denis Leary on the cover of his 2009 book \"Why We Suck\".\nCareer.\nLeary began working as a comedian at the Boston underground club Play It Again Sam's. His first real gig was at the Rascals Comedy Club as part of the TV show \"The Rascals Comedy Hour\", on October 18, 1990. He wrote and appeared on a local comedy series, \"Lenny Clarke's Late Show\", hosted by his friend Lenny Clarke and written by Martin Olson. Leary and Clarke both spoke about their early affiliations and influences in the Boston comedy scene in the documentary film \"When Standup Stood Out\" (2006). During Leary's time as a Boston-area stand-up comic, he developed his stage persona.\nLeary appeared in sketches on the MTV game show \"Remote Control\", playing characters such as Keith Richards, co-host Colin Quinn's brother and artist Andy Warhol. He earned fame when he ranted about R.E.M. in an early 1990s MTV sketch. Several other commercials for MTV quickly followed, in which Leary would rant at high speeds about a variety of topics, playing off the then-popular and growing alternative scene. One of these rants served as an introduction to the video for \"Shamrocks and Shenanigans (Boom Shalock Lock Boom)\" by House of Pain. Leary released two records of his comedy: \"No Cure for Cancer\" (1993) and \"Lock 'n Load\" (1997). In late 2004, he released the EP \"Merry F %$in' Christmas\", which included a mix of new music, previously unreleased recordings and some tracks from \"Lock 'n Load\". \nIn 1993, Leary's sardonic song \"Asshole\", about the stereotypical American male, achieved much notoriety. The song was voted No. 1 in an Australian radio poll and was used in Holsten Pils ads in the UK, with Leary's participation, and with adapted lyrics criticizing a drunk driver. The single was a minor hit there, peaking at No. 58 in the UK Singles Chart in January 1996.\nIn 1995, Leary was asked by Boston Bruins legend Cam Neely to help orchestrate a Boston-based comedy benefit show for Neely's cancer charity; this became Comics Come Home, which Leary has hosted annually ever since. Leary has appeared in many films, including \"The Sandlot\" as Scott's stepfather Bill, \"Monument Ave.\", \"The Matchmaker\", \"The Ref\", \"Draft Day\", \"Suicide Kings\", \"Dawg\", \"Wag the Dog\", \"Demolition Man\" (as an Emmanuel Goldstein-esque revolutionary to Nigel Hawthorne's Big Brother), \"Judgment Night\", \"The Thomas Crown Affair\" and \"Operation Dumbo Drop\". He had a role in Oliver Stone's \"Natural Born Killers\" that was eventually cut. He held the lead role in two television series, \"The Job\" and \"Rescue Me \". He co-created the latter, in which he played Tommy Gavin, a New York City firefighter dealing with alcoholism, family dysfunction and other issues in post-9/11 New York City.\nLeary received Emmy Award nominations in 2006 and 2007 for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for \"Rescue Me\", and in 2008 for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for the HBO movie \"Recount\". Leary was offered the role of Dignam in \"The Departed\" (2006) but turned it down because of scheduling conflicts with \"Rescue Me\". He provided voices for characters in animated films, such as a fire-breathing dragon named Flame in the series \"The Agents\", a pugnacious ladybug named Francis in \"A Bug's Life\" and a prehistoric saber-toothed tiger named Diego in the \"Ice Age\" film series. He has produced numerous movies, television shows, and specials through his production company, Apostle; these include Comedy Central's \"Shorties Watchin' Shorties\", the stand-up special \"Denis Leary's Merry F#$%in' Christmas\" and the movie \"Blow\". \nAs a Boston Red Sox fan, Leary narrated the official 2004 World Series film. In 2006, Leary and Lenny Clarke appeared on television during a Red Sox telecast and, upon realizing that Red Sox first baseman Kevin Youkilis is Jewish, delivered a criticism of Mel Gibson's antisemitic comments. As an ice hockey fan, Leary hosted the National Hockey League video \"NHL's Greatest Goals\". In 2003, he was the subject of the \"Comedy Central Roast of Denis Leary\".\nLeary did the TV voiceover for MLB 2K8 advertisements, using his trademark rant style in baseball terms, and ads for the 2009 Ford F-150 pickup truck. He has also appeared in commercials for Hulu and DirecTV's NFL Sunday Ticket package. Leary was a producer of the Fox series \"Canterbury's Law\", and wrote and directed its pilot episode. \"Canterbury's Law\" aired in the spring of 2008 and was canceled after eight episodes. On September 9, 2008, Leary hosted the sixth annual \"Fashion Rocks\" event, which aired on CBS. In December of the year, he appeared in a video on funnyordie.com critiquing a list of some of his \"best\" films, titled \"Denis Leary Remembers Denis Leary Movies\". Also in 2008, Leary voiced a guest role as himself in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Lost Verizon\".\nOn March 21, 2009, Leary began the Rescue Me Comedy Tour in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The 11-date tour, featuring \"Rescue Me\" co-stars Lenny Clarke and Adam Ferrara, was Leary's first stand-up comedy tour in 12 years. The Comedy Central special \"Douchebags and Donuts\", filmed during the tour, debuted on American television on January 16, 2011, with a DVD release on January 18, 2011.\nLeary played Captain George Stacy in the movie \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", released in July 2012. He wrote the American adaptation of \"Sirens\". He is an executive producer of the documentary \"Burn\", which chronicles the struggles of the Detroit Fire Department. \"Burn\" won the 2012 Tribeca Film Festival Audience Award.\nLeary created a television series for FX called \"Sex &amp; Drugs &amp; Rock &amp; Roll\", taking the starring role himself. A 10-episode first season was ordered by FX, with the premiere on July 16, 2015. The show ran for two seasons.\nIn 2022, he was cast in the recurring role of Frank Donnelly, an NYPD officer on \"\".\nLeary has been the narrator for NESN's documentary show about the Boston Bruins called \"Behind the B\" since the show began in 2013.\nPersonal life.\nLeary has been married to author Ann Lembeck Leary since 1989. They met when he was her instructor in an English class at Emerson College. They have two children, son John Joseph \"Jack\" (born 1990) and daughter Devin (born 1992). Ann Leary published a memoir, \"An Innocent, a Broad\", about the premature birth of their son on a visit to London. She has also written a novel, \"Outtakes From a Marriage\", which was published in 2008. Her second novel, \"The Good House\", was published in 2013. Her essay in a New York Times column about her marriage to Denis inspired the \"Modern Love\" series Episode 4: \"Rallying to Keep the Game Alive\".\nLeary is an ice hockey fan and has a backyard rink at his home in Roxbury, Connecticut, with piping installed under the ice surface to help it stay frozen. He is a fan of the Boston Bruins and the Boston Red Sox, as well as the Green Bay Packers.\nLeary describes himself as a \"Jack Kennedy Democrat\" with some conservative ideologies, including support for the military. Leary told Glenn Beck, \"I was a life-long Democrat, but now at my age, I've come to realize that the Democrats suck, and the Republicans suck, and basically the entire system sucks. But you have to go within the system to find what you want.\"\nLeary has said of his religious beliefs, \"I'm a lapsed Catholic in the best sense of the word. You know, I was raised with Irish parents, Irish immigrant parents. My parents, you know, prayed all the time, took us to Mass. And my father would sometimes swear in Gaelic. It doesn't get more religious than that. But, no, after a while, they taught us wrong. I didn't raise my kids with the fear of God. I raised my kids with the sense of, you know, to me, Jesus was this great guy...\"\nLeary is godfather to Damian Hurley, the son of actress Elizabeth Hurley.\nLeary Firefighters Foundation.\nOn December 3, 1999, six firefighters from Leary's hometown of Worcester were killed in the Worcester Cold Storage Warehouse fire. Among the dead were Leary's cousin Jerry Lucey, as well as Leary's close childhood friend, Lt. Tommy Spencer. In response, the comedian founded the Leary Firefighters Foundation. Since its creation in the year 2000, the foundation has distributed over $2.5\u00a0million (USD) to fire departments in the Worcester, Boston and New York City areas for equipment, training materials, new vehicles and new facilities. Leary won $125,000 for the foundation on the game show \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire\".\nA separate fund run by Leary's foundation, the Fund for New York's Bravest, has distributed over $2\u00a0million to the families of the 343 firemen killed in the September 11 attacks in 2001, in addition to providing funding for necessities such as a new mobile command center, first-responder training, and a high-rise simulator for the New York City Fire Department's training campus. As the foundation's president, Leary has been active in all of the fundraising. In the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, Leary donated over a dozen boats to the New Orleans Fire Department to aid in rescue efforts in future disasters. The foundation also rebuilt entire NOLA firehouses.\nControversies.\nPlagiarism.\nFor many years, Leary had been friends with fellow comedian Bill Hicks. But when Leary's comedy album \"No Cure for Cancer\" was released, Leary was accused of stealing Hicks' act and material, ending their friendship abruptly. In April 1993, the \"Austin Comedy News\" remarked on the similarities of Leary's performance: \"Watching Leary is like seeing Hicks from two years ago. He smokes with the same mannerisms. (Hicks recently quit.) He sports the same attitude, the same clothes. He touches on almost all of the same themes. Leary even invokes Jim Fixx.\" When asked about this, Hicks told the magazine, \"I have a scoop for you. I stole his [Leary's] act. I camouflaged it with punchlines, and to really throw people off, I did it before he did\".\nAt least three stand-up comedians have gone on the record stating they believe Leary stole Hicks' material, comedic persona and attitude. One similar routine was about the so-called Judas Priest \"suicide trial,\" during which Hicks says, \"I don't think we lost a cancer cure.\"\nDuring Leary's 2003 Comedy Central Roast, comedian Lenny Clarke, a friend of Leary's, said there was a carton of cigarettes backstage from Bill Hicks with the message, \"Wish I had gotten these to you sooner.\" This joke was cut from the final broadcast.\nThe feud is also mentioned in Cynthia True's biography \"American Scream: The Bill Hicks Story\":\nAccording to the book, True said that upon hearing a tape of Leary's album \"No Cure for Cancer\", \"Bill was furious. All these years, aside from the occasional jibe, he had pretty much shrugged off Leary's lifting. Comedians borrowed, stole stuff and even bought bits from one another. Milton Berle and Robin Williams were famous for it. This was different. Leary had, practically line for line, taken huge chunks of Bill's act and \"recorded\" it.\"\nIn a 2008 appearance on \"The Opie and Anthony Show\", comedian Louis C.K. claimed Leary stole his \"I'm an asshole\" routine, which was then expanded upon and turned into a hit song by Leary. On a later episode of the same show, Leary challenged this assertion by claiming to have co-written the song with Chris Phillips.\nAutism.\nIn his 2008 book \"Why We Suck: A Feel Good Guide to Staying Fat, Loud, Lazy and Stupid\", Leary wrote:\nLeary later stated that the quote was taken out of context and that in that paragraph he had been talking about what he calls the trend of \"unwarranted\" over-diagnosis of autism, which he attributed to American parents seeking an excuse for behavioral problems and under-performance. Later, he apologized to parents with children diagnosed with autism whom he had offended."}
{"id": "8879", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8879", "title": "Recreational use of dextromethorphan", "text": "Dextromethorphan, or DXM, a common active ingredient found in many over-the-counter cough suppressant cold medicines, is used as a recreational drug and entheogen for its dissociative effects. Street names include Brownies, Dextro, Drix, Gel, Groove, Lean, Mega-perls, Poor man's ecstasy, Poor man's PCP, Red devils, Robo, Rojo, Rome, Skittles, Sizzurp, Triple Cs, Sky and Velvet.\nIt has almost no psychoactive effects at medically recommended doses. However, dextromethorphan has powerful dissociative and euphoric properties when administered in doses well above those considered therapeutic for cough suppression. Recreational use of DXM is sometimes referred to in slang form as \"robo-tripping\" or \"skittling\", whose prefix derives from the Robitussin brand name, or \"Triple Cs\", which derives from the Coricidin brand whose tablets are printed with \"CC+C\" for \"Coricidin Cough and Cold\". However, this brand presents additional danger when used at recreational doses due to the presence of chlorpheniramine (antihistamine).\nIn over-the-counter formulations, DXM is often combined with acetaminophen (paracetamol, APAP) to relieve pain; however, to achieve DXM's dissociative effects, the maximum daily therapeutic dose of 4000\u00a0mg of APAP is often exceeded, potentially causing acute or chronic liver failure, making abuse and subsequent tolerance of products which contain both DXM and APAP potentially fatal.\nAn online essay first published in 1995 entitled \"The DXM FAQ\" described dextromethorphan's potential for recreational use, and classified its effects into so-called plateaus. Each plateau is categorized depending on how much MG of DXM is ingested, each featuring varying or more intense effects. The defined number of plateaus vary depending on source, but the generally agreed-upon number is 4 or 5.\nOwing to its recreational use, many retailers in the US have moved dextromethorphan-containing products behind the counter so that one must ask a pharmacist to receive them or be 18 years (19 in New York and Alabama, 21 in Mississippi) or older to purchase them. Some retailers also give out printed recommendations about the potential for abuse with the purchase of products containing dextromethorphan.\nClassification.\nAt high doses, dextromethorphan is classified as a dissociative general anesthetic and hallucinogen, similar to the controlled substances ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP). Also like those drugs, dextromethorphan is an NMDA receptor antagonist. It generally does not produce withdrawal symptoms characteristic of physical dependence-inducing substances, but cases of both psychological dependence and physical dependence have been reported in the past, although physical dependence is usually only seen in cases of heavy abuse. Due to dextromethorphan's selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor-like action, the sudden cessation of recreational dosing in tolerant individuals can result in mental and physical withdrawal symptoms similar to the withdrawal from SSRIs. These withdrawal effects can manifest as psychological effects, including depression, irritability, cravings, and as physical effects, including lethargy, body aches, and a sensation of unpleasant tingling, not unlike a mild \"electric shock\".\nEffects.\nDextromethorphan's effects have been divided into four plateaus.\nAlso, a marked difference is seen between dextromethorphan hydrobromide, contained in most cough suppressant preparations, and dextromethorphan polistirex, contained in the brand name preparation Delsym. Polistirex is a polymer that is bonded to the dextromethorphan that requires more time for the stomach to digest it, as it requires that an ion exchange reaction take place prior to its dissolution into the blood. Because of this, dextromethorphan polistirex takes considerably longer to absorb, resulting in more gradual and longer lasting effects reminiscent of time-release pills. As a cough suppressant, the polistirex version lasts up to 12 hours. This duration also holds true when used recreationally.\nIn 1981, a paper by Gosselin estimated that the lethal dose is between 50 and 500\u00a0mg/kg. Doses as high as 15\u201320\u00a0mg/kg are taken by some recreational users. A single case study suggests that the antidote to dextromethorphan overdose is naloxone, administered intravenously.\nIn addition to producing PCP-like mental effects, high doses may cause a false-positive result for PCP and opiates in some drug tests.\nRisks associated with use.\nDextromethorphan has not been shown to cause vacuolization in animals, also known as Olney's lesions, despite early speculation that it might, due to similarities with ketamine. In rats, oral administration of dextromethorphan did not cause vacuolization in laboratory tests. Oral administration of dextromethorphan repeatedly during adolescence, however, has been shown to impair learning in those rats during adulthood. The occurrence of Olney's lesions in humans, however, has not been proven or disproven.\nWilliam E. White, author of the \"DXM FAQ\", has compiled informal research from correspondence with dextromethorphan users suggesting that heavy abuse may result in various deficits corresponding to the brain areas affected by Olney's lesions; these include loss of episodic memory, decline in ability to learn, abnormalities in some aspects of visual processing, and deficits of abstract language comprehension. In 2004, however, White retracted the article in which he made these claims.\nA formal survey of dextromethorphan users showed that more than half of users reported experience of these withdrawal symptoms individually for the first week after long-term/addictive dextromethorphan use: fatigue, apathy, flashbacks, and constipation. Over a quarter reported insomnia, nightmares, anhedonia, impaired memory, attention deficit, and decreased libido. Rarer side effects included panic attacks, impaired learning, tremor, jaundice, urticaria (hives), and myalgia. Medical DXM use has not been shown to cause the above issues.\nOther ingredients.\nMisuse of multisymptom cold medications, rather than use of a cough suppressant whose sole active ingredient is dextromethorphan, carries significant risk of fatality or serious illness. Multisymptom cold medicines contain other active ingredients, such as paracetamol (acetaminophen), which can cause permanent bodily damage such as kidney failure or death if taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dose. Chlorphenamine and phenylephrine may also contribute to the harm. Sorbitol, an artificial sweetener found in many cough syrups containing dextromethorphan, can also have negative side effects, including diarrhea and nausea when taken at recreational dosages of dextromethorphan. Guaifenesin, an expectorant commonly accompanying dextromethorphan in cough preparations, can cause unpleasant symptoms including vomiting, nausea, kidney stones, and headache.\nInteractions.\nCombining dextromethorphan with other substances can compound risks. Central nervous system (CNS) stimulants such as amphetamine and/or cocaine can cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure and heart rate. CNS depressants such as alcohol will have a combined depressant effect, which can cause a decreased respiratory rate. Combining dextromethorphan with other CYP2D6 substrates can cause both drugs to build to dangerous levels in the bloodstream. Combining dextromethorphan with other serotonergic drugs could possibly cause serotonin syndrome, an excess of serotonergic activity in the CNS and peripheral nervous system.\nPharmacology.\nDextromethorphan is primarily a sigma receptor agonist and an SNRI, and dextromethorphan's effects as a dissociative hallucinogen may be attributed partially to dextrorphan (DXO), a metabolite produced when dextromethorphan is metabolized by the body. Both dextrorphan and dextromethorphan are NMDA receptor antagonists, alike other dissociative hallucinogens such as ketamine and PCP. Although dextrorphan is more potent than its \"parent molecule\" dextromethorphan, it likely works in combination with dextromethorphan to produce hallucinogenic effects due to only a small percentage of dextromethorphan being metabolized into dextrorphan.\nAs NMDA receptor antagonists, dextrorphan and dextromethorphan inhibit the excitatory amino acid and neurotransmitter glutamate in the brain. This can effectively slow, or even shut down certain neural pathways, preventing areas of the brain from communicating with each other. This leaves the user feeling dissociated or disconnected, experienced as brain fog or derealization.\nLegality.\nAntitussive preparations containing dextromethorphan are legal to purchase from pharmacies in most countries, with some exceptions being UAE, France, and Sweden.. In Russia, dextromethorphan (commonly sold under the brand names Tussin+ and Glycodin) is a Schedule III controlled substance and is placed in the same list as benzodiazepines and the majority of barbiturates.\nChina.\nIn December 2021, the National Medical Products Administration reclassified all oral single-component dextromethorphan to prescription drugs due to potential abuse. The authorities also mandated manufacturers to remove statements like \"no addiction or tolerance with long-term use\" from their instructions. Despite the online sales ban, the drug can still be found on some niche e-commerce platforms in China and Twitter.\nIn April 2024, the National Medical Products Administration announced that dextromethorphan, compound diphenoxylate tablets, nalfurafine, and lorcaserin are included in the second-class psychotropic drug catalog. The announcement took effect in July. In August, Xi'an police arrested a suspect and seized 23 boxes of dextromethorphan; in October, the Hepu County People's Court sentenced one defendant to 7 months in prison, while the Yanchi County People's Court sentenced a pharmacy owner to 6 months, both for drug trafficking involving dextromethorphan.\nIndonesia.\nAfter previously being available over the counter, the National Agency of Drug and Food Control of Republic of Indonesia (BPOM-RI) now prohibits single-component dextromethorphan drug sales with or without prescription. Indonesia is the only country in the world that makes single-component dextromethorphan illegal even by prescription and violators may be prosecuted by law. Indonesian National Narcotic Bureau has even threatened to revoke pharmacies' and drug stores' licenses if they still stock dextromethorphan, and will notify the police for criminal prosecution. As a result of this regulation, 130 drugs have been withdrawn from the market, but drugs containing multicomponent dextromethorphan can be sold over the counter. In its official press release, the bureau also stated that dextromethorphan is often used as a substitute for marijuana, amphetamine, and heroin by drug abusers, and its use as an antitussive is less beneficial nowadays.\nThe Director of Narcotics, Psychotropics, and Addictive Substances Control (NAPZA) BPOM-RI, Dr. Danardi Sosrosumihardjo, SpKJ, explains that dextromethorphan, morphine, and heroin are derived from the same tree, and states the effect of dextromethorphan to be equivalent to 1/100 of morphine and injected heroin.\nBy contrast, the Deputy of Therapeutic Product and NAPZA Supervision BPOM-RI, Dra. Antonia Retno Tyas Utami, Apt. MEpid., states that dextromethorphan, being chemically similar to morphine, has a much more dangerous and direct effect to the central nervous system, thus causing mental breakdown in the user. She also claimed, without citing any prior scientific study or review, that unlike morphine users, dextromethorphan users cannot be rehabilitated. This claim is contradicted by numerous scientific studies which show that naloxone alone offers effective treatment and promising therapy results in treating dextromethorphan addiction and poisoning. Dra. Antonia Retno Tyas Utami also claimed high rates of dextromethorphan abuse - including fatalities - in Indonesia, and even more questionable, suggested that codeine, despite being a more physically addictive \u03bc-opioid class antitussive, be made available as an alternative to dextromethorphan.\nUnited States.\nNo legal distinction currently exists in the United States between medical and recreational use, sale, or purchase. Some states and store chains have implemented restrictions, such as requiring signatures for DXM sale, limiting quantities allowable for purchase, and requiring that purchasers be over the age of majority in their state. The sale of dextromethorphan in its pure powder form may incur penalties, although no explicit law exists prohibiting its sale or possession, other than in Illinois. Cases of individuals being sentenced to time in prison and other penalties for selling pure dextromethorphan in this form have been reported, because of the incidental violation of more general laws for the sale of legitimate drugs \u2013 such as resale of a medication without proper warning labels.\nDextromethorphan was excluded from the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of 1970 and was specifically excluded from the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. As of 2010, it was still excluded from U.S. Schedules of Controlled Substances; however, officials have warned that it could still be added if increased abuse warrants its scheduling. The motivation behind its exclusion from the CSA was that under the CSA, all optical isomers of listed Schedule II opiates are automatically Schedule II substances. Since dextromethorphan is an optical isomer of the Schedule II opiate levomethorphan (but does not act like an opiate), an exemption was necessary to keep it an uncontrolled substance. The Federal Analog Act does not apply to dextromethorphan because a new drug application has been filed for it."}
{"id": "8880", "revid": "48564263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8880", "title": "Dryope", "text": "In Greek mythology, Dryope (; Ancient Greek: \u0394\u03c1\u03c5\u03cc\u03c0\u03b7 derived from \u03b4\u03c1\u1fe6\u03c2 \"drys\", \"oak\"; \"dryope\" \"woodpecker\") is the name attributed to several distinct figures:"}
{"id": "8881", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8881", "title": "Doctor (title)", "text": "Doctor is an academic title that originates from the Latin word of the same spelling and meaning. The word is originally an agentive noun of the Latin verb 'to teach'. It has been used as an academic title in Europe since the 13th century, when the first doctorates were awarded at the University of Bologna and the University of Paris.\nHaving become established in European universities, this usage spread around the world. Contracted \"Dr\" or \"Dr.\", it is used as a designation for a person who has obtained a doctorate (commonly a PhD). In past usage, the term could be applied to any learned person. In many parts of the world today it is also used by medical practitioners, regardless of whether they hold a doctoral-level degree.\nOrigins.\nThe doctorate () appeared in medieval Europe as a license to teach () at a medieval university. Its roots can be traced to the early church, when the term \"doctor\" referred to the Apostles, church fathers and other Christian authorities who taught and interpreted the Bible. The right to grant a \"licentia docendi\" was originally reserved to the church which required the applicant to pass a test, take an Oath of allegiance and pay a fee. The Third Council of the Lateran of 1179 guaranteed the access\u2009\u2014\u2009now largely free of charge\u2009\u2014\u2009of all able applicants, who were, however, still tested for aptitude by the ecclesiastic scholastic. This right remained a bone of contention between church authorities and the slowly emancipating universities, but was granted by the pope to the University of Paris in 1213, when it became a universal license to teach (\"licentia ubiquie docendi\"). However, while the licentia continued to hold more prestige than the bachelor's degree (\"Baccalaureus\"), it was eventually positioned below the magister and the doctorate, which became the only titles with which one could teach.\nThe earliest doctoral degrees\u2009\u2014\u2009in theology, law, and medicine\u2009\u2014\u2009reflected the historical separation of university study into these three fields. Over time, the Doctor of Divinity has become less common, whereas studies in law and medicine have become more common. These areas were historically referred to as \"philosophy\" (used as a general term for academic studies, not the specific academic discipline of philosophy), but are now classified as humanities and sciences, respectively. The historical usage survives in the degree of Doctor of Philosophy).\nThe Doctor of Philosophy was originally a degree granted by a university to learned individuals who had achieved the approval of their peers and who had demonstrated a long and productive career in the field of philosophy (in the broad sense of the term, meaning the pursuit of knowledge). The appellation \"Doctor\" (from Latin: teacher) was usually awarded only when the individual was in middle age. It indicated a life dedicated to learning, knowledge, and the spread of knowledge. The PhD entered widespread use in the 19th century at Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin as a degree to be granted to someone who had undertaken original research in the sciences or humanities. Prior to the formal degree, the contemporary doctorate (PhD), arguably, arose in Leipzig as a successor to the Master's degree in 1652 (Dr. habil).\nIn some European countries, such as Italy and Portugal, \"Doctor\" became a title given to all or most degree holders, not just those with doctorates.\nAs a result, the title is now used by many professionals in these countries, including those such as lawyers who are not normally granted the title elsewhere. The title is also used for lawyers in South America, where they have traditionally earned doctoral degrees, as well as in the former Portuguese territories of Goa in India and Macau in China.\nDevelopment in English-speaking countries.\nThe primary meaning of \"Doctor\" in English has historically been with reference to the holder of a doctoral degree. These particularly referred to the ancient faculties of divinity, law and medicine, sometimes with the addition of music, which were the only doctoral degrees offered until the 19th century. During the 19th century, PhDs became increasingly common in Britain, although to obtain the degree it was necessary to travel to continental Europe or (from 1861) to the United States, as the degree was not awarded in the UK until 1917.\nHowever, the title, not being protected by law, was adopted by quacks. As a result, by the mid 19th century, it was normal in the UK to omit the title \"Dr\" when addressing letters to those holding doctoral degrees, and instead write the abbreviated form of the degree after the name, e.g., \"The Reverend Robert Phelps, D.D.\", \"Thomas Elliotson, Esq. M.D.\", or \"John Lindsey, Esq. Ph.D.\", in order to avoid classing academic doctors \"with the village apothecary and the farrier\" and various \"quacks in literature, science, or art\". In the US it similarly became customary to use post-nominals rather than the title of Doctor when addressing letters. All those with doctoral degrees continued to use the title professionally and socially.\nDespite being historically associated with doctorates in law, the title of \"doctor\" for lawyers has not customarily been used in English-speaking countries, where lawyers were traditionally not required to have a university degree and were trained by other lawyers by apprenticeship or in the Inns of Court. The exception being those areas where, up to the 19th century, civil law rather than common law was the governing tradition, including admiralty law, probate and ecclesiastical law: such cases were heard in the Doctor's Commons, and argued by advocates who held degrees either of doctor of civil law at Oxford or doctor of law at Cambridge. As such, lawyers practicing common law in England were not doctoral candidates and had not earned a doctorate. When university degrees became more common for those wanting to qualify as a lawyer in England, the degree awarded was the Bachelor of Laws (LLB). Similarly in the US, even though degrees became standard for lawyers much earlier, the degree was again the LLB, only becoming the Juris Doctor (JD) generally in the latter half of the 20th century.\nIn many English-speaking countries, it is common to refer to physicians by the title of doctor, even when they do not hold a doctoral level qualification. The word \"Doctor\" has long had a secondary meaning in English of physician, e.g., in Johnson's Dictionary, which quotes its use with this meaning by Shakespeare. In the US, the medical societies established the proprietary medical colleges in the 19th century to award their own MDs, but in the UK and the British Empire, where degree granting was strictly controlled, this was not an option. The usage of the title to refer to medical practitioners, even when they did not hold doctoral degrees, was common by the mid 18th century. However, the first official recognition of Doctor being applied as a title to medical practitioners regardless of whether they held a doctoral degree was in 1838, when the Royal College of Physicians resolved that it would \"regard in the same light, and address by the same appellation, all who have obtained its diploma, whether they have graduated elsewhere or not.\"\nThe Medical Act 1858 made it illegal for anyone not qualified in medicine to use a title that implied they were. This led to prosecutions of people making unauthorised use of the title \"Dr\". However, it also called into question the use of the title by licentiates of the Colleges of Physicians \u2013 all of whom were, under the new act, allowed to practice throughout the UK. In 1859, the London College reversed its earlier decision, resolving \"That the title of Doctor shall not be given in any official document issued from this College to any person who is not possessed of the Degree of Doctor of Medicine\". This was followed up in 1860 by new bylaws that stated \"No Fellow, Member, or Licentiate of the College shall assume the title of Doctor of Medicine, or use any other name, title, designation or distinction implying that he is a Graduate in Medicine of an University, unless he be a Graduate in Medicine of an University\". In Ireland, the question of whether the license of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland granted the title of Doctor of Medicine led to a court case in 1861, with the conclusion that it did not. The \"British Medical Journal\" (\"BMJ\") observed, however, that anyone wanting the right to the title of \"Doctor\" could gain it \"with a five-shilling degree of Doctor of Philosophy\" from abroad, or could simply assume the title, as only \"Doctor of Medicine\" was actually protected. Debate continued as to the use of \"Doctor\" as a courtesy title by those who did not use it by right as holders of doctoral degrees, with the \"BMJ\" noting in 1876 that \"We have again a sort of flood of letters for and against the use of the title of Doctor by physicians\" and in 1882 that \"There is not any other subject which appears to excite so wide spread an interest as this\". In February 1876, a report recommended that the Royal College of Physicians should use the courtesy title of Doctor for all fellows and members, but this was rejected. Then in April of the same year, the college amended its bylaws to forbid any fellow, member, extra-licentiate or licentiate from using the title of Doctor unless they had a doctorate in medicine from a recognised university \u2013 closing the loophole the \"BMJ\" had identified. It was not until the early 20th century that this was reversed. In 1905 the Royal College of Surgeons passed a motion instructing their council \"to take the necessary steps in conjunction with the Royal College of Physicians to ensure that all persons who pass the Conjoint examination shall be legally entitled to call themselves Doctors\". The council of the surgeons' College felt it to be impractical to secure the legal right to the title as this would mean gaining the right to award MDs, but noted that the title had been used by the public to refer to medics for generations and was used without any legal right by Bachelors of Medicine \u2013 the only obstacle to licentiates of both colleges doing the same was the prohibition in the physicians' bylaws. On this occasion the College of Physicians refused to act, but they did finally relent in 1912, removing the clause forbidding the assumption of the title of Doctor. This was described in the American press as \"the British apostles of red-tape have been forced to bow to the popular will\".\nRegulation of the medical profession also took place in the United States in the latter half of the 19th century, preventing quacks from using the title of Doctor. However, medical usage of the title was far from exclusive, with it being acknowledged that other doctorate holders could use the title and that dentists and veterinarians frequently did. \"The Etiquette of To-day\", published in 1913, recommended addressing letters to physicians \"(full name), M.D.\" and those to other people holding doctorates \"Dr. (full name)\", although both were \"Dr.\" in the salutation and only physicians were explicitly said to include their title on their visiting card. By the 1920s there were a great variety of doctorates in the US, many of them taking entrants directly from high school, and ranging from the Doctor of Chiropractic (DC), which (at the time) required only two or three years of college-level education, up to the PhD. All doctoral degree holders, with the exception of the JD, were customarily addressed as \"Doctor\", but the title was also regularly used, without doctoral degrees, by pharmacists, ministers of religion, teachers and chiropodists, and sometimes by other professions such as beauty practitioners, patent medicine manufacturers, etc.\nBy the 1940s, the widespread usage of the title in the US was under threat. A 1944 article claimed that \"the Ph.D. has immediate and far-reaching value of social as well as economic nature\" due to America's \"national fondness for the tinsel of titles\", but went on to note that some universities were moving away from using the title, concluding that \"it is ungracious in most environments not to render unto the Doctor of Philosophy his 'Doctor' title\". The same writer noted in a letter to the \"Journal of Higher Education\" in 1948 that Alfred University had banned the use of the title for faculty (while retaining it for the president and deans) \"in a strange move professedly designed to uphold and promote 'democracy' and 'Americanism. However, it was noted in 1959 that professors with PhDs were now generally addressed as \"Doctor\", with the title of \"Professor\" sometimes being substituted for those without doctorates, leading to a decline in the perceived value of that title.\nIn the 1960s the inconsistent usage at American universities and colleges was mentioned in the \"New York Times Book Review\" and the editor of \"Science\" noted that: \"In some universities, administrators call all Ph.D.'s 'Mister,' but students and colleagues call them 'Doctor.' Often, but not always, Ph.D.'s are 'Misters' socially. In industry and government, both socially and professionally, they are 'Doctors,' as they are also in the pages of the \"New Yorker\", \"Time\", the \"Saturday Review\", and the New York \"Times\".\" In 1965, the League of Women Voters designated MDs \"Dr.\" and PhDs \"Mr.\" at a hustings in Princeton, leading to a letter of protest in \"Science\"; it was reported that the League believed PhDs would be embarrassed by the title, and that etiquette writers differed in whether PhDs used the title. In 1970, reverse snobbism in the face of the rising number of \"discount doctorates\" was linked to professors at prestigious universities wanting to be called \"mister\".\nIn the late 1960s the rising number of American law schools awarding Juris Doctor (JD) degrees led to debate over whether lawyers could ethically use the title \"Doctor\". Initial informal ethics opinions, based on the Canons of Professional Ethics then in force, came down against this. These were then reinforced with a full ethics opinion that maintained the ban on using the title in legal practice as a form of self-laudation (except when dealing with countries where the use of \"Doctor\" by lawyers was standard practice), but allowed the use of the title in academia \"if the school of graduation thinks of the J.D. degree as a doctor's degree\". These opinions led to further debate. The introduction of the new Code of Professional Responsibility in 1969 seemed to settle the question \u2013 in states where this was adopted \u2013 in favour of allowing the use of the title. There was some dispute over whether only the PhD-level Doctor of Juridical Science should properly be seen as granting the title, but ethics opinions made it clear that the new Code allowed JD-holders to be called \"Doctor\", while reaffirming that the older Canons did not. As not all state bars adopted the new Code, and some omitted the clause permitting the use of the title, confusion over whether lawyers could ethically use the title \"Doctor\" continued. The introduction of further professional doctorates in the US at ISCED level 7, the same as the MD and JD, has led to continuing debate about the use of the title by holders of such degrees, particularly in medical contexts.\nIn 2018, a decision by \"The Globe and Mail\" newspaper in Canada to update its style guide so as to restrict the use of the title Doctor to medics led to a backlash on Twitter, particularly by women with PhDs, using the #ImmodestWomen hashtag. This was widely reported on internationally and led to \"The Globe and Mail\" reverting to its earlier style of using Doctor for both physicians and PhD holders. The Canadian University of Calgary also announced that it would adopt the use of Doctor for those with doctoral degrees, breaking with the style recommended by the Canadian Press.\nDoctor as a noun.\nThroughout much of the academic world, the term \"Doctor\" refers to someone who has earned a doctoral degree (highest degree) from a university. This is normally the Doctor of Philosophy, abbreviated PhD (sometimes Ph.D. in North America) from the Latin \"Philosophiae Doctor\" or DPhil from its English name, or equivalent research doctorates at level 8 of the International Standard Classification of Education 2011 classifications (ISCED 2011) or level 6 of the ISCED 1997 classifications. Beyond academia (but specifically in the anglophone world, Italy, and France), \"Doctor\" as a noun normally refers to a physician, who would usually hold a qualification at level 7 of ISCED 2011/level 5 of ISCED 1997 such as the British MBBS or the American MD or DO.\nForms of address.\nWhen addressing several people, each of whom holds a doctoral title, one may use the plural contraction \"Drs\" (or \"Drs.\" in American English) \u2013 or in some languages (for example, German) \"Dres.\" (from the Latin doctores) may be used \u2013 for example, instead of Dr. Miller and Dr. Ahmed: Drs. Miller and Ahmed. When referring to relatives with the same surname the form \"The Doctors Smith\" can be used. The abbreviation Drs. can also refer to doctorandus, a Dutch academic title that was replaced with the master title with the introduction of the master system.\nIn English, Dr is not usually combined with other titles, except for The Reverend in \"The Revd Dr\" before the surname of a minister of religion, e.g., \"The Revd Dr Smith\" or \"The Revd John Smith, DD\", and similarly \"Rabbi Dr\". In Caribbean English, the usage \"Dr. the Honourable\" is common for politicians holding doctoral degrees. Usage in many other languages is similar to English but some, notably German, allow for the stacking of titles.\nUsage by medical practitioners in the UK and culturally-related countries.\nIn the United Kingdom, India, Pakistan, Hong Kong, Trinidad and Tobago, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Ghana, and other countries whose cultures were recently linked to the UK, the title \"Dr\" is generally used both for those who hold doctoral degrees and for registered medical practitioners. History has dictated the use of the courtesy title \"Dr\" by physicians and general practitioners. However, surgeons do not use the title of \"Dr\" and, due to the origins of surgery with the barber surgeons, instead use \"Mr, Mrs, Ms, Miss\", etc. This custom applies to surgeons of any grade who have passed the appropriate exams and is not the exclusive province of consultant-level surgeons. In recent times, other surgically orientated specialists, such as gynaecologists, have also adopted these prefixes. A surgeon who is also a professor is usually known as \"Professor\" and, similarly, a surgeon who has been ennobled, knighted, created a baronet or appointed a dame uses the corresponding title (Lord, Sir, Dame). Physicians, on the other hand, when they pass their \"MRCP(UK)\" examinations, or equivalent, do not drop \"Dr\" but retain it, even as consultants. The status and rank of consultant surgeons, addressed as \"Mister\" or \"Ms.\", and consultant physicians, addressed as \"Doctor\", is equivalent.\nWorldwide usage.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nIn Bangladesh, use of the title of doctor (or Dr) is permitted for PhD degree holders and registered medical practitioners. For registered medical practitioners, only MBBS and BDS degree holders are allowed to use the title and be called \"medical doctors\". Registered veterinary practitioners may use the title after earning a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM) degree. However, registered homeopathic practitioners also use the title of doctor even though, according to the Homeopathic Practitioners Ordinance 1983, they are only permitted to use \"homeopath\". Physiotherapy has no separate council and no act of parliament at present permits the use of the title for physiotherapist, but the High Court has given an interim order that permits physiotherapy graduates to use the title, pending the formation of a separate council. According to the Bangladesh Unani &amp; Ayurvedic Practitioners Ordinance 1983, practitioners of the Unani system are called \"Tabib\" or \"Hakim\" and practitioners of Ayurvedic system are called \"Vaid\" or \"Kabiraj\"; both are prohibited from using the title of doctor. Currently, medical practitioners having an MBBS degree or dental surgeons having a BDS are legally permitted to use Dr as a prefix; its use by other medical practitioners remains controversial.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong follows British practice in calling physicians \"Doctor\" even though many of them hold only a degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS or MBChB). An attempt by their professional body to prevent chiropractors from calling themselves \"Doctor\" failed in the courts, in part because it was pointed out that practicing chiropractors may hold an academic doctorate in their discipline, and it would be anomalous to prevent them using the title when holders of doctorates in non-medical disciplines faced no such restriction.\nIndia.\nIn India, medical practitioners are legally referred to as \"registered medical practitioners\". The title of doctor is frequently used by qualified professional medical practitioners in the fields of Allopathic medicine (MBBS) and dentistry (BDS), as well as by other practitioners like Siddha (BSMS), Yoga and Naturopathy (BNYS), Ayurveda (BAMS), Unani medicine (BUMS) and Homeopathy(BHMS), Veterinarians (BVSc) and holders of doctoral degrees, including PhDs and pharmacists with PharmDs. Physiotherapists (BPT) use 'Doctor' as a suffix accompanied by the prefix PT.\nThe usage by pharmacists is legally disputed, while the Supreme Court of India has ruled against the use of the title as a prefix by physiotherapists.\nIndonesia.\nThe Indonesian titles \"dr.\" is used in front of the name of medical doctor who holds a specification as general practitioner, also when the doctor already holds his specialization to ___, such as \"Sp.THT\" or \"Spesialis Telinga, Hidung, Tenggorokan\" (ENT or Ear, Nose, and Throat Specialist).\nDr. is used in front of the name as the title \"Doktor\" for doctorate title, the same level as PhD title.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, the title of Doctor (Dr.) can be used by PhD degree holders as well as medical, dental, optometry and veterinary doctors with MBBS, BDS, OD and DVM degrees respectively. Usage by physiotherapists DPT degree respectively is disputed, with the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council saying they should not use the title, but the Pharmacy Council of Pakistan (the regulatory body for pharmacists) and the Higher Education Commission permitting and encouraging its use.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, titles and names of occupations usually follow Spanish naming conventions which utilize gender-specific terms. \"\"Dokt\u00f3r\" is the masculine form, which retains the abbreviation \"Dr.\"; the feminine form is \"Dokt\u00f3ra\", and is abbreviated usually as \"Dra.\"\"; others, however, some being Anglophones who wish to sound modern and Westernised (or were raised in an almost exclusively English-speaking family environment), or some who advocate gender equality, would dispense with the distinction altogether. There does exist in Filipino an equivalent, gender-neutral term for the professional that carries the more general notion of \"healer\", traditional (for example, an \"albul\u00e1ryo\") or otherwise: \"manggag\u00e1mot\". Contracted \"Dr\" or \"Dr.\", it is also used as a designation for a person who has obtained a doctorate degree (e.g. PhD, EdD, DPA).\nSri Lanka.\nIn Sri Lanka the title doctor \"Dr.\" is used for PhD holders and medical practitioner such as physicians, surgeons, dental surgeons and veterinarians. However, when addressing in native Sinhalese a medical practitioner is addressed as \"Vaidya\" (\u0dc0\u0ddb\u0daf\u0dca\u0dba) or \"Dosthara\" (\u0daf\u0ddc\u0dc3\u0dca\u0dad\u0dbb) while a PhD holder is addressed as \"Aacharya\" (\u0d86\u0da0\u0dcf\u0dbb\u0dca\u0dba). It is a common practice for married female medical practitioners to use the title \"Dr (Mrs)\" in a both professional and social capacity.\nThailand.\nThe usage of Doctor (\u0e14\u0e2d\u0e01\u0e40\u0e15\u0e2d\u0e23\u0e4c) or Dr (\u0e14\u0e23.) has been borrowed from English. It can be seen as a title in academic circles and in the mass media. In contrast to other academic titles (Professor, Associate Professor and assistant professor), the use of Doctor as a title has not been recognized by the Royal Institute of Thailand. Therefore, this title, in theory, cannot be used officially. For example, in court of justice where strictly formal Thai language is used, Dr cannot be mentioned as a person's title.\nThe Americas.\nBrazil.\nThe 'doctor' title is used by individuals holding a PhD degree. 'Doctor' is also used as a deferential title in Brazilian Portuguese. The title \u201cDoctor\u201d can also be used in Brazil to address medics and lawyers by the law since the imperial times. The law was enacted by the second Brazilian emperor, Dom Pedro II, to attract more medics and lawyers from other countries in imperial times when there was very few practitioners of both professions in the country for the crescent population of that time. The law still is enacted.\nCanada.\nCanada lies somewhere between British and American usage of the degree and terminology of \"doctor\". Holders of research doctorates \u2013 PhDs and similar degrees \u2013 commonly use the title \"doctor\". A number of regulated healthcare professionals can also use the title \"doctor\"; in Ontario these are limited by law (in the provision of health care) to physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors, doctorate-level psychologists and social workers who are members of the relevant Ontario college. In Alberta, Registered Nurses or Nurse Practitioners with an earned doctoral degree may use the title \"doctor\" in conjunction with professional practice. Some professionals earn degrees with the title of doctor but which are considered, despite their name, to be at bachelor's-level, e.g. DDS, MD, JD. In Ontario, registered naturopathic doctors may only use the title \"doctor\" in written format if they also use the phrase, \"naturopathic doctor\" immediately following their name, while a 2006 amendment that would allow practitioners of Traditional Chinese Medicine to use the title has not, , entered into force. As of 2022, in Alberta, Doctors of Acupuncture may use the doctor title. \nQuebec.\nThe usage of the French \"Docteur\" and \"Docteure\", and their abbreviated forms \"Dr\", \"Dre\", \"D\" and \"D\", is controlled by the \"Code des professions\". As a pre-nominal title it can be used without any further explication by physicians, veterinarians, and dentists. It can also be used prenominally, when accompanied by the name of the profession immediately after the name, by professionals who require a doctorate for their professional licence, such as psychology, and chiropractic, e.g. \"Dr X, psychologue\" or \"Dr Y, chiropraticien\". Academic doctors, where the doctorate is not required to practice, bear the title only after their name; this is not abbreviated, e.g. \"M. Z, docteur en philosophie\" not \"M. Z, PhD\"\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the use of the title \"Doctor\" is dependent upon the setting. The title is commonly used socially by physicians and those holding doctoral degrees; however, there was formerly a division between Letitia Baldrige and Miss Manners on its social usage by those who are not physicians. Baldrige saw this usage as acceptable, while in contrast, Miss Manners wrote that \"only people of the medical profession correctly use the title of doctor socially,\" but supports those who wish to use it in social contexts in the spirit of addressing people according to their wishes. Miss Manners has since softened her approach, noting in her \"The Washington Post\" column that there are two approaches: \"having been earned, it should be used\" and \"that level of education being assumed, it need not be expressly mentioned\"; while she maintains that everyone should be addressed according to their wishes, she no longer states that only medical professionals use the title correctly but instead acknowledges that the title has been earned by those with PhDs. The Emily Post Institute similarly advises that \"Socially as well as professionally, medical doctors, dentists, and other professionals are addressed by, and introduced with, their titles. People who have earned a Ph.D. or any other academic, nonmedical doctoral degree have the choice of whether to use \"Dr.\" both professionally and socially.\" Other advice columns have also noted that \"it has become common to see someone with a Ph.D. addressed on the envelope as Dr., and as a consequence, deviation from convention has become acceptable.\" The 2017 book \"Etiquette Rules!\" gives identical forms for addressing a \"doctor of medicine (MD), dental surgery (DDS), veterinary medicine (DVM), etc.\", and the holder of a PhD, advising in both cases the use of initials after the name for formal correspondence and Dr. before the name for social correspondence. Although the usage of the title by Ph.D. graduates has become common, its use socially by holders of professional doctorates (other than those noted) is neither explicitly endorsed nor explicitly discouraged by writers on etiquette. Miss Manners has, however, stated that a physician who has had their license revoked should be addressed by their former preferred honorific (i.e. not according to their MD degree). It is unusual for those who hold honorary doctorates to use the title \"Doctor\".\nPublications from the office of the President of the United States of America also refer to PhD holders as Dr. Soandso,\nand Jill Biden, who holds an EdD, used the style \"Dr. Jill Biden\" as second lady and has continued to do so as first lady. For addresses (defined as \"the conventional forms of address as determined by social and official custom\"), NASA uses \"Dr. (full name)\" in addresses for PhD holders while for physicians it uses \"(full name), MD\", although both are addressed as \"Dr. (surname)\" in the salutation (which is described as \"informal\"). The National Institutes of Health similarly use \"Dr. (surname)\" in salutations for people with an MD, PhD or DDS. They advise using full name followed by degrees in addresses, explicitly stating not to use the title \"Dr.\", although an example in the following paragraph does use the title rather than giving degrees.\nMost newspapers in the US follow the AP Stylebook and reserve the title for physicians in their house styles; notable exceptions include \"The New York Times\", which follows the preference of the individual when referring to PhD holders (although the title is not used for those with honorary doctorates),\nand \"The Wall Street Journal\", which similarly prefers \"Dr.\" for PhD holders and physicians (if this is the person's choice) while stating explicitly that the title is not used for lawyers with JDs or people with honorary doctorates. Until 1989, The Washington Post used the title for \"practitioners of the healing arts (including chiropractors and osteopaths) but not for holders of PhDs or honorary degrees\", after which it dropped its use entirely. Some sources state that AP style allows the use of Dr. for holders of non-medical doctoral degrees as long as their speciality is given.\nThe expansion of professional doctorates in clinical fields in the late 20th and early 21st centuries has led to disputes between physicians and other medical professions over who can use the title in a clinical context. This has been interpreted by some as part of larger battles within medicine, such as who gets to treat patients first and who has prescribing authority. The American Medical Association calls for non-physicians (those not holding an MD or DO) who use the title \"Doctor\" and are in direct contact with patients to clarify that they are not physicians and to \"define the nature of their doctorate degree\", while the American Osteopathic Association opposes the use of the title by non-physicians in clinical settings absolutely as (in their view) \"such use deceives the public\". Contrary to this, the Emergency Nurses Association has adopted as a position statement that \"1. Nurses are entitled to have their educational degrees recognized and acknowledged in the same manner as other professions. 2. The proper title protection and use of accurate credentials is appropriate in the clinical setting. 3. When being addressed or introduced as doctor in the clinical environment, it is responsible practice for all healthcare providers to clarify their professional role. 4. Patients, families and the general public have a right and expectation to be informed regarding the credentials of their caregivers, including the use of the title \"doctor\".\"\nThe American Medical Association launched a campaign in 2011 for states to adopt \"truth in advertising\" legislation. As a result, many states now have laws in place that protect the title of doctor when offering medical services. In some jurisdictions, the use of the title in health care is limited to those who have both a doctorate and are licensed to practice medicine, and there is a requirement that the field of the doctorate be disclosed. Some other jurisdictions require the practitioner to hold a doctorate and to disclose the field, but make no stipulations as to licensing. Some states require name badges to be worn in medical facilities giving first name, licensure status, and staff position, although these laws may not explicitly address the use of the title \"Doctor\".\nAlthough lawyers in the United States do not customarily use the title, the law degree in that country is the Juris Doctor, a professional doctorate. Some JD holders in the United States use the title of doctor in professional situations, although ethics board decisions have varied on whether this is permissible or might mislead the public into believing the lawyer was medically qualified or had a PhD. It is also sometimes used by JD holders in academic situations. In 2011, \"Mother Jones\" published an article claiming that Michele Bachmann was misrepresenting her qualifications by using the \"bogus\" title Dr. based on her JD. The article was later amended to note that the use of the title by lawyers \"is a (begrudgingly) accepted practice in some states and not in others\", although they maintained that it was rarely used as it \"suggests that you're a medical doctor or a Ph.D.\u2014and therefore conveys a false level of expertise\".\nEcclesiastical seminaries and entitled churches award their own doctorates in the United States, e.g. the \"Doctor of Religious Science\" (Dr. sc. rel.), the \"Doctor of Divinity\" (DD), the \"Doctor of Biblical Studies\" (DBS) or the \"Doctor of Metaphysics\" (Dr. mph.). These titles are most commonly awarded to meritorious clerics for their outstanding work or another achievement in the field of religious and biblical studies.\nAmerican professional doctorates are not generally considered doctoral level degrees internationally, instead being classified as bachelor's or master's level. The ISCED mapping for these degrees, developed collaboratively between the US and UNESCO, places them at master's level. As a result, holders of MD, JD, PharmD, etc. may not be permitted to use the title of Doctor in countries such as Germany where this is strictly controlled.\nEurope.\nIn the European Union, the title of \"doctor\" refers primarily to holders of post-graduate research doctorates, such as the PhD. In many European languages the term \"doctor\" is distinct from a medical practitioner, which can be referred to as e.g. \"l\u00e4kare\" in Swedish, \"Arzt\" in German, \"dokter\" or \"arts\" in Dutch, or \"l\u00e4\u00e4k\u00e4ri\" in Finnish.\nStandardisation of degrees into the three cycles of bachelor's\u2013master's\u2013doctorate across the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) is being carried out through the Bologna process, although not all EHEA member states have fully conformed to the 1999 Bologna declaration in favour of their own historic customs. With respect to the title \"doctor\", the Bologna process makes no prescriptions regarding the names of degrees nor the titles they may confer. However, under the Lisbon Recognition Convention, recognition of a foreign degree allows \"the use of an academic title, subject to the laws and regulations of the country in which recognition is sought\". According to the \"Explanatory report\", this means that: \"The competent authorities of the Parties may grant the right to use the title in the exact form in which it was awarded in the Party concerned or in any other form. They may alternatively grant the right to use the corresponding title of the country in which recognition is sought.\"\nAustria.\nIn Austria, the degree \"Doktor\" is granted to holders of research degrees (ISCED 8) with a denoting Latin particle being added (\"Dr. techn.\", \"Dr. phil.\", \"Dr. rer. nat.\", \"Dr.iur.\", \"Dr.theol.\" etc.). Newer study programmes award a PhD, but these exist alongside the older degrees since many prefer obtaining a \"Dr.\" to a PhD. These degrees take 3\u20134 years full-time and are organised in doctoral schools.\nIn addition, the academic degree \"Doktor\" (ISCED 7) is granted to physicians (Dr. med. univ.) and dentists (Dr. med. dent.), who since 2002 do not obtain doctoral degrees (ISCED 8) but instead follow a master's level six-year training (360 ECTS) programme, similar to an American MD or DDS. For these degrees, students have to write a \"Diplomarbeit\" thesis of 50-100 pages. Research doctorates in medicine (Dr. scient. med. or PhD) can also be obtained after a three year full-time post-graduate study programme at a medical university.\nAll doctors may be addressed as \"Doktor _____\"; the title is usually contracted to \"Dr. _____\", oftentimes they are just addressed as \"Herr/Frau Doktor\" (Mr/Ms Doctor), omitting the family name unless they are being introduced to someone.\nContrary to popular belief in the country, the title \"Dr.\" is not part of a person's name or a specific honour but simply a degree like BSc/BA, \"Mag\" (MA/MSc) or \"Dipl.-Ing.\" (MEng). It is not mandatory to use it, although it may be added to official documents (e.g. driver's licence, passport), if desired\nFinland.\nIn Finland, the title of \"tohtori\" or \"doktor\" denotes holder of a research doctorate comparable to a PhD. Getting the doctorate requires advanced studies after the master's degree, writing a thesis, nowadays often a thesis by publication, and publicly defending the thesis. Customary doctorates do not exist even in the field of medicine: physicians hold the degree of \"l\u00e4\u00e4ketieteen lisensiaatti\" (Licentiate of Medicine), and are referred to simply as \"l\u00e4\u00e4k\u00e4ri\" (physician); \"tohtori\" would be rustic or old-fashioned. A research doctorate in medicine, \"l\u00e4\u00e4ketieteen tohtori\", requires further research work and a separate doctoral thesis, and is not taken by all medical graduates. Regardless, in Finnish usage, the use of titles is uncommon and restricted to only the most formal of contexts.\nFrance.\nIn France, the title of \"Docteur\" is only used generally for physicians (\"m\u00e9decin\") but can also be used by holders of research doctorates. Medical professionals do not normally hold a doctorate, which in France always refers to a research doctorate, but a \"State Diploma of Doctor of Medicine\" (\"Dipl\u00f4me d'\u00c9tat de docteur en m\u00e9decine\").\nThe law in France allows the title of Dr to be used professionally by holders of research doctorates, with the field of their speciality being mentioned after the name. The courts have ruled that stating the specialisation is not necessary except in circumstances specifically related to professional practice; at other times the title alone may be used. The courts have also determined that questioning the right of the holder of a research doctorate to use the title Dr is a form of libel. The National Union of Hospital Scientists (\"Syndicat National des Scientifiques Hospitaliers\") launched a campaign in 2015 to raise awareness of the right of scientists to use the title.\nGermany.\nIn German language-speaking countries, the word \"Doktor\" refers to a doctorate awardee in formal language (similar to a PhD). It is distinct from \"Arzt\", since a doctoral degree is not a requirement for medical practitioners, though colloquial use of the word \"Doktor\" for physician is common and ordinary people often incorrectly assume that only Doktors may practice medicine. For this reason, 80% of all students in medicine write \"doctoral\" dissertations, often comparable to a master's thesis in science, alongside their undergraduate studies to obtain a Dr. med. degree. The European Research Council decided in 2010 that those Dr. med. doctorates do not meet the international standards of a PhD research degree.\nIn Germany, the most common doctoral degrees are \"Dr. med.\" (medicine), \"Dr. med. dent.\" (dentistry), \"Dr. med. vet.\" (veterinary medicine), \"Dr. rer. nat.\" (natural sciences), \"Dr. phil.\" (humanities), \"Dr. iur.\" (law), \"Dr. rer. pol.\" (economic and political sciences, also as Dr. rer. oec. in Switzerland), \"Dr.-Ing.\" (engineering), and \"Dr. theol.\" (theology). All holders of doctoral degrees are appropriately addressed as \"Herr/Frau Dr. _____\" in all social situations.\nIn Germany, double doctorates are indicated in the title by \"Dr. Dr.\" or \"DDr.\" and triple doctorates as \"Dr. Dr. Dr.\" or \"DDDr.\" More doctorates are indicated by the addition of \"mult.\", such as \"Dr. mult.\" Honorary titles are shown with the addition of \"h.c.\", which stands for \"honoris causa\". Example: \"Dr. h.c. mult.\" Some honorary titles are shown by addition of German equivalents of \"h.c.\", like \"e.h.\", \"E.h.\", or \"eh.\", which stand for \"ehrenhalber\" (honorary). Example: \"Dr. e.h. mult.\"\nAll people holding a doctorate from an EU member state are, since 2001, entitled to use \"Doctor\" or \"Dr.\" in all formal, legal and published communications without any further addenda. For academics with doctorates from non-EU member states, the qualification must be recognised formally (\"validated\") by the Federal Educational Ministry in Bonn. The recognition process can be done by the employer or employee and may be part of the official bureaucracy for confirming professional status and is dependent on individual bilateral agreements between Germany and other countries and, since 2007, the Lisbon Recognition Convention. An example of mutual recognition of Doctor titles among EU countries is the \"Bonn Agreement of November 14, 1994\", signed between Germany and Spain (prior to the general recognition of EU doctorates).\nIn 2008, The Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs of the L\u00e4nder in the Federal Republic of Germany extended their 2001 decision to recognise EU PhDs to cover PhDs that were awarded in Australia, Israel, Japan, Canada, and some American universities. It was announced in 2012 that this would be further extended to cover PhDs awarded in New Zealand. PhDs that were awarded in the United States are recognized if the awarding institution is classified by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a \"Research University (high research activity)\" or as a \"Research University (very high research activity).\" Permission to use the title covers only scientific research degrees and does not extend to professional degrees such as the MD or JD.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, doctor \"\u0394\u03b9\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1\" (\"did\u00e1ktor\") is indicated in the title as \u0394\u03c1 and it is used for holders of doctoral degrees. Other alternative names are also used, namely \u00ab\u03b4\u03cc\u03ba\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1\u00bb and \u00ab\u03b4\u03cc\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03c1\u03b1\u03c2\u00bb, derived from the French \"docteur\". The term \"\u0399\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03cc\u03c2\" (\"iatr\u00f3s\") indicates medical practitioners.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, graduates of six-year medical schools (\"dr. med.\"), five-year dentistry schools (\"dr. med. dent.\"), five-year law schools (\"dr. jur.\") and five-year veterinary medical schools (\"dr. vet.\") receive the title of a \"doctor\" at the end of their studies, after completing and successfully defending their thesis; their undergraduate studies must have lasted for a minimum of three years. Completing a PhD research programme (or DLA in arts and music) also leads to the doctor title. Since 2008, also those who graduated of five-year pharmacy schools have the right to use the title \"dr\" (\"dr. pharm.\").\nA large part of Hungarians with doctor titles received their titles for research in the old academic system before PhD was introduced in Hungary. Since the introduction of PhD title (1993), the \"dr. univ\" title (given before 1993). The CSc \"Candidate of Science\" title was a scientific title in the old academic system and is now treated as an equivalent of PhD. CSc titles were awarded by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.\nThe highest level doctoral degree in Hungary is DSc \"Doctor of Sciences\", awarded by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. It is also called \"Doctor of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences\".\nThe title of doctor used to become a part of the name and was added as such to personal identity documents. This practice is still common and graduates after receiving their diploma would usually change their personal documents in order to officially indicate the achievement.\nIreland.\nUsage in Ireland is similar to that in the UK. The title of doctor is used for holders of doctoral degrees as well as for medical practitioners (except surgeons), dentists, and vets. The title is also used in Ireland for Catholic bishops, who are styled \"The Most Reverend Dr X, Bishop of Y\" on envelopes.\nItaly.\nThe first university of Western civilization, the University of Bologna, is located in Italy, where until modern times the only degree granted was that of the doctorate, and all other Italian universities followed that model. During the 20th century Italian universities introduced more advanced research degrees, such as the PhD.\nItalian academia is part of the Bologna Process, and has standardised its degrees as part of the 3+2+3 formula. The undergraduate degree \" was reduced to 3 years (making it equivalent to a Bachelor's degree). This is followed by a 2 year \" (literally \"magistral degree\", equivalent to a Master's degree). The old-system \"laurea\", which lasted about 5-6 years and is now discontinued, were made equivalent to a \"laurea magistrale\". Few fields retain the 5-6 year system (such as law and medicine) but are called \"laurea magistrale a ciclo unico\" and are an integrated master's degree. Finally, the Italian system also introduced a doctorate (\"dottorato di ricerca\"), which lasts 3 years and is the terminal degree of the educational hierarchy, corresponding to a PhD.\nFor historical reasons, the title of doctor is awarded to all university degree holders. \"Laurea\" holders are awarded the title of doctor (dottore/dottoressa), \"laurea magistrale\" holders are awarded the title of magistral doctor (dottore magistrale/dottoressa magistrale), and doctorate holders are called (dottore di ricerca/dottoressa di ricerca).\nMalta.\nIn Malta, the title of Doctor is used by academic doctors (with PhDs), medical practitioners, dentists and lawyers. Its use by lawyers is due to the qualifying degree for practicing law having been the LLD until reforms in 2014, and has been described as \"historical baggage\" by the Dean of the University of Malta's law school. Lawyers do not generally use the title when practicing outside of Malta.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Dutch language doctor is used both for physicians and for the academic title, however the spelling differs with \"dokter\" referring to a physician, whereas \"doctor\" refers to the academic title. Both doctor titles are abbreviated as dr. placed before the holders name (note the lowercase).\nTo enter a Dutch doctoral defense, the candidate must hold a validated master's degree (a master's degree of an acknowledged university, or a master equivalent degree validated on a case-by-case basis by the Dutch government). In some cases the candidate can be granted special dispensation if no master's degree is held.\nThere is no specific notation of the discipline in which the doctorate is obtained. Once the doctorate is obtained the preceding master's degree is generally no longer reported. Exceptions only exist for the disciplines with specific master titles of engineering \"ir.\" (\"ingenieur\", i.e. Engineer) and law \"mr.\" (\"meester\", i.e. Master of Law) where the title dr. is added to the original master title. For these disciplines, the original master's degree abbreviation is combined with the dr. abbreviation thus resulting in for example \"dr. ir. Familyman\". The dr. title is always placed in front of the ir. title. In the case of a PhD in law, the original mr. title is placed before the dr. title (mr. dr., see e.g. Jan Peter Balkenende). For a person having a law master's degree, but holding a PhD in another field than law the mr. title is placed after the dr. title (dr. mr.). No specific notation or title for the medical disciplines exists in the Netherlands. Although a physician is usually referred to as \"dokter\" (note the spelling difference) this does not necessarily imply the physician holds a doctoral degree; nor does it give the physician a title equivalent to that of PhD.\nConfusion can be caused by the original Dutch Master level title \"drs.\" (for all non-engineering and non-law master's degrees). This abbreviation stands for the Dutch title doctorandus Latin for \"he who should become a doctor\" (female form is \"doctoranda\"). Dutch drs. should not be confused with the plural 'doctorates': having multiple PhDs. Once a doctorate is achieved the doctorandus is promoted to doctor, and no longer uses the drs. abbreviation.\nStacking of multiples titles of the same level, as seen in countries like for example Germany (Dr. Dr. Dr. Musterfrau) is highly uncommon in the Netherlands (although stacking of titles with different levels is common: prof. dr. ir. Appelmans). Those who have multiple doctor titles may use dr.mult. before their name, although this is rarely used.\nAfter obtaining a doctorate successfully, Dutch doctors may bear either the title dr. (lower case) before, or the letter D (rarely in practice) behind their name, but not both simultaneously. In the Netherlands, Academic titles are used exclusively within academia. Holding a doctorate has become a standard requirement for a university career. The doctor title has little to no meaning or implications for public life outside academia. It cannot be added to documentation (e.g. passport, drivers licence), and is used infrequently in daily practice.\nHistorically, the Netherlands used their own academic degree nomenclature, but for many years now have recognised and implemented the Bologna declaration. In everyday practice, the Anglo Saxon titles (e.g. PhD) are frequently used. Dutch academic titles and degrees are legally protected, and as of 2021 the traditional \u2019dr.\u2019 and the PhD are legally equivalent and can be used interchangeably. Doctoral degrees (PhD degrees) can only be granted by recognised (research) universities. Illegal use of the title is considered a misdemeanour and subject to legal prosecution.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, up to recent times after the completion of an undergraduate degree \u2013 except in architecture and engineering \u2013 a person was referred to as \"doutor (Dr.) \u2013 male\" or \"doutora (Dra.) \u2013 female\". The architects and engineers were referred by their professional titles: \"arquitecto\" (Arq.) and \"engenheiro\" (Eng.). Nurses are also referred to as \"nurse\", \"enfermeiro\" (male) or \"enfermeira\" (female), the title being \"Enf.\" for both.\nNowadays Portugal is a signatory to the Bologna process and according to the current legislation the title of Doctor (\"doutor, doutora\") is reserved for graduate holders of an academic doctorate. Professions such as physicians, attorneys, pharmacists, veterinarians, and few others are usually referred to by the title Dr. (doutor) even if they have not been awarded a doctoral degree.\nHowever, custom gives the legislation little strength and most graduates use the Dr. title in its abbreviated form, although use of the full \"Doutor\" is normally restricted to those with doctorates. Those who are both holders of an academic doctorate and Professors at a college level are generally referred to as \"Professor Doutor\".\nSpain.\nThe social standing of Doctors in Spain is evidenced by the fact that only PhD holders, Grandees and Dukes can take seat and cover their heads in the presence of the King.\nPhD Degrees are regulated by Royal Decree (RD 1393\u20132007), \"Real Decreto\" (in Spanish). They are granted by the university on behalf of the King, and its Diploma has the force of a public document. The Ministry of Science keeps a national database of doctoral theses called TESEO. Any person who uses the Spanish title of \"doctor/doctora\" (or \"Dr./Dra.\") without being included in this Government database can be prosecuted for fraud. However, the Spanish Royal Academy recognises that it is used colloquially to describe physicians, even without doctoral degrees, as well as (in the feminine form, \"doctora\", abbreviated \"Dra.\") the wives of doctors (i.e. holders of doctoral degrees) and medics, as well as \"women who shine with wisdom and understanding\".\nUnlike other countries, until recently Spain has registered a comparatively small number of Doctor degree holders, but the tendency is changing. According to the Spanish Statistical Office (INE), less than 5% of MSc degree holders are admitted to PhD programs. This reinforces the prestige that Doctors have historically enjoyed in Spain's society.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDoctor is commonly used in the United Kingdom as the title for a person who has received a doctoral degree or, as courtesy title, for a qualified medical practitioner or dentist who does not have a doctorate. There are no restrictions on the use of the title \"Doctor\" in the United Kingdom, except where, in commercial advertising, it might imply that the user holds a general medical qualification. The UK government allows medical doctors and holders of doctorates to have the title recorded on the observations page of their UK passport. The lack of legal restrictions was confirmed in Parliament in 1996 by health minister Gerald Malone, who noted that the title doctor had never been restricted by law to either medical practitioners or those with doctoral degrees in the UK, although the titles \"physician, doctor of medicine, licentiate in medicine and surgery, bachelor of medicine, surgeon, general practitioner and apothecary\" were protected.\nAccording to the etiquette guide, Debrett's, holders of doctoral degrees and medical doctors (but not surgeons) should be addressed as \"Doctor\". For medical doctors, \"Doctor\" is a professional title rather than an academic one: it is due to their being a medical practitioner rather than their having gained a doctoral degree. The Quality Assurance Agency states that \"The use of the title 'Dr' by medical doctors is a historical abbreviation for the profession; it does not indicate a qualification at doctoral level\". On guest lists and seating plans for formal events, holders of academic doctorates (but not medical doctors or other people using the title as a courtesy title) are listed either as \"Dr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq, PhD\", while untitled men (other than those holding doctorates) are shown as either \"Mr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq\" (as appropriate to ensure the styling remains consistent). The title \"Dr\" is also used on visiting cards.\nMedical students in the UK normally complete a course of study leading to the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS, BMBS or MBChB). The MD degree is not a qualifying degree in the UK, but can be either a professional doctorate (at the same academic level as a PhD), a doctorate by thesis, or a higher doctorate, depending on the university. To be eligible for an MD degree in the UK one must already hold an entry-level medical degree (for example, MBBS, MBChB, BMed, or a North American MD degree) and usually must have had at least 5 years of postgraduate training and experience. Trainee doctors are permitted to use the title Doctor once they have started their post-graduation \"Foundation Programme\".\nDebrett's states that medical doctors (except surgeons) should be addressed on envelopes as \"Dr (full name), (medical qualifications)\", e.g. \"Dr John Smith, MD\", \"Dr Anne Jones, MB BS, FRCP\", \"Dr David Evans, MB ChB\", contrary to the normal rule of not mixing titles and post-nominals. Surgeons (and dentists, if not holding a doctoral degree) should be \"(full name), Esq, (medical/dental qualifications)\", e.g. \"John Smith, Esq, MS, FRCS\", \"David Evans, Esq., BDS\", but \"Dr Anne Jones, DDS, FDS RCS\". By contrast, those holding (non medical or dental) doctoral degrees, if not surgeons, should be \"Dr (full name)\" without post-nominals on envelopes, e.g. \"Dr John Smith\".\nA &amp; C Black's \"Titles and Forms of Address\" diverges from Debrett's on how to address envelopes to medical doctors, omitting the pre-nominal title of Dr (e.g. John Smith, Esq, MD; John Smith, MD; John Smith, MB) except in Scotland and for general practitioners, where the post-nominals are instead usually omitted (e.g. Dr John Smith). Black's also state that it is down to individual choice whether non-medical doctors are addressed on envelopes as \"Dr John Smith\" or \"John Smith, Esq, PhD\" (or appropriate letters for the doctorate held), with the exception of doctors of divinity, who would be \"The Rev. J. Smith, DD\" on the envelope and \"Reverend Sir\" in a formal salutation (informally in the salutation \"Dear Dr Smith\", and \"Dr Smith\" in speech).\nThe custom of not referring to surgeons (members and fellows of the Royal College of Surgeons) as Dr has been commented on in the \"British Medical Journal\" and may stem from the historical origins of the profession such as that some barbers also used to function as surgeons. In 2005, the then-president of the Royal College of Surgeons called upon surgeons to use the title of Dr, saying that the use of Mr or Miss was confusing to patients. Black's note that gynaecologists are addressed as surgeons in England and Wales but as doctors elsewhere.\nIn a similar manner to the medical MBBS, dentists qualify with a Bachelor of Dental Surgery (BDS) and vets with a Bachelor of Veterinary Science (BVSc), Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine (BVetMed) or Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (BVMS). All of these are, like the MBBS, master's level qualifications that bear bachelor's designations for historical reasons.\nDentists have traditionally (as dental surgeons) been referred to in the same way as surgeons, but since 1995 the General Dental Council have permitted dentists to use the title \"Doctor\", though many do not choose to do this, thereby stressing their surgeon status. However, Debrett's continues to advises that dentists are normally addressed as surgeons and that the title \"Doctor\" is usually only used for dentists who have a doctoral degree.\nOn 5 March 2015 the council of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) voted to permit its members to use the courtesy title of \"Doctor\". Guidance from the RCVS says the title should be used either with the description \"veterinary surgeon\" or the postnominals \"MRCVS\" to ensure there is no confusion with doctors of human medicine or holders of doctoral degrees.\nOptometrists are not permitted to use the title \"Doctor\" based on their initial qualification (BOptom or BSc (Optom)). Optometrists can earn PhDs or Doctor of Optometry degrees (in the UK a PhD-level qualification for qualified optometrists with experience in practice). Ophthalmologists are fully qualified medical doctors. However, ophthalmology is considered a branch of surgery, thus ophthalmologists, like other surgeons in the UK, do not use the title \"Doctor\".\nThe General Chiropractic Council permits registered chiropractors to use the title \"Doctor\", although it advises chiropractors to avoid using the title in advertising or, if they do, to spell out that they are \"Doctors of Chiropractic\". The Committee of Advertising Practice advises, however, that \"references to 'DC' or 'doctor of chiropractic' are unlikely to dispel that misleading impression [of being a medical practitioner], when used in conjunction with unqualified references to the prefix 'Dr, saying that the use of the title by chiropractors may be acceptable in advertising if \"clearly and prominently qualified with additional text which makes clear it is a courtesy title and that the practitioner does not hold a general medical qualification\".\nThe Advertising Standards Authority has ruled that practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine should not use the title doctor in adverts unless they hold a general medical qualification and are registered with the General Medical Council. It similarly advises that osteopaths should not use the title unless holding a general medical qualification. There have also been rulings that an advert for an osteomyologist which referred to him as a doctor was misleading, as was an advert which used the title \"Dr\" and the post-nominals \"PhD\" on the basis of a PhD from an unaccredited university.\nHolders of honorary doctorates in the UK have the right, in most cases, to use the title of Doctor, although holders are encouraged to refrain from doing so. Black's says that \"The same rules apply as to other holders\", although notes that the post-nominals would not normally be used.\nIn some circumstances, \"doctor\" may be used on its own as a form of address rather than as a title before a name. This is limited to when the person is being addressed by their job title and so is only used for medical doctors.\nWales.\nWales follows UK usage in English. In Welsh, the holder of a doctoral degree is \"doethur\" while a medical doctor is \"doctor\" or \"meddyg\". The title \"y Doethur\" is used by those holding doctorates, e.g. \"y Doethur Brinley Jones\", \"y Doethur John Elfed Jones\", which can be abbreviated \"Dr\". Medical doctors use, as in English, the title \"Doctor\", also abbreviated \"Dr\".\nFormer Yugoslavia.\nIn countries that were formerly Yugoslavian republics, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Slovenia the title formally belongs to holders of academic doctoral degree such as doctor of science (dr. sc.) or doctor of arts (dr. art.) degree. There is no \"Ph.D.\" in any of those countries, even though when holders are translating their dr. sc. degree to English, they nevertheless use \"Ph.D.\", even though it should be \"D.Sc.\" or \"Sc.D.\".\nInformally, the title, in both its full and abbreviated form (i.e. \"dr.\") is used honorifically to address medical doctors even in more formal environment like in lectored media texts, however officially it is reserved only for the holders of academic degrees. Formally the professional title for medical doctor is \"lijekar\" in Bosnian and Montenegrin, \"lije\u010dnik\" in Croatian, \"lekar/\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0430\u0440\" in Macedonian and Serbian and \"zdravnik\" in Slovenian and they can hold different academic degrees, as well as additional honorific title of \"Primarius\" that is given to distinguished specialists with exemplary reputation and achievements.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nWith the introduction of National Health Practitioner registration legislation on 1 July 2010, the title \"doctor\" is not restricted in any Australian state. The title \"medical practitioner\" is restricted for use by registered medical practitioners, while the title \"doctor\" is not restricted by law. Despite this, the Medical Board of Australia advises that practitioners who are not medical practitioners who choose to use the title 'Doctor' (or 'Dr') should clearly state their profession in advertisements, even if they hold a PhD or another doctoral degree, e.g. 'Dr Smith (Dentist)' or 'Dr Jones (Chiropodist)'. The Psychology Board of Australia prohibits psychologists from using the title, to avoid confusion with psychiatrists, unless they hold a doctoral degree, in which case they must make it clear that they are not a medical practitioner or psychiatrist, e.g. by putting '(Psychologist)' after their name. The Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) defines doctoral degrees as being at Level 10 of the framework; it specifies that: \"Individuals who have been awarded a Doctoral Degree at Level 10 on the AQF are entitled to use the title 'Doctor'. The title 'Doctor' will not be used by those who hold an honorary award.\" The name 'Doctor' is also used in the name of some extended master's degrees at Level 9 (e.g. Juris Doctor and Doctor of Medicine); these are not considered doctoral degrees.\nAbbreviation.\nDoctor is abbreviated \"Dr\" in British English and \"Dr.\" in North American English. The plural abbreviation is \"Drs\".\nBritish usage.\nIn British English it is not necessary to indicate an abbreviation with a full stop after the abbreviation, when the first and last letters of the abbreviation are the same as for the unabbreviated word, i.e. the abbreviation is a contraction, as in the case for \"Doctor\".\nIn the United Kingdom, it is normal also to omit stops from postnominal letters, thus the usual abbreviation for \"Doctor of Philosophy\" is \"PhD\" (or \"DPhil\", where this is used). The fully punctuated \"Ph.D.\" or \"D.Phil.\" is anachronistic and, where the abbreviated form of the degree is defined by regulation rather than custom (e.g. Oxford), may be technically incorrect.\nAmerican usage.\nAmerican English makes no distinction between abbreviations that are contractions and abbreviations that are not. A period is used: the abbreviation of Doctor is usually written as \"Dr.\" in North America. However, the US Postal Service prefers punctuation to be omitted from addresses.\nHonorary doctorates.\nAn honorary doctorate is a doctoral degree awarded for service to the institution or the wider community. It may also be awarded for outstanding achievement in a particular field. This service or achievement does not need to be academic in nature. Often, the same set of degrees is used for higher doctorates, but they are distinguished as being \"honoris causa\": in comprehensive lists, the lettering used to indicate the possession of a higher doctorate is often adjusted to indicate this, for example, \"Hon ScD\", as opposed to the earned research doctorate \"ScD\". The degrees of Doctor of the University (DUniv) and Doctor of Humane Letters (DHL), however, are only awarded as honorary degrees.\nBy convention, recipients of honorary doctorates do not use the title \"Dr\" in general correspondence, although in formal correspondence from the university issuing the honorary degree it is normal to address the recipient by the title. However, this social convention is not always scrupulously observed; notable people who defied social convention and used the honorary prefix include:"}
{"id": "8882", "revid": "1231544678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8882", "title": "Domnall mac Ailp\u00edn", "text": "Domnall mac Ailp\u00edn (Modern Gaelic: \"D\u00f2mhnall mac Ailpein\"), anglicised sometimes as Donald MacAlpin and known in most modern regnal lists as Donald I (812 \u2013 13 April 862), was King of the Picts from 858 to 862. He followed his brother Kenneth I to the Pictish throne.\nReign.\nThe Chronicle of the Kings of Alba says that Domnall reigned for four years, matching the notices in the Annals of Ulster of his brother's death in February 858 and his own in April 862. The Chronicle notes:\nThe laws of \u00c1ed Find are entirely lost, but it has been assumed that, like the laws attributed to Giric of Scotland and Constantine II (Causant\u00edn mac \u00c1eda), these related to the church and in particular to granting the privileges and immunities common elsewhere. The significance of Forteviot as the site of this law-making, along with Kenneth's death there and Constantine's later gathering at nearby Scone, may point to this as being the heartland of the sons of Alp\u00edn's support.\nThe Chronicle of Melrose says of Domnall, \"in war he was a vigorous soldier ... he is said to have been assassinated at Scone.\" No other source reports Domnall's death by violence.\nThe Prophecy of Berch\u00e1n may refer to Domnall in stanzas 123\u2013124:\nAlthough Domnall is generally supposed to have been childless, it has been suggested that Giric was a son of Domnall, reading his patronym as \"mac Domnaill\" rather than the commonly supposed \"mac D\u00fangail\". This, however, is not widely accepted.\nDomnall died, either at the palace of Cinnbelachoir (location unknown), or at \"Rathinveralmond\" (also unknown, and may be the same place, presumed to be near the junction of the Almond and the Tay, near Scone). He was buried on Iona."}
{"id": "8884", "revid": "49018974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8884", "title": "Danse Macabre", "text": "The Danse Macabre (; ), also called the Dance of Death, is an artistic genre of allegory from the Late Middle Ages on the universality of death.\nThe \"Danse Macabre\" consists of the dead, or a personification of death, summoning representatives from all walks of life to dance along to the grave, typically with a pope, emperor, king, child, and labourer. The effect is both frivolous and terrifying, beseeching its audience to react emotionally. It was produced as \"memento mori\", to remind people of the fragility of their lives and the vanity of earthly glory. Its origins are postulated from illustrated sermon texts; the earliest recorded visual scheme (apart from 14th century Triumph of Death paintings) was a now-lost mural at Holy Innocents' Cemetery in Paris dating from 1424 to 1425.\nBackground.\nReligion is an important contextual factor around the Dance of Death tradition and its effect on the population, with new eschatology concepts in the fourteenth century being critical for the development of the Dance of Death. Early examples of Dance of Death artwork were present in religious contexts such as murals on Christian church walls. These served to remind people about the inevitability of death and urge moral reflection in order to cope with this reality. In his 1998 study on medieval religious practices, historian Francis Rapp wrote thatChristians were moved by the sight of the Infant Jesus playing on his mother's knee; their hearts were touched by the Piet\u00e0; and patron saints reassured them by their presence. But, all the while, the danse macabre urged them not to forget the end of all earthly things.It is generally agreed upon by scholars that Dance of Death depictions do show realistic dancing based on the quality of gestures seen in artwork and familiarity with steps found in texts. The paintings include body positions that seem to indicate movement, particular gestures, and specific orders and dynamics between the characters, while texts use relevant dance vocabulary. These elements may indicate the presence of past enacted dances and that the depictions were read for a performative function, as hypothesized by Gertsman in her paper \u201cPleyinge and Peyntynge: Performing the Dance of Death.\u201d This view centers on the incorporation of both visual and theatrical devices in these depictions to create effective artwork. Gertsman writes thatBy drawing its inspiration from the sphere of performance, the Dance of Death imagery, along with its text, invites a performative reading, informed by specific structures of the verses, the concept of movement, and the understanding of the body language of the danse macabre's protagonists. However, there is scarce evidence surrounding a physical dancing performance tradition of the Dance of Death outside of its other depictions. The \"Danse Macabre\" was possibly enacted at village pageants and at court masques, with people \"dressing up as corpses from various strata of society\", and may have been the origin of costumes worn during Allhallowtide. Regardless, its main influence has been in the form of visual arts such as murals, paintings, and more.\nThe bubonic plague and its devastating effects on the European population were significantly contributing factors to the inspiration and solidification of the Dance of Death tradition in the fourteenth century. In her thesis, \"The Black Death and its Effect on 14th and 15th Century Art\", Anna Louise Des Ormeaux describes the effect of the Black Death on art, mentioning the \"Danse Macabre\" as she does so:Some plague art contains gruesome imagery that was directly influenced by the mortality of the plague or by the medieval fascination with the macabre and awareness of death that were augmented by the plague. Some plague art documents psychosocial responses to the fear that plague aroused in its victims. Other plague art is of a subject that directly responds to people's reliance on religion to give them hope. The cultural impact of mass outbreaks of disease are not fleeting or temporary. In their paper on \u201cBlack Death, Plagues, and the Danse Macabre. Depictions of Epidemics in Art,\u201d Rittershaus and Eschenberg discuss artistic representations of various epidemics starting with the bubonic plague and extending to cholera and recent epidemics. The suffering and realization of death\u2019s closeness, which the black death caused in Europe, were integrated with concepts of morality and Christianity to give rise to the Dance of Death tradition as a direct response to the epidemic. Cholera cases in the nineteenth century inspired a resurgence of Dance of Death depictions after the initial black death depictions, with religious connotations still present but less important. The Dance of Death tradition is a testament to the profound impact of an epidemic on people as depicted in art. A disease\u2019s effect can endure past the initial stages of outbreak, in its deep etching upon the culture and society. This can be seen in the artworks and motifs of \"Danse Macabre\" as people attempted to cope with the death surrounding them.\nPaintings.\nWhat is often considered to be the earliest recorded visual example is the lost mural on the south wall of the Cemetery of the Holy Innocents in Paris. It was painted in 1424\u201325 during the regency of John, Duke of Bedford. It features an emphatic inclusion of a dead crowned king at a time when France did not have a crowned king. The mural may well have had a political subtext. However, some have argued that 14th century Triumph of Death paintings such as the fresco by Francesco Traini are also examples of danse macabre.\nThere were also painted schemes in Basel (the earliest dating from ); a series of paintings on canvas by Bernt Notke (1440\u20131509) in L\u00fcbeck (1463); the initial fragment of the original Bernt Notke painting \"Danse Macabre\" (accomplished at the end of the 15th century) in the St Nicholas' Church, Tallinn, Estonia; the painting at the back wall of the chapel of Sv. Marija na \u0160krilinama in the Istrian town of Beram (1474), painted by Vincent of Kastav; the painting in the Holy Trinity Church of Hrastovlje, Istria by John of Kastav (1490).\nA notable example was painted on the cemetery walls of the Dominican Abbey, in Bern, by Niklaus Manuel Deutsch (1484\u20131530) in 1516/7. This work of art was destroyed when the wall was torn down in 1660, but a 1649 copy by Albrecht Kauw (1621\u20131681) is extant. There was also a \"Dance of Death\" painted around 1430 and displayed on the walls of Pardon Churchyard at Old St Paul's Cathedral, London, with texts by John Lydgate (1370\u20131451) known as the 'Dance of (St) Poulys', which was destroyed in 1549.\nThe deathly horrors of the 14th century such as recurring famines, the Hundred Years' War in France, and, most of all, the Black Death, were culturally assimilated throughout Europe. The omnipresent possibility of sudden and painful death increased the religious desire for penance, but it also evoked a hysterical desire for amusement while still possible; a last dance as cold comfort. The \"Danse Macabre\" combines both desires: in many ways similar to the medieval mystery plays, the dance-with-death allegory was originally a didactic dialogue poem to remind people of the inevitability of death and to advise them strongly to be prepared at all times for death (see \"memento mori\" and ).\nShort verse dialogues between Death and each of its victims, which could have been performed as plays, can be found in the direct aftermath of the Black Death in Germany and in Spain (where it was known as the \"Totentanz\" and \"la Danza de la Muerte\", respectively).\nThe French term \"Danse Macabre\" may derive from the Latin \"Chorea Machab\u00e6orum\", literally \"dance of the Maccabees.\" In 2 Maccabees, a deuterocanonical book of the Bible, the grim martyrdom of a mother and her seven sons is described and was a well-known medieval subject. It is possible that the Maccabean Martyrs were commemorated in some early French plays, or that people just associated the book's vivid descriptions of the martyrdom with the interaction between Death and its prey.\nAn alternative explanation is that the term entered France via Spain, the , \"maqabir\" (pl., \"cemeteries\") being the root of the word. Both the dialogues and the evolving paintings were ostensive penitential lessons that even illiterate people (who were the overwhelming majority) could understand.\nMural paintings.\nFrescoes and murals dealing with death had a long tradition, and were widespread. For example, the legend of the \"Three Living and the Three Dead.\" On a ride or hunt, three young gentlemen meet three cadavers (sometimes described as their ancestors) who warn them, \"Quod fuimus, estis; quod sumus, vos eritis\" (\"What we were, you are; what we are, you will be\"). Numerous mural versions of that legend from the 13th century onwards have survived (for instance, in the of Wismar or the residential Longthorpe Tower outside Peterborough). Since they showed pictorial sequences of men and corpses covered with shrouds, those paintings are sometimes regarded as cultural precursors of the new genre.\nA \"Danse Macabre\" painting may show a round dance headed by Death or, more usually, a chain of alternating dead and live dancers. From the highest ranks of the mediaeval hierarchy (usually pope and emperor) descending to its lowest (beggar, peasant, and child), each mortal's hand is taken by an animated skeleton or cadaver. The famous \"Totentanz\" by Bernt Notke in St. Mary's Church, L\u00fcbeck (destroyed during the Allied bombing of L\u00fcbeck in World War II), presented the dead dancers as very lively and agile, making the impression that they were actually dancing, whereas their living dancing partners looked clumsy and passive. The apparent class distinction in almost all of these paintings is completely neutralized by Death as the ultimate equalizer, so that a sociocritical element is subtly inherent to the whole genre. The \"Totentanz\" of Metnitz, for example, shows how a pope crowned with his tiara is being led into Hell by Death.\nUsually, a short dialogue is attached to each pair of dancers, in which Death is summoning him (or, more rarely, her) to dance and the summoned is moaning about impending death. In the first printed \"Totentanz\" textbook (Anon.: \"Vierzeiliger oberdeutscher Totentanz\", Heidelberger Blockbuch, ), Death addresses, for example, the emperor:\nAt the lower end of the \"Totentanz\", Death calls, for example, the peasant to dance, who answers:\nVarious examples of \"Danse Macabre\" in Slovenia and Croatia below: \nHans Holbein's woodcuts.\nRenowned for his \"Dance of Death\" series, the famous designs by Hans Holbein the Younger (1497\u20131543) were drawn in 1526 while he was in Basel. They were cut in wood by the accomplished Formschneider (block cutter) Hans L\u00fctzelburger.\nWilliam Ivins (quoting W. J. Linton) writes of L\u00fctzelburger's work wrote:\n\"\"Nothing indeed, by knife or by graver, is of higher quality than this man's doing.' For by common acclaim the originals are technically the most marvelous woodcuts ever made\".\" \nThese woodcuts soon appeared in proofs with titles in German. The first book edition, titled \"Les Simulachres et Histori\u00e9es Faces de la Mort\" and containing forty-one woodcuts, was published at Lyons by the Treschsel brothers in 1538. The popularity of the work, and the currency of its message, are underscored by the fact that there were eleven editions before 1562, and over the sixteenth century perhaps as many as a hundred unauthorized editions and imitations. Ten further designs were added in later editions.\nThe \"Dance of Death\" (1523\u201326) refashions the late-medieval allegory of the \"Danse Macabre\" as a reformist satire, and one can see the beginnings of a gradual shift from traditional to reformed Christianity. That shift had many permutations however, and in a study Natalie Zemon Davis has shown that the contemporary reception and afterlife of Holbein's designs lent themselves to neither purely Catholic or Protestant doctrine, but could be outfitted with different surrounding prefaces and sermons as printers and writers of different political and religious leanings took them up. Most importantly, \"The pictures and the Bible quotations above them were the main attractions [\u2026] Both Catholics and Protestants wished, through the pictures, to turn men's thoughts to a Christian preparation for death.\".\nThe 1538 edition which contained Latin quotations from the Bible above Holbein's designs, and a French quatrain below composed by Gilles Corrozet (1510\u20131568) actually did not credit Holbein as the artist. It bore the title: Les simulachres &amp; / HISTORIEES FACES / DE LA MORT, AUTANT ELE/gamm\u0113t pourtraictes, que artifi/ciellement imagin\u00e9es. / A Lyon. / Soubz l'escu de COLOIGNE. / M.D. XXXVIII. (\"Images and Illustrated facets of Death, as elegantly depicted as they are artfully conceived.\") These images and workings of death as captured in the phrase \"histories faces\" of the title \"are the particular exemplification of the way death works, the individual scenes in which the lessons of mortality are brought home to people of every station.\"\nIn his preface to the work Jean de Vauz\u00e8le, the Prior of Montrosier, addresses Jehanne de Tourzelle, the Abbess of the Convent at St. Peter at Lyons, and names Holbein's attempts to capture the ever-present, but never directly seen, abstract images of death \"simulachres.\" He writes: \"[\u2026] simulachres les dis ie vrayement, pour ce que simulachre vient de simuler, &amp; faindre ce que n'est point.\" (\"Simulachres they are most correctly called, for simulachre derives from the verb to simulate and to feign that which is not really there.\") He next employs a trope from the memento mori (remember we all must die) tradition and a metaphor from printing which well captures the undertakings of Death, the artist, and the printed book before us in which these simulachres of death barge in on the living: \"Et pourtant qu'on n'a peu trouver chose plus approchante a la similitude de Mort, que la personne morte, on d'icelle effigie simulachres, &amp; faces de Mort, pour en nos pensees imprimer la memoire de Mort plus au vis, que ne pourroient toutes les rhetoriques descriptiones de orateurs.\" (\"And yet we cannot discover any one thing more near the likeness of Death than the dead themselves, whence come these simulated effigies and images of Death's affairs, which imprint the memory of Death with more force than all the rhetorical descriptions of the orators ever could.\").\nHolbein's series shows the figure of \"Death\" in many disguises, confronting individuals from all walks of life. None escape Death's skeletal clutches, not even the pious. As Davis writes, \"Holbein's pictures are independent dramas in which Death comes upon his victim in the midst of the latter's own surroundings and activities. This is perhaps nowhere more strikingly captured than in the wonderful blocks showing the plowman earning his bread by the sweat of his brow only to have his horses speed him to his end by Death. The Latin from the 1549 Italian edition pictured here reads: \"In sudore vultus tui, vesceris pane tuo.\" (\"Through the sweat of thy brow you shall eat your bread\"), quoting Genesis 3.19. The Italian verses below translate: (\"Miserable in the sweat of your brow,/ It is necessary that you acquire the bread you need eat,/ But, may it not displease you to come with me,/ If you are desirous of rest.\"). Or there is the nice balance in composition Holbein achieves between the heavy-laden traveling salesman insisting that he must still go to market while Death tugs at his sleeve to put down his wares once and for all: \"Venite ad me, qui onerati estis.\" (\"Come to me, all ye who [labour and] are heavy laden\"), quoting Matthew 11.28. The Italian here translates: \"Come with me, wretch, who are weighed down / Since I am the dame who rules the whole world:/ Come and hear my advice / Because I wish to lighten you of this load.\"\nMusical settings.\nMusical settings of the motif include:\nTextual examples of the Danse Macabre.\nThe \"Danse Macabre\" was a frequent motif in poetry, drama and other written literature in the Middle Ages in several areas of western Europe. There is a Spanish , a French , and a German with various Latin manuscripts written during the 14th century. Printed editions of books began appearing in the 15th century, such as the ones produced by Guy Marchant of Paris. Similarly to the musical or artistic representations, the texts describe living and dead persons being called to dance or form a procession with Death.\n\"Danse Macabre\" texts were often, though not always, illustrated with illuminations and woodcuts.\nThere is one danse macabre text devoted entirely to women: \"The Danse Macabre of Women\". This work survives in five manuscripts, and two printed editions. In it, 36 women of various ages, in Paris, are called from their daily lives and occupations to join the Dance with Death. An English translation of the French manuscript was published by Ann Tukey Harrison in 1994.\nJohn Lydgate's \"Dance of Death\" is a Middle English poem written in the early 15th century. It is a translation of a French poem of the same name, and it is one of the most popular examples of the Danse Macabre genre.\nThe poem is a moral allegory in which Death leads a procession of people from all walks of life to their graves. The poem includes a variety of characters, including the emperor, the pope, the cardinal, the bishop, the abbot, the prioress, the monk, the nun, the doctor, the lawyer, the merchant, the knight, the plowman, the beggar, and the child.\nThe poem is written in rhyme royal, a seven-line stanzaic form that was popular in the Middle Ages."}
{"id": "8885", "revid": "22837787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8885", "title": "David Abercromby", "text": "David Abercromby was a 17th-century Scottish physician and writer, thought to have died in 1702. Brought up at Douai as a Roman Catholic by Jesuit priests, he was converted to Protestantism in 1682 and came to abjure popery, and published \"Protestancy proved Safer than Popery\" (1686).\nWorks.\nHis medical reputation was based on his \"Tuta ac efficax luis venereae saepe absque mercurio ac semper absque salivatione mercuriali curando methodus\" (1684) which was translated into French, Dutch and German. Two other works by him were \"De Pulsus Variatione\" (1685), and \"Ars explorandi medicas facultates plantarum ex solo sapore\" (1688); his \"Opuscula\" were collected in 1687. These professional writings gave him a place and memorial in Albrecht von Haller, \"Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae\" (1779). According to Haller he was alive early in the 18th century.\nHe also wrote some books in theology and philosophy, controversial in their time but little remembered today. But the most noticeable of his productions is \"A Discourse of Wit\" (1685), which contains some of the most characteristic metaphysical opinions of the Scottish philosophy of common sense. It was followed by \"Academia Scientiarum\" (1687), and by \"A Moral Discourse of the Power of Interest\" (1690), dedicated to Robert Boyle, Abercromby's patron in the 1680s. He later wrote \"Reasons Why A Protestant Should not Turn Papist\" (1687), which has often wrongly been attributed to Boyle. \"A Short Account of Scots Divines\", by him, was printed at Edinburgh in 1833, edited by James Maidment."}
{"id": "8886", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8886", "title": "Deconstruction", "text": "In philosophy, deconstruction is a loosely-defined set of approaches to understanding the relationship between text and meaning. The concept of deconstruction was introduced by the philosopher Jacques Derrida, who described it as a turn away from Platonism's ideas of \"true\" forms and essences which are valued above appearances. \nSince the 1980s, these proposals of language's fluidity instead of being ideally static and discernible have inspired a range of studies in the humanities, including the disciplines of law, anthropology, historiography, linguistics, sociolinguistics, psychoanalysis, LGBT studies, and feminism. Deconstruction also inspired deconstructivism in architecture and remains important within art, music, and literary criticism.\nOverview.\nJacques Derrida's 1967 book \"Of Grammatology\" introduced the majority of ideas influential within deconstruction. Derrida published a number of other works directly relevant to the concept of deconstruction, such as \"Diff\u00e9rance\", \"Speech and Phenomena\", and \"Writing and Difference\".\nTo Derrida,\nAccording to Derrida, and taking inspiration from the work of Ferdinand de Saussure, language as a system of signs and words only has meaning because of the contrast between these signs. As Richard Rorty contends, \"words have meaning only because of contrast-effects with other words\u00a0... no word can acquire meaning in the way in which philosophers from Aristotle to Bertrand Russell have hoped it might\u2014by being the unmediated expression of something non-linguistic (e.g., an emotion, a sensed observation, a physical object, an idea, a Platonic Form)\". As a consequence, meaning is never present, but rather is deferred to other signs. Derrida refers to the\u2014in his view, mistaken\u2014belief that there is a self-sufficient, non-deferred meaning as metaphysics of presence. Rather, according to Derrida, a concept must be understood in the context of its opposite: for example, the word \"being\" does not have meaning without contrast with the word \"nothing\".\nFurther, Derrida contends that \"in a classical philosophical opposition we are not dealing with the peaceful coexistence of a vis-a-vis, but rather with a violent hierarchy. One of the two terms governs the other (axiologically, logically, etc.), or has the upper hand\": signified over signifier; intelligible over sensible; speech over writing; activity over passivity, etc. The first task of deconstruction is, according to Derrida, to find and overturn these oppositions inside a text or texts; but the final objective of deconstruction is not to surpass all oppositions, because it is assumed they are structurally necessary to produce sense: the oppositions simply cannot be suspended once and for all, as the hierarchy of dual oppositions always reestablishes itself (because it is necessary for meaning). Deconstruction, Derrida says, only points to the necessity of an unending analysis that can make explicit the decisions and hierarchies intrinsic to all texts.\nDerrida further argues that it is not enough to expose and deconstruct the way oppositions work and then stop there in a nihilistic or cynical position, \"thereby preventing any means of intervening in the field effectively\". To be effective, deconstruction needs to create new terms, not to synthesize the concepts in opposition, but to mark their difference and eternal interplay. This explains why Derrida always proposes new terms in his deconstruction, not as a free play but from the necessity of analysis. Derrida called these undecidables\u2014that is, unities of simulacrum\u2014\"false\" verbal properties (nominal or semantic) that can no longer be included within philosophical (binary) opposition. Instead, they inhabit philosophical oppositions\u2014resisting and organizing them\u2014without ever constituting a third term or leaving room for a solution in the form of a Hegelian dialectic (e.g., , archi-writing, pharmakon, supplement, hymen, gram, spacing).\nInfluences.\nDerrida's theories on deconstruction were themselves influenced by the work of linguists such as Ferdinand de Saussure (whose writings on semiotics also became a cornerstone of structuralism in the mid-20th century) and literary theorists such as Roland Barthes (whose works were an investigation of the logical ends of structuralist thought). Derrida's views on deconstruction stood in opposition to the theories of structuralists such as psychoanalytic theorist Jacques Lacan, and anthropologist Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss. However, Derrida resisted attempts to label his work as \"post-structuralist\".\nInfluence of Nietzsche.\nDerrida's motivation for developing deconstructive criticism, suggesting the fluidity of language over static forms, was largely inspired by Friedrich Nietzsche's philosophy, beginning with his interpretation of Trophonius. In \"Daybreak\", Nietzsche announces that \"All things that live long are gradually so saturated with reason that their origin in unreason thereby becomes improbable. Does not almost every precise history of an origination impress our feelings as paradoxical and wantonly offensive? Does the good historian not, at bottom, constantly contradict?\".\nNietzsche's point in \"Daybreak\" is that standing at the end of modern history, modern thinkers know too much to continue to be deceived by an illusory grasp of satisfactorily complete reason. Mere proposals of heightened reasoning, logic, philosophizing and science are no longer solely sufficient as the royal roads to truth. Nietzsche disregards Platonism to revisualize the history of the West as the self-perpetuating history of a series of political moves, that is, a manifestation of the will to power, that at bottom have no greater or lesser claim to truth in any noumenal (absolute) sense. By calling attention to the fact that he has assumed the role of a subterranean Trophonius, in dialectical opposition to Plato, Nietzsche hopes to sensitize readers to the political and cultural context, and the political influences that impact authorship.\nWhere Nietzsche did not achieve deconstruction, as Derrida sees it, is that he missed the opportunity to further explore the will to power as more than a manifestation of the sociopolitically effective operation of writing that Plato characterized, stepping beyond Nietzsche's penultimate revaluation of all Western values, to the ultimate, which is the emphasis on \"the role of writing in the production of knowledge\".\nInfluence of Saussure.\nDerrida approaches all texts as constructed around elemental oppositions which all discourse has to articulate if it intends to make any sense whatsoever. This is so because identity is viewed in non-essentialist terms as a construct, and because constructs only produce meaning through the interplay of difference inside a \"system of distinct signs\". This approach to text is influenced by the semiology of Ferdinand de Saussure.\nSaussure is considered one of the fathers of structuralism when he explained that terms get their meaning in reciprocal determination with other terms inside language:\nIn language there are only differences. Even more important: a difference generally implies positive terms between which the difference is set up; but in language there are only differences without positive terms. Whether we take the signified or the signifier, language has neither ideas nor sounds that existed before the linguistic system, but only conceptual and phonic differences that have issued from the system. The idea or phonic substance that a sign contains is of less importance than the other signs that surround it. [...] A linguistic system is a series of differences of sound combined with a series of differences of ideas; but the pairing of a certain number of acoustical signs with as many cuts made from the mass thought engenders a system of values.\nSaussure explicitly suggested that linguistics was only a branch of a more general semiology, a science of signs in general, human codes being only one part. Nevertheless, in the end, as Derrida pointed out, Saussure made linguistics \"the regulatory model\", and \"for essential, and essentially metaphysical, reasons had to privilege speech, and everything that links the sign to phone\". Derrida will prefer to follow the more \"fruitful paths (formalization)\" of a general semiotics without falling into what he considered \"a hierarchizing teleology\" privileging linguistics, and to speak of \"mark\" rather than of language, not as something restricted to mankind, but as prelinguistic, as the pure possibility of language, working everywhere there is a relation to something else.\nDeconstruction according to Derrida.\nEtymology.\nDerrida's original use of the word \"deconstruction\" was a translation of \"Destruktion\", a concept from the work of Martin Heidegger that Derrida sought to apply to textual reading. Heidegger's term referred to a process of exploring the categories and concepts that tradition has imposed on a word, and the history behind them.\nBasic philosophical concerns.\nDerrida's concerns flow from a consideration of several issues:\nTo this end, Derrida follows a long line of modern philosophers, who look backwards to Plato and his influence on the Western metaphysical tradition. Like Nietzsche, Derrida suspects Plato of dissimulation in the service of a political project, namely the education, through critical reflections, of a class of citizens more strategically positioned to influence the polis. However, unlike Nietzsche, Derrida is not satisfied with such a merely political interpretation of Plato, because of the particular dilemma in which modern humans find themselves. His Platonic reflections are inseparably part of his critique of modernity, hence his attempt to be something beyond the modern, because of his Nietzschean sense that the modern has lost its way and become mired in nihilism.\n is the observation that the meanings of words come from their synchrony with other words within the language and their diachrony between contemporary and historical definitions of a word. Understanding language, according to Derrida, requires an understanding of both viewpoints of linguistic analysis. The focus on diachrony has led to accusations against Derrida of engaging in the etymological fallacy.\nThere is one statement by Derrida\u2014in an essay on Rousseau in \"Of Grammatology\"\u2014which has been of great interest to his opponents. It is the assertion that \"there is no outside-text\" (), which is often mistranslated as \"there is nothing outside of the text\". The mistranslation is often used to suggest Derrida believes that nothing exists but words. Michel Foucault, for instance, famously misattributed to Derrida the very different phrase for this purpose. According to Derrida, his statement simply refers to the unavoidability of context that is at the heart of .\nFor example, the word \"house\" derives its meaning more as a function of how it differs from \"shed\", \"mansion\", \"hotel\", \"building\", etc. (form of content, which Louis Hjelmslev distinguished from form of expression) than how the word \"house\" may be tied to a certain image of a traditional house (i.e., the relationship between signified and signifier), with each term being established in reciprocal determination with the other terms than by an ostensive description or definition: when can one talk about a \"house\" or a \"mansion\" or a \"shed\"? The same can be said about verbs in all languages: when should one stop saying \"walk\" and start saying \"run\"? The same happens, of course, with adjectives: when must one stop saying \"yellow\" and start saying \"orange\", or exchange \"past\" for \"present\"? Not only are the topological differences between the words relevant here, but the differentials between what is signified is also covered by .\nThus, complete meaning is always \"differential\" and \"postponed\" in language; there is never a moment when meaning is complete and total. A simple example would consist of looking up a given word in a dictionary, then proceeding to look up the words found in that word's definition, etc., also comparing with older dictionaries. Such a process would never end.\nMetaphysics of presence.\nDerrida describes the task of deconstruction as the identification of metaphysics of presence, or \"logocentrism\" in western philosophy. Metaphysics of presence is the desire for immediate access to meaning, the privileging of presence over absence. This means that there is an assumed bias in certain binary oppositions where one side is placed in a position over another, such as good over bad, speech over the written word, male over female. Derrida writes,\nTo Derrida, the central bias of logocentrism was the now being placed as more important than the future or past. This argument is largely based on the earlier work of Heidegger, who, in \"Being and Time\", claimed that the theoretical attitude of pure presence is parasitical upon a more originary involvement with the world in concepts such as ready-to-hand and being-with.\nDeconstruction and dialectics.\nIn the deconstruction procedure, one of the main concerns of Derrida is to not collapse into Hegel's dialectic, where these oppositions would be reduced to contradictions in a dialectic that has the purpose of resolving it into a synthesis. The presence of Hegelian dialectics was enormous in the intellectual life of France during the second half of the 20th century, with the influence of Koj\u00e8ve and Hyppolite, but also with the impact of dialectics based on contradiction developed by Marxists, and including the existentialism of Sartre, etc. This explains Derrida's concern to always distinguish his procedure from Hegel's, since Hegelianism believes binary oppositions would produce a synthesis, while Derrida saw binary oppositions as incapable of collapsing into a synthesis free from the original contradiction.\nDifficulty of definition.\nThere have been problems defining deconstruction. Derrida claimed that all of his essays were attempts to define what deconstruction is, and that deconstruction is necessarily complicated and difficult to explain since it actively criticises the very language needed to explain it.\nDerrida's \"negative\" descriptions.\nDerrida has been more forthcoming with negative (apophatic) than with positive descriptions of deconstruction. When asked by Toshihiko Izutsu some preliminary considerations on how to translate \"deconstruction\" in Japanese, in order to at least prevent using a Japanese term contrary to \"deconstruction\"'s actual meaning, Derrida began his response by saying that such a question amounts to \"what deconstruction is not, or rather \"ought\" not to be\".\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not an analysis, a critique, or a method in the traditional sense that philosophy understands these terms. In these negative descriptions of deconstruction, Derrida is seeking to \"multiply the cautionary indicators and put aside all the traditional philosophical concepts\". This does not mean that deconstruction has absolutely nothing in common with an analysis, a critique, or a method, because while Derrida distances deconstruction from these terms, he reaffirms \"the necessity of returning to them, at least under erasure\". Derrida's necessity of returning to a term under erasure means that even though these terms are problematic, they must be used until they can be effectively reformulated or replaced. The relevance of the tradition of negative theology to Derrida's preference for negative descriptions of deconstruction is the notion that a positive description of deconstruction would over-determine the idea of deconstruction and would close off the openness that Derrida wishes to preserve for deconstruction. If Derrida were to positively define deconstruction\u2014as, for example, a critique\u2014then this would make the concept of critique immune to itself being deconstructed. Some new philosophy beyond deconstruction would then be required in order to encompass the notion of critique.\nNot a method.\nDerrida states that \"Deconstruction is not a method, and cannot be transformed into one\". This is because deconstruction is not a mechanical operation. Derrida warns against considering deconstruction as a mechanical operation, when he states that \"It is true that in certain circles (university or cultural, especially in the United States) the technical and methodological \"metaphor\" that seems necessarily attached to the very word 'deconstruction' has been able to seduce or lead astray\". Commentator Richard Beardsworth explains that:\nDerrida is careful to avoid this term [method] because it carries connotations of a procedural form of judgement. A thinker with a method has already decided \"how\" to proceed, is unable to give him or herself up to the matter of thought in hand, is a functionary of the criteria which structure his or her conceptual gestures. For Derrida [...] this is irresponsibility itself. Thus, to talk of a method in relation to deconstruction, especially regarding its ethico-political implications, would appear to go directly against the current of Derrida's philosophical adventure.\nBeardsworth here explains that it would be irresponsible to undertake a deconstruction with a complete set of rules that need only be applied as a method to the object of deconstruction, because this understanding would reduce deconstruction to a thesis of the reader that the text is then made to fit. This would be an irresponsible act of reading, because it becomes a prejudicial procedure that only finds what it sets out to find.\nNot a critique.\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not a critique in the Kantian sense. This is because Kant defines the term \"critique\" as the opposite of dogmatism. For Derrida, it is not possible to escape the dogmatic baggage of the language used in order to perform a pure critique in the Kantian sense. Language is dogmatic because it is inescapably metaphysical. Derrida argues that language is inescapably metaphysical because it is made up of signifiers that only refer to that which transcends them\u2014the signified. In addition, Derrida asks rhetorically \"Is not the idea of knowledge and of the acquisition of knowledge in itself metaphysical?\" By this, Derrida means that all claims to know something necessarily involve an assertion of the metaphysical type that something \"is\" the case somewhere. For Derrida the concept of neutrality is suspect and dogmatism is therefore involved in everything to a certain degree. Deconstruction can challenge a particular dogmatism and hence de-sediment dogmatism in general, but it cannot escape all dogmatism all at once.\nNot an analysis.\nDerrida states that deconstruction is not an analysis in the traditional sense. This is because the possibility of analysis is predicated on the possibility of breaking up the text being analysed into elemental component parts. Derrida argues that there are no self-sufficient units of meaning in a text, because individual words or sentences in a text can only be properly understood in terms of how they fit into the larger structure of the text and language itself. For more on Derrida's theory of meaning see the article on .\nNot post-structuralist.\nDerrida states that his use of the word deconstruction first took place in a context in which \"structuralism was dominant\" and deconstruction's meaning is within this context. Derrida states that deconstruction is an \"antistructuralist gesture\" because \"[s]tructures were to be undone, decomposed, desedimented\". At the same time, deconstruction is also a \"structuralist gesture\" because it is concerned with the structure of texts. So, deconstruction involves \"a certain attention to structures\" and tries to \"understand how an 'ensemble' was constituted\". As both a structuralist and an antistructuralist gesture, deconstruction is tied up with what Derrida calls the \"structural problematic\". The structural problematic for Derrida is the tension between genesis, that which is \"in the essential mode of creation or movement\", and structure: \"systems, or complexes, or static configurations\". An example of genesis would be the sensory ideas from which knowledge is then derived in the empirical epistemology. An example of structure would be a binary opposition such as good and evil where the meaning of each element is established, at least partly, through its relationship to the other element.\nIt is for this reason that Derrida distances his use of the term deconstruction from post-structuralism, a term that would suggest that philosophy could simply go beyond structuralism. Derrida states that \"the motif of deconstruction has been associated with 'post-structuralism, but that this term was \"a word unknown in France until its 'return' from the United States\". In his deconstruction of Edmund Husserl, Derrida actually argues the contamination of pure origins by the structures of language and temporality. Manfred Frank has even referred to Derrida's work as \"neostructuralism\", identifying a \"distaste for the metaphysical concepts of domination and system\".\nAlternative definitions.\nThe popularity of the term deconstruction, combined with the technical difficulty of Derrida's primary material on deconstruction and his reluctance to elaborate his understanding of the term, has meant that many secondary sources have attempted to give a more straightforward explanation than Derrida himself ever attempted. Secondary definitions are therefore an interpretation of deconstruction by the person offering them rather than a summary of Derrida's actual position.\nPopular definitions.\nA survey of the secondary literature reveals a wide range of heterogeneous arguments. Particularly problematic are the attempts to give neat introductions to deconstruction by people trained in literary criticism who sometimes have little or no expertise in the relevant areas of philosophy in which Derrida is working. These secondary works (e.g. \"Deconstruction for Beginners\" and \"Deconstructions: A User's Guide\") have attempted to explain deconstruction while being academically criticized for being too far removed from the original texts and Derrida's actual position.\n\"Cambridge Dictionary\" states that \"deconstruction\" is \"the act of breaking something down into its separate parts in order to understand its meaning, especially when this is different from how it was previously understood\". The Merriam-Webster dictionary states that \"deconstruction\" is \"the analytic examination of something (such as a theory) often in order to reveal its inadequacy\".\nApplication.\nDerrida's observations have greatly influenced literary criticism and post-structuralism.\nLiterary criticism.\nDerrida's method consisted of demonstrating all the forms and varieties of the originary complexity of semiotics, and their multiple consequences in many fields. His way of achieving this was by conducting readings of philosophical and literary texts, with the goal to understand what in those texts runs counter to their apparent systematicity (structural unity) or intended sense (authorial genesis). By demonstrating the aporias and ellipses of thought, Derrida hoped to show the infinitely subtle ways that this originary complexity, which by definition cannot ever be completely known, works its structuring and destructuring effects.\nDeconstruction denotes the pursuing of the meaning of a text to the point of exposing the supposed contradictions and internal oppositions upon which it is founded\u2014supposedly showing that those foundations are irreducibly complex, unstable, or impossible. It is an approach that may be deployed in philosophy, in literary analysis, and even in the analysis of scientific writings. Deconstruction generally tries to demonstrate that any text is not a discrete whole but contains several irreconcilable and contradictory meanings; that any text therefore has more than one interpretation; that the text itself links these interpretations inextricably; that the incompatibility of these interpretations is irreducible; and thus that an interpretative reading cannot go beyond a certain point. Derrida refers to this point as an \"aporia\" in the text; thus, deconstructive reading is termed \"aporetic\". He insists that meaning is made possible by the relations of a word to other words within the network of structures that language is.\nDerrida initially resisted granting to his approach the overarching name \"deconstruction\", on the grounds that it was a precise technical term that could not be used to characterize his work generally. Nevertheless, he eventually accepted that the term had come into common use to refer to his textual approach, and Derrida himself increasingly began to use the term in this more general way.\nDerrida's deconstruction strategy is also used by postmodernists to locate meaning in a text rather than discover meaning due to the position that it has multiple readings. There is a focus on the deconstruction that denotes the tearing apart of a text to find arbitrary hierarchies and presuppositions for the purpose of tracing contradictions that shadow a text's coherence. Here, the meaning of a text does not reside with the author or the author's intentions because it is dependent on the interaction between reader and text. Even the process of translation is also seen as transformative since it \"modifies the original even as it modifies the translating language\".\nCritique of structuralism.\nDerrida's lecture at Johns Hopkins University, \"Structure, Sign, and Play in the Human Sciences\", often appears in collections as a manifesto against structuralism. Derrida's essay was one of the earliest to propose some theoretical limitations to structuralism, and to attempt to theorize on terms that were clearly no longer structuralist. Structuralism viewed language as a number of signs, composed of a signified (the meaning) and a signifier (the word itself). Derrida proposed that signs always referred to other signs, existing only in relation to each other, and there was therefore no ultimate foundation or centre. This is the basis of .\nDevelopment after Derrida.\nThe Yale School.\nBetween the late 1960s and the early 1980s, many thinkers were influenced by deconstruction, including Paul de Man, Geoffrey Hartman, and J. Hillis Miller. This group came to be known as the Yale school and was especially influential in literary criticism. Derrida and Hillis Miller were subsequently affiliated with the University of California, Irvine.\nMiller has described deconstruction this way: \"Deconstruction is not a dismantling of the structure of a text, but a demonstration that it has already dismantled itself. Its apparently solid ground is no rock, but thin air.\"\nCritical legal studies movement.\nArguing that law and politics cannot be separated, the founders of the Critical Legal Studies movement found it necessary to criticize the absence of the recognition of this inseparability at the level of theory. To demonstrate the indeterminacy of legal doctrine, these scholars often adopt a method, such as structuralism in linguistics, or deconstruction in Continental philosophy, to make explicit the deep structure of categories and tensions at work in legal texts and talk. The aim was to deconstruct the tensions and procedures by which they are constructed, expressed, and deployed.\nFor example, Duncan Kennedy, in explicit reference to semiotics and deconstruction procedures, maintains that various legal doctrines are constructed around the binary pairs of opposed concepts, each of which has a claim upon intuitive and formal forms of reasoning that must be made explicit in their meaning and relative value, and criticized. Self and other, private and public, subjective and objective, freedom and control are examples of such pairs demonstrating the influence of opposing concepts on the development of legal doctrines throughout history.\n\"Deconstructing History\".\nDeconstructive readings of history and sources have changed the entire discipline of history. In \"Deconstructing History\", Alun Munslow examines history in what he argues is a postmodern age. He provides an introduction to the debates and issues of postmodernist history. He also surveys the latest research into the relationship between the past, history, and historical practice, as well as articulating his own theoretical challenges.\n\"The Inoperative Community\".\nJean-Luc Nancy argues, in his 1982 book \"The Inoperative Community\", for an understanding of community and society that is undeconstructable because it is prior to conceptualisation. Nancy's work is an important development of deconstruction because it takes the challenge of deconstruction seriously and attempts to develop an understanding of political terms that is undeconstructable and therefore suitable for a philosophy after Derrida. Nancy's work produced a critique of deconstruction by making the possibility for a relation to the other. This relation to the other is called \u201canastasis\u201d in Nancy's work.\n\"The Ethics of Deconstruction\".\nSimon Critchley argues, in his 1992 book \"The Ethics of Deconstruction\", that Derrida's deconstruction is an intrinsically ethical practice. Critchley argues that deconstruction involves an openness to the Other that makes it ethical in the Levinasian understanding of the term.\n\"Derrida and the Political\".\nJacques Derrida has had a great influence on contemporary political theory and political philosophy. Derrida's thinking has inspired Slavoj Zizek, Richard Rorty, Ernesto Laclau, Judith Butler and many more contemporary theorists who have developed a deconstructive approach to politics. Because deconstruction examines the internal logic of any given text or discourse it has helped many authors to analyse the contradictions inherent in all schools of thought; and, as such, it has proved revolutionary in political analysis, particularly ideology critiques.\nRichard Beardsworth, developing from Critchley's \"Ethics of Deconstruction\", argues, in his 1996 \"Derrida and the Political\", that deconstruction is an intrinsically political practice. He further argues that the future of deconstruction faces a perhaps undecidable choice between a theological approach and a technological approach, represented first of all by the work of Bernard Stiegler.\nFaith.\nThe term \"deconstructing faith\" has been used to describe processes of critically examining one's religious beliefs with the possibility of rejecting them, taking individual responsibility for beliefs acquired from others, or reconstructing more nuanced or mature faith. This use of the term has been particularly prominent in American Evangelical Christianity in the 2020s. Author David Hayward said he \"co-opted the term\" \"deconstruction\" because he was reading the work of Derrida at the time his religious beliefs came into question. Others had earlier used the term \"faith deconstruction\" to describe similar processes, and theologian James W. Fowler articulated a similar concept as part of his faith stages theory.\nCuisine.\nLeading Spanish chef Ferran Adri\u00e0 coined \"deconstruction\" as a style of cuisine, which he described as drawing from the creative principles of Spanish modernists like Salvador Dal\u00ed and Antoni Gaud\u00ed to deconstruct conventional cooking techniques in the modern era. Deconstructed recipes typically preserve the core ingredients and techniques of an established dish, but prepare components of a dish separately while experimenting radically with its flavor, texture, ratios, and assembly to culminate in a stark, minimalist style of presentation with similarly minimal portion sizes.\nCriticisms.\nDerrida was involved in a number of high-profile disagreements with prominent philosophers, including Michel Foucault, John Searle, Willard Van Orman Quine, Peter Kreeft, and J\u00fcrgen Habermas. Most of the criticisms of deconstruction were first articulated by these philosophers and then repeated elsewhere.\nJohn Searle.\nIn the early 1970s, Searle had a brief exchange with Jacques Derrida regarding speech-act theory. The exchange was characterized by a degree of mutual hostility between the philosophers, each of whom accused the other of having misunderstood his basic points. Searle was particularly hostile to Derrida's deconstructionist framework and much later refused to let his response to Derrida be printed along with Derrida's papers in the 1988 collection \"Limited Inc\". Searle did not consider Derrida's approach to be legitimate philosophy, or even intelligible writing, and argued that he did not want to legitimize the deconstructionist point of view by paying any attention to it. Consequently, some critics have considered the exchange to be a series of elaborate misunderstandings rather than a debate, while others have seen either Derrida or Searle gaining the upper hand.\nThe debate began in 1972, when, in his paper \"Signature Event Context\", Derrida analyzed J. L. Austin's theory of the illocutionary act. While sympathetic to Austin's departure from a purely denotational account of language to one that includes \"force\", Derrida was sceptical of the framework of normativity employed by Austin. Derrida argued that Austin had missed the fact that any speech event is framed by a \"structure of absence\" (the words that are left unsaid due to contextual constraints) and by \"iterability\" (the constraints on what can be said, imposed by what has been said in the past). Derrida argued that the focus on intentionality in speech-act theory was misguided because intentionality is restricted to that which is already established as a possible intention. He also took issue with the way Austin had excluded the study of fiction, non-serious, or \"parasitic\" speech, wondering whether this exclusion was because Austin had considered these speech genres as governed by different structures of meaning, or had not considered them due to a lack of interest. In his brief reply to Derrida, \"Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida\", Searle argued that Derrida's critique was unwarranted because it assumed that Austin's theory attempted to give a full account of language and meaning when its aim was much narrower. Searle considered the omission of parasitic discourse forms to be justified by the narrow scope of Austin's inquiry. Searle agreed with Derrida's proposal that intentionality presupposes iterability, but did not apply the same concept of intentionality used by Derrida, being unable or unwilling to engage with the continental conceptual apparatus. This, in turn, caused Derrida to criticize Searle for not being sufficiently familiar with phenomenological perspectives on intentionality. Some critics have suggested that Searle, by being so grounded in the analytical tradition that he was unable to engage with Derrida's continental phenomenological tradition, was at fault for the unsuccessful nature of the exchange, however Searle also argued that Derrida's disagreement with Austin turned on Derrida's having misunderstood Austin's type\u2013token distinction and having failed to understand Austin's concept of failure in relation to performativity.\nDerrida, in his response to Searle ( in \"Limited Inc\"), ridiculed Searle's positions. Claiming that a clear sender of Searle's message could not be established, Derrida suggested that Searle had formed with Austin a (a \"limited liability company\") due to the ways in which the ambiguities of authorship within Searle's reply circumvented the very speech act of his reply. Searle did not reply. Later in 1988, Derrida tried to review his position and his critiques of Austin and Searle, reiterating that he found the constant appeal to \"normality\" in the analytical tradition to be problematic.\nJ\u00fcrgen Habermas.\nIn \"The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity\", J\u00fcrgen Habermas criticized what he considered Derrida's opposition to rational discourse. Further, in an essay on religion and religious language, Habermas criticized what he saw as Derrida's emphasis on etymology and philology (see \"Etymological fallacy\").\nWalter A. Davis.\nThe American philosopher Walter A. Davis, in \"Inwardness and Existence: Subjectivity in/and Hegel, Heidegger, Marx and Freud\", argues that both deconstruction and structuralism are prematurely arrested moments of a dialectical movement that issues from Hegelian \"unhappy consciousness\".\nIn popular media.\nPopular criticism of deconstruction intensified following the Sokal affair, which many people took as an indicator of the quality of deconstruction as a whole, despite the absence of Derrida from Sokal's follow-up book \"Impostures intellectuelles\".\nChip Morningstar holds a view critical of deconstruction, believing it to be \"epistemologically challenged\". He claims the humanities are subject to isolation and genetic drift due to their unaccountability to the world outside academia. During the Second International Conference on Cyberspace (Santa Cruz, California, 1991), he reportedly heckled deconstructionists off the stage. He subsequently presented his views in the article \"How to Deconstruct Almost Anything\", where he stated, \"Contrary to the report given in the 'Hype List' column of issue #1 of Wired ('Po-Mo Gets Tek-No', page 87), we did not shout down the postmodernists. We made fun of them.\""}
{"id": "8887", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8887", "title": "Direct product", "text": "In mathematics, one can often define a direct product of objects already known, giving a new one. This induces a structure on the Cartesian product of the underlying sets from that of the contributing objects. More abstractly, one talks about the product in category theory, which formalizes these notions.\nExamples are the product of sets, groups (described below), rings, and other algebraic structures. The product of topological spaces is another instance.\nThere is also the direct sum \u2013 in some areas this is used interchangeably, while in others it is a different concept.\nExamples.\nIn a similar manner, we can talk about the direct product of finitely many algebraic structures, for example, formula_17 This relies on the direct product being associative up to isomorphism. That is, formula_18 for any algebraic structures formula_19 formula_20 and formula_21 of the same kind. The direct product is also commutative up to isomorphism, that is, formula_22 for any algebraic structures formula_23 and formula_24 of the same kind. We can even talk about the direct product of infinitely many algebraic structures; for example we can take the direct product of countably many copies of formula_25 which we write as formula_26\nDirect product of groups.\nIn group theory one can define the direct product of two groups formula_27 and formula_28 denoted by formula_29 For abelian groups that are written additively, it may also be called the direct sum of two groups, denoted by formula_30\nIt is defined as follows:\nNote that formula_27 may be the same as formula_35\nThis construction gives a new group. It has a normal subgroup isomorphic to formula_36 (given by the elements of the form formula_37), and one isomorphic to formula_38 (comprising the elements formula_39).\nThe reverse also holds. There is the following recognition theorem: If a group formula_40 contains two normal subgroups formula_31 such that formula_42 and the intersection of formula_43 contains only the identity, then formula_40 is isomorphic to formula_29 A relaxation of these conditions, requiring only one subgroup to be normal, gives the semidirect product.\nAs an example, take as formula_43 two copies of the unique (up to isomorphisms) group of order 2, formula_47 say formula_48 Then formula_49 with the operation element by element. For instance, formula_50 andformula_51\nWith a direct product, we get some natural group homomorphisms for free: the projection maps defined by\nformula_52\nare called the coordinate functions.\nAlso, every homomorphism formula_53 to the direct product is totally determined by its component functions formula_54\nFor any group formula_27 and any integer formula_56 repeated application of the direct product gives the group of all formula_57-tuples formula_58 (for formula_59 this is the trivial group), for example formula_60 and formula_61\nDirect product of modules.\nThe direct product for modules (not to be confused with the tensor product) is very similar to the one defined for groups above, using the Cartesian product with the operation of addition being componentwise, and the scalar multiplication just distributing over all the components. Starting from formula_1 we get Euclidean space formula_63 the prototypical example of a real formula_57-dimensional vector space. The direct product of formula_65 and formula_66 is formula_67\nNote that a direct product for a finite index formula_68 is canonically isomorphic to the direct sum formula_69 The direct sum and direct product are not isomorphic for infinite indices, where the elements of a direct sum are zero for all but for a finite number of entries. They are dual in the sense of category theory: the direct sum is the coproduct, while the direct product is the product.\nFor example, consider formula_70 and formula_71 the infinite direct product and direct sum of the real numbers. Only sequences with a finite number of non-zero elements are in formula_72 For example, formula_73 is in formula_74 but formula_75 is not. Both of these sequences are in the direct product formula_76 in fact, formula_74 is a proper subset of formula_78 (that is, formula_79).\nTopological space direct product.\nThe direct product for a collection of topological spaces formula_80 for formula_81 in formula_82 some index set, once again makes use of the Cartesian product\nformula_83\nDefining the topology is a little tricky. For finitely many factors, this is the obvious and natural thing to do: simply take as a basis of open sets to be the collection of all Cartesian products of open subsets from each factor:\nformula_84\nThis topology is called the product topology. For example, directly defining the product topology on formula_85 by the open sets of formula_1 (disjoint unions of open intervals), the basis for this topology would consist of all disjoint unions of open rectangles in the plane (as it turns out, it coincides with the usual metric topology).\nThe product topology for infinite products has a twist, and this has to do with being able to make all the projection maps continuous and to make all functions into the product continuous if and only if all its component functions are continuous (that is, to satisfy the categorical definition of product: the morphisms here are continuous functions): we take as a basis of open sets to be the collection of all Cartesian products of open subsets from each factor, as before, with the proviso that all but finitely many of the open subsets are the entire factor:\nformula_87\nThe more natural-sounding topology would be, in this case, to take products of infinitely many open subsets as before, and this does yield a somewhat interesting topology, the box topology. However it is not too difficult to find an example of bunch of continuous component functions whose product function is not continuous (see the separate entry box topology for an example and more). The problem that makes the twist necessary is ultimately rooted in the fact that the intersection of open sets is only guaranteed to be open for finitely many sets in the definition of topology.\nProducts (with the product topology) are nice with respect to preserving properties of their factors; for example, the product of Hausdorff spaces is Hausdorff; the product of connected spaces is connected, and the product of compact spaces is compact. That last one, called Tychonoff's theorem, is yet another equivalence to the axiom of choice.\nFor more properties and equivalent formulations, see the separate entry product topology.\nDirect product of binary relations.\nOn the Cartesian product of two sets with binary relations formula_88 define formula_89 as formula_90 If formula_91 are both reflexive, irreflexive, transitive, symmetric, or antisymmetric, then formula_92 will be also. Similarly, totality of formula_92 is inherited from formula_94 Combining properties it follows that this also applies for being a preorder and being an equivalence relation. However, if formula_91 are connected relations, formula_92 need not be connected; for example, the direct product of formula_97 on formula_98 with itself does not relate formula_99\nDirect product in universal algebra.\nIf formula_100 is a fixed signature, formula_101 is an arbitrary (possibly infinite) index set, and formula_102 is an indexed family of formula_100 algebras, the direct product formula_104 is a formula_100 algebra defined as follows:\nFor each formula_117 the formula_81th projection formula_123 is defined by formula_124 It is a surjective homomorphism between the formula_100 algebras formula_126\nAs a special case, if the index set formula_127 the direct product of two formula_100 algebras formula_129 is obtained, written as formula_130 If formula_100 just contains one binary operation formula_132 the above definition of the direct product of groups is obtained, using the notation formula_133 formula_134 Similarly, the definition of the direct product of modules is subsumed here.\nCategorical product.\nThe direct product can be abstracted to an arbitrary category. In a category, given a collection of objects formula_135 indexed by a set formula_101, a product of these objects is an object formula_23 together with morphisms formula_138 for all formula_139, such that if formula_24 is any other object with morphisms formula_141 for all formula_139, there exists a unique morphism formula_143 whose composition with formula_144 equals formula_145 for every formula_81. \nSuch formula_23 and formula_148 do not always exist. If they do exist, then formula_149 is unique up to isomorphism, and formula_23 is denoted formula_151.\nIn the special case of the category of groups, a product always exists: the underlying set of formula_151 is the Cartesian product of the underlying sets of the formula_108, the group operation is componentwise multiplication, and the (homo)morphism formula_138 is the projection sending each tuple to its formula_81th coordinate.\nInternal and external direct product.\nSome authors draw a distinction between an internal direct product and an external direct product. For example, if formula_23 and formula_24 are subgroups of an additive abelian group formula_36, such that formula_159 and formula_160, then formula_161 and we say that formula_36 is the \"internal\" direct product of formula_23 and formula_24. To avoid ambiguity, we can refer to the set formula_165 as the \"external\" direct product of formula_23 and formula_24."}
{"id": "8888", "revid": "982329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8888", "title": "D\u00e9j\u00e0 vu", "text": "D\u00e9j\u00e0 vu ( , ; \"already seen\") is the phenomenon of feeling as though one has lived through the present situation before. It is an illusion of memory whereby\u2014despite a strong sense of recollection\u2014the time, place, and context of the \"previous\" experience are uncertain or impossible. Approximately two-thirds of surveyed populations report experiencing \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" at least one time in their lives. The phenomenon manifests occasionally as a symptom of seizure auras, and some researchers have associated chronic/frequent \"pathological\" \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" with neurological or psychiatric \n illness. Experiencing \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" has been correlated with higher socioeconomic status, better educational attainment, and lower ages. People who travel often, frequently watch films, or frequently remember their dreams are also more likely to report experiencing \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" than others.\nHistory.\nThe term was first used by \u00c9mile Boirac in 1876. Boirac was a French philosopher whose book \"L'avenir des sciences psychiques\" () included the sensation of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu. D\u00e9j\u00e0 vu has been presented by \u00c9mile as a reminiscence of memories, \"These experiments have led scientists to suspect that d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu is a memory phenomenon. We encounter a situation that is similar to an actual memory but we can\u2019t fully recall that memory.\" This evidence, found by \u00c9mile Boirac, helps the public understand what d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu can entail on the average brain. It was also stated, \"Our brain recognizes the similarities between our current experience and one in the past ... left with a feeling of familiarity that we can't quite place.\"\nThroughout history, there have been many theories on what causes d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu.\nMedical disorders.\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" is associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. This experience is a neurological anomaly related to epileptic electrical discharge in the brain, creating a strong sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past.\nMigraines with aura are also associated with \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\".\nEarly researchers tried to establish a link between \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" and mental disorders such as anxiety, dissociative identity disorder and schizophrenia but failed to find correlations of any diagnostic value. No special association has been found between \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" and schizophrenia. A 2008 study found that \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences are unlikely to be pathological dissociative experiences.\nSome research has looked into genetics when considering \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\". Although there is not currently a gene associated with \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\", the LGI1 gene on chromosome 10 is being studied for a possible link. Certain forms of the gene are associated with a mild form of epilepsy, and, though by no means a certainty, \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\", along with \"jamais vu\", occurs often enough during seizures (such as simple partial seizures) that researchers have reason to suspect a link.\nPharmacology.\nCertain combinations of medical drugs have been reported to increase the chances of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" occurring in the user. Taiminen and J\u00e4\u00e4skel\u00e4inen (2001) explored the case of an otherwise healthy person who started experiencing intense and recurrent sensations of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" upon taking the drugs amantadine and phenylpropanolamine together to relieve flu symptoms. Because of the dopaminergic action of the drugs and previous findings from electrode stimulation of the brain (e.g. Bancaud, Brunet-Bourgin, Chauvel, &amp; Halgren, 1994), Tamminen and J\u00e4\u00e4skel\u00e4inen speculated that \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" occurs as a result of hyperdopaminergic action in the medial temporal areas of the brain. A similar case study by Karla, Chancellor, and Zeman (2007) suggests a link between \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" and the serotonergic system, after an otherwise healthy woman began experiencing similar symptoms while taking a combination of 5-hydroxytryptophan and carbidopa.\nExplanations.\nSplit perception explanation.\nD\u00e9j\u00e0 vu may happen if a person experienced the current sensory experience twice successively. The first input experience is brief, degraded, occluded, or distracted. Immediately following that, the second perception might be familiar because the person naturally related it to the first input. One possibility behind this mechanism is that the first input experience involves shallow processing, which means that only some superficial physical attributes are extracted from the stimulus.\nMemory-based explanation.\nImplicit memory.\nResearch has associated \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences with good memory functions, particularly long-term implicit memory. Recognition memory enables people to realize the event or activity that they are experiencing has happened before. When people experience d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, they may have their recognition memory triggered by certain situations which they have never encountered.\nThe similarity between a d\u00e9j\u00e0-vu-eliciting stimulus and an existing, or non-existing but different, memory trace may lead to the sensation that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past. Thus, encountering something that evokes the implicit associations of an experience or sensation that cannot be remembered may lead to d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu. In an effort to reproduce the sensation experimentally, Banister and Zangwill (1941) used hypnosis to give participants posthypnotic amnesia for material they had already seen. When this was later re-encountered, the restricted activation caused thereafter by the posthypnotic amnesia resulted in three of the 10 participants reporting what the authors termed \"paramnesias\".\nTwo approaches are used by researchers to study feelings of previous experience, with the process of recollection and familiarity. Recollection-based recognition refers to an ostensible realization that the current situation has occurred before. Familiarity-based recognition refers to the feeling of familiarity with the current situation without being able to identify any specific memory or previous event that could be associated with the sensation.\nIn 2010, O'Connor, Moulin, and Conway developed another laboratory analog of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" based on two contrast groups of carefully selected participants, a group under posthypnotic amnesia condition (PHA) and a group under posthypnotic familiarity condition (PHF). The idea of PHA group was based on the work done by Banister and Zangwill (1941), and the PHF group was built on the research results of O'Connor, Moulin, and Conway (2007). They applied the same puzzle game for both groups, \"Railroad Rush Hour\", a game in which one aims to slide a red car through the exit by rearranging and shifting other blocking trucks and cars on the road. After completing the puzzle, each participant in the PHA group received a posthypnotic amnesia suggestion to forget the game in the hypnosis. Then, each participant in the PHF group was not given the puzzle but received a posthypnotic familiarity suggestion that they would feel familiar with this game during the hypnosis. After the hypnosis, all participants were asked to play the puzzle (the second time for PHA group) and reported the feelings of playing.\nIn the PHA condition, if a participant reported no memory of completing the puzzle game during hypnosis, researchers scored the participant as passing the suggestion. In the PHF condition, if participants reported that the puzzle game felt familiar, researchers scored the participant as passing the suggestion. It turned out that, both in the PHA and PHF conditions, five participants passed the suggestion and one did not, which is 83.33% of the total sample. More participants in PHF group felt a strong sense of familiarity, for instance, comments like \"I think I have done this several years ago.\" Furthermore, more participants in PHF group experienced a strong \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\", for example, \"I think I have done the exact puzzle before.\" Three out of six participants in the PHA group felt a sense of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, and none of them experienced a strong sense of it. These figures are consistent with Banister and Zangwill's findings. Some participants in PHA group related the familiarity when completing the puzzle with an exact event that happened before, which is more likely to be a phenomenon of source amnesia. Other participants started to realize that they may have completed the puzzle game during hypnosis, which is more akin to the phenomenon of breaching. In contrast, participants in the PHF group reported that they felt confused about the strong familiarity of this puzzle, with the feeling of playing it just sliding across their minds. Overall, the experiences of participants in the PHF group is more likely to be the \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" in life, while the experiences of participants in the PHA group is unlikely to be real d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu.\nA 2012 study in the journal \"Consciousness and Cognition\", that used virtual reality technology to study reported \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences, supported this idea. This virtual reality investigation suggested that similarity between a new scene's spatial layout and the layout of a previously experienced scene in memory (but which fails to be recalled) may contribute to the \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experience. When the previously experienced scene fails to come to mind in response to viewing the new scene, that previously experienced scene in memory can still exert an effect\u2014that effect may be a feeling of familiarity with the new scene that is subjectively experienced as a feeling that an event or experience currently being experienced has already been experienced in the past, or of having been there before despite knowing otherwise.\nIn 2018 a study examined volunteers' brains under experimentally induced d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu through the use of fMRI brain scans. The induced \"deja vu\" state was created by getting them to look at a series of logically related and unrelated words. The researchers would then ask the participants how many words starting with a specific letter they saw. With related words such as \"door, shutter, screen, breeze\", the participants would be asked if they saw any words that started with \"W\" (i.e. Window, a term that was not presented to the participants). If they did note that they thought they saw a word that wasn't presented to them, then d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu was induced. The researchers would then examine the volunteers' brains at the moment of induced d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu. From these scans, they noticed that there was visible activity in regions of the brain associated with mnemonic conflict. This finding suggests that more research regarding memory conflict may be important in better understanding d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu.\nCryptomnesia.\nAnother possible explanation for the phenomenon of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" is the occurrence of cryptomnesia, which is where information learned is forgotten but nevertheless stored in the brain, and similar occurrences invoke the contained knowledge, leading to a feeling of familiarity because the event or experience being experienced has already been experienced in the past, known as \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\". Some experts suggest that memory is a process of reconstruction, rather than a recollection of fixed, established events. This reconstruction comes from stored components, involving emotions, distortions, and omissions. Each successive recall of an event is merely a recall of the last reconstruction. The proposed sense of recognition (d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu) involves achieving a good match between the present experience and the stored data. This reconstruction, however, may now differ so much from the original event it is as though it had never been experienced before, even though it seems similar.\nDual neurological processing.\nIn 1965, Robert Efron of Boston's Veterans Hospital proposed that \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" is caused by dual neurological processing caused by delayed signals. Efron found that the brain's sorting of incoming signals is done in the temporal lobe of the brain's left hemisphere. However, signals enter the temporal lobe twice before processing, once from each hemisphere of the brain, normally with a slight delay of milliseconds between them. Efron proposed that if the two signals were occasionally not synchronized properly, then they would be processed as two separate experiences, with the second seeming to be a re-living of the first.\nDream-based explanation.\nDreams can also be used to explain the experience of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, and they are related in three different aspects. Firstly, some \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences duplicate the situation in dreams instead of waking conditions, according to the survey done by Brown (2004). Twenty percent of the respondents reported their \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences were from dreams and 40% of the respondents reported from both reality and dreams. Secondly, people may experience \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" because some elements in their remembered dreams were shown. Research done by Zuger (1966) supported this idea by investigating the relationship between remembered dreams and \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" experiences, and suggested that there is a strong correlation. Thirdly, people may experience \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" during a dream state, which links \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\" with dream frequency. Some researchers, including Swiss scientist Arthur Funkhouser, firmly believe that precognitive dreams are the source of many d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu experiences. Researchers also connected evidence of precognitive dreams experiences to d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu experiences that occurred anywhere from one day to eight years later.\nCollective unconscious.\nCollective Unconscious is a controversial theory created by Carl Jung that has been used to explain the phenomenon of \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu\". His theory was that all people have a shared pool of knowledge that has been passed down through generations and we can unconsciously access this knowledge. Some of said knowledge would be about certain archetypes like mother, father and hero or possibly about basic situations, emotions or other patterns. If we can access shared knowledge d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu could potentially be an effect of recognizing one of the collectively stored patterns.\nRelated terms.\n\"Jamais vu\".\n\"Jamais vu\" (from French, meaning \"never seen\") is any familiar situation which is not recognized by the observer.\nOften described as the opposite of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, \"jamais vu\" involves a sense of eeriness and the observer's impression of seeing the situation for the first time, despite rationally knowing that they have been in the situation before. \"Jamais vu\" is most commonly experienced when a person momentarily does not recognize a word, person or place that they already know. \"Jamais vu\" is sometimes associated with certain types of aphasia, amnesia, and epilepsy.\nTheoretically, a \"jamais vu\" feeling in someone with a delirious disorder or intoxication could result in a delirious explanation of it, such as in the Capgras delusion, in which the patient takes a known person for a false double or impostor. If the impostor is himself, the clinical setting would be the same as the one described as depersonalization, hence \"jamais vus\" of oneself or of the \"reality of reality\", are termed depersonalization (or surreality) feelings.\nThe feeling has been evoked through semantic satiation. Chris Moulin of the University of Leeds asked 95 volunteers to write the word \"door\" 30 times in 60 seconds. Sixty-eight percent of the subjects reported symptoms of \"jamais vu\", with some beginning to doubt that \"door\" was a real word.\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 v\u00e9cu\".\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 v\u00e9cu\" (from French, meaning \"already lived\") is an intense, but false, feeling of having already lived through the present situation. Recently, it has been considered a pathological form of d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu. However, unlike d\u00e9j\u00e0 vu, \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 v\u00e9cu\" has behavioral consequences. Patients with d\u00e9j\u00e0 v\u00e9cu often cannot tell that this feeling of familiarity is not real. Because of the intense feeling of familiarity, patients experiencing \"d\u00e9j\u00e0 v\u00e9cu\" may withdraw from their current events or activities. Patients may justify their feelings of familiarity with beliefs bordering on delusion.\n\"Presque vu\".\n\"Presque vu\" (, from French, meaning \"almost seen\") is the intense feeling of being on the very brink of a powerful epiphany, insight, or revelation, without actually achieving the revelation. The feeling is often therefore associated with a frustrating, tantalizing sense of incompleteness or near-completeness.\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 r\u00eav\u00e9\".\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 r\u00eav\u00e9\" (from French, meaning \"already dreamed\") is the feeling of having already dreamed something that is currently being experienced.\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 entendu\".\n\"D\u00e9j\u00e0 entendu\" (literally \"already heard\") is the experience of feeling sure about having already heard something, even though the exact details are uncertain or were perhaps imagined."}
{"id": "8892", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8892", "title": "Dionysius Thrax", "text": "Dionysius Thrax ( \"Dion\u00fdsios ho Thr\u00e2ix\", 170\u201390 BC) was a Greek grammarian and a pupil of Aristarchus of Samothrace. He was long considered to be the author of the earliest grammatical text on the Greek language, one that was used as a standard manual for perhaps some 1,500 years, and which was until recently regarded as the groundwork of the entire Western grammatical tradition.\nLife.\nHis place of origin was not Thrace, as the epithet \"Thrax\" denotes, but probably Alexandria. His Thracian background was inferred from the name of his father T\u0113r\u0113s (\u03a4\u03ae\u03c1\u03b7\u03c2), which is considered to be a Thracian name. One of his co-students during his studies in Alexandria under Aristarchus was Apollodorus of Athens, who also became a distinguished grammarian. Rudolf Pfeiffer dates his shift to the isle of Rhodes to , when political upheavals associated with the policies of Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II are thought to have led to his exile. According to a report in Athenaeus' Deipnosophistae (11,489a, b), his Rhodian pupils, grateful for his learning, gathered enough silver to enable him to fashion a cup whose shape aspired to recreate that of Nestor mentioned in the Iliad (Book 11, lines 632\u2013637).\nDionysius was primarily a Homeric scholar, which was integral to his training under Aristarchus in Alexandria. His work shows some influence of earlier Stoic grammatical theory, particularly on word classes. He is also reported by Varro to have been an erudite analyst of Greek lyric poetry, perhaps referring to his linguistic and prosodic use of that material. He wrote prolifically in three genres: philological questions (\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03bc\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac); running commentaries (\u1f51\u03c0\u03bf\u03bc\u03bd\u03ae\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1) and treatises (\u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b3\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac). Of the last genre, he wrote a polemical monograph criticizing the Homeric interpretations of Krates. Another work he is said to have written was the \u03a0\u03b5\u03c1\u1f76 \u03c0\u03bf\u03c3\u03bf\u03c4\u03ae\u03c4\u03c9\u03bd (On quantities). From the scholia preserved from the critical works of Aristonicus and Didymus who excerpted Dionysius' work it is clear that he was decidedly independent in his textual judgements on the Homeric corpus, since he frequently contradicts his master's known readings. His teaching may have exercised a formative impact on the rise of Roman grammatical studies if as an entry in the Suda suggests, the elder Tyrannion was one of his pupils. The founder of classical scholarship in Rome, L. Aelius Stilo, may have profited from Dionysius' instruction, since he accompanied to Rhodes Q. Metellus Numidicus when the latter went into voluntary exile, and while Dionysius was still teaching there.\nT\u00e9khn\u0113 grammatik\u0113.\nDionysius Thrax was credited traditionally as the author of the first extant grammar of Greek, \"Art of Grammar\" (, \"T\u00e9khn\u0113 grammatik\u0113\"). The Greek text, in August Immanuel Bekker's edition, runs to fifty pages. Its importance in Byzantine scholarship is attested by the fact that commentaries on it by Byzantine scholiasts run to some 600 pages. The text itself was thought to be the unique extant example of a work by Hellenistic scholars. This general consensus began to break down when examinations of grammatical texts datable to a later period emerged among the finds of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri which, until relatively late, showed no awareness of key elements in the text attributed to Dionysius Thrax. It concerns itself primarily with a morphological description of Greek, lacking any treatment of syntax. The work was translated into Armenian sometime around the 5th to 6th centuries AD, and into Syriac by Joseph Huzaya around that same period.\nDionysius defines grammar at the beginning of the \"T\u00e9khn\u0113\" as \"the empirical knowledge of what is for the most part being said by poets and prose writers\". He states that \"grammatik\u0113\", what we might nowadays call \"literary criticism\", comprises six parts:\n\"Grammatik\u1e17\"\nParagraph 6 outlines the \u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9\u03c7\u03b5\u1fd6\u03b1 (\"stoikheia\") or letters of the alphabet, together with the divisions into vowels, diphthongs and consonants.\nParagraphs 7\u201310 deal with syllables, long (\u03bc\u03b1\u03ba\u03c1\u03b1\u1f76 \u03c3\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03b1\u03b2\u03b1\u03af), short (\u03b2\u03c1\u03b1\u03c7\u03b5\u1fd6\u03b1\u03b9 \u03c3\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03b1\u03b2\u03b1\u03af) and \"anceps\" (\u03ba\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03b1\u1f76 \u03c3\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03b1\u03b2\u03b1\u03af).\nParagraph 11 treats the eight-word classes, though strong doubts exist as to whether or not this division goes back to Dionysius Thrax, since ancient testimonies assert that he conflated proper nouns and appellatives, and classified the article together with pronouns. In the text attributed to Dionysius, the eight classes, which Di Benedetto and others argue was probably developed by Tryphon several decades after Dionysius, are as follows:\nParagraphs 12-20 then elaborate successively on the parts of speech.\nAuthorship.\nModern scepticism over the attribution is associated with the pioneering work of Vincenzo Di Benedetto in particular, though as early as 1822 Karl Wilhelm G\u00f6ttling, by analyzing the scholia on the text that had recently been collected and published by A. I. Bekker, concluded that the text as we have it was to be dated, not to the Hellenistic period but rather to the Byzantine period. G\u00f6ttling's thesis convinced neither nor Gustav Uhlig, and disappeared from view. In 1958/1959, Di Benedetto revived doubts by comparing the received text with ancient grammatical papyri that had since come to light. He argued that before the 3rd to 4th centuries AD, no papyri on Greek grammar reveal material structured in a way similar to the exposition we have in Dionysius's treatise, that the surviving witnesses for the period before that late date, namely authors such as Sextus Empiricus, Aelius Herodianus, Apollonius Dyscolus and Quintilian, fail to cite him, and that Dionysius's work only begins to receive explicit mention in the works written from the 5th century onwards by such scholars as Timotheus of Gaza, Ammonius Hermiae and Priscian. Di Benedetto concluded that only the first five paragraphs of the treatise came from Dionysius' hand.\nThough initially rebuffed by scholars of the calibre of Pfeiffer and Hartmut Erbse, Di Benedetto's argument has found general acceptance today among specialists."}
{"id": "8893", "revid": "34378758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8893", "title": "December 29", "text": ""}
{"id": "8894", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8894", "title": "DNA chip", "text": ""}
{"id": "8895", "revid": "13936648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8895", "title": "Despina", "text": "Despina may refer to:"}
{"id": "8898", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8898", "title": "Darwinian", "text": ""}
{"id": "8899", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8899", "title": "DXF", "text": ""}
{"id": "8900", "revid": "1174762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8900", "title": "Discrimination", "text": "Discrimination is the process of making unfair or prejudicial distinctions between people based on the groups, classes, or other categories to which they belong or are perceived to belong, such as race, gender, age, species, religion, physical attractiveness or sexual orientation. Discrimination typically leads to groups being unfairly treated on the basis of perceived statuses based on ethnic, racial, gender or religious categories. It involves depriving members of one group of opportunities or privileges that are available to members of another group.\nDiscriminatory traditions, policies, ideas, practices and laws exist in many countries and institutions in all parts of the world, including some, where such discrimination is generally decried. In some places, countervailing measures such as quotas have been used to redress the balance in favor of those who are believed to be current or past victims of discrimination. These attempts have often been met with controversy, and sometimes been called reverse discrimination.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"discriminate\" appeared in the early 17th century in the English language. It is from the Latin \"discriminat-\" 'distinguished between', from the verb \"discriminare\", from \"discrimen\" 'distinction', from the verb \"discernere\" (corresponding to \"to discern\"). Since the American Civil War the term \"discrimination\" generally evolved in American English usage as an understanding of prejudicial treatment of an individual based solely on their race, later generalized as membership in a certain socially undesirable group or social category. \nBefore this sense of the word became almost universal, it was a synonym for discernment, tact and culture as in \"taste and discrimination\", generally a laudable attribute; to \"discriminate against\" being commonly disparaged.\nDefinitions.\nMoral philosophers have defined discrimination using a moralized definition. Under this approach, discrimination is defined as acts, practices, or policies that wrongfully impose a relative disadvantage or deprivation on persons based on their membership in a salient social group. This is a comparative definition. An individual need not be actually harmed in order to be discriminated against. He or she just needs to be treated \"worse\" than others for some arbitrary reason. If someone decides to donate to help orphan children, but decides to donate less, say, to children of a particular race out of a racist attitude, he or she will be acting in a discriminatory way even if he or she actually benefits the people he discriminates against by donating some money to them. Discrimination also develops into a source of oppression, the action of recognizing someone as 'different' so much that they are treated inhumanly and degraded.\nThis moralized definition of discrimination is distinct from a non-moralized definition - in the former, discrimination is wrong by definition, whereas in the latter, this is not the case.\nThe United Nations stance on discrimination includes the statement: \"Discriminatory behaviors take many forms, but they all involve some form of exclusion or rejection.\" The United Nations Human Rights Council and other international bodies work towards helping ending discrimination around the world.\nTypes.\nAge.\nAgeism or age discrimination is discrimination and stereotyping based on the grounds of someone's age. It is a set of beliefs, norms, and values which used to justify discrimination or subordination based on a person's age. Ageism is most often directed toward elderly people, or adolescents and children.\nAge discrimination in hiring has been shown to exist in the United States. Joanna Lahey, professor at The Bush School of Government and Public Service at Texas A&amp;M, found that firms are more than 40% more likely to interview a young adult job applicant than an older job applicant. In Europe, Stijn Baert, Jennifer Norga, Yannick Thuy and Marieke Van Hecke, researchers at Ghent University, measured comparable ratios in Belgium. They found that age discrimination is heterogeneous by the activity older candidates undertook during their additional post-educational years. In Belgium, they are only discriminated if they have more years of inactivity or irrelevant employment.\nIn a survey for the University of Kent, England, 29% of respondents stated that they had suffered from age discrimination. This is a higher proportion than for gender or racial discrimination. Dominic Abrams, social psychology professor at the university, concluded that ageism is the most pervasive form of prejudice experienced in the UK population.\nCaste.\nAccording to UNICEF and Human Rights Watch, caste discrimination affects an estimated 250 million people worldwide and is mainly prevalent in parts of Asia (India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Japan) and Africa. , there were 200 million Dalits or Scheduled Castes (formerly known as \"untouchables\") in India.\nDisability.\nDiscrimination against people with disabilities in favor of people who are not is called ableism or disablism. Disability discrimination, which treats non-disabled individuals as the standard of 'normal living', results in public and private places and services, educational settings, and social services that are built to serve 'standard' people, thereby excluding those with various disabilities. Studies have shown that disabled people not only need employment in order to be provided with the opportunity to earn a living but they also need employment in order to sustain their mental health and well-being. Work fulfils a number of basic needs for an individual such as collective purpose, social contact, status, and activity. A person with a disability is often found to be socially isolated and work is one way to reduce his or her isolation. In the United States, the Americans with Disabilities Act mandates the provision of equality of access to both buildings and services and is paralleled by similar acts in other countries, such as the Equality Act 2010 in the UK.\nName.\nDiscrimination based on a person's name may also occur, with researchers suggesting that this form of discrimination is present based on a name's meaning, its pronunciation, its uniqueness, its gender affiliation, and its racial affiliation. Research has further shown that real world recruiters spend an average of just six seconds reviewing each r\u00e9sum\u00e9 before making their initial \"fit/no fit\" screen-out decision and that a person's name is one of the six things they focus on most. France has made it illegal to view a person's name on a r\u00e9sum\u00e9 when screening for the initial list of most qualified candidates. Great Britain, Germany, Sweden, and the Netherlands have also experimented with name-blind summary processes. Some apparent discrimination may be explained by other factors such as name frequency. The effects of name discrimination based on a name's fluency is subtle, small and subject to significantly changing norms.\nNationality.\nThe Anti-discrimination laws of most countries allow and make exceptions for discrimination based on nationality and immigration status. The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) does not prohibit discrimination by nationality, citizenship or naturalization but forbids discrimination \"against any particular nationality\".\nDiscrimination on the basis of nationality is usually included in employment laws (see above section for employment discrimination specifically). It is sometimes referred to as bound together with racial discrimination although it can be separate. It may vary from laws that stop refusals of hiring based on nationality, asking questions regarding origin, to prohibitions of firing, forced retirement, compensation and pay, etc., based on nationality.\nDiscrimination on the basis of nationality may show as a \"level of acceptance\" in a sport or work team regarding new team members and employees who differ from the nationality of the majority of team members.\nIn the GCC states, in the workplace, preferential treatment is given to full citizens, even though many of them lack experience or motivation to do the job. State benefits are also generally available for citizens only. Westerners might also get paid more than other expatriates.\nRace or ethnicity.\nRacial and ethnic discrimination differentiates individuals on the basis of real and perceived racial and ethnic differences and leads to various forms of the ethnic penalty. It can also refer to the belief that groups of humans possess different behavioral traits corresponding to physical appearance and can be divided based on the superiority of one race over another. It may also mean prejudice, discrimination, or antagonism directed against other people because they are of a different race or ethnicity. Modern variants of racism are often based in social perceptions of biological differences between peoples. These views can take the form of social actions, practices or beliefs, or political systems in which different races are ranked as inherently superior or inferior to each other, based on presumed shared inheritable traits, abilities, or qualities. It has been official government policy in several countries, such as South Africa during the apartheid era. Discriminatory policies towards ethnic minorities include the race-based discrimination against ethnic Indians and Chinese in Malaysia After the Vietnam War, many Vietnamese refugees moved to Australia and the United States, where they faced discrimination.\nRegion.\nRegional or geographic discrimination is a form of discrimination that is based on the region in which a person lives or the region in which a person was born. It differs from national discrimination because it may not be based on national borders or the country in which the victim lives, instead, it is based on prejudices against a specific region of one or more countries. Examples include discrimination against Chinese people who were born in regions of the countryside that are far away from cities that are located within China, and discrimination against Americans who are from the southern or northern regions of the United States. It is often accompanied by discrimination that is based on accent, dialect, or cultural differences.\nReligious beliefs.\nReligious discrimination is valuing or treating people or groups differently because of what they do or do not believe in or because of their feelings towards a given religion. For instance, the Jewish population of Germany, and indeed a large portion of Europe, was subjected to discrimination under Adolf Hitler and his Nazi party between 1933 and 1945. They were forced to live in ghettos, wear an identifying star of David on their clothes, and sent to concentration and death camps in rural Germany and Poland, where they were to be tortured and killed, all because of their Jewish religion. Many laws (most prominently the Nuremberg Laws of 1935) separated those of Jewish faith as supposedly inferior to the Christian population.\nRestrictions on the types of occupations that Jewish people could hold were imposed by Christian authorities. Local rulers and church officials closed many professions to religious Jews, pushing them into marginal roles that were considered socially inferior, such as tax and rent collecting and moneylending, occupations that were only tolerated as a \"necessary evil\". The number of Jews who were permitted to reside in different places was limited; they were concentrated in ghettos and banned from owning land. In Saudi Arabia, non-Muslims are not allowed to publicly practice their religions and they cannot enter Mecca and Medina. Furthermore, private non-Muslim religious gatherings might be raided by the religious police. In Maldives, non-Muslims living and visiting the country are prohibited from openly expressing their religious beliefs, holding public congregations to conduct religious activities, or involving Maldivians in such activities. Those expressing religious beliefs other than Islam may face imprisonment of up to five years or house arrest, fines ranging from 5,000 to 20,000 rufiyaa ($320 to $1,300), and deportation.\nIn a 1979 consultation on the issue, the United States commission on civil rights defined religious discrimination in relation to the civil rights which are guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. Whereas religious civil liberties, such as the right to hold or not to hold a religious belief, are essential for Freedom of Religion (in the United States as secured by the First Amendment), religious discrimination occurs when someone is denied \"equal protection under the law, equality of status under the law, equal treatment in the administration of justice, and equality of opportunity and access to employment, education, housing, public services and facilities, and public accommodation because of their exercise of their right to religious freedom\".\nSex, sex characteristics, gender, and gender identity.\nSexism is a form of discrimination based on a person's sex or gender. It has been linked to stereotypes and gender roles, and may include the belief that one sex or gender is intrinsically superior to another. Extreme sexism may foster sexual harassment, rape, and other forms of sexual violence. Gender discrimination may encompass sexism and is discrimination toward people based on their gender identity or their gender or sex differences. Gender discrimination is especially defined in terms of workplace inequality. It may arise from social or cultural customs and norms.\nIntersex persons experience discrimination due to innate, atypical sex characteristics. Multiple jurisdictions now protect individuals on grounds of \"intersex status\" or \"sex characteristics\". South Africa was the first country to explicitly add intersex to legislation, as part of the attribute of 'sex'. Australia was the first country to add an independent attribute, of 'intersex status'. Malta was the first to adopt a broader framework of 'sex characteristics', through legislation that also ended modifications to the sex characteristics of minors undertaken for social and cultural reasons. Global efforts such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 is also aimed at ending all forms of discrimination on the basis of gender and sex.\nSexual orientation.\nOne's sexual orientation is a \"predilection for homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality\". Like most minority groups, homosexuals and bisexuals are vulnerable to prejudice and discrimination from the majority group. They may experience hatred from others because of their sexuality; a term for such hatred based upon one's sexual orientation is often called homophobia. Many continue to hold negative feelings towards those with non-heterosexual orientations and will discriminate against people who have them or are thought to have them. People of other uncommon sexual orientations also experience discrimination. One study found its sample of heterosexuals to be more prejudiced against asexual people than against homosexual or bisexual people.\nEmployment discrimination based on sexual orientation varies by country. Revealing a lesbian sexual orientation (by means of mentioning an engagement in a rainbow organisation or by mentioning one's partner name) lowers employment opportunities in Cyprus and Greece but overall, it has no negative effect in Sweden and Belgium. In the latter country, even a positive effect of revealing a lesbian sexual orientation is found for women at their fertile ages.\nBesides these academic studies, in 2009, ILGA published a report based on research carried out by Daniel Ottosson at S\u00f6dert\u00f6rn University College in Stockholm, Sweden. This research found that of the 80 countries around the world that continue to consider homosexuality illegal, five carry the death penalty for homosexual activity, and two do in some regions of the country. In the report, this is described as \"State sponsored homophobia\". This happens in Islamic states, or in two cases regions under Islamic authority. On February 5, 2005, the IRIN issued a reported titled \"Iraq: Male homosexuality still a taboo\". The article stated, among other things that honor killings by Iraqis against a gay family member are common and given some legal protection. In August 2009, Human Rights Watch published an extensive report detailing torture of men accused of being gay in Iraq, including the blocking of men's anuses with glue and then giving the men laxatives. Although gay marriage has been legal in South Africa since 2006, same-sex unions are often condemned as \"un-African\". Research conducted in 2009 shows 86% of black lesbians from the Western Cape live in fear of sexual assault.\nA number of countries, especially those in the Western world, have passed measures to alleviate discrimination against sexual minorities, including laws against anti-gay hate crimes and workplace discrimination. Some have also legalized same-sex marriage or civil unions in order to grant same-sex couples the same protections and benefits as opposite-sex couples. In 2011, the United Nations passed its first resolution recognizing LGBT rights.\nReverse discrimination.\nReverse discrimination is discrimination against members of a dominant or majority group, in favor of members of a minority or historically disadvantaged group.\nThis discrimination may seek to redress social inequalities under which minority groups have had less access to privileges enjoyed by the majority group. In such cases it is intended to remove discrimination that minority groups may already face. Reverse discrimination can be defined as the unequal treatment of members of the majority groups resulting from preferential policies, as in college admissions or employment, intended to remedy earlier discrimination against minorities.\nConceptualizing affirmative action as reverse discrimination became popular in the early- to mid-1970s, a time period that focused on under-representation and action policies intended to remedy the effects of past discrimination in both government and the business world.\nAnti-discrimination legislation.\nIndia.\nArticle 15 of the Constitution of India prohibits discrimination against any citizen on grounds of caste, religion, sex, race or place of birth etc. Similarly, the Constitution of India guarantees several rights to all citizens irrespective of gender, such as right to equality under Article 14, right to life and personal liberty under Article 21. \nIndian Penal Code, 1860 (Section 153 A) - Criminalises the use of language that promotes discrimination or violence against people on the basis of race, caste, sex, place of birth, religion, gender identity, sexual orientation or any other category.\nUnited Nations documents.\nImportant UN documents addressing discrimination include:\nTheories and philosophy.\nSocial theories such as egalitarianism assert that social equality should prevail. In some societies, including most developed countries, each individual's civil rights include the right to be free from government sponsored social discrimination. Due to a belief in the capacity to perceive pain or suffering shared by all animals, abolitionist or vegan egalitarianism maintains that the interests of every individual (regardless of their species), warrant equal consideration with the interests of humans, and that not doing so is speciesist.\nPhilosophers have debated as to how inclusive the definition of discrimination should be. Some philosophers have argued that discrimination should only refer to wrongful or disadvantageous treatment in the context of a socially salient group (such as race, gender, sexuality etc.) within a given context. Under this view, failure to limit the concept of discrimination would lead to it being overinclusive; for example, since most murders occur because of some perceived difference between the perpetrator and the victim, many murders would constitute discrimination if the social salience requirement is not included. Thus this view argues that making the definition of discrimination overinclusive renders it meaningless. Conversely, other philosophers argue that discrimination should simply refer to wrongful disadvantageous treatment regardless of the social salience of the group, arguing that limiting the concept only to socially salient groups is arbitrary, as well as raising issues of determining which groups would count as socially salient. The issue of which groups should count has caused many political and social debates.\nBased on realistic-conflict theory and social-identity theory, Rubin and Hewstone have highlighted a distinction among three types of discrimination:\nLabeling theory.\nDiscrimination, in labeling theory, takes form as mental categorization of minorities and the use of stereotype. This theory describes difference as deviance from the norm, which results in internal devaluation and social stigma that may be seen as discrimination. It is started by describing a \"natural\" social order. It is distinguished between the fundamental principle of fascism and social democracy. The Nazis in 1930s-era Germany and the pre-1990 Apartheid government of South Africa used racially discriminatory agendas for their political ends. This practice continues with some present day governments.\nGame theory.\nEconomist Yanis Varoufakis (2013) argues that \"discrimination based on utterly arbitrary characteristics evolves quickly and systematically in the experimental laboratory\", and that neither classical game theory nor neoclassical economics can explain this.\nIn 2002, Varoufakis and Shaun Hargreaves-Heap ran an experiment where volunteers played a computer-mediated, multiround hawk-dove game. At the start of each session, each participant was assigned a color at random, either red or blue. At each round, each player learned the color assigned to his or her opponent, but nothing else about the opponent. Hargreaves-Heap and Varoufakis found that the players' behavior within a session frequently developed a discriminatory convention, giving a Nash equilibrium where players of one color (the \"advantaged\" color) consistently played the aggressive \"hawk\" strategy against players of the other, \"disadvantaged\" color, who played the acquiescent \"dove\" strategy against the advantaged color. Players of both colors used a mixed strategy when playing against players assigned the same color as their own. The experimenters then added a cooperation option to the game, and found that disadvantaged players usually cooperated with each other, while advantaged players usually did not. They state that while the equilibria reached in the original hawk-dove game are predicted by evolutionary game theory, game theory does not explain the emergence of cooperation in the disadvantaged group. Citing earlier psychological work of Matthew Rabin, they hypothesize that a norm of differing entitlements emerges across the two groups, and that this norm could define a \"fairness\" equilibrium within the disadvantaged group."}
{"id": "8903", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8903", "title": "Direct Connect", "text": ""}
{"id": "8904", "revid": "1233074336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8904", "title": "Double-ended queue", "text": "In computer science, a double-ended queue (abbreviated to deque, ) is an abstract data type that generalizes a queue, for which elements can be added to or removed from either the front (head) or back (tail). It is also often called a head-tail linked list, though properly this refers to a specific data structure \"implementation\" of a deque (see below).\nNaming conventions.\n\"Deque\" is sometimes written \"dequeue\", but this use is generally deprecated in technical literature or technical writing because \"dequeue\" is also a verb meaning \"to remove from a queue\". Nevertheless, several libraries and some writers, such as Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman in their textbook \"Data Structures and Algorithms\", spell it \"dequeue\". John Mitchell, author of \"Concepts in Programming Languages,\" also uses this terminology.\nDistinctions and sub-types.\nThis differs from the queue abstract data type or \"first in first out\" list (FIFO), where elements can only be added to one end and removed from the other. This general data class has some possible sub-types:\nBoth the basic and most common list types in computing, queues and stacks can be considered specializations of deques, and can be implemented using deques. A deque is a data structure that allows users to perform push and pop operations at both ends, providing flexibility in managing the order of elements.\nOperations.\nThe basic operations on a deque are \"enqueue\" and \"dequeue\" on either end. Also generally implemented are \"peek\" operations, which return the value at that end without dequeuing it.\nNames vary between languages; major implementations include:\nImplementations.\nThere are at least two common ways to efficiently implement a deque: with a modified dynamic array or with a doubly linked list.\nThe dynamic array approach uses a variant of a dynamic array that can grow from both ends, sometimes called array deques. These array deques have all the properties of a dynamic array, such as constant-time random access, good locality of reference, and inefficient insertion/removal in the middle, with the addition of amortized constant-time insertion/removal at both ends, instead of just one end. Three common implementations include:\nPurely functional implementation.\nDouble-ended queues can also be implemented as a purely functional data structure. Two versions of the implementation exist. The first one, called \"'real-time deque\", is presented below. It allows the queue to be persistent with operations in worst-case time, but requires lazy lists with memoization. The second one, with no lazy lists nor memoization is presented at the end of the sections. Its amortized time is if the persistency is not used; but the worst-time complexity of an operation is where is the number of elements in the double-ended queue.\nLet us recall that, for a list codice_1, codice_2 denotes its length, that codice_3 represents an empty list and codice_4 represents the list whose head is codice_5 and whose tail is codice_6. The functions codice_7 and codice_8 return the list codice_1 without its first codice_10 elements, and the first codice_10 elements of codice_1, respectively. Or, if codice_13, they return the empty list and codice_1 respectively.\nReal-time deques via lazy rebuilding and scheduling.\nA double-ended queue is represented as a sextuple codice_15 where codice_16 is a linked list which contains the front of the queue of length codice_17. Similarly, codice_18 is a linked list which represents the reverse of the rear of the queue, of length codice_19. Furthermore, it is assured that codice_20 and codice_21 - intuitively, it means that both the front and the rear contains between a third minus one and two thirds plus one of the elements. Finally, codice_22 and codice_23 are tails of codice_16 and of codice_18, they allow scheduling the moment where some lazy operations are forced. Note that, when a double-ended queue contains codice_26 elements in the front list and codice_26 elements in the rear list, then the inequality invariant remains satisfied after codice_10 insertions and codice_29 deletions when codice_30. That is, at most codice_31 operations can happen between each rebalancing.\nLet us first give an implementation of the various operations that affect the front of the deque - cons, head and tail. Those implementations do not necessarily respect the invariant. In a second time we'll explain how to modify a deque which does not satisfy the invariant into one which satisfies it. However, they use the invariant, in that if the front is empty then the rear has at most one element. The operations affecting the rear of the list are defined similarly by symmetry. \nempty = (0, NIL, NIL, 0, NIL, NIL)\nfun insert'(x, (len_front, front, tail_front, len_rear, rear, tail_rear)) =\n (len_front+1, CONS(x, front), drop(2, tail_front), len_rear, rear, drop(2, tail_rear))\nfun head((_, CONS(h, _), _, _, _, _)) = h\nfun head((_, NIL, _, _, CONS(h, NIL), _)) = h\nfun tail'((len_front, CONS(head_front, front), tail_front, len_rear, rear, tail_rear)) =\n (len_front - 1, front, drop(2, tail_front), len_rear, rear, drop(2, tail_rear))\nfun tail'((_, NIL, _, _, CONS(h, NIL), _)) = empty \nIt remains to explain how to define a method codice_32 that rebalance the deque if codice_33 or codice_34 broke the invariant. The method codice_35 and codice_34 can be defined by first applying codice_33 and codice_38 and then applying codice_32.\nfun balance(q as (len_front, front, tail_front, len_rear, rear, tail_rear)) =\n let floor_half_len = (len_front + len_rear) / 2 in\n let ceil_half_len = len_front + len_rear - floor_half_len in\n if len_front &gt; 2*len_rear+1 then\n let val front' = take(ceil_half_len, front)\n val rear' = rotateDrop(rear, floor_half_len, front)\n in (ceil_half_len, front', front', floor_half_len, rear', rear')\n else if len_front &gt; 2*len_rear+1 then\n let val rear' = take(floor_half_len, rear)\n val front' = rotateDrop(front, ceil_half_len, rear)\n in (ceil_half_len, front', front', floor_half_len, rear', rear')\n else q\nwhere codice_40 return the concatenation of codice_16 and of codice_42. That iscodice_43 put into codice_44 the content of codice_16 and the content of codice_18 that is not already in codice_47. Since dropping codice_26 elements takes formula_1 time, we use laziness to ensure that elements are dropped two by two, with two drops being done during each codice_38 and each codice_33 operation. \nfun rotateDrop(front, i, rear) =\n if i &lt; 2 then rotateRev(front, drop(i, rear), NIL)\n else let CONS(x, front') = front in\n CONS(x, rotateDrop(front', j-2, drop(2, rear)))\nwhere codice_51 is a function that returns the front, followed by the middle reversed, followed by the rear. This function is also defined using laziness to ensure that it can be computed step by step, with one step executed during each codice_33 and codice_38 and taking a constant time. This function uses the invariant that codice_54 is 2 or 3. \nfun rotateRev(NIL, rear, a) =\n reverse(rear)++a\nfun rotateRev(CONS(x, front), rear, a) =\n CONS(x, rotateRev(front, drop(2, rear), reverse(take(2, rear))++a))\nwhere codice_55 is the function concatenating two lists.\nImplementation without laziness.\nNote that, without the lazy part of the implementation, this would be a non-persistent implementation of queue in amortized time. In this case, the lists codice_22 and codice_23 could be removed from the representation of the double-ended queue.\nLanguage support.\nAda's containers provides the generic packages codice_58 and codice_59, for the dynamic array and linked list implementations, respectively.\nC++'s Standard Template Library provides the class templates codice_60 and codice_61, for the multiple array and linked list implementations, respectively.\nAs of Java 6, Java's Collections Framework provides a new interface that provides the functionality of insertion and removal at both ends. It is implemented by classes such as (also new in Java 6) and , providing the dynamic array and linked list implementations, respectively. However, the codice_62, contrary to its name, does not support random access.\nJavascript's Array prototype &amp; Perl's arrays have native support for both removing (shift and pop) and adding (unshift and push) elements on both ends.\nPython 2.4 introduced the codice_63 module with support for deque objects. It is implemented using a doubly linked list of fixed-length subarrays.\nAs of PHP 5.3, PHP's SPL extension contains the 'SplDoublyLinkedList' class that can be used to implement Deque datastructures. Previously to make a Deque structure the array functions array_shift/unshift/pop/push had to be used instead.\nGHC's Data.Sequence module implements an efficient, functional deque structure in Haskell. The implementation uses 2\u20133 finger trees annotated with sizes. There are other (fast) possibilities to implement purely functional (thus also persistent) double queues (most using heavily lazy evaluation). Kaplan and Tarjan were the first to implement optimal confluently persistent catenable deques. Their implementation was strictly purely functional in the sense that it did not use lazy evaluation. Okasaki simplified the data structure by using lazy evaluation with a bootstrapped data structure and degrading the performance bounds from worst-case to amortized. Kaplan, Okasaki, and Tarjan produced a simpler, non-bootstrapped, amortized version that can be implemented either using lazy evaluation or more efficiently using mutation in a broader but still restricted fashion. Mihaescu and Tarjan created a simpler (but still highly complex) strictly purely functional implementation of catenable deques, and also a much simpler implementation of strictly purely functional non-catenable deques, both of which have optimal worst-case bounds.\nRust's codice_64 includes VecDeque which implements a double-ended queue using a growable ring buffer.\nApplications.\nOne example where a deque can be used is the work stealing algorithm. This algorithm implements task scheduling for several processors. A separate deque with threads to be executed is maintained for each processor. To execute the next thread, the processor gets the first element from the deque (using the \"remove first element\" deque operation). If the current thread forks, it is put back to the front of the deque (\"insert element at front\") and a new thread is executed. When one of the processors finishes execution of its own threads (i.e. its deque is empty), it can \"steal\" a thread from another processor: it gets the last element from the deque of another processor (\"remove last element\") and executes it. The work stealing algorithm is used by Intel's Threading Building Blocks (TBB) library for parallel programming."}
{"id": "8905", "revid": "1210878982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8905", "title": "Diene", "text": "In organic chemistry, a diene ( ); also diolefin, ) or alkadiene) is a covalent compound that contains two double bonds, usually among carbon atoms. They thus contain two alk\"ene\" units, with the standard prefix \"di\" of systematic nomenclature. As a subunit of more complex molecules, dienes occur in naturally occurring and synthetic chemicals and are used in organic synthesis. Conjugated dienes are widely used as monomers in the polymer industry. Polyunsaturated fats are of interest to nutrition.\nClasses.\nDienes can be divided into three classes, depending on the relative location of the double bonds:\nAccording to the \"Gold Book\" definition, a \"diene\" could include one or more heteroatoms which replace unsaturated carbon atoms, giving structures that could more specifically be called \"heterodienes\".\nCompounds that contain more than two double bonds are called polyenes. Polyenes and dienes share many properties.\nSynthesis of dienes.\nOn an industrial scale, butadiene is prepared by thermal cracking of butanes. In a similarly non-selective process, dicyclopentadiene is obtained from coal tars.\nIn the laboratory, more directed and more delicate processes are employed such as dehydrohalogenations and condensations. Myriad methods have been developed, such as the Whiting reaction. Families of nonconjugated dienes are derived from the oligomerization and dimerization of conjugated dienes. For example, 1,5-cyclooctadiene and 4-vinylcyclohexene are produced by dimerization of 1,3-butadiene.\nDiene-containing fatty acids are biosynthesized from acetyl CoA.\n\u03b1,\u03c9-Dienes have the formula (CH2)n(CH=CH2)2. They are prepared industrially by ethenolysis of cyclic dienes. For example, 1,5-hexadiene and 1,9-decadiene, useful crosslinking agents and synthetic intermediates, are produced from 1,5-cyclooctadiene and cyclooctene, respectively. The catalyst is derived from Re2O7 on alumina.\nReactivity and uses.\nPolymerization.\nThe most heavily practiced reaction of alkenes, dienes included, is polymerization. 1,3-Butadiene is a precursor to rubber used in tires, and isoprene is the precursor to natural rubber. Chloroprene is related but it is a synthetic monomer.\nCycloadditions.\nAn important reaction for conjugated dienes is the Diels\u2013Alder reaction. Many specialized dienes have been developed to exploit this reactivity for the synthesis of natural products (e.g., Danishefsky's diene).\nOther addition reactions.\nConjugated dienes add reagents such as bromine and hydrogen by both 1,2-addition and 1,4-addition pathways. Addition of polar reagents can generate complex architectures:\nMetathesis reactions.\nNonconjugated dienes are substrates for ring-closing metathesis reactions. These reactions require a metal catalyst:c\nAcidity.\nThe position adjacent to a double bond is acidic because the resulting allyl anion is stabilized by resonance. This effect becomes more pronounced as more alkenes are involved to create greater stability. For example, deprotonation at position 3 of a 1,4-diene or position 5 of a 1,3-diene give a pentadienyl anion. An even greater effect is seen if the anion is aromatic, for example, deprotonation of cyclopentadiene to give the cyclopentadienyl anion.\nAs ligands.\nDienes are widely used chelating ligands in organometallic chemistry. In some cases they serve as placeholder ligands, being removed during a catalytic cycle. For example, the cyclooctadiene (\"cod\") ligands in bis(cyclooctadiene)nickel(0) are labile. In some cases, dienes are spectator ligands, remaining coordinated throughout a catalytic cycle and influencing the product distributions. Chiral dienes have also been described. Other diene complexes include (butadiene)iron tricarbonyl, cyclobutadieneiron tricarbonyl, and cyclooctadiene rhodium chloride dimer."}
{"id": "8906", "revid": "21091634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8906", "title": "Diatessaron", "text": "The Diatessaron (; c. 160\u2013175 AD) is the most prominent early gospel harmony. It was created in the Syriac language by Tatian, an Assyrian early Christian apologist and ascetic. Tatian sought to combine all the textual material he found in the four gospels - Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John - into a single coherent narrative of Jesus's life and death. However, and in contradistinction to most later gospel harmonists, Tatian appears not to have been motivated by any aspiration to validate the four separate canonical gospel accounts; or to demonstrate that, as they stood, they could each be shown as being without inconsistency or error.\nAlthough widely used by early Syriac Christians, the original text has not survived. It was reconstructed in 1881 by Theodor Zahn from translations and commentaries.\nTerminology.\nThe title \"Diatessaron\" comes from the Latin \"diatessar\u014dn\", meaning: \"made of four [ingredients]\"; this is derived in turn from Greek, \u03b4\u03b9\u1f70 \u03c4\u03b5\u03c3\u03c3\u03ac\u03c1\u03c9\u03bd (\"dia tessar\u014dn\"), meaning \"out of four\" (i.e., \"\u03b4\u03b9\u03ac, dia\", \"at intervals of\" and \"tessar\u014dn\" [genitive of \u03c4\u03ad\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u03c1\u03b5\u03c2, \"tessares\"], \"four\").\nThe Syriac name for this gospel harmony is \" (\"Ewangeliy\u00f4n Damhallt\u00ea\") meaning: \"Gospel of the Mixed\".\nOverview.\nTatian's harmony follows the gospels closely in terms of text but, in order to fit all the canonical material in, he created his own narrative sequence, which is different from both the synoptic sequence and John's sequence; and occasionally creates intervening time periods that are found in none of the source accounts. This sequence is coherent and consistent within itself, but not necessarily consistent with that in all or any of the separate canonical gospels; and Tatian apparently applies the same principle in respect of the narrative itself. Where the gospels differ from one another in respect of the details of an event or teaching, the Diatessaron resolves such apparent contradictions by selecting one or another alternative wording and adding consistent details from the other gospels; while omitting apparent duplicate matter, especially across the synoptics. Hence, in respect of the healing of the blind at Jericho the Diatessaron reports only one blind man, Bartimeaus, healed by Jesus when leaving the city according to the account in Mark 10:46ff (expanded with phrases from Luke 18:36\u201337); consequently omitting any separate mention of two unnamed blind men healed by Jesus leaving Jericho (Matthew 20:29ff), and also the healing by Jesus entering Jericho the previous day of a single unnamed blind man (Luke 18:35ff).\nOtherwise, Tatian originally omitted altogether both of the different genealogies in Matthew and Luke, as well as Luke's introduction (Luke 1:1\u20134); and also did not originally include Jesus' encounter with the adulteress (the pericope adulterae: John 7:53\u20138:11). The pericope is present in western manuscripts believed to be based on the Diatessaron (e.g., Codex Fuldensis) but is generally considered to be a latter interpolation to the Gospel of John, with the Diatessaron itself often cited as an early textual witness in support of its omission. \nMost scholars agree that Tatian did, from the beginning, include the longer ending of Mark (Mark 16: 9\u201320), and correspondingly is amongst the earliest witnesses to this inclusion. Tatian added no significant wording to the textual material he took from the separate gospels. Only 56 verses in the canonical Gospels do not have a counterpart in the Diatessaron, mostly the genealogies and the pericope adulterae. The final work is about 72 per cent the length of the four gospels put together; around a quarter of the text of the separate gospels being adjudged by Tatian to be duplicated. (McFall, 1994).\nIn the early Church, the gospels at first circulated independently, with Matthew the most popular. The Diatessaron is notable evidence for the authority already enjoyed by the gospels by the mid- to late-2nd century. Within twenty years after Tatian's harmony was written, Irenaeus was expressly arguing for the authoritative character of the Four Gospels. It is unclear whether Tatian intended the Diatessaron to supplement or replace the four separate gospels; but both outcomes came to pass in different churches. The Diatessaron became adopted as the standard lectionary text of the gospels in some Syriac-speaking churches from the late 2nd to the 5th century, until it gave way to the four separate Gospels such as the Syriac Sinaitic gospels, or later in the Peshitta version. At the same time, in the churches of the Latin west, the Diatessaron circulated as a supplement to the four gospels, especially in the Latin translation.\nRecensions and translations.\nA number of recensions of the \"Diatessaron\" are extant. The earliest, part of the Eastern family of recensions, is preserved in 4th century theologian Ephrem the Syrian's \"Commentary\" on Tatian's work, which itself is preserved in two versions: an Armenian translation preserved in two copies, and a copy of Ephrem's original Syriac text dated to the late 5th or early 6th century, which has been edited by Louis Leloir (Paris, 1966).\nMany other translations have been made, sometimes including substantial revisions to the text. There are translations into Arabic, Latin, Old Georgian, Old High German, Middle High German, Middle English, Middle Dutch and Old Italian. There is a Persian harmony that seems to have borrowed some readings from the \"Diatessaron\". There are also Parthian texts with borrowings from the \"Diatessaron\". The Arabic translation was made by Ibn al-Tayyib in the early 11th century from the original Syriac.\nTatian's harmony.\nTatian was an Assyrian who was a pupil of Justin Martyr in Rome, where, Justin says, the \"apomnemoneumata\" (recollections or memoirs) of the Apostles, the gospels, were read every Sunday. When Justin quotes the synoptic Gospels, he tends to do so in a harmonised form, and Helmut Koester and others conclude that Justin must have possessed a Greek harmony text of Matthew, Luke and Mark.\nIf so, it is unclear how much Tatian may have borrowed from this previous author in determining his own narrative sequence of Gospel elements. It is equally unclear whether Tatian took the Syriac Gospel texts composited into his Diatessaron from a previous translation, or whether the translation was his own. Where the Diatessaron records Gospel quotations from the Jewish Scriptures, the text appears to agree with that found in the Syriac Peshitta Old Testament rather than that found in the Greek Septuagint\u2014as used by the original Gospel authors. The majority consensus is that the Peshitta Old Testament preceded the Diatessaron, and represents an independent translation from the Hebrew Bible. Resolution of these scholarly questions remained very difficult so long as no complete version of the \"Diatessaron\" in Syriac or Greek had been recovered; while the medieval translations that had survived\u2014in Arabic and Latin\u2014both relied on texts that had been heavily corrected to conform better with later canonical versions of the separate Gospel texts.\nThere is scholarly uncertainty about what language Tatian used for its original composition, whether Syriac or Greek.\n\"Diatessaron\" in Syriac Christianity.\nThe \"Diatessaron\" was used as the standard Gospel text in the liturgy of at least some sections of the Syrian Church for possibly up to two centuries and was quoted or alluded to by Syrian writers. Ephrem the Syrian wrote a commentary on it, the Syriac original of which was rediscovered only in 1957, when a manuscript acquired by Sir Chester Beatty in 1957 (now Chester Beatty Syriac MS 709, Dublin) turned out to contain the text of Ephrem's commentary. The manuscript constituted approximately half of the leaves of a volume of Syriac writings that had been catalogued in 1952 in the library of the Coptic monastery of Deir es-Suriani in Wadi Natrun, Egypt. Subsequently, the Chester Beatty library was able to track down and buy a further 42 leaves, so that now approximately eighty per cent of the Syriac commentary is available (McCarthy 1994). Ephrem did not comment on all passages in the Diatessaron, and nor does he always quote commentated passages in full; but for those phrases that he does quote, the commentary provides for the first time a dependable witness to Tatian's original; and also confirms its content and their sequence. .\nTheodoret, bishop of Cyrrhus on the Euphrates in upper Syria in 423, suspecting Tatian of having been a heretic, sought out and found more than two hundred copies of the \"Diatessaron\", which he \"collected and put away, and introduced instead of them the Gospels of the four evangelists\".\nVernacular harmonies derived from the \"Diatessaron\".\nNo Christian tradition, other than some Syriac ones, has ever adopted a harmonized Gospel text for use in its liturgy. However, in many traditions, it was not unusual for subsequent Christian generations to seek to provide paraphrased Gospel versions in language closer to the vernacular of their own day. Frequently such versions have been constructed as Gospel harmonies, sometimes taking Tatian's Diatessaron as an exemplar; other times proceeding independently. Hence from the Syriac Diatessaron text was derived an 11th-century Arabic harmony (the source for the published versions of the Diatessaron in English); and a 13th-century Persian harmony. The Arabic harmony preserves Tatian's sequence exactly, but uses a source text corrected in most places to that of the standard Syriac Peshitta Gospels; the Persian harmony differs greatly in sequence, but translates a Syriac text that is rather closer to that in Ephrem's commentary.\nA Vetus Latina version of Tatian's Syriac text appears to have circulated in the West from the late 2nd century; with a sequence adjusted to conform more closely to that of the canonical Gospel of Luke; and also including additional canonical text (such as the \"Pericope Adulterae\"), and possibly non-canonical matter from the Gospel of the Hebrews. With the gradual adoption of the Vulgate as the liturgical Gospel text of the Latin Church, the Latin Diatessaron was increasingly modified to conform to Vulgate readings. In 546 Victor of Capua discovered such a mixed manuscript; and, further corrected by Victor so as to provide a very pure Vulgate text within a modified Diatessaron sequence and to restore the two genealogies of Jesus side-by-side, this harmony, the Codex Fuldensis, survives in the monastic library at Fulda, where it served as the source text for vernacular harmonies in Old High German, Eastern Frankish and Old Saxon (the alliterative poem 'Heliand'). The older mixed Vulgate/Diatessaron text type also appears to have continued as a distinct tradition, as such texts appear to underlie surviving 13th\u201314th century Gospel harmonies in Middle Dutch, Middle High German, Middle French, Middle English, Tuscan and Venetian; although no example of this hypothetical Latin sub-text has ever been identified. The Li\u00e8ge Diatessaron is a particularly poetic example. This Latin Diatessaron textual tradition has also been suggested as underlying the 16th century Islam-influenced Gospel of Barnabas (Joosten, 2002).\nUse of the word \"God\".\nRobert F. Shedinger writes that in quotations to the Old Testament where the great uncial codices have \"\u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2\" and the Hebrew OT manuscripts \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4 (YHWH), Tatian wrote the term \"God\". Pavlos D. Vasileiadis reports that \"Shedinger proposed that the Syriac Diatessaron, composed some time after the middle of the second century CE, may provide additional confirmation of Howard's hypothesis (Tatian and the Jewish Scriptures, 136\u2013140). Additionally, within the Syriac Peshitta is discernible the distinction between \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 rendered as \u0721\u072a\u071d\u0710 (\"marya\", which means \"lord\" and refers to the God as signified by the Tetragrammaton; see Lu 1:32) and \u0721\u072a\u0722 (\"maran\", a more generic term for \"lord\"; see Joh 21:7).\" R. F. Shedinger holds that after \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4, \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2 could be a term before \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 became the standard term in the New Testament Greek copies.\nShedinger's work has been strongly criticized. Since Tatian's Diatessaron is known only indirectly from references to it in other works, Shedinger's dissertation is based on his collection of 69 \"possible\" readings, only two of which, in the judgment of William L. Petersen. reach the level of probability. Peterson complains of Shedinger's \"inconsistent methodology\" and says that the surviving readings do not support his conclusions. Petersen thinks the dissertation should never have been accepted for a doctoral degree, in view of \"the illogical arguments, inconsistent standards, philological errors, and methodological blunders that mar this book. [...] the errors are so frequent and so fundamental that this volume can contribute nothing to scholarship. What it says that is true has already been said elsewhere, with greater clarity and perspective. What it says that is new is almost always wrong, plagued [...] with philological, logical, and methodological errors, and a gross insensitivity to things historical (both within the discipline, as well as the transmission-history of texts). Reading this book fills one with dismay and despair. It is shocking that a work which does not rise to the level of a master's thesis should be approved as a doctoral dissertation; how it found its way into print is unfathomable. One shudders to think of the damage it will do when, in the future, it is cited by the ignorant and the unsuspecting as \"demonstrating\" what it has not.\" Jan Joosten's review of Shedinger's work is also condemnatory. In his judgment \"Shedinger's study remains unconvincing, not only in the final conclusions but also in the details of the argument.\""}
{"id": "8910", "revid": "1650522", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8910", "title": "Dean Koontz", "text": "Dean Ray Koontz (born July 9, 1945) is an American author. His novels are billed as suspense thrillers, but frequently incorporate elements of horror, fantasy, science fiction, mystery, and satire. Many of his books have appeared on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list, with fourteen hardcovers and sixteen paperbacks reaching the number-one position. Koontz wrote under a number of pen names earlier in his career, including \"David Axton\", \"Deanna Dwyer\", \"K.R. Dwyer\", \"Leigh Nichols\" and \"Brian Coffey\". He has published over 105 novels and a number of novellas and collections of short stories, and has sold over 450\u00a0million copies of his work.\nEarly life.\nKoontz was born on July 9, 1945, in Everett, Pennsylvania, the son of Florence (n\u00e9e Logue) and Raymond Koontz. He has said that he was regularly beaten and abused by his alcoholic father, which influenced his later writing, as also did the courage of his physically diminutive mother in standing up to her husband. In his senior year at Shippensburg State College, he won a fiction competition sponsored by \"Atlantic Monthly\" magazine. After graduation in 1967, he went to work as an English teacher at Mechanicsburg High School in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania. In the 1960s, Koontz worked for the Appalachian Poverty Program, a federally funded initiative designed to help poor children. In a 1996 interview with \"Reason\" magazine, he said that while the program sounded \"very noble and wonderful, ...\u00a0[i]n reality, it was a dumping ground for violent children\u00a0... and most of the funding ended up 'disappearing somewhere.'\" This experience greatly shaped Koontz's political outlook. In his book, \"The Dean Koontz Companion\", he recalled that he\n\"...\u00a0realized that most of these programs are not meant to help anyone, merely to control people and make them dependent. I was forced to reconsider everything I'd once believed. I developed a profound distrust of government regardless of the philosophy of the people in power. I remained a liberal on civil-rights issues, became a conservative on defense, and a semi-libertarian on all other matters.\"\nCareer.\nIn his spare time, Koontz wrote his first novel, \"Star Quest\", which was published in 1968. Koontz went on to write over a dozen science fiction novels. Seeing the Catholic faith as a contrast to the chaos in his family, Koontz converted in college because faith provided existential answers for life; he admired Catholicism's \"intellectual rigor,\" saying it permitted a view of life that saw mystery and wonder in all things. He says he sees Catholicism as English writer and Catholic convert G. K. Chesterton did: that it encourages a \"joy about the gift of life\". Koontz says that spirituality has always been part of his books, as are grace and our struggle as fallen souls, but he \"never get[s] on a soapbox\".\nIn the 1970s, Koontz began writing suspense and horror fiction, both under his own name and several pseudonyms, sometimes publishing up to eight books a year. Koontz has stated that he began using pen names after several editors convinced him that authors who switched back and forth between different genres invariably fell victim to \"negative crossover\" (alienating established fans and simultaneously failing to pick up any new ones). Known pseudonyms used by Koontz during his career include Deanna Dwyer, K. R. Dwyer, Aaron Wolfe, David Axton, Brian Coffey, John Hill, Leigh Nichols, Owen West, Richard Paige, and Anthony North. As Brian Coffey, he wrote the \"Mike Tucker\" trilogy (\"Blood Risk\", \"Surrounded\", \"Wall of Masks\") in acknowledged tribute to the Parker novels of Richard Stark (Donald E. Westlake). Many of Koontz's pseudonymous novels are now available under his real name. Many others remain suppressed by Koontz, who bought back the rights to ensure they could not be republished; he has, on occasion, said that he might revise some for republication, but only three have appeared\u2009\u2014\u2009\"Demon Seed\" and \"Invasion\" were both heavily rewritten before they were republished, and \"Prison of Ice\" had certain sections bowdlerised.\nAfter writing full-time for more than 10 years, Koontz had his acknowledged breakthrough novel with \"Whispers\", published in 1980. The two books before that, \"The Key to Midnight\" and \"The Funhouse\", also sold over a million copies, but were written under pen names. His first bestseller was \"Demon Seed\", the sales of which picked up after the release of the film of the same name in 1977, and sold over two million copies in one year. His first hardcover bestseller, which finally promised some financial stability and lifted him out of the midlist hit-and-miss range, was his book \"Strangers\".\nSince then, 12 hardcovers and 14 paperbacks written by Koontz have reached number one on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nBestselling science fiction writer Brian Herbert has stated, \"I even went through a phase where I read everything that Dean Koontz wrote, and in the process I learned a lot about characterization and building suspense.\"\nIn 1997, psychologist Katherine Ramsland published an extensive biography of Koontz based on interviews with his family and him. This \"psychobiography\" (as Ramsland called it) often showed the conception of Koontz's characters and plots from events in his own life.\nEarly author photos on the back of many of his novels show a balding Koontz with a mustache. After Koontz underwent hair transplantation surgery in the late 1990s, his subsequent books have featured a new, clean-shaven appearance with a fuller head of hair. Koontz explained the change by claiming that he was tired of looking like G. Gordon Liddy.\nMany of his novels are set in and around Orange County, California. As of 2006, he lives there with his wife, Gerda (Cerra), in Newport Coast, California, behind the gates of Pelican Hills. In 2008, he was the world's sixth-most highly paid author, tied with John Grisham, at $25\u00a0million annually.\nIn 2019, Koontz began publishing with Amazon Publishing. At the time of the announcement, Koontz was one of the company's most notable signings.\nPet dogs.\nOne of Koontz's pen names was inspired by his dog, Trixie Koontz, a Golden Retriever, shown in many of his book-jacket photos. Trixie originally was a service dog with Canine Companions for Independence (CCI), a charitable organization that provides service dogs for people with disabilities. Trixie was a gift from CCI in gratitude of Koontz's substantial donations, totaling $2.5 million between 1991 and 2004. Koontz was taken with the charity while he was researching his novel \"Midnight\", a book which included a CCI-trained dog, a black Labrador Retriever, named Moose.\nIn 2004, Koontz wrote and edited \"Life Is Good: Lessons in Joyful Living\" in her name, and in 2005, Koontz wrote a second book credited to Trixie, \"Christmas Is Good\". Both books are written from a supposed canine perspective on the joys of life. The royalty payments of the books were donated to CCI. In 2007, Trixie contracted terminal cancer that created a tumor in her heart. The Koontzes had her euthanized outside their family home on June 30. After Trixie's death, Koontz has continued writing on his website under the name \"TOTOS\", standing for \"Trixie on the Other Side\". Trixie is widely thought to have been his inspiration for his November 2007 book, \"The Darkest Evening of the Year\", about a woman who runs a Golden Retriever rescue home, and who rescues a \"special\" dog, named Nickie, which eventually saves her life. In August 2009, Koontz published \"A Big Little Life\", a memoir of his life with Trixie.\nIn October 2008, Koontz revealed that he had adopted a new dog, Anna. Eventually, he learned that Anna was the grandniece of Trixie. Anna died on May 22, 2016. Koontz then adopted a new dog, Elsa, on July 11, 2016.\nDisputed authorship.\nA number of letters, articles, and novels were ostensibly written by Koontz during the 1960s and 1970s, but he has stated he did not write them. These include 30 erotic novels, allegedly written together by Koontz and his wife Gerda, including books such as \"Thirteen and Ready!\", \"Swappers Convention\", and \"Hung\", the last one published under the name \"Leonard Chris\". They also include contributions to the fanzines \"Energumen\" and \"BeABohema\" in the late 1960s and early 1970s, including articles that mention the erotic novels, such as a movie column called \"Way Station\" in \"BeABohema\".\nKoontz wrote in \"How to Write Best Selling Fiction\", a much revised and updated version of 'Writing Popular Fiction' (1972), \"During my first six years as a full-time novelist ... I wrote a lot of ephemeral stuff; anything that would pay some bills ... I did Gothic romance novels under a pen-name ... Like many writers, I did some pornography too, and a variety of other things, none of which required me to commit my heart or my soul to the task. (This is not to say I didn't bother to do a good job; on the contrary, I never wrote down to any market, and I always tried to give my editors and readers their money's worth.)\" The Gothic novels are identifiable, but none of Koontz's acknowledged work fits into the latter category.\nKoontz has stated on his website that he used only the ten known pen names and \"there are no secret pen names used by Dean\"; he adds that his own identity was stolen by \"a person he had previously worked with professionally\", who submitted letters and some articles to fanzines under Koontz's name between 1969 and at least the early 1970s. Koontz has stated that he was only made aware of these bogus letters and articles in 1991 in a written admission from the identity thief. He has stated that he will reveal this person's name in his memoirs."}
{"id": "8911", "revid": "1113720412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8911", "title": "Discriminatory", "text": ""}
{"id": "8912", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8912", "title": "Drake equation", "text": "The Drake equation is a probabilistic argument used to estimate the number of active, communicative extraterrestrial civilizations in the Milky Way Galaxy.\nThe equation was formulated in 1961 by Frank Drake, not for purposes of quantifying the number of civilizations, but as a way to stimulate scientific dialogue at the first scientific meeting on the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI). The equation summarizes the main concepts which scientists must contemplate when considering the question of other radio-communicative life. It is more properly thought of as an approximation than as a serious attempt to determine a precise number.\nCriticism related to the Drake equation focuses not on the equation itself, but on the fact that the estimated values for several of its factors are highly conjectural, the combined multiplicative effect being that the uncertainty associated with any derived value is so large that the equation cannot be used to draw firm conclusions.\nEquation.\nThe Drake equation is:\nformula_1\nwhere\nand\nThis form of the equation first appeared in Drake's 1965 paper.\nHistory.\nIn September 1959, physicists Giuseppe Cocconi and Philip Morrison published an article in the journal \"Nature\" with the provocative title \"Searching for Interstellar Communications\". Cocconi and Morrison argued that radio telescopes had become sensitive enough to pick up transmissions that might be broadcast into space by civilizations orbiting other stars. Such messages, they suggested, might be transmitted at a wavelength of 21\u00a0cm (1,420.4\u00a0MHz). This is the wavelength of radio emission by neutral hydrogen, the most common element in the universe, and they reasoned that other intelligences might see this as a logical landmark in the radio spectrum.\nTwo months later, Harvard University astronomy professor Harlow Shapley speculated on the number of inhabited planets in the universe, saying \"The universe has 10 million, million, million suns (10 followed by 18 zeros) similar to our own. One in a million has planets around it. Only one in a million million has the right combination of chemicals, temperature, water, days and nights to support planetary life as we know it. This calculation arrives at the estimated figure of 100 million worlds where life has been forged by evolution.\"\nSeven months after Cocconi and Morrison published their article, Drake began searching for extraterrestrial intelligence in an experiment called Project Ozma. It was the first systematic search for signals from communicative extraterrestrial civilizations. Using the dish of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank in Green Bank, West Virginia, Drake monitored two nearby Sun-like stars: Epsilon Eridani and Tau Ceti, slowly scanning frequencies close to the 21\u00a0cm wavelength for six hours per day from April to July 1960. The project was well designed, inexpensive, and simple by today's standards. It detected no signals.\nSoon thereafter, Drake hosted the first search for extraterrestrial intelligence conference on detecting their radio signals. The meeting was held at the Green Bank facility in 1961. The equation that bears Drake's name arose out of his preparations for the meeting.\nThe ten attendees were conference organizer J. Peter Pearman, Frank Drake, Philip Morrison, businessman and radio amateur Dana Atchley, chemist Melvin Calvin, astronomer Su-Shu Huang, neuroscientist John C. Lilly, inventor Barney Oliver, astronomer Carl Sagan, and radio-astronomer Otto Struve. These participants called themselves \"The Order of the Dolphin\" (because of Lilly's work on dolphin communication), and commemorated their first meeting with a plaque at the observatory hall.\nUsefulness.\nThe Drake equation results in a summary of the factors affecting the likelihood that we might detect radio-communication from intelligent extraterrestrial life. The last three parameters, , , and , are not known and are very difficult to estimate, with values ranging over many orders of magnitude (see ). Therefore, the usefulness of the Drake equation is not in the solving, but rather in the contemplation of all the various concepts which scientists must incorporate when considering the question of life elsewhere, and gives the question of life elsewhere a basis for scientific analysis. The equation has helped draw attention to some particular scientific problems related to life in the universe, for example abiogenesis, the development of multi-cellular life, and the development of intelligence itself.\nWithin the limits of existing human technology, any practical search for distant intelligent life must necessarily be a search for some manifestation of a distant technology. After about 50 years, the Drake equation is still of seminal importance because it is a 'road map' of what we need to learn in order to solve this fundamental existential question. It also formed the backbone of astrobiology as a science; although speculation is entertained to give context, astrobiology concerns itself primarily with hypotheses that fit firmly into existing scientific theories. Some 50 years of SETI have failed to find anything, even though radio telescopes, receiver techniques, and computational abilities have improved significantly since the early 1960s. SETI efforts since 1961 have conclusively ruled out widespread alien emissions near the 21\u00a0cm wavelength of the hydrogen frequency.\nEstimates.\nOriginal estimates.\nThere is considerable disagreement on the values of these parameters, but the 'educated guesses' used by Drake and his colleagues in 1961 were: \nInserting the above minimum numbers into the equation gives a minimum N of 20 (see: Range of results). Inserting the maximum numbers gives a maximum of 50,000,000. Drake states that given the uncertainties, the original meeting concluded that , and there were probably between 1000 and 100,000,000 planets with civilizations in the Milky Way Galaxy.\nCurrent estimates.\nThis section discusses and attempts to list the best current estimates for the parameters of the Drake equation.\nRate of star creation in this Galaxy,.\nCalculations in 2010, from NASA and the European Space Agency indicate that the rate of star formation in this Galaxy is about of material per year. To get the number of stars per year, we divide this by the initial mass function (IMF) for stars, where the average new star's mass is about . This gives a star formation rate of about 1.5\u20133 stars per year.\nFraction of those stars that have planets,.\nAnalysis of microlensing surveys, in 2012, has found that may approach 1\u2014that is, stars are orbited by planets as a rule, rather than the exception; and that there are one or more bound planets per Milky Way star.\nAverage number of planets that might support life per star that has planets,.\nIn November 2013, astronomers reported, based on Kepler space telescope data, that there could be as many as 40\u00a0billion Earth-sized planets orbiting in the habitable zones of sun-like stars and red dwarf stars within the Milky Way Galaxy. 11 billion of these estimated planets may be orbiting sun-like stars. Since there are about 100 billion stars in the galaxy, this implies is roughly 0.4. The nearest planet in the habitable zone is Proxima Centauri b, which is as close as about 4.2 light-years away.\nThe consensus at the Green Bank meeting was that had a minimum value between 3 and 5. Dutch science journalist Govert Schilling has opined that this is optimistic. Even if planets are in the habitable zone, the number of planets with the right proportion of elements is difficult to estimate. Brad Gibson, Yeshe Fenner, and Charley Lineweaver determined that about 10% of star systems in the Milky Way Galaxy are hospitable to life, by having heavy elements, being far from supernovae and being stable for a sufficient time.\nThe discovery of numerous gas giants in close orbit with their stars has introduced doubt that life-supporting planets commonly survive the formation of their stellar systems. So-called hot Jupiters may migrate from distant orbits to near orbits, in the process disrupting the orbits of habitable planets.\nOn the other hand, the variety of star systems that might have habitable zones is not just limited to solar-type stars and Earth-sized planets. It is now estimated that even tidally locked planets close to red dwarf stars might have habitable zones, although the flaring behavior of these stars might speak against this. The possibility of life on moons of gas giants (such as Jupiter's moon Europa, or Saturn's moons Titan and Enceladus) adds further uncertainty to this figure.\nThe authors of the rare Earth hypothesis propose a number of additional constraints on habitability for planets, including being in galactic zones with suitably low radiation, high star metallicity, and low enough density to avoid excessive asteroid bombardment. They also propose that it is necessary to have a planetary system with large gas giants which provide bombardment protection without a hot Jupiter; and a planet with plate tectonics, a large moon that creates tidal pools, and moderate axial tilt to generate seasonal variation.\nFraction of the above that actually go on to develop life,.\nGeological evidence from the Earth suggests that may be high; life on Earth appears to have begun around the same time as favorable conditions arose, suggesting that abiogenesis may be relatively common once conditions are right. However, this evidence only looks at the Earth (a single model planet), and contains anthropic bias, as the planet of study was not chosen randomly, but by the living organisms that already inhabit it (ourselves). From a classical hypothesis testing standpoint, without assuming that the underlying distribution of is the same for all planets in the Milky Way, there are zero degrees of freedom, permitting no valid estimates to be made. If life (or evidence of past life) were to be found on Mars, Europa, Enceladus or Titan that developed independently from life on Earth it would imply a value for close to 1. While this would raise the number of degrees of freedom from zero to one, there would remain a great deal of uncertainty on any estimate due to the small sample size, and the chance they are not really independent.\nCountering this argument is that there is no evidence for abiogenesis occurring more than once on the Earth\u2014that is, all terrestrial life stems from a common origin. If abiogenesis were more common it would be speculated to have occurred more than once on the Earth. Scientists have searched for this by looking for bacteria that are unrelated to other life on Earth, but none have been found yet. It is also possible that life arose more than once, but that other branches were out-competed, or died in mass extinctions, or were lost in other ways. Biochemists Francis Crick and Leslie Orgel laid special emphasis on this uncertainty: \"At the moment we have no means at all of knowing\" whether we are \"likely to be alone in the galaxy (Universe)\" or whether \"the galaxy may be pullulating with life of many different forms.\" As an alternative to abiogenesis on Earth, they proposed the hypothesis of directed panspermia, which states that Earth life began with \"microorganisms sent here deliberately by a technological society on another planet, by means of a special long-range unmanned spaceship\".\nIn 2020, a paper by scholars at the University of Nottingham proposed an \"Astrobiological Copernican\" principle, based on the Principle of Mediocrity, and speculated that \"intelligent life would form on other [Earth-like] planets like it has on Earth, so within a few billion years life would automatically form as a natural part of evolution\". In the authors' framework, , , and are all set to a probability of 1 (certainty). Their resultant calculation concludes there are more than thirty current technological civilizations in the galaxy (disregarding error bars).\nFraction of the above that develops intelligent life,.\nThis value remains particularly controversial. Those who favor a low value, such as the biologist Ernst Mayr, point out that of the billions of species that have existed on Earth, only one has become intelligent and from this, infer a tiny value for . Likewise, the Rare Earth hypothesis, notwithstanding their low value for above, also think a low value for dominates the analysis. Those who favor higher values note the generally increasing complexity of life over time, concluding that the appearance of intelligence is almost inevitable, implying an approaching 1. Skeptics point out that the large spread of values in this factor and others make all estimates unreliable. (See Criticism).\nIn addition, while it appears that life developed soon after the formation of Earth, the Cambrian explosion, in which a large variety of multicellular life forms came into being, occurred a considerable amount of time after the formation of Earth, which suggests the possibility that special conditions were necessary. Some scenarios such as the snowball Earth or research into extinction events have raised the possibility that life on Earth is relatively fragile. Research on any past life on Mars is relevant since a discovery that life did form on Mars but ceased to exist might raise the estimate of but would indicate that in half the known cases, intelligent life did not develop.\nEstimates of have been affected by discoveries that the Solar System's orbit is circular in the galaxy, at such a distance that it remains out of the spiral arms for tens of millions of years (evading radiation from novae). Also, Earth's large moon may aid the evolution of life by stabilizing the planet's axis of rotation.\nThere has been quantitative work to begin to define formula_2. One example is a Bayesian analysis published in 2020. In the conclusion, the author cautions that this study applies to Earth's conditions. In Bayesian terms, the study favors the formation of intelligence on a planet with identical conditions to Earth but does not do so with high confidence.\nPlanetary scientist Pascal Lee of the SETI Institute proposes that this fraction is very low (0.0002). He based this estimate on how long it took Earth to develop intelligent life (1 million years since \"Homo erectus\" evolved, compared to 4.6 billion years since Earth formed).\nFraction of the above revealing their existence via signal release into space,.\nFor deliberate communication, the one example we have (the Earth) does not do much explicit communication, though there are some efforts covering only a tiny fraction of the stars that might look for human presence. (See Arecibo message, for example). There is considerable speculation why an extraterrestrial civilization might exist but choose not to communicate. However, deliberate communication is not required, and calculations indicate that current or near-future Earth-level technology might well be detectable to civilizations not too much more advanced than present day humans. By this standard, the Earth is a communicating civilization.\nAnother question is what percentage of civilizations in the galaxy are close enough for us to detect, assuming that they send out signals. For example, existing Earth radio telescopes could only detect Earth radio transmissions from roughly a light year away.\nLifetime of such a civilization wherein it communicates its signals into space,.\nMichael Shermer estimated as 420 years, based on the duration of sixty historical Earthly civilizations. Using 28 civilizations more recent than the Roman Empire, he calculates a figure of 304 years for \"modern\" civilizations. It could also be argued from Michael Shermer's results that the fall of most of these civilizations was followed by later civilizations that carried on the technologies, so it is doubtful that they are separate civilizations in the context of the Drake equation. In the expanded version, including \"reappearance number\", this lack of specificity in defining single civilizations does not matter for the result, since such a civilization turnover could be described as an increase in the \"reappearance number\" rather than increase in , stating that a civilization reappears in the form of the succeeding cultures. Furthermore, since none could communicate over interstellar space, the method of comparing with historical civilizations could be regarded as invalid.\nDavid Grinspoon has argued that once a civilization has developed enough, it might overcome all threats to its survival. It will then last for an indefinite period of time, making the value for potentially billions of years. If this is the case, then he proposes that the Milky Way Galaxy may have been steadily accumulating advanced civilizations since it formed. He proposes that the last factor be replaced with , where is the fraction of communicating civilizations that become \"immortal\" (in the sense that they simply do not die out), and representing the length of time during which this process has been going on. This has the advantage that would be a relatively easy-to-discover number, as it would simply be some fraction of the age of the universe.\nIt has also been hypothesized that once a civilization has learned of a more advanced one, its longevity could increase because it can learn from the experiences of the other.\nThe astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that all of the terms, except for the lifetime of a civilization, are relatively high and the determining factor in whether there are large or small numbers of civilizations in the universe is the civilization lifetime, or in other words, the ability of technological civilizations to avoid self-destruction. In Sagan's case, the Drake equation was a strong motivating factor for his interest in environmental issues and his efforts to warn against the dangers of nuclear warfare. Paleobiologist Olev Vinn suggests that the lifetime of most technological civilizations is brief due to inherited behavior patterns present in all intelligent organisms. These behaviors, incompatible with civilized conditions, inevitably lead to self-destruction soon after the emergence of advanced technologies.\nAn intelligent civilization might not be organic, as some have suggested that artificial general intelligence may replace humanity.\nRange of results.\nAs many skeptics have pointed out, the Drake equation can give a very wide range of values, depending on the assumptions, as the values used in portions of the Drake equation are not well established. In particular, the result can be , meaning we are likely alone in the galaxy, or , implying there are many civilizations we might contact. One of the few points of wide agreement is that the presence of humanity implies a probability of intelligence arising of greater than zero.\nAs an example of a low estimate, combining NASA's star formation rates, the rare Earth hypothesis value of , Mayr's view on intelligence arising, Drake's view of communication, and Shermer's estimate of lifetime:\ngives:\ni.e., suggesting that we are probably alone in this galaxy, and possibly in the observable universe.\nOn the other hand, with larger values for each of the parameters above, values of can be derived that are greater than 1. The following higher values that have been proposed for each of the parameters:\nUse of these parameters gives:\nMonte Carlo simulations of estimates of the Drake equation factors based on a stellar and planetary model of the Milky Way have resulted in the number of civilizations varying by a factor of 100.\nPossible former technological civilizations.\nIn 2016, Adam Frank and Woodruff Sullivan modified the Drake equation to determine just how unlikely the event of a technological species arising on a given habitable planet must be, to give the result that Earth hosts the \"only\" technological species that has \"ever\" arisen, for two cases: (a) this Galaxy, and (b) the universe as a whole. By asking this different question, one removes the lifetime and simultaneous communication uncertainties. Since the numbers of habitable planets per star can today be reasonably estimated, the only remaining unknown in the Drake equation is the probability that a habitable planet \"ever\" develops a technological species over its lifetime. For Earth to have the only technological species that has ever occurred in the universe, they calculate the probability of any given habitable planet ever developing a technological species must be less than . Similarly, for Earth to have been the only case of hosting a technological species over the history of this Galaxy, the odds of a habitable zone planet ever hosting a technological species must be less than (about 1 in 60 billion). The figure for the universe implies that it is extremely unlikely that Earth hosts the only technological species that has ever occurred. On the other hand, for this Galaxy one must think that fewer than 1 in 60 billion habitable planets develop a technological species for there not to have been at least a second case of such a species over the past history of this Galaxy.\nModifications.\nAs many observers have pointed out, the Drake equation is a very simple model that omits potentially relevant parameters, and many changes and modifications to the equation have been proposed. One line of modification, for example, attempts to account for the uncertainty inherent in many of the terms.\nCombining the estimates of the original six factors by major researchers via a Monte Carlo procedure leads to a best value for the non-longevity factors of 0.85 1/years. This result differs insignificantly from the estimate of unity given both by Drake and the Cyclops report.\nOthers note that the Drake equation ignores many concepts that might be relevant to the odds of contacting other civilizations. For example, David Brin states: \"The Drake equation merely speaks of the number of sites at which ETIs spontaneously arise. The equation says nothing directly about the contact cross-section between an ETIS and contemporary human society\". Because it is the contact cross-section that is of interest to the SETI community, many additional factors and modifications of the Drake equation have been proposed.\nformula_4\nwhere\nand\nCriticism.\nCriticism of the Drake equation is varied. Firstly, many of the terms in the equation are largely or entirely based on conjecture. Star formation rates are well-known, and the incidence of planets has a sound theoretical and observational basis, but the other terms in the equation become very speculative. The uncertainties revolve around the present day understanding of the evolution of life, intelligence, and civilization, not physics. No statistical estimates are possible for some of the parameters, where only one example is known. The net result is that the equation cannot be used to draw firm conclusions of any kind, and the resulting margin of error is huge, far beyond what some consider acceptable or meaningful.\nOthers point out that the equation was formulated before our understanding of the universe had matured. Astrophysicist Ethan Siegel, said:\nOne reply to such criticisms is that even though the Drake equation currently involves speculation about unmeasured parameters, it was intended as a way to stimulate dialogue on these topics. Then the focus becomes how to proceed experimentally. Indeed, Drake originally formulated the equation merely as an agenda for discussion at the Green Bank conference.\nFermi paradox.\nA civilization lasting for tens of millions of years could be able to spread throughout the galaxy, even at the slow speeds foreseeable with present-day technology. However, no confirmed signs of civilizations or intelligent life elsewhere have been found, either in this Galaxy or in the observable universe of 2\u00a0trillion galaxies. According to this line of thinking, the tendency to fill (or at least explore) all available territory seems to be a universal trait of living things, so the Earth should have already been colonized, or at least visited, but no evidence of this exists. Hence Fermi's question \"Where is everybody?\".\nA large number of explanations have been proposed to explain this lack of contact; a book published in 2015 elaborated on 75 different explanations. In terms of the Drake Equation, the explanations can be divided into three classes:\nThese lines of reasoning lead to the Great Filter hypothesis, which states that since there are no observed extraterrestrial civilizations despite the vast number of stars, at least one step in the process must be acting as a filter to reduce the final value. According to this view, either it is very difficult for intelligent life to arise, or the lifetime of technologically advanced civilizations, or the period of time they reveal their existence must be relatively short.\nAn analysis by Anders Sandberg, Eric Drexler and Toby Ord suggests \"a substantial \"ex ante\" (predicted) probability of there being no other intelligent life in our observable universe\".\nIn fiction and popular culture.\nThe equation was cited by Gene Roddenberry as supporting the multiplicity of inhabited planets shown on \"Star Trek\", the television series he created. However, Roddenberry did not have the equation with him, and he was forced to \"invent\" it for his original proposal. The invented equation created by Roddenberry is:\nformula_5\nRegarding Roddenberry's fictional version of the equation, Drake himself commented that a number raised to the first power is just the number itself.\nA commemorative plate on NASA's Europa Clipper mission, planned for launch in October 2024, features a poem by the U.S. Poet Laureate Ada Lim\u00f3n, waveforms of the word 'water' in 103 languages, a schematic of the water hole, the Drake equation, and a portrait of planetary scientist Ron Greeley on it.\nThe track \"Abiogenesis\" on the Carbon Based Lifeforms album World of Sleepers features the Drake equation in a spoken voice-over."}
{"id": "8914", "revid": "14377864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8914", "title": "Damascus", "text": "Damascus ( , ; ) is the largest city in Syria, the oldest capital in the world and, according to some, the fourth holiest city in Islam. Known colloquially in Syria as () and dubbed, poetically, the \"City of Jasmine\" ( ), Damascus is a major cultural center of the Levant and the Arab world.\nSituated in southwestern Syria, Damascus is the center of a large metropolitan area. Nestled among the eastern foothills of the Anti-Lebanon mountain range inland from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean on a plateau above sea level, Damascus experiences an arid climate because of the rain shadow effect. The Barada River flows through Damascus.\nDamascus is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. First settled in the 3rd millennium BC, it was chosen as the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate from 661 to 750. After the victory of the Abbasid dynasty, the seat of Islamic power was moved to Baghdad. Damascus saw its importance decline throughout the Abbasid era, only to regain significant importance in the Ayyubid and Mamluk periods. \nToday, it is the seat of the central government of Syria. , eight years into the Syrian civil war, Damascus was named the least livable city out of 140 global cities in the Global Liveability Ranking. , it was the least livable out of 173 global cities in the same Global Liveability Ranking. In 2017, two new development projects have been launched in Damascus to build new residential districts, Marota City and Basillia City to symbolize post-war reconstruction.\nNames and etymology.\nThe name of Damascus first appeared in the geographical list of Thutmose III as () in the 15th century BC.\nThe etymology of the ancient name is uncertain. It is attested as () in Akkadian, () in Egyptian, () in Old Aramaic and () in Biblical Hebrew. A number of Akkadian spellings are found in the Amarna letters, from the 14th century BC: (), (), and ().\nLater Aramaic spellings of the name often include an intrusive \"resh\" (letter \"r\"), perhaps influenced by the root , meaning \"dwelling\". Thus, the English and Latin name of the city is , which was imported from Greek and originated from the Qumranic (), and () in Syriac, meaning \"a well-watered land\".\nIn Arabic, the city is called Dimashq ( ). The city is also known as by the citizens of Damascus, of Syria and other Arab neighbors and Turkey (). is an Arabic term for \"Levant\" and for \"Syria\"; the latter, and particularly the historical region of Syria, is called (, ). The latter term etymologically means \"land of the left-hand side\" or \"the north\", as someone in the Hijaz facing east, oriented to the sunrise, will find the north to the left. This is contrasted with the name of Yemen ( ), correspondingly meaning \"the right-hand side\" or \"the south\". The variation ('), of the more typical (), is also attested in Old South Arabian, (), with the same semantic development.\nGeography.\nDamascus was built in a strategic site on a plateau above sea level and about inland from the Mediterranean, sheltered by the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, supplied with water by the Barada River, and at a crossroads between trade routes: the north\u2013south route connecting Egypt with Asia Minor, and the east\u2013west cross-desert route connecting Lebanon with the Euphrates river valley. The Anti-Lebanon Mountains mark the border between Syria and Lebanon. The range has peaks of over and blocks precipitation from the Mediterranean Sea, so the region of Damascus is sometimes subject to droughts. However, in ancient times, the Barada River mitigated this, which originates from mountain streams fed by melting snow. Damascus is surrounded by the Ghouta, irrigated farmland where many vegetables, cereals, and fruits have been farmed since ancient times. Maps of Roman Syria indicate that the Barada River emptied into a lake of some size east of Damascus. Today it is called Bahira Atayba, the hesitant lake because in years of severe drought, it does not even exist.\nThe modern city has an area of , out of which is urban, while Jabal Qasioun occupies the rest.\nThe old city of Damascus, enclosed by the city walls, lies on the south bank of the river Barada which is almost dry ( left). To the southeast, north, and northeast it is surrounded by suburban areas whose history stretches back to the Middle Ages: Midan in the southwest, Sarouja and Imara in the north and north-west. These neighborhoods originally arose on roads leading out of the city, near the tombs of religious figures. In the 19th century outlying villages developed on the slopes of Jabal Qasioun, overlooking the city, already the site of the al-Salihiyah neighborhood centered on the important shrine of medieval Andalusian Sheikh and philosopher Ibn Arabi. These new neighborhoods were initially settled by Kurdish soldiery and Muslim refugees from the Europe regions of the Ottoman Empire which had fallen under Christian rule. Thus they were known as \"al-Akrad\" \"(the Kurds)\" and \"al-Muhajirin\" \"(the migrants)\". They lay north of the old city.\nFrom the late 19th century on, a modern administrative and commercial center began to spring up to the west of the old city, around the Barada, centered on the area known as al-Marjeh or \"the meadow\". Al-Marjeh soon became the name of what was initially the central square of modern Damascus, with the city hall in it. The courts of justice, post office, and railway station stood on higher ground slightly to the south. A Europeanized residential quarter soon began to be built on the road leading between al-Marjeh and al-Salihiyah. The commercial and administrative center of the new city gradually shifted northwards slightly towards this area.\nIn the 20th century, newer suburbs developed north of the Barada, and to some extent to the south, invading the Ghouta oasis. In 1956\u20131957, the new neighborhood of Yarmouk became a second home to many Palestinian refugees. City planners preferred to preserve the Ghouta as far as possible, and in the later 20th century some of the main areas of development were to the north, in the western Mezzeh neighborhood and most recently along the Barada valley in Dummar in the northwest and on the slopes of the mountains at Barzeh in the north-east. Poorer areas, often built without official approval, have mostly developed south of the main city.\nDamascus used to be surrounded by an oasis, the Ghouta region (), watered by the Barada river. The Fijeh spring, west along the Barada valley, used to provide the city with drinking water, and various sources to the west are tapped by water contractors. The flow of the Barada dropped with the rapid expansion of housing and industry in the city and it is almost dry. The lower aquifers are polluted by the city's runoff from heavily used roads, industry, and sewage.\nClimate.\nDamascus has a cool arid climate (\"BWk\") in the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger system, due to the rain shadow effect of the Anti-Lebanon Mountains and the prevailing ocean currents. Summers are prolonged, dry, and hot with less humidity. Winters are cool and somewhat rainy; snowfall is infrequent. Autumn is brief and mild, but has the most drastic temperature change, unlike spring where the transition to summer is more gradual and steady. Annual rainfall is around , occurring from October to May.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nCarbon-14 dating at Tell Ramad, on the outskirts of Damascus, suggests that the site may have been occupied since the second half of the seventh millennium BC, possibly around 6300 BC. However, evidence of settlement in the wider Barada basin dating back to 9000 BC exists, although no large-scale settlement was present within Damascus' walls until the second millennium BC.\nLate Bronze.\nSome of the earliest Egyptian records are from 1350 BC Amarna letters when Damascus (called \"Dimasqu\") was ruled by king Biryawaza. The Damascus region, as well as the rest of Syria, became a battleground circa 1260 BC, between the Hittites from the north and the Egyptians from the south, ending with a signed treaty between Hattusili III and Ramesses II where the former handed over control of the Damascus area to Ramesses II in 1259 BC. The arrival of the Sea Peoples, around 1200 BC, marked the end of the Bronze Age in the region and brought about new development of warfare. Damascus was only a peripheral part of this picture, which mostly affected the larger population centers of ancient Syria. However, these events contributed to the development of Damascus as a new influential center that emerged with the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age.\nDamascus is mentioned in Genesis 14:15 as existing at the time of the War of the Kings. According to the 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus in his twenty-one volume \"Antiquities of the Jews\", Damascus (along with Trachonitis), was founded by Uz, the son of Aram. In Antiquities i. 7, Josephus reports:\nAram-Damascus.\nDamascus is first documented as an important city during the arrival of the Aramaeans, a Semitic people, in the 11th century BC. By the start of the first millennium BC, several Aramaic kingdoms were formed, as Aramaeans abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and formed federated tribal states. One of these kingdoms was Aram-Damascus, centered on its capital Damascus. The Aramaeans who entered the city without battle, adopted the name \"Dimashqu\" for their new home. Noticing the agricultural potential of the still-undeveloped and sparsely populated area, they established the water distribution system of Damascus by constructing canals and tunnels which maximized the efficiency of the river Barada. The Romans and the Umayyads later improved the same network, and still forms the basis of the water system of the old part of the city today. The Aramaeans initially turned Damascus into an outpost of a loose federation of Aramaean tribes, known as Aram-Zobah, based in the Beqaa Valley.\nThe city would gain pre-eminence in southern Syria when Ezron, the claimant to Aram-Zobah's throne who was denied kingship of the federation, fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC. Ezron overthrew the city's tribal governor and founded the independent entity of Aram-Damascus. As this new state expanded south, it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east. Under Ezron's grandson, Ben-Hadad I (880\u2013841 BC), and his successor Hazael, Damascus annexed Bashan (modern-day Hauran region), and went on the offensive with Israel. This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria. As a result, he granted Israel trading rights in Damascus.\nAnother possible reason for the treaty between Aram-Damascus and Israel was the common threat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire which was attempting to expand into the Mediterranean coast. In 853 BC, King Hadadezer of Damascus led a Levantine coalition, that included forces from the northern Aram-Hamath kingdom and troops supplied by King Ahab of Israel, in the Battle of Qarqar against the Neo-Assyrian army. Aram-Damascus came out victorious, temporarily preventing the Assyrians from encroaching into Syria. However, after Hadadzezer was killed by his successor, Hazael, the Levantine alliance collapsed. Aram-Damascus attempted to invade Israel but was interrupted by the renewed Assyrian invasion. Hazael ordered a retreat to the walled part of Damascus while the Assyrians plundered the remainder of the kingdom. Unable to enter the city, they declared their supremacy in the Hauran and Beqa'a valleys.\nBy the 8th century BC, Damascus was practically engulfed by the Assyrians and entered a Dark Age. Nonetheless, it remained the economic and cultural center of the Near East as well as the Arameaen resistance. In 727, a revolt took place in the city but was put down by Assyrian forces. After Assyria led by Tiglath-Pileser III went on a wide-scale campaign of quelling revolts throughout Syria, Damascus became subjugated by their rule. A positive effect of this was stability for the city and benefits from the spice and incense trade with Arabia. In 694 BC, the town was called \"\u0160a\u02beimeri\u0161u\" (Akkadian: \ud809\udc3c\ud808\udd3f\ud808\ude28\ud808\ude91\ud808\uded9\ud808\udf0b) and its governor was named \"Ilu-iss\u012bya\". However, Assyrian authority was dwindling by 609\u2013605 BC, and Syria-Palestine was falling into the orbit of Pharaoh Necho II's Egypt. In 572 BC, all of Syria had been conquered by Nebuchadnezzar II of the Neo-Babylonians, but the status of Damascus under Babylon is relatively unknown.\nHellenistic period.\nDamascus was conquered by Alexander the Great. After the death of Alexander in 323 BC, Damascus became the site of a struggle between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic empires. The control of the city passed frequently from one empire to the other. Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals, made Antioch the capital of his vast empire, which led to the decline of Damascus' importance compared with new Seleucid cities such as Syrian Laodicea in the north. Later, Demetrius III Philopator rebuilt the city according to the Greek hippodamian system and renamed it \"Demetrias\".\nRoman period.\nIn 64 BC, the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria. The Romans occupied Damascus and subsequently incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis which themselves were incorporated into the province of Syria and granted autonomy.\nThe city of Damascus was entirely redesigned by the Romans after Pompey conquered the region. Still today the Old Town of Damascus retains the rectangular shape of the Roman city, with its two main axes: the Decumanus Maximus (east-west; known today as the \"Via Recta\") and the Cardo (north-south), the Decumanus being about twice as long. The Romans built a monumental gate which still survives at the eastern end of Decumanus Maximus. The gate originally had three arches: the central arch was for chariots while the side arches were for pedestrians.\nIn 23 BC, Herod the Great was given lands controlled by Zenodorus by Caesar Augustus and some scholars believe that Herod was also granted control of Damascus as well. The control of Damascus reverted to Syria either upon the death of Herod the Great or was part of the lands given to Herod Philip which were given to Syria with his death in 33/34 AD.\nIt is speculated that control of Damascus was gained by Aretas IV Philopatris of Nabatea between the death of Herod Philip in 33/34 AD and the death of Aretas in 40 AD but there is substantial evidence against Aretas controlling the city before 37 AD and many reasons why it could not have been a gift from Caligula between 37 and 40 AD. In fact, all these theories stem not from any actual evidence outside the New Testament but rather \"a certain understanding of 2 Corinthians 11:32\" and in reality \"neither from archaeological evidence, secular-historical sources, nor New Testament texts can Nabatean sovereignty over Damascus in the first century AD be proven.\" Roman emperor Trajan who annexed the Nabataean Kingdom, creating the province of Arabia Petraea, had previously been in Damascus, as his father Marcus Ulpius Traianus served as governor of Syria from 73 to 74 AD, where he met the Nabatean architect and engineer, Apollodorus of Damascus, who joined him in Rome when he was a consul in 91 AD, and later built several monuments during the 2nd century AD.\nDamascus became a metropolis by the beginning of the 2nd century and in 222 it was upgraded to a \"colonia\" by the Emperor Septimius Severus. During the \"Pax Romana\", Damascus and the Roman province of Syria in general began to prosper. Damascus's importance as a caravan city was evident with the trade routes from southern Arabia, Palmyra, Petra, and the Silk Road all converging on it. The city satisfied the Roman demands for eastern luxuries. Circa 125 AD the Roman emperor Hadrian promoted the city of Damascus to \"Metropolis of Coele-Syria\".\nLittle remains of the architecture of the Romans, but the town planning of the old city did have a lasting effect. The Roman architects brought together the Greek and Aramaean foundations of the city and fused them into a new layout measuring approximately , surrounded by a city wall. The city wall contained seven gates, but only the eastern gate, Bab Sharqi, remains from the Roman period. Roman Damascus lies mostly at depths of up to below the modern city.\nThe old borough of Bab Tuma was developed at the end of the Roman/Byzantine era by the local Eastern Orthodox community. According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Thomas both lived in that neighborhood. Roman Catholic historians also consider Bab Tuma to be the birthplace of several Popes such as John V and Gregory III. Accordingly, there was a community of Jewish Christians who converted to Christianity with the advent of Saint Paul's proselytization.\nDuring the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628, the city was besieged and captured by Shahrbaraz in 613, along with a large number of Byzantine troops as prisoners, and was in Sasanian hands until near the end of the war.\nRashidun period.\nThe Prophet Muhammad's first indirect interaction with the people of Damascus was when he sent a letter, through his companion Shiya ibn Wahab, to Harith ibn Abi Shamir, the king of Damascus. The letter stated: \"Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Be informed that my religion shall prevail everywhere. You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command shall remain yours.\"\nAfter most of the Syrian countryside was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate during the reign of Caliph Umar (), Damascus itself was conquered by the Arab Muslim general Khalid ibn al-Walid in August\u2013September 634 CE. His army had previously attempted to capture the city in April 634 but without success. With Damascus now in Muslim-Arab hands, the Byzantines, alarmed at the loss of their most prestigious city in the Near East, had decided to wrest back control of it. Under Emperor Heraclius, the Byzantines fielded an army superior to that of the Rashidun in manpower. They advanced into southern Syria during the spring of 636 and consequently Khalid ibn al-Walid's forces withdrew from Damascus to prepare for renewed confrontation. In August, the two sides met along the Yarmouk River where they fought a major battle which ended in a decisive Muslim victory, solidifying Muslim rule in Syria and Palestine. While the Muslims administered the city, the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian\u2014Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite\u2014with a growing community of Muslims from Mecca, Medina, and the Syrian Desert. The governor assigned to the city which had been chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria was Mu'awiya I.\nUmayyad and Abbasid periods.\nFollowing the fourth Rashidun caliph Ali's death in 661, Mu'awiya was chosen as the caliph of the expanding Islamic empire. Because of the vast amounts of assets his clan, the Umayyads, owned in the city and because of its traditional economic and social links with the Hijaz as well as the Christian Arab tribes of the region, Mu'awiya established Damascus as the capital of the entire Caliphate. With the ascension of Caliph Abd al-Malik in 685, an Islamic coinage system was introduced and all of the surplus revenue of the Caliphate's provinces were forwarded to the treasury of Damascus. Arabic was also established as the official language, giving the Muslim minority of the city an advantage over the Aramaic-speaking Christians in administrative affairs.\nAbd al-Malik's successor, al-Walid initiated the construction of the Grand Mosque of Damascus (known as the Umayyad Mosque) in 706. The site originally had been the Christian Cathedral of St. John and the Muslims maintained the building's dedication to John the Baptist. By 715, the mosque was complete. Al-Walid died that same year and he was succeeded at first by Suleiman ibn Abd al-Malik and then by Umar II, who each ruled for brief periods before the reign of Hisham in 724. With these successions, the status of Damascus was gradually weakening as Suleiman had chosen Ramla as his residence and later Hisham chose Resafa. Following the murder of the latter in 743, the Caliphate of the Umayyads\u2014which by then stretched from Spain to India\u2014 was crumbling as a result of widespread revolts. During the reign of Marwan II in 744, the capital of the empire was relocated to Harran in the northern Jazira region.\nOn 25 August 750, the Abbasids, having already beaten the Umayyads in the Battle of the Zab in Iraq, conquered Damascus after facing little resistance. With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate, Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad, the new Islamic capital. Within the first six months of Abbasid rule, revolts began erupting in the city, albeit too isolated and unfocused to present a viable threat. Nonetheless, the last of the prominent Umayyads were executed, the traditional officials of Damascus were ostracised, and army generals from the city were dismissed. Afterwards, the Umayyad family cemetery was desecrated and the city walls were torn down, reducing Damascus into a provincial town of little importance. It roughly disappeared from written records for the next century and the only significant improvement of the city was the Abbasid-built treasury dome in the Umayyad Mosque in 789. In 811, distant remnants of the Umayyad dynasty staged a strong uprising in Damascus that was eventually put down.\nOn 24 November 847, a multiple earthquake struck and destroyed Damascus, causing the lives of 70,000 people in estimated deaths.\nAhmad ibn Tulun, a dissenting Turkish wali appointed by the Abbasids, conquered Syria, including Damascus, from his overlords in 878\u201379. In an act of respect for the previous Umayyad rulers, he erected a shrine on the site of Mu'awiya's grave in the city. Tulunid rule of Damascus was brief, lasting only until 906 before being replaced by the Qarmatians who were adherents of Shia Islam. Due to their inability to control the vast amount of land they occupied, the Qarmatians withdrew from Damascus and a new dynasty, the Ikhshidids, took control of the city. They maintained the independence of Damascus from the Arab Hamdanid dynasty of Aleppo 967. A period of instability in the city followed, with a Qarmatian raid in 968, a Byzantine raid in 970, and increasing pressures from the Fatimids in the south and the Hamdanids in the north.\nThe Shia Fatimids gained control in 970, inflaming hostilities between them and the Sunni Arabs of the city who frequently revolted. A Turk, Alptakin drove out the Fatimids five years later, and through diplomacy, prevented the Byzantines during the Syrian campaigns of John Tzimiskes from attempting to annex the city. However, by 977, the Fatimids under Caliph al-Aziz, wrested back control of the city and tamed Sunni dissidents. The Arab geographer, al-Muqaddasi, visited Damascus in 985, remarking that the architecture and infrastructure of the city were \"magnificent\", but living conditions were awful. Under al-Aziz, the city saw a brief period of stability that ended with the reign of al-Hakim (996\u20131021). In 998, hundreds of Damascus citizens were rounded up and executed by him for incitement. Three years after al-Hakim's mysterious disappearance, a rebellion was initiated in southern Syria against the Fatimids, but was stifled by the Fatimid Turkish governor of Syria and Palestine, Anushtakin al-Duzbari, in 1029. This victory gave the latter mastery over Syria, displeasing his Fatimid overlords, but gaining the admiration of Damascus' citizens. He was exiled by Fatimid authorities to Aleppo where he died in 1041. From that date to 1063, there are no known records of the city's history. By then, Damascus lacked a city administration, had an enfeebled economy, and a greatly reduced population.\nSeljuq and Ayyubid periods.\nWith the arrival of the Seljuq Turks in the late 11th century, Damascus again became the capital of independent states. It was ruled by Abu Sa'id Taj ad-Dawla Tutush I starting in 1079 and he was succeeded by his son Abu Nasr Duqaq in 1095. The Seljuqs established a court in Damascus and a systematic reversal of Shia inroads in the city. The city also saw an expansion of religious life through private endowments financing religious institutions (\"madrasas\") and hospitals (\"maristans\"). Damascus soon became one of the most important centers of propagating Islamic thought in the Muslim world. After Duqaq died in 1104, his mentor (\"atabeg\"), Toghtekin, took control of Damascus and the Burid line of the Seljuq dynasty. Under Duqaq and Toghtekin, Damascus experienced stability, elevated status, and a revived role in commerce. In addition, the city's Sunni majority enjoyed being a part of the larger Sunni framework effectively governed by various Turkic dynasties who in turn were under the moral authority of the Baghdad-based Abbasids.\nWhile the rulers of Damascus were preoccupied in conflict with their fellow Seljuqs in Aleppo and Diyarbakir, the Crusaders, who arrived in the Levant in 1097, conquered Jerusalem, Mount Lebanon and Palestine. Duqaq seemed to have been content with Crusader's rule as a buffer between his dominion and the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt. Toghtekin, however, saw the Western invaders as a viable threat to Damascus which, at the time, nominally included Homs, the Beqaa Valley, Hauran, and the Golan Heights as part of its territories. With military support from Sharaf al-Din Mawdud of Mosul, Toghtekin managed to halt Crusader raids in the Golan and Hauran. Mawdud was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque in 1109, depriving Damascus of northern Muslim backing and forcing Toghtekin to agree to a truce with the Crusaders in 1110. In 1126, the Crusader army led by Baldwin II fought Burid forces led by Toghtekin at Marj al-Saffar near Damascus; however, despite their tactical victory, the Crusaders failed in their objective to capture Damascus.\nFollowing Toghtekin's death in 1128, his son, Taj al-Muluk Buri, became the nominal ruler of Damascus. Coincidentally, the Seljuq prince of Mosul, Imad al-Din Zengi, took power in Aleppo and gained a mandate from the Abbasids to extend his authority to Damascus. In 1129, around 6,000 Isma'ili Muslims were killed in the city along with their leaders. The Sunnis were provoked by rumors alleging there was a plot by the Isma'ilis, who controlled the strategic fort at Banias, to aid the Crusaders in capturing Damascus in return for control of Tyre. Soon after the massacre, the Crusaders aimed to take advantage of the unstable situation and launch an assault against Damascus with nearly 2,000 knights and 10,000 infantry. However, Buri allied with Zengi and managed to prevent their army from reaching the city. Buri was assassinated by Isma'ili agents in 1132; he was succeeded by his son, Shams al-Mulk Isma'il who ruled tyrannically until he was murdered in 1135 on secret orders from his mother, Safwat al-Mulk Zumurrud; Isma'il's brother, Shihab al-Din Mahmud, replaced him. Meanwhile, Zengi, intent on putting Damascus under his control, married Safwat al-Mulk in 1138. Mahmud's reign then ended in 1139 after he was killed for relatively unknown reasons by members of his family. Mu'in al-Din Unur, his \"mamluk\" (\"slave soldier\") took effective power of the city, prompting Zengi\u2014with Safwat al-Mulk's backing\u2014to lay siege against Damascus the same year. In response, Damascus allied with the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem to resist Zengi's forces. Consequently, Zengi withdrew his army and focused on campaigns against northern Syria.\nIn 1144, Zengi conquered Edessa, a crusader stronghold, which led to a new crusade from Europe in 1148. In the meantime, Zengi was assassinated and his territory was divided among his sons, one of whom, Nur ad-Din, emir of Aleppo, made an alliance with Damascus. When the European crusaders arrived, they and the nobles of Jerusalem agreed to attack Damascus. Their siege, however, was a complete failure. When the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls and was driven back. By 1154, Damascus was firmly under Nur ad-Din's control.\nIn 1164, King Amalric of Jerusalem invaded Fatimid Egypt, requested help from Nur ad-Din. The Nur ad-Din sent his general Shirkuh, and in 1166 Amalric was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein. When Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin, who defeated a joint crusader-Byzantine siege of Damietta. Saladin eventually overthrew the Fatimid caliphs and established himself as Sultan of Egypt. He also began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to begin exerting control over Damascus and Nur ad-Din's other Syrian possessions. In 1177 Saladin was defeated by the crusaders at the Battle of Montgisard, despite his numerical superiority. Saladin also besieged Kerak in 1183, but was forced to withdraw. He finally launched a full invasion of Jerusalem in 1187 and annihilated the crusader army at the Battle of Hattin in July. Acre fell to Saladin soon after, and Jerusalem itself was captured in October. These events shocked Europe, resulting in the Third Crusade in 1189, led by Richard I of England, Philip II of France and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, though the last drowned en route.\nThe surviving crusaders, joined by new arrivals from Europe, put Acre to a lengthy siege which lasted until 1191. After re-capturing Acre, Richard defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf in 1191 and the Battle of Jaffa in 1192, recovering most of the coast for the Christians, but could not recover Jerusalem or any of the inland territory of the kingdom. The crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192. Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the Crusaders to fulfill their vows, after which they all returned home. Local crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.\nSaladin died in 1193, and there were frequent conflicts between different Ayyubid sultans ruling in Damascus and Cairo. Damascus was the capital of independent Ayyubid rulers between 1193 and 1201, from 1218 to 1238, from 1239 to 1245, and from 1250 to 1260. At other times it was ruled by the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt. During the internecine wars fought by the Ayyubid rulers, Damascus was besieged repeatedly, as, e.g., in 1229.\nThe patterned Byzantine and Chinese silks available through Damascus, one of the Western termini of the Silk Road, gave the English language \"damask\".\nMamluk period.\nAyyubid rule (and independence) came to an end with the Mongol invasion of Syria in 1260, in which the Mongols led by Kitbuqa entered the city on 1 March 1260, along with the King of Armenia, Hethum I, and the Prince of Antioch, Bohemond VI; hence, the citizens of Damascus saw for the first time for six centuries three Christian potentates ride in triumph through their streets. However, following the Mongol defeat at Ain Jalut on 3 September 1260, Damascus was captured five days later and became the provincial capital of the Mamluk Sultanate, ruled from Egypt, following the Mongol withdrawal. Following their victory at the Battle of Wadi al-Khaznadar, the Mongols led by Ghazan besieged the city for ten days, which surrendered between December 30, 1299, and January 6, 1300, though its Citadel resisted. Ghazan then retreated with most of his forces in February, probably because the Mongol horses needed fodder, and left behind about 10,000 horsemen under the Mongol general Mulay. Around March 1300, Mulay returned with his horsemen to Damascus, then followed Ghazan back across the Euphrates. In May 1300, the Egyptian Mamluks returned from Egypt and reclaimed the entire area without a battle. In April 1303, the Mamluks managed to defeat the Mongol army led by Kutlushah and Mulay along with their Armenian allies at the Battle of Marj al-Saffar, to put an end to Mongol invasions of the Levant. Later on, the Black Death of 1348\u20131349 killed as much as half of the city's population.\nIn 1400, Timur, the Turco-Mongol conqueror, besieged Damascus. The Mamluk sultan dispatched a deputation from Cairo, including Ibn Khaldun, who negotiated with him, but after their withdrawal, Timur sacked the city on 17 March 1401. The Umayyad Mosque was burnt and men and women were taken into slavery. A huge number of the city's artisans were taken to Timur's capital at Samarkand. These were the luckier citizens: many were slaughtered and their heads piled up in a field outside the north-east corner of the walls, where a city square still bears the name \"Burj al-Ru'us\" (between modern-day Al-Qassaa and Bab Tuma), originally \"the tower of heads\".\nRebuilt, Damascus continued to serve as a Mamluk provincial capital until 1516.\nOttoman period.\nIn early 1516, the Ottoman Empire, wary of the danger of an alliance between the Mamluks and the Persian Safavids, started a campaign of conquest against the Mamluk sultanate. On 21 September, the Mamluk governor of Damascus fled the city, and on 2 October the khutba in the Umayyad mosque was pronounced in the name of Selim I. The day after, the victorious sultan entered the city, staying for three months. On 15 December, he left Damascus by Bab al-Jabiya, intent on the conquest of Egypt. Little appeared to have changed in the city: one army had simply replaced another. However, on his return in October 1517, the sultan ordered the construction of a mosque, tekkiye and mausoleum at the shrine of Shaikh Muhi al-Din ibn Arabi in al-Salihiyah. This was to be the first of Damascus' great Ottoman monuments.\nDuring this time, according to an Ottoman census, Damascus had 10,423 households.\nThe Ottomans remained for the next 400 years, except for a brief occupation by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt from 1832 to 1840. Because of its importance as the point of departure for one of the two great Hajj caravans to Mecca, Damascus was treated with more attention by the Porte than its size might have warranted\u2014for most of this period, Aleppo was more populous and commercially more important. In 1559 the western building of Sulaymaniyya Takiyya, comprising a mosque and khan for pilgrims on the road to Mecca, was completed to a design by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, and soon afterward the Salimiyya Madrasa was built adjoining it.\nEarly in the nineteenth century, Damascus was noted for its shady cafes along the banks of the Barada. A depiction of these by William Henry Bartlett was published in 1836, along with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon, see Under Ottoman rule, Christians and Jews were considered dhimmis and were allowed to practice their religious precepts. During the Damascus affair of 1840 the false accusation of ritual murder was brought against members of the Jewish community of Damascus. The massacre of Christians in 1860 was also one of the most notorious incidents of these centuries when fighting between Druze and Maronites in Mount Lebanon spilled over into the city. Several thousand Christians were killed in June 1860, with many more being saved through the intervention of the Algerian exile Abd al-Qadir and his soldiers (three days after the massacre started), who brought them to safety in Abd al-Qadir's residence and the Citadel of Damascus. The Christian quarter of the old city (mostly inhabited by Catholics), including several churches, was burnt down. The Christian inhabitants of the notoriously poor and refractory Midan district outside the walls (mostly Orthodox) were, however, protected by their Muslim neighbors.\nAmerican Missionary E.C. Miller records that in 1867 the population of the city was 'about' 140,000, of whom 30,000 were Christians, 10,000 Jews, and 100,000 'Mohammedans' with fewer than 100 Protestant Christians. In the meantime, American writer Mark Twain visited Damascus, then wrote about his travel in \"The Innocents Abroad\", in which he mentioned: \"Though old as history itself, thou art fresh as the breath of spring, blooming as thine own rose-bud, and fragrant as thine own orange flower, O Damascus, pearl of the East!\". In November 1898, German emperor Wilhelm II toured Damascus, during his trip to the Ottoman Empire.\nModern period.\n20th century.\nIn the early years of the 20th century, nationalist sentiment in Damascus, initially cultural in its interest, began to take a political coloring, largely in reaction to the turkicisation program of the Committee of Union and Progress government established in Istanbul in 1908. The hanging of a number of patriotic intellectuals by Jamal Pasha, governor of Damascus, in Beirut and Damascus in 1915 and 1916 further stoked nationalist feeling, and in 1918, as the forces of the Arab Revolt and the British Imperial forces approached, residents fired on the retreating Turkish troops.\nOn 1 October 1918, T. E. Lawrence entered Damascus, the third arrival of the day, the first being the Australian 3rd Light Horse Brigade, led by Major A.C.N. 'Harry' Olden. Two days later, 3 October 1918, the forces of the Arab revolt led by Prince Faisal also entered Damascus. A military government under Shukri Pasha was named and Faisal ibn Hussein was proclaimed king of Syria. Political tension arose in November 1917, when the new Bolshevik government in Russia revealed the Sykes-Picot Agreement whereby Britain and France had arranged to partition the Arab East between them. A new Franco-British proclamation on 17 November promised the \"complete and definitive freeing of the peoples so long oppressed by the Turks.\" The Syrian National Congress in March adopted a democratic constitution. However, the Versailles Conference had granted France a mandate over Syria, and in 1920 a French army commanded by the General Mariano Goybet crossed the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, defeated a small Syrian defensive expedition at the Battle of Maysalun and entered Damascus. The French made Damascus the capital of their League of Nations Mandate for Syria.\nWhen in 1925 the Great Syrian Revolt in the Hauran spread to Damascus, the French suppressed it with heavy weaponry, bombing and shelling the city on 9 May 1926. As a result, the area of the old city between Al-Hamidiyah Souq and Medhat Pasha Souq was burned to the ground, with many deaths, and has since then been known as \"al-Hariqa\" (\"the fire\"). The old city was surrounded with barbed wire to prevent rebels from infiltrating the Ghouta, and a new road was built outside the northern ramparts to facilitate the movement of armored cars.\nOn 21 June 1941, 3 weeks into the Allied Syria-Lebanon campaign, Damascus was captured from the Vichy French forces by a mixed British Indian and Free French force. The French agreed to withdraw in 1946, following the British intervention during the Levant Crisis, thus leading to the full independence of Syria. Damascus remained the capital.\nIn 1979, the Old City of Damascus, with its collection of archaeological and historical religious sites, was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.\nCivil war.\nBy January 2012, clashes between the regular army and rebels reached the outskirts of Damascus, reportedly preventing people from leaving or reaching their houses, especially when security operations there intensified from the end of January into February.\nBy June 2012, bullets and shrapnel shells smashed into homes in Damascus overnight as troops battled the Free Syrian Army in the streets. At least three tank shells slammed into residential areas in the central Damascus neighborhood of Qaboun, according to activists. Intense exchanges of assault rifle fire marked the clash, according to residents and amateur video posted online.\nThe Damascus suburb of Ghouta suffered heavy bombing in December 2017 and a further wave of bombing started in February 2018, also known as Rif Dimashq Offensive.\nOn 20 May 2018, Damascus and the entire Rif Dimashq Governorate came fully under government control for the first time in 7 years after the evacuation of IS from Yarmouk Camp. In September 2019, Damascus entered the \"Guinness World Records\" as the least liveable city, scoring 30.7 points on the Economist's Global Liveability Index in 2019, based on factors such as: stability, healthcare, culture and environment, education, and infrastructure. However, the trend of being the least liveable city on Earth started in 2017, and continued as of 2024.\nSyrian rebels entered Damascus on 8 December 2024 after a series of offensives, capturing Sednaya Prison and later resulting in the collapse of Ba'athist Syria.\nEconomy.\nThe historical role that Damascus played as an important trade center has changed in recent years due to political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade. Most goods produced in Damascus, as well as in Syria, are distributed to countries of the Arabian peninsula. Damascus has also held an annual international trade exposition every fall, since 1954.\nThe tourism industry in Damascus has a lot of potential, however, the civil war has hampered these prospects. The abundance of cultural wealth in Damascus has been modestly employed since the late 1980s with the development of many accommodation and transportation establishments and other related investments. Since the early 2000s, numerous boutique hotels and bustling cafes opened in the old city which attracts plenty of European tourists and Damascenes alike.\nIn 2009 new office space was built and became available on the real estate market. Marota City and Basilia City are two new development projects in Damascus. These two projects are viewed as post-war reconstruction efforts. The Damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in March 2009, and the exchange is the only stock exchange in Syria. It is located in the Barzeh district, within Syria's financial markets and securities commission. Its final home is to be located in the upmarket business district of \"Yaafur\".\nDamascus is home to a wide range of industrial activities, such as textile, food processing, cement, and various chemical industries. The majority of factories are run by the state, however limited privatization in addition to economic activities led by the private sector, were permitted starting in the early 2000s with the liberalization of trade that took place.\nTraditional handcrafts and artisan copper engravings are still produced in the old city.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nIn the 2004 Census of Population conducted by Central Bureau of Statistics (Syria), Damascus had a population of 1,552,161 living in 309,317 of its 345,097 total dwellings. The estimated population of Damascus in 2011 was 1,711,000. However, in 2022, the city had an estimated population of 2,503,000, which in early 2023 rose to 2,584,771.\nDamascus is the center of a crowded metropolitan area with an estimated population of 5\u00a0million. The metropolitan area of Damascus includes the cities of Douma, Harasta, Darayya, Al-Tall and Jaramana.\nThe city's growth rate is higher than in Syria as a whole, primarily due to rural-urban migration and the influx of young Syrian migrants drawn by employment and educational opportunities. The migration of Syrian youths to Damascus has resulted in an average age within the city that is below the national average. Nonetheless, the population of Damascus is thought to have decreased in recent years as a result of the ongoing Syrian civil war.\nEthnicity.\nThe vast majority of Damascenes are Syrian Arabs. The Kurds are the second largest ethnic minority, with a population of approximately 300,000. They reside primarily in the neighborhoods of Wadi al-Mashari (\"Zorava\" or \"Zore Afa\" in Kurdish) and Rukn al-Din. Other minorities include Palestinians, Assyrians, Syrian Turkmen, Armenians, Circassians and a small Greek community.\nThere was once a significant Jewish community in Damascus, but as of 2023, no Jews remain.\nReligion.\nIslam is the largest religion. The majority of Muslims are Sunni while Alawites and Twelver Shi'a comprise sizeable minorities. Alawites live primarily in the neighbourhoods of Mezzeh 86 and Sumariyah part of the Mezzeh district, in addition to the neighbourhood of Eish al-Warwar in the district of Barzeh. Twelvers primarily live near the Shia holy sites of Sayyidah Ruqayya and Sayyidah Zaynab. It is believed that there are more than 200 mosques in Damascus, the most well-known being the Umayyad Mosque.\nChristians represent about 10%\u201315% of the population. Several Eastern Christian rites have their headquarters in Damascus, including the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, the Melkite Greek Catholic Church, and the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch. The Christian districts in the city are Bab Tuma, Qassaa and Ghassani. Each have many churches, most notably the ancient Chapel of Saint Paul, St. Paul Cathedral, Our Lady of the Dormition Cathedral, and St Georges Cathedral in Bab Tuma. At the suburb of Soufanieh a series of apparitions of the Virgin Mary have reportedly been observed between 1982 and 2004. The Patriarchal See of the Syriac Orthodox is based in Damascus, Bab Touma.\nA smaller Druze minority inhabits the city, notably in the mixed Christian-Druze suburbs of Tadamon, Jaramana, and Sahnaya.\nThere was a small Jewish community namely in what is called \"Harat al-Yahud\" the Jewish quarter. They are the remnants of an ancient and much larger Jewish presence in Syria, dating back at least to Roman times, if not before to the time of King David.\nSufism.\nSufism throughout the second half of the 20th century has been an influential current in the Sunni religious practises, particularly in Damascus. The largest women-only and girls-only Muslim movement in the world happens to be Sufi-oriented and is based in Damascus, led by Munira al-Qubaysi. Syrian Sufism has its stronghold in urban regions such as Damascus, where it also established political movements such as Zayd, with the help of a series of mosques, and clergy such as Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi, Sa'id Hawwa, Abd al-Rahman al-Shaghouri and Muhammad al-Yaqoubi.\nHistorical sites.\nThe Ancient City of Damascus was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1979. Beginning with the Aramaic kingdom (11th-7th centuries BC), Damascus grew into the political and urban hub for the region. Today, the ancient city encompasses over 125 cultural heritage sites that represent Damascus\u2019 long history, including archaeological and architectural remains from the Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, Islamic, and Ottoman periods. Tragically, ongoing conflict and war continues to threaten the archaeological heritage and prevent archaeological discovery of Damascus.\nThe Citadel of Damascus is in the northwest corner of the Old City. The \"Damascus Straight Street\" (referred to in the account of the conversion of St. Paul in Acts 9:11), also known as the \"Via Recta\", was the decumanus (east\u2013west main street) of Roman Damascus, and extended for over . Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate), where St George's Cathedral, the seat of the Syriac Orthodox Church, is notably located. Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk. At the end of Bab Sharqi Street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam. A shrine in the mosque is said to contain the body of St. John the Baptist. The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque. Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque, the shrine of the youngest daughter of Husayn ibn Ali, can also be found near the Umayyad Mosque. The ancient district of Amara is also within walking distance from these sites. Another heavily visited site is Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque, where the tomb of Zaynab bint Ali is located. Shias, Fatemids, and Dawoodi Bohras believe that after the battle of Karbala (680 AD), in Iraq, the Umayyad Caliph Yezid brought Imam Husain's head to Damascus, where it was first kept in the courtyard of Yezid Mahal, now part of Umayyad Mosque complex. All other remaining members of Imam Husain's family (left alive after Karbala) along with the heads of all other companions, who were killed at Karbala, were also brought to Damascus. These members were kept as prisoners on the outskirts of the city (near Bab al-Saghir), where the other heads were kept at the same location, now called Ru'\u00fbs ash-Shuhad\u00e2-e-Karbala or ganj-e-sarha-e-shuhada-e-Karbala. There is a qibla (place of worship) marked at the place, where devotees say Imam Ali-Zain-ul-Abedin used to pray while in captivity.\nThe Harat Al Yehud or Jewish Quarter is a recently restored historical tourist destination popular among Europeans before the outbreak of civil war.\nWalls and gates of Damascus.\nThe Old City of Damascus with an approximate area of 86.12 hectares is surrounded by ramparts on the northern and eastern sides and part of the southern side. There are seven extant city gates, the oldest of which dates back to the Roman period. These are, clockwise from the north of the citadel:\nOther areas outside the walled city also bear the name \"gate\": Bab al-Faraj, Bab Mousalla and Bab Sreija, both to the south-west of the walled city.\nThreats to the future of the old City.\nDue to the rapid decline of the population of Old Damascus (between 1995 and 2009 about 30,000 people moved out of the old city for more modern accommodation), a growing number of buildings are being abandoned or are falling into disrepair. In March 2007, the local government announced that it would be demolishing Old City buildings along a stretch of rampart walls as part of a redevelopment scheme. These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world. It is hoped that its inclusion on the list will draw more public awareness to these significant threats to the future of the historic Old City of Damascus.\nState of old Damascus.\nIn spite of the recommendations of the UNESCO World Heritage Center:\nIn October 2010, Global Heritage Fund named Damascus one of 12 cultural heritage sites most \"on the verge\" of irreparable loss and destruction.\nEducation.\nDamascus is the main center of education in Syria. It is home to Damascus University, which is the oldest and largest university in Syria. After the enactment of legislation allowing private higher institutions, several new universities were established in the city and the surrounding area, including:\nThe institutes play an important rule in the education, including:\nIn Damascus, Higher education in Syrian Arab Republic started with sustainable development steps through Damascus University. \nTransportation.\nDamascus is linked with other major cities in Syria via a motorway network. The M5 connects Damascus with Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Turkey in the north and Jordan in the south. The M1 is going from Homs onto Latakia and Tartus.\nThe M4 links the city with Al-Hasakah and Iraq. The M1 highway connects the city to western Syria and Beirut.\nThe main airport is Damascus International Airport, approximately away from the city, with connections to a few Middle Eastern cities. Before the beginning of the Syrian civil war, the airport had connectivity to many Asian, European, African, and, South American cities.\nStreets in Damascus are often narrow, especially in the older parts of the city, and speed bumps are widely used to limit the speed of vehicles. Many taxi companies operate in Damascus. Fares are regulated by law and taxi drivers are obliged to use a taximeter.\nPublic transport in Damascus depends extensively on buses and minibuses. There are about one hundred lines that operate inside the city and some of them extend from the city center to nearby suburbs. There is no schedule for the lines, and due to the limited number of official bus stops, buses will usually stop wherever a passenger needs to get on or off. The number of buses serving the same line is relatively high, which minimizes the waiting time. Lines are not numbered, rather they are given captions mostly indicating the two endpoints and possibly an important station along the line. Between 2019 and 2022, more than 100 modern buses were delivered from China as part of the international agreement. These deliveries strengthened and modernized the public transport of Damascus.\nServed by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the former main railway station of Damascus was al-Hejaz railway station, about west of the old city. The station is now defunct and the tracks have been removed, but there still is a ticket counter and a shuttle to Damascus Qadam station in the south of the city, which now functions as the main railway station.\nIn 2008, the government announced a plan to construct a Damascus Metro. The green line will be an essential west\u2013east axis for the future public transportation network, serving Moadamiyeh, Sumariyeh, Mezzeh, Damascus University, Hijaz, the Old City, Abbassiyeen and Qaboun Pullman bus station. A four-line metro network is expected to be in operation by 2050.\nCulture.\nDamascus was chosen as the 2008 Arab Capital of Culture. The preparation for the festivity began in February 2007 with the establishing of the Administrative Committee for \"Damascus Arab Capital of Culture\" by a presidential decree. Museums in Damascus includes National Museum of Damascus, Azem Palace, Military Museum, October War Panorama Museum, Museum of Arabic Calligraphy and Nur al-Din Bimaristan\nSports and leisure.\nPopular sports include football, basketball, swimming, tennis, table tennis, equestrian and chess. Damascus is home to many football clubs that participate in the Syrian Premier League including al-Jaish, al-Shorta, Al-Wahda and Al-Majd. Many Other sports clubs are located in several districts of the city: Barada SC, Al-Nidal SC, Al-Muhafaza, Qasioun SC, al-Thawra SC, Maysalun SC, al-Fayhaa SC, Dummar SC, al-Majd SC and al-Arin SC.\nThe fifth and the seventh Pan Arab Games were held in Damascus in 1976 and 1992 respectively.\nThe now modernized Al-Fayhaa Sports City features a basketball court and a hall that can accommodate up to 8,000 people. In late November 2021, Syria's national basketball team played there against Kazakhstan, making Damascus host of Syria's first international basketball tournament in almost two decades.\nThe city also has a modern golf course located near the Ebla Cham Palace Hotel on the southeastern outskirts of Damascus.\nDamascus has a busy nightlife. Coffeehouses offer Arabic coffee, tea and nargileh (water pipes). Card games, tables (backgammon variants), and chess are activities frequented in caf\u00e9s. These coffeehouses had an international reputation in the past, as indicated by Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration, \"Cafes in Damascus\", to a picture by William Henry Bartlett in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1837. Current movies can be seen at Cinema City which was previously known as Cinema Dimashq.\nTishreen Park is one of the largest parks in Damascus. It is home to the annual Damascus Flower Show. Other parks include al-Jahiz, al-Sibbki, al-Tijara, al-Wahda, etc... The city's famous Ghouta oasis is also a weekend destination for recreation. Many recreation centers operate in the city including sports clubs, swimming pools, and golf courses. The Syrian Arab Horse Association in Damascus offers a wide range of activities and services for horse breeders and riders."}
{"id": "8915", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8915", "title": "Discrete multitone modulation", "text": ""}
{"id": "8918", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8918", "title": "Dancing", "text": ""}
{"id": "8921", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8921", "title": "Diplomatic immunity", "text": "Diplomatic immunity is a principle of international law by which certain foreign government officials are recognized as having legal immunity from the jurisdiction of another country. It allows diplomats safe passage and freedom of travel in a host country and affords almost total protection from local lawsuits and prosecution.\nDiplomatic immunity is one of the oldest and most widespread practices in international relations; most civilizations since antiquity have granted some degree of special status to foreign envoys and messengers. It is designed to facilitate relations between states by allowing their respective representatives to conduct their duties freely and safely, even during periods of political tension and armed conflict. Moreover, such protections are generally understood to be reciprocal and therefore mutually beneficial.\nAs a longstanding and nearly universal concept, diplomatic immunity has long been considered customary law; however, it was traditionally granted on a bilateral, \"ad hoc\" basis, leading to varying and sometimes conflicting standards of protection. Modern practices of diplomatic immunity have largely conformed to the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which formally codified the legal and political status of diplomats, and has been ratified by the vast majority of sovereign states.\nContrary to popular belief, diplomats are not entirely immune from the jurisdiction of their host country. Like most foreign persons, they may still be declared \"persona non grata\" and expelled. A foreign official's home country may waive immunity, typically in the event that they are involved in some manner in a serious crime unrelated to their diplomatic role (as opposed to, for example, allegations of spying). However, many countries refuse to waive immunity as a matter of course, and diplomats have no authority to waive their own immunity (except perhaps in cases of defection). Alternatively, the home country may prosecute the individual on its own accord or through the insistence of the host country. \nHistory.\nPrior to modern period.\nThe concept of diplomatic immunity can be found in ancient Indian epics like \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\", where messengers and diplomats were given immunity from capital punishment. In \"Ramayana\", when the demon king Ravana ordered the killing of Hanuman, Ravana's younger brother Vibhishana pointed out that messengers or diplomats should not be killed, as per ancient practices.\nDuring the evolution of international justice, many wars were considered rebellions or unlawful by one or more combatant sides. In such cases, the servants of the \"criminal\" sovereign were often considered accomplices and their persons violated. In other circumstances, harbingers of inconsiderable demands were killed as a declaration of war. Herodotus records that when heralds of the Persian king Xerxes demanded \"earth and water\" (i.e., symbols of submission) of Greek cities, the Athenians threw them into a pit and the Spartans threw them down a well for the purpose of suggesting they would find both earth and water at the bottom, these often being mentioned by the messenger as a threat of siege. However, even for Herodotus, this maltreatment of envoys is a crime. He recounts a story of divine vengeance befalling Sparta for this deed.\nA Roman envoy was urinated on as he was leaving the city of Tarentum. The oath of the envoy, \"This stain will be washed away with blood!\", was fulfilled during the Pyrrhic War.\nGregory of Tours recorded that Frankish envoys sent from King Childebert II to the Byzantine emperor Maurice were killed in Carthage by the prefect of the city, after one of the Franks had murdered a merchant. After Emperor Maurice heard about this, he ordered for several Carthaginians to be arrested and sent to Childebert for judgment on account of what happened to his envoys.\nThe arrest and ill-treatment of the envoy of Raja Raja Chola by the king of Kulasekhara dynasty (Second Cheras), which is now part of modern India, led to the naval Kandalur War in AD 994.\nThe Islamic prophet Muhammad sent and received envoys and strictly forbade harming them. This practice was continued by the Rashidun caliphs who exchanged diplomats with the Ethiopians and the Byzantines. This diplomatic exchange continued during the Arab\u2013Byzantine wars.\nClassical Sharia called for hospitality to be shown towards anyone who has been granted \"am\u0101n\" (or right of safe passage). \"Am\u0101n\" was readily granted to any emissary bearing a letter or another sealed document. The duration of the \"am\u0101n\" was typically a year. Envoys with this right of passage were given immunity of person and property. They were exempt from taxation, as long as they did not engage in trade.\nAs diplomats by definition enter the country under safe conduct, violating them is normally viewed as a great breach of honor. Genghis Khan and the Mongols were well known for insisting on the rights of diplomats, and would often take terrifying vengeance against any state that violated these rights; at times razing entire cities in retaliation for the execution of their ambassadors. The Mongols invaded and destroyed the Khwarezmid Empire after their ambassadors were mistreated.\n16th\u201319th century.\nThe British Parliament first guaranteed diplomatic immunity to foreign ambassadors under the Diplomatic Privileges Act in 1709, after Count Andrey Matveyev, a Russian resident in London, was subjected to verbal and physical abuse by British bailiffs.\nModern diplomatic immunity evolved parallel to the development of modern diplomacy. In the 17th century, European diplomats realized that protection from prosecution was essential to doing their jobs, and a set of rules evolved guaranteeing the rights of diplomats. These were still confined to Western Europe and were closely tied to the prerogatives of nobility. Thus, an emissary to the Ottoman Empire could expect to be arrested and imprisoned upon the outbreak of hostilities between his state and the empire. The French Revolution also disrupted this system, as the revolutionary state and Napoleon imprisoned numerous diplomats who were accused of working against France. More recently, the Iran hostage crisis is universally considered a violation of diplomatic immunity. Although the hostage takers did not officially represent the state, host countries are obligated to protect diplomatic property and personnel. On the other hand, during World War II, diplomatic immunity was upheld and the embassies of the belligerents were evacuated through neutral countries.\nFor the upper class of the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries, diplomatic immunity was an easy concept to understand. The first embassies were not permanent establishments but actual visits by high-ranking representatives, often close relatives of the sovereign, or by the sovereign in person. As permanent representations evolved, usually on a treaty basis between two powers, they were frequently staffed by relatives of the sovereign or high-ranking nobles.\nWarfare was a status of hostilities not between individual states but between their sovereigns, as well as the officers and officials of European governments, and armies often changed employers. Truces and ceasefires were commonplace, as was the fraternization between officers of opposing armies. If officers were taken prisoner, they usually gave their parole and were only restricted to a city away from the theatre of war. Almost always, they were given leave to carry their personal sidearms. Even during the French Revolutionary Wars, British scientists visited the French Academy. In such an atmosphere, it was easy to accept that some persons were immune to the laws. After all, they were still bound by strict requirements of honour and customs.\nModern era and Vienna convention.\nIn the 19th century, the Congress of Vienna reasserted the rights of diplomats; they have been largely respected since then, as the European model has spread throughout the world. Currently, diplomatic relations, including diplomatic immunity, are governed internationally by the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which has been ratified by almost every country in the world.\nIn modern times, diplomatic immunity continues to provide a means, albeit imperfect, to safeguard diplomatic personnel from any animosity that might arise between nations. As one article put it: \"So why do we agree to a system in which we're dependent on a foreign country's whim before we can prosecute a criminal inside our own borders? The practical answer is: because we depend on other countries to honor our own diplomats' immunity just as scrupulously as we honor theirs.\"\nDuring the 18 April 1961 Vienna Convention, the Holy See was granted diplomatic immunity to its foreign ambassadors as well.\nIn the United States, the Diplomatic Relations Act of 1978 ( et seq.) follows the principles introduced by the Vienna Conventions. The United States tends to be generous when granting diplomatic immunity to visiting diplomats, because a large number of US diplomats work in host countries less protective of individual rights. If the United States were to punish a visiting diplomat without sufficient grounds, US representatives in other countries could receive harsher treatment. If a person with immunity is alleged to have committed a crime or faces a civil lawsuit, the State Department asks the home country to waive immunity of the alleged offender so that the complaint can be moved to the courts. If immunity is not waived, prosecution cannot be undertaken. However, the State Department still has the right to expel the diplomat. In many such cases, the diplomat's visas are revoked, and they and their family may be barred from returning to the United States. Crimes committed by members of a diplomat's family can also result in dismissal.\nExceptions to the Vienna Convention.\nSome countries have made reservations to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, but they are minor. A number of countries limit the diplomatic immunity of persons who are citizens of the receiving country. As nations keep faith to their treaties with differing zeal, other rules may also apply, though in most cases this summary is a reasonably accurate approximation. The Convention does not cover the personnel of international organizations, whose privileges are decided upon on a case-by-case basis, usually in the treaties founding such organizations.\nUN organisations.\nThe United Nations system (including its agencies, which comprise the most recognizable international bodies such as the World Bank and many others) has a relatively standardized form of limited immunities for staff traveling on UN laissez-passer; diplomatic immunity is often granted to the highest-ranking officials of these agencies. Consular officials (that do not have concurrent diplomatic accreditation) formally have a more limited form of immunity, generally limited to their official duties. Diplomatic technical and administrative staff also have more limited immunity under the Vienna Convention; for this reason, some countries may accredit a member of technical or administrative staff as an attach\u00e9.\nOthers.\nOther categories of government officials that may travel frequently to other countries may not have diplomatic passports or diplomatic immunity, such as members of the military, high-ranking government officials, ministers, and others. For the US military, official passports can be used for work related travels only. Many countries provide non-diplomatic official passports to such personnel, and there may be different classes of such travel documents such as official passports, service passports, and others. De facto recognition of some form of immunity may be conveyed by states accepting officials traveling on such documents, or there may exist bilateral agreements to govern such cases (as in, for example, the case of military personnel conducting or observing exercises on the territory of the receiving country).\nFormally, diplomatic immunity may be limited to officials accredited to a host country, or traveling to or from their host country. In practice, many countries may effectively recognize diplomatic immunity for those traveling on diplomatic passports, with admittance to the country constituting acceptance of the diplomatic status. However, this is not universal, and diplomats have been prosecuted and jailed for crimes committed outside the country they are accredited to.\nAs a result of their title, diplomats are exempt from being prosecuted by the state in open court when they are suspected to be guilty of a crime. Not only are these agents free from the criminal jurisdiction of the state, they are also immune from administrative and civil jurisdiction. This applies for most scenarios; however, there are some exceptions when the diplomatic immunity is subject to waiver.\nAsadollah Asadi, an Iranian diplomat, was arrested while returning to his residence in Austria on a highway in Germany on June 10, 2018, accused of being involved in an attempted bombing at a gathering of the National Council of Resistance of Iran (a political organisation opposing the Iranian regime). While Assadi was entitled to diplomatic immunity where applicable, it was deemed that he was not protected when he was arrested as he was on holiday (in Germany) outside the country where he was posted and hence protected.\nUses and abuses.\nIn reality, most diplomats are representatives of nations with a tradition of professional civil service; they are expected to obey regulations governing their behaviour and suffer severe disciplinary action if they flout local laws. In many nations, a professional diplomat's career may be compromised if they (or members of their family) disobey the local authorities or cause serious embarrassment, and such cases are, at any rate, a violation of the spirit of the Vienna Conventions.\nThe Vienna Convention is explicit that \"without prejudice to their privileges and immunities, it is the duty of all persons enjoying such privileges and immunities to respect the laws and regulations of the receiving State.\" Nevertheless, on some occasions, protected diplomats have violated laws (including those that would be violations at home as well) of the host country, and that country has been essentially limited to informing the diplomat's nation that the diplomat is no longer welcome (\"persona non grata\"). Diplomatic agents are not, however, exempt from the jurisdiction of their home state, and hence prosecution may be undertaken by the sending state. For minor violations of the law, the sending state may impose administrative procedures specific to the foreign service or diplomatic mission.\nViolation of the law by diplomats has included espionage, smuggling, child custody law violations, money laundering, tax evasion, making terrorist threats, slavery, child solicitation, and murder.\nOffences against the person.\nOn-duty police officer Yvonne Fletcher was murdered in London in 1984, by a person shooting from inside the Libyan embassy during a protest. The incident caused a breakdown in diplomatic relations until Libya admitted \"general responsibility\" in 1999. The incident became a major factor in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's decision to allow President of the United States Ronald Reagan to launch the US bombing of Libya in 1986 from American bases in the United Kingdom.\nIn 1987, the Human Resources Administration of New York City placed 9-year-old Terrence Karamba in a foster home after his elementary school teachers noticed suspicious scars and injuries. He and his 7-year-old sister, who was also placed in city custody, told officials the wounds had been inflicted by their father, Floyd Karamba, an administrative attach\u00e9 at the Zimbabwean Mission to the UN. No charges were filed, as Karamba had diplomatic immunity.\nIn February 1999 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, Kazuko Shimokoji, wife of the Japanese Consul-General, showed up at the emergency department of a city hospital with two black eyes and a bruised neck. She told doctors that her husband had beaten her. When local police questioned her husband, Mr. Shimokoji said, \"Yes, I punched her out and she deserved it\", and described the incident as \"a cultural thing and not a big deal\". Although an arrest warrant was issued, Mr. Shimokoji could not be arrested due to his diplomatic immunity. However, his statement to the police was widely reported in both the local and Japanese press. The subsequent public uproar prompted the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to waive Mr. Shimokoji's immunity. Though he pleaded guilty in Canadian court, he was given an absolute discharge. Nonetheless, he was recalled to Japan where he was reassigned to office duty and had his pay cut.\nIn 2002, a Colombian diplomat in the United Kingdom was prosecuted for manslaughter once diplomatic immunity was waived by the Colombian government.\nIn November 2006 in New York City, Fred Matwanga, Kenyan diplomat to the UN, was taken into police custody by officers responding to reports that he had assaulted his son; he was released after asserting diplomatic immunity.\nIn 2011, Turkish president Erdogan and his team started fighting with UN officials at the United Nations Headquarters. The then secretary general, Ban Ki Moon, soon ran over and apologised to Erdogan.\nIn April 2012 in the Philippines, Erick Shcks Bairnals, a technical officer of the Panama Maritime Authority's regional office in Manila, was accused of raping a 19-year-old Filipino woman. Being an attached agency to the Panamanian embassy in Manila, the AMP office was classified as a diplomatic entity, its officers possessing the same privileges conferred to the embassy's diplomats. Shcks was later released from detention because Shcks \"enjoys protection under the 1961 Vienna Convention.\"\nIn March 2013, the Supreme Court of India restricted Italian ambassador Daniele Mancini from leaving India for breaching an undertaking given to the apex court. Despite Italian and European Union protests regarding the restrictions as contrary to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, the Supreme Court of India said it would be unacceptable to argue diplomatic immunity after voluntarily submitting to the court's jurisdiction. The Italian envoy had invoked Article 32 of the Constitution of India when filing an affidavit to the Supreme Court taking responsibility for the return of the two Italian marines to India after casting their votes in the March 2012 general elections in Italy. The Indian Supreme Court opined that the Italian ambassador had waived his diplomatic immunity and could be charged for contempt. The two marines were being tried in India for the murder of two Indian fishermen off the coast of Kerala (see the Enrica Lexie case).\nIn October 2013, Russian diplomat Dmitri Borodin was arrested in The Hague, The Netherlands, after neighbours called the police. Borodin was alleged to have been drunk and violent towards his children, aged two and four. Police were in the area because Borodin's wife had lost control over her car while also intoxicated, and had rammed four parked cars near the diplomats' house. Russia immediately demanded an apology from the Dutch government for violating Borodin's diplomatic immunity. The row came at a time of tension between Russia and the Netherlands, after the Russian security services captured a Greenpeace vessel sailing under the Dutch flag, \"Arctic Sunrise\", that was protesting against oil drilling in the Prirazlomnoye field.\nIn June 2014, the New Zealand government confirmed that Mohammed Rizalman Bin Ismail from Malaysia, aged in his 30s and employed at Malaysia's High Commission in Wellington, had invoked diplomatic immunity when faced with charges of burglary and assault with intent to rape after allegedly following a 21-year-old woman to her home. He returned to Malaysia in May 2014 with his family while the case was still in hearing. The New Zealand foreign ministry was criticized for allowing the defendant to leave the country, which was blamed on miscommunication between the foreign ministries of the two countries, as Prime Minister John Key expressed his view that \"the man should have faced the charges in New Zealand\". Malaysia eventually agreed to send the diplomat back to assist in investigations and he was eventually tried and sentenced to nine months' home detention in New Zealand.\nIn July 2017, in Jordan, two Jordanian carpenters were invited to repair furniture at an Israeli diplomatic security agent's residence near the Israeli embassy. It is believed that the Jordanians and Israeli security agent quarreled over the ongoing tensions regarding the installations of metal detectors at entry points to al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem. One carpenter, a teenager of Palestinian origin reportedly tried to stab the Israeli security agent with his screwdriver, and the Israeli security agent shot and killed the Jordanian carpenter, and also shot the property landlord as well, a doctor, who happened to be there at the time. Israel refused to allow Jordanian authorities to question the agent, claiming diplomatic immunity under the Vienna convention.\nIn August 2017, Grace Mugabe, the former First Lady of Zimbabwe, invoked diplomatic immunity on 15 August after assault charges were laid against her by a South African model.\nIn 2018, Saudi American journalist Jamal Khashoggi was killed by Saudi officials inside the Saudi embassy in Turkey. The Turkish police were not allowed to enter the premises days after this death. Furthermore, a Saudi government vehicle with diplomatic license plates was spotted entering a park.\nIn August 2022, UN diplomat Charles Dickens Imene Oliha of South Sudan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs claimed diplomatic immunity and was released from jail in New York City after raping a woman twice inside her apartment building. He subsequently returned to South Sudan, where he was suspended from his duties and is to be investigated.\nTheft.\nIn April 2021, two Pakistani diplomats in South Korea were caught shoplifting in Seoul. The Pakistani diplomats were caught stealing $1.70 chocolate and a $10 hat. The case was closed owing to their diplomatic immunity.\nSmuggling.\nDiplomats and officials involved in drug smuggling have benefited from diplomatic immunity. For example, a Venezuelan general wanted in the United States on drugs charges was arrested in Aruba only to be released after the Venezuelan government protested his diplomatic immunity and threatened sanctions if Aruba did not release him.\nIn December 2014, Gambian diplomats were found guilty by Southwark Crown Court of London for selling tax-free tobacco from the Gambian embassy in the United Kingdom. The Crown Prosecution Service told the court that much of this was sold from the embassy without paying value-added tax and excise duty.\nEmployer abuse and slavery.\nDiplomatic immunity from local employment and labor law has precipitated incidents in which diplomatic staff have been accused of abusing local workers, who are often hired for positions requiring local knowledge (such as an administrative assistant, press/PR officer) or for general labor. In such situations, the employees are in a legal limbo where the laws of neither the host country nor the diplomat's country are enforceable. Diplomats have ignored local laws concerning minimum wages, maximum working hours, vacation and holidays, and in some cases have imprisoned employees in their homes, deprived them of their earned wages, passports, food, and communication with the outside world, abused them physically and emotionally, and invaded their privacy. Reported incidents include the following:\nVehicular offences.\nParking violations.\nA particular problem is the difficulty in enforcing ordinary laws, such as prohibitions on double parking. For example, the Autobahn 555 in Cologne, Germany was nicknamed the \"Diplomatenrennbahn\" (Diplomat's Raceway), when Bonn was the capital of West Germany, because of the numerous diplomats that used to speed through the highway under diplomatic immunity. Certain cities, for example The Hague and New York City have taken to impounding such cars rather than fining their owners. Diplomats' status does not guarantee the release of impounded cars. Diplomats' cars may not be searched or entered in the US.\nDiplomatic missions have their own regulations, but many require their staff to pay any fines due for parking violations. A 2006 economic study found that there was a significant correlation between home-country corruption (as measured by Transparency International) and unpaid parking fines: six countries had in excess of 100 violations per diplomat: Kuwait, Egypt, Chad, Sudan, Bulgaria and Mozambique. In particular, New York City, which hosts the United Nations Headquarters, regularly protests to the United States Department of State about nonpayment of parking tickets because of diplomatic status. In 2001, the city had more than 200,000 outstanding parking tickets from diplomats, totaling more than $21.3 million, of which only $160,682 had been collected; a decade later, the total cost of unpaid parking tickets was over $17 million. In 1997, then-mayor Rudy Giuliani proposed to the Clinton administration that the U.S. State Department revoke the special DPL plates for diplomats who ignore parking summonses; the State Department denied Giuliani's request.\nIn cities that impose a congestion charge, the decision of some diplomatic missions not to furnish payment has proved controversial. In London, embassies have amassed approximately \u00a358 million in unpaid charges as of 2012, with the American embassy comprising approximately \u00a36 million and the Russian, German and Japanese missions around \u00a32 million each.\nVehicular assault and drunk driving.\nGeorgian driver in the United States.\nIn January 1997, Gueorgui Makharadze, a high-ranking Georgian diplomat, caused a five-car pileup in Washington, D.C., in the United States, which killed a 16-year-old girl. Makharadze's claim of diplomatic immunity created a national outrage in the United States, particularly given Makharadze's previous record of driving offenses: In April 1996, Makharadze had been charged with speeding in Virginia, and four months later, he was detained by District of Columbia police on suspicion of drunk driving. In both prior cases, charges were dismissed based on his immunity. On the basis of the media coverage, Georgia revoked Makharadze's immunity, and he was ultimately sentenced to seven years in prison after pleading guilty to one count of involuntary manslaughter and four counts of aggravated assault.\nAmerican driver in Russia.\nOn 27 October 1998, in Vladivostok, Russia, Douglas Kent, the American Consul General to Russia, was involved in a car accident that left a young man, Alexander Kashin, disabled. Kent was not prosecuted in a US court. Under the Vienna Convention, diplomatic immunity does not apply to civil actions relating to vehicular accidents, but in 2006, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that, since he was using his vehicle for consular purposes, Kent could not be sued civilly.\nRussian driver in Canada.\nIn 2001, a Russian diplomat, Andrei Knyazev, hit and killed a woman while driving drunk in Ottawa. Knyazev refused to take a breathalyzer at the scene of the crash, citing diplomatic immunity. Russia refused Canadian requests to waive his immunity, and Knyazev was expelled from Canada. Though the Russian Foreign Ministry fired him and charged him with involuntary manslaughter, and Russian and Canadian authorities cooperated in the investigation, the case caused a political storm in Canada. Many accused the Foreign Ministry of incompetence after it emerged that Knyazev had twice been previously investigated for drunk driving. The Canadian Foreign Minister had fought unsuccessfully to have Knyazev tried in Ottawa. In 2002, Knyazev was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter in Russia.\nAmerican driver in Romania.\nOn 3 December 2004, in Bucharest, Romania, Christopher Van Goethem, an American Marine serving his embassy, ran a red traffic signal, collided with a taxi, and killed popular Romanian musician Teo Peter. The Romanian government requested the American government to lift his immunity, which it refused to do. In a court-martial, he was acquitted of manslaughter and adultery but was convicted of obstruction of justice and making false statements.\nCanadian driver in Tanzania.\nOn 9 December 2009, in Tanzania, Canadian Junior Envoy Jean Touchette was arrested after it was reported that he spat at a traffic police officer on duty in the middle of a traffic jam in the Banana district on the outskirts of Dar es Salaam. Canada's High Commissioner, Robert Orr, was summoned by the Tanzanian Foreign Ministry over the incident, and the junior envoy was later recalled.\nRomanian driver in Singapore.\nOn 15 December 2009, in Singapore, the Romanian charg\u00e9 d'affaires, Silviu Ionescu, was allegedly behind a drunk-driving hit-and-run accident that killed a 30-year-old man and seriously injured two others. He left Singapore for Romania three days after the accident. The Romanian foreign ministry suspended Ionescu from his post. A coroner's inquiry in Singapore, which included testimony by the Romanian embassy driver, concluded that Ionescu was solely responsible for the accident. An Interpol Red Notice was subsequently issued for his arrest and possible extradition notwithstanding the fact that Romania had not waived his diplomatic immunity and had commenced criminal proceedings against him in Romania. The Singapore government argued that by reason of Article 39(2) of the Vienna Convention, Ionescu was no longer protected by diplomatic immunity. Ionescu was eventually sentenced to six years in jail.\nAmerican driver in Pakistan.\nIn January 2011 in Lahore, Pakistan, American embassy employee Raymond Allen Davis shot and killed two Pakistani civilians, while a third man was struck and killed by a US consulate car responding to the shooting. According to Davis, they were about to rob him and he acted in self-defense. When detained by police, Davis claimed to be a consultant at the US consulate in Lahore. He was formally arrested and remanded into custody. Further investigations revealed that he was working with the CIA as a contractor in Pakistan. The US State Department declared him a diplomat and repeatedly requested immunity under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, to which Pakistan is a signatory. On 16 March 2011, Davis was released after the families of the two killed men were paid $2.4\u00a0million in \"diyya\" (a form of monetary compensation or blood money). Judges then acquitted him on all charges and Davis immediately departed Pakistan.\nUnited Nations driver in Pakistan.\nOn 10 April 2011, in Islamabad, Pakistan, Patrick Kibuta, an electrical engineer in the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan caused a vehicle collision with another vehicle, while under the influence of alcohol. Kibuta, who was driving in the opposing lane, injured a Canadian citizen residing in Islamabad, who suffered multiple fractures and required surgery. The Kohsar police impounded Kibuta's UN vehicle on the scene, and a blood test confirmed that he had an elevated blood alcohol level. Charges for reckless and drunken driving were filed against Kibuta, who enjoyed diplomatic immunity.\nAmerican driver in Pakistan.\nOn 14 February 2013, a vehicle bearing diplomatic plates registered to the US Embassy got into an accident in Islamabad, Pakistan involving two residents out of which one was killed and the other survived. Murder charges were laid under Section 320 of the Pakistani Penal Code against the driver of the vehicle who is a diplomat according to Pakistani officials.\nAmerican driver in Kenya.\nIn July 2013, Joshua Walde, an American diplomat in Nairobi, Kenya, crashed into a mini-bus, killing one man and seriously injuring eight others, who were left with no financial assistance to pay for hospital bills. United States embassy officials took the diplomat and his family out of Kenya the following day. The United States government was concerned about the impact the accident could have on bilateral relations with Kenya. Walde gave a statement to police, but was not detained due to his diplomatic immunity. Kenyan police say the case remains under investigation.\nLebanese driver in South Korea.\nIn September 2013, Jad Saeed al-Hassan, Lebanese Ambassador to South Korea, was involved in a hit-and-run in Seoul. Right after the accident, he drove directly into the Lebanese embassy compound and refused to cooperate with the local police investigation, claiming his diplomatic immunity. He stayed in his post as ambassador until his death due to another traffic collision in Seoul in 2014.\nQatari driver in the United States.\nOn 12 September 2015, Sheikh Khalid bin Hamad Al Thani tried to claim diplomatic immunity when his Ferrari LaFerrari and a Porsche 911 GT3 were caught on camera drag racing through a residential neighborhood in Beverly Hills. He owns the cars and a drag racing team, and is a member of Qatar's ruling family. The Beverly Hills Police Department contacted the US State Department to clarify if he had diplomatic immunity. They stated he did not. However, his face was not shown on camera, and no officer witnessed the crime, so the state of California has not yet pressed charges. He has since fled the country. The investigation is ongoing.\nSaudi driver in Germany.\nIn June 2017, in Berlin, Germany a Saudi driver killed a cyclist by opening the door of his Porsche directly into the cyclist's path without checking to see if the road was clear. Anger arose when the Saudi claimed diplomatic immunity. Police said that under normal circumstances the driver would face investigation and possible prosecution on suspicion of negligent manslaughter, but prosecutors said they had no choice but to close the case because he had diplomatic immunity.\nAmerican driver in the United Kingdom.\nOn 27 August 2019, Anne Sacoolas, the wife of an American government employee working in the United Kingdom, was a suspect in a traffic incident involving 19-year-old Harry Dunn in Croughton, Northamptonshire, England. Dunn was riding his motorcycle when it was reported that a woman emerged from RAF Croughton driving on the wrong side of the road, resulting in a head-on collision. After 999 handlers wrongly categorized the call, there was a 43-minute wait for an ambulance, resulting in a two-hour delay arriving at a trauma center, where Harry Dunn later died. Sacoolas was breathalyzed at the accident site. The following day, police interviewed Sacoolas at her home, learning the US claimed diplomatic immunity.\nSacoolas told police she had no immediate plans to leave the country. However, on 13 October US authorities notified the UK's Foreign and Commonwealth Office of plans to send Sacoolas home, unless serious objections were raised: on 16 October, the UK's Foreign Secretary, Dominic Raab, went to present objections, a day after the family was sent back.\nWoody Johnson, U.S. Ambassador to the UK, expressed \"profound sadness\" at the death of Harry Dunn and the US Embassy also offered their sympathies and condolences. U.S. President Donald Trump called it a \"terrible accident\" and mentioned that the woman was \"driving on the wrong side of the road, and that can happen\". The US government has not waived the diplomatic immunity afforded to Sacoolas and has stated she would not return to the UK, despite calls by the UK government to do so.\nSacoolas was scheduled to appear in UK court via video link charged with causing the death of Mr Dunn by dangerous driving. A hearing took place in Westminster Magistrates Court on the 18th January 2022. She appeared by video-link at the Old Bailey, where she pleaded guilty to causing death by careless driving on 20 October 2022. She was handed an eight-month jail term, suspended for 12 months, and was also disqualified from driving for 12 months.\nAmerican driver in Zimbabwe.\nIn 2023, a tragic accident in Zimbabwe claimed the life of 11-year-old Lillian Mapiye when she was struck by a vehicle driven by U.S. diplomat Eric Kimpton.\nInvoking diplomatic immunity under the Vienna Convention, Kimpton avoided legal proceedings and returned to the United States. The heartbreaking loss of Lillian sparked discussions between the Zimbabwean government and the U.S.\nEmbassy, with officials emphasizing that while immunity protects diplomats, it does\nnot absolve them of their moral responsibility to respect the laws and lives of their host country \nFinancial abuse.\nHistorically, large debts run up by diplomats have caused many problems. Some financial institutions do not extend credit to diplomats because they have no legal means of ensuring the money be repaid. Local citizens and businesses are often at a disadvantage when filing civil claims against a diplomat, especially in cases of unpaid rent, alimony, and child support.\nRents.\nThe bulk of diplomatic debt lies in the rental of office space and living quarters. Individual debts can range from a few thousand dollars to $1 million in back rent. A group of diplomats and the office space in which they work are referred to as a diplomatic mission. Creditors cannot sue missions individually to collect money they owe. Landlords and creditors have found that the only thing they can do is contact a city agency to see if they can try to get some money back. They cannot enter the offices or apartments of diplomats to evict them because the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act says that \"the property in the United States of a foreign state shall be immune from attachment, arrest and execution\" (). This has led creditors who are owed money by diplomats to become more cautious about their renters and to change their rental or payment policies.\nIn one case, for example, officials from Zaire stopped paying rent to their private landlord and ran up $400,000 in debt. When the landlord sued, the US State Department defended the Zaireans on the basis of diplomatic immunity, and a circuit court agreed. When the landlord finally cut off the utilities, the officials fled without paying their back rent. The landlords reportedly later reached an \"amicable agreement\" with the Zairean government.\nAlimony and child support.\nThe issue of abusing diplomatic immunity in family relations, especially alimony and child support, has become so widespread that it prompted discussion at the 1995 UN Fourth World Conference on Women, in Beijing. Historically, the United Nations has not become involved with family disputes and has refused to garnish the wages of diplomats who owe money for child support, citing sovereign immunity. However, in September 1995, the incumbent head of Legal Affairs for the United Nations acknowledged there was a moral and legal obligation to take at least a partial responsibility in family disputes. Fathers working as diplomats who refused to fulfill their family-related financial duties were increasing in numbers in the United Nations: several men who had left their wives and children were still claiming UN dependency, travel, and education allowances for their families, though they are no longer supporting those families.\nTaxes and fees.\nDiplomats are exempt from most taxes, but not from \"charges levied for specific services rendered\". In certain cases, whether a payment is or is not considered a tax may be disputed, such as central London's congestion charge. It was reported in 2006 that the UAE embassy had agreed to pay their own accumulated charges of nearly \u00a3100,000.\nThere is an obligation for the receiving state not to \"discriminate as between states\"; in other words, any such fees should be payable by all accredited diplomats equally. This may allow the diplomatic corps to negotiate as a group with the authorities of the receiving country.\nDiplomats are exempt from import duty and tariffs for items for their personal use. In some countries, this has led to charges that diplomatic agents are profiting personally from resale of \"tax free\" goods. The receiving state may choose to impose restrictions on what may reasonably constitute personal use (for example, only a certain quantity of cigarettes per day). When enacted, such restrictions are generally quite generous so as to avoid tit-for-tat responses.\nMoney laundering.\n\"United States v. Al Sharaf\" is a criminal case which was filed by the government on March 5, 2015, in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. Al Sharaf was a Kuwaiti Financial Attach\u00e9 assigned to handle the finances of Kuwait Health Office in Washington, D.C. She was charged by the government as she had violated 18 U.S.C \u00a7 1956 for conspiring to launder money. Al Sharaf filed a motion to dismiss the case on the basis of lack of subject matter jurisdiction because as per the 22 U.S.C \u00a7 254d her actions were immune under the diplomatic immunity that she had. Since it was a criminal case, the prosecution presented evidence beyond a reasonable doubt to prove that Al Sharaf had engaged in commercial activity and her actions were different from her official functions as a representative of Kuwait, thereby, as per the VCDR art. 31(c) her diplomatic immunity was subject to waiver. The court ruled in prosecution's favor and stated that since the defendant had engaged in commercial activity which was different from her official functions, her diplomatic immunity was subject to waiver and hence the defendant's motion to dismiss the case on the basis of lack of subject matter jurisdiction was denied.\nEspionage and sabotage.\nFranz von Papen entered the diplomatic service in December 1913 as a military attach\u00e9 to the German ambassador in the United States. Starting in September 1914, Papen abused his diplomatic immunity as German military attach\u00e9, violating US laws to start organising plans for incursions into Canada for a campaign of sabotage against canals, bridges and railroads. In October 1914, Papen became involved with what was later dubbed \"the Hindu\u2013German Conspiracy\", by covertly arranging with Indian nationalists based in California for arms trafficking to the latter for a planned uprising against the British Raj. In February 1915, Papen also covertly organised the Vanceboro international bridge bombing, in which his diplomatic immunity protected him from arrest. At the same time, he remained involved in plans to restore Huerta to power, and arranged for the arming and financing of a planned invasion of Mexico. Papen's covert operations were known to British intelligence, which shared its information with the US government. As a result, for complicity in the planning of acts of sabotage on 28 December 1915, Captain von Papen was declared \"persona non grata\" and recalled to Germany. Upon his return, he was awarded the Iron Cross.\nOn 24 April 2008, in New Orleans, Mexican press attach\u00e9 Rafael Quintero Curiel was seen stealing BlackBerry PDA units from a White House press meeting room. Quintero made it all the way to the airport before members of the United States Secret Service caught up with him. He initially denied taking the devices, but after being confronted with security video, Quintero claimed it was purely accidental, gave the devices back, claimed diplomatic immunity and left New Orleans with the Mexican delegation. He was eventually fired for the incident.\nIn 2021, it was reported that the UAE Embassy in Canberra was building non-compliant fences and installing CCTV.\nIn the United States.\nThe following chart outlines the immunities afforded to foreign diplomatic personnel residing in the United States. In general, these rules follow the Vienna Convention (or the New York Convention for UN officials) and apply in other countries as well (with the exceptions of immunities for United Nations officials, which can vary widely across countries based on the \"Host Country Agreement\" signed between the UN and the host country, whereby additional immunities beyond those granted by the New York Convention may be established)."}
{"id": "8922", "revid": "40489648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8922", "title": "DDR SDRAM", "text": "Double Data Rate Synchronous Dynamic Random-Access Memory (DDR SDRAM) is a double data rate (DDR) synchronous dynamic random-access memory (SDRAM) class of memory integrated circuits used in computers. DDR SDRAM, also retroactively called DDR1 SDRAM, has been superseded by DDR2 SDRAM, DDR3 SDRAM, DDR4 SDRAM and DDR5 SDRAM. None of its successors are forward or backward compatible with DDR1 SDRAM, meaning DDR2, DDR3, DDR4 and DDR5 memory modules will not work on DDR1-equipped motherboards, and vice versa.\nCompared to single data rate (SDR) SDRAM, the DDR SDRAM interface makes higher transfer rates possible through more strict control of the timing of the electrical data and clock signals. Implementations often have to use schemes such as phase-locked loops and self-calibration to reach the required timing accuracy. The interface uses double pumping (transferring data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal) to double data bus bandwidth without a corresponding increase in clock frequency. One advantage of keeping the clock frequency low is that it reduces the signal integrity requirements on the circuit board connecting the memory to the controller. The name \"double data rate\" refers to the fact that a DDR SDRAM with a certain clock frequency achieves nearly twice the bandwidth of a SDR SDRAM running at the same clock frequency, due to this double pumping.\nWith data being transferred 64 bits at a time, DDR SDRAM gives a transfer rate (in bytes/s) of (memory bus clock rate) \u00d7 2 (for dual rate) \u00d7 64 (number of bits transferred) / 8 (number of bits/byte). Thus, with a bus frequency of 100\u00a0MHz, DDR SDRAM gives a maximum transfer rate of 1600\u00a0MB/s.\nHistory.\nIn the late 1980s IBM invented DDR SDRAM, they built a dual-edge clocking RAM and presented their results at the International Solid-State Circuits Convention in 1990.\nSamsung released the first commercial DDR SDRAM chip (64Mbit) in June 1998, followed soon after by Hyundai Electronics (now SK Hynix) the same year. DDR SDRAM specification was finalized by JEDEC in June 2000 (JESD79). JEDEC has set standards for the data rates of DDR SDRAM, divided into two parts. The first specification is for memory chips, and the second is for memory modules. The first retail PC motherboard using DDR SDRAM was released in August 2000.\nSpecification.\nModules.\nTo increase memory capacity and bandwidth, chips are combined on a module. For instance, the 64-bit data bus for DIMM requires eight 8-bit chips, addressed in parallel. Multiple chips with common address lines are called a memory rank. The term was introduced to avoid confusion with chip internal rows and banks. A memory module may bear more than one rank. The term sides would also be confusing because it incorrectly suggests the physical placement of chips on the module. All ranks are connected to the same memory bus (address + data). The chip select signal is used to issue commands to specific rank.\nAdding modules to the single memory bus creates additional electrical load on its drivers. To mitigate the resulting bus signaling rate drop and overcome the memory bottleneck, new chipsets employ the multi-channel architecture.\nNote: All items listed above are specified by JEDEC as JESD79F. All RAM data rates in-between or above these listed specifications are not standardized by JEDEC \u2013 often they are simply manufacturer optimizations using tighter tolerances or overvolted chips. The package sizes in which DDR SDRAM is manufactured are also standardized by JEDEC.\nThere is no architectural difference between DDR SDRAM modules. Modules are instead designed to run at different clock frequencies: for example, a PC-1600 module is designed to run at , and a PC-2100 is designed to run at . A module's clock speed designates the data rate at which it is guaranteed to perform, hence it is guaranteed to run at lower (\"underclocking\") and can possibly run at higher (\"overclocking\") clock rates than those for which it was made.\nDDR SDRAM modules for desktop computers, dual in-line memory modules (DIMMs), have 184 pins (as opposed to 168 pins on SDRAM, or 240 pins on DDR2 SDRAM), and can be differentiated from SDRAM DIMMs by the number of notches (DDR SDRAM has one, SDRAM has two). DDR SDRAM for notebook computers, SO-DIMMs, have 200 pins, which is the same number of pins as DDR2 SO-DIMMs. These two specifications are notched very similarly and care must be taken during insertion if unsure of a correct match. Most DDR SDRAM operates at a voltage of 2.5\u00a0V, compared to 3.3\u00a0V for SDRAM. This can significantly reduce power consumption. Chips and modules with the DDR-400/PC-3200 standard have a nominal voltage of 2.6\u00a0V.\nJEDEC Standard No. 21\u2013C defines three possible operating voltages for 184 pin DDR, as identified by the key notch position relative to its centreline. Page 4.5.10-7 defines 2.5V (left), 1.8V (centre), TBD (right), while page 4.20.5\u201340 nominates 3.3V for the right notch position. The orientation of the module for determining the key notch position is with 52 contact positions to the left and 40 contact positions to the right.\nIncreasing the operating voltage slightly can increase maximum speed but at the cost of higher power dissipation and heating, and at the risk of malfunctioning or damage.\nModule and chip characteristics are inherently linked.\nTotal module capacity is a product of one chip's capacity and the number of chips. ECC modules multiply it by because they use 1\u00a0bit per byte (8\u00a0bits) for error correction. A module of any particular size can therefore be assembled either from 32 small chips (36 for ECC memory), or 16(18) or 8(9) bigger ones.\nDDR memory bus width per channel is 64 bits (72 for ECC memory). Total module bit width is a product of bits per chip and number of chips. It also equals number of ranks (rows) multiplied by DDR memory bus width. Consequently, a module with a greater number of chips or using \u00d78 chips instead of \u00d74 will have more ranks.\nThis example compares different real-world server memory modules with a common size of 1\u00a0GB. One should definitely be careful buying 1\u00a0GB memory modules, because all these variations can be sold under one price position without stating whether they are \u00d74 or \u00d78, single- or dual-ranked.\nThere is a common belief that number of module ranks equals number of sides. As above data shows, this is not true. One can also find 2-side/1-rank modules. One can even think of a 1-side/2-rank memory module having 16(18) chips on single side \u00d78 each, but it is unlikely such a module was ever produced.\nChip characteristics.\nDouble data rate (DDR) SDRAM specification.\nFrom Ballot JCB-99-70, and modified by numerous other Board Ballots, formulated under the cognizance of Committee JC-42.3 on DRAM Parametrics.\nStandard No. 79 Revision Log:\n\"This comprehensive standard defines all required aspects of 64Mb through 1Gb DDR SDRAMs with X4/X8/X16 data interfaces, including features, functionality, ac and dc parametrics, packages and pin assignments. This scope will subsequently be expanded to formally apply to x32 devices, and higher density devices as well.\"\nOrganization.\nPC3200 is DDR SDRAM designed to operate at 200\u00a0MHz using DDR-400 chips with a bandwidth of 3,200\u00a0MB/s. Because PC3200 memory transfers data on both the rising and falling clock edges, its effective clock rate is 400\u00a0MHz.\n1\u00a0GB PC3200 non-ECC modules are usually made with 16 512\u00a0Mbit chips, 8 on each side (512\u00a0Mbits \u00d7 16\u00a0chips) / (8 bits (per byte)) = 1,024\u00a0MB. The individual chips making up a 1\u00a0GB memory module are usually organized as 226 8-bit words, commonly expressed as 64M\u00d78. Memory manufactured in this way is low-density RAM and is usually compatible with any motherboard specifying PC3200 DDR-400 memory.\nGenerations.\nDDR (DDR1) was superseded by DDR2 SDRAM, which had modifications for a higher clock frequency and again doubled throughput, but operates on the same principle as DDR. Competing with DDR2 was Rambus XDR DRAM. DDR2 dominated due to cost and support factors. DDR2 was in turn superseded by DDR3 SDRAM, which offered higher performance for increased bus speeds and new features. DDR3 has been superseded by DDR4 SDRAM, which was first produced in 2011 and whose standards were still in flux (2012) with significant architectural changes.\nDDR's prefetch buffer depth is 2 (bits), while DDR2 uses 4. Although the effective clock rates of DDR2 are higher than DDR, the overall performance was not greater in the early implementations, primarily due to the high latencies of the first DDR2 modules. DDR2 started to be effective by the end of 2004, as modules with lower latencies became available.\nMemory manufacturers stated that it was impractical to mass produce DDR1 memory with effective transfer rates in excess of 400\u00a0MHz (i.e. 400\u00a0MT/s and 200\u00a0MHz external clock) due to internal speed limitations. DDR2 picks up where DDR1 leaves off, utilizing internal clock rates similar to DDR1, but is available at effective transfer rates of 400\u00a0MHz and higher. DDR3 advances extended the ability to preserve internal clock rates while providing higher effective transfer rates by again doubling the prefetch depth.\nThe DDR4 SDRAM is a high-speed dynamic random-access memory internally configured as 16 banks, 4 bank groups with 4 banks for each bank group for \u00d74/\u00d78 and 8 banks, 2 bank groups with 4 banks for each bank group for \u00d716 DRAM.\nThe DDR4 SDRAM uses an 8\"n\" prefetch architecture to achieve high-speed operation. The 8\"n\" prefetch architecture is combined with\nan interface designed to transfer two data words per clock cycle at the I/O pins. A single read or write operation for the DDR4 SDRAM consists of a single 8\"n\"-bit-wide 4-clock data transfer at the internal DRAM core and 8 corresponding \"n\"-bit-wide half-clock-cycle data transfers at the I/O pins.\nRDRAM was a particularly expensive alternative to DDR SDRAM, and most manufacturers dropped its support from their chipsets. DDR1 memory's prices substantially increased from Q2 2008, while DDR2 prices declined. In January 2009, 1\u00a0GB DDR1 was 2\u20133 times more expensive than 1\u00a0GB DDR2. \nMobile DDR.\nMDDR is an acronym that some enterprises use for Mobile DDR SDRAM, a type of memory used in some portable electronic devices, like mobile phones, handhelds, and digital audio players. Through techniques including reduced voltage supply and advanced refresh options, Mobile DDR can achieve greater power efficiency."}
{"id": "8924", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8924", "title": "Devanagiri", "text": ""}
{"id": "8927", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8927", "title": "Don Rosa", "text": "Keno Don Hugo Rosa (), known as Don Rosa (born June 29, 1951), is an American comic book writer and illustrator known for his Disney comics stories about Scrooge McDuck, Donald Duck, and other characters which Carl Barks created for Disney-licensed comic books, first published in America by Dell Comics. Many of his stories are built on characters and locations created by Barks; among these was his first Duck story, \"The Son of the Sun\" (1987), which was nominated for a Harvey Award in the \"Best Story of the Year\" category.\nRosa created about 90 stories between 1987 and 2006. In 1995, his 12-chapter work \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" won the Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story.\nEarly life.\nDon Rosa's grandfather, Gioachino Rosa, lived in Maniago, a town at the foot of the Alps in Northern Italy, in the province of Pordenone. He immigrated to Kentucky, the United States, around 1900, established a successful tile and terrazzo company, then returned to Italy to marry and start a family. In 1915 just after the birth of his son Ugo Rosa, Gioachino returned to Kentucky with his wife, two daughters and two sons. Ugo Rosa grew up and was later married in Kentucky. His wife was born to a German-American father and a mother with both Scottish and Irish ancestry.\nDon Rosa was born Keno Don Hugo Rosa on June 29, 1951, in Louisville, Kentucky. He was named after both his father and grandfather. Gioachino was called \"Keno\" for short. Don's father was named Ugo Dante Rosa but used the name \"Hugo Don\" Rosa in America.\nRosa's older sister, Deanna, was an avid collector of comics and exposed Don to comics as a storytelling medium at a very early age, teaching him to \u201cread the pictures.\u201d\nRosa's favorite comic books while growing up were \"Uncle Scrooge\" and \"Little Lulu\" comics from Dell Comics, as well as his sister's collection of MAD magazines. At age 12, Rosa discovered the Superman titles of DC Comics, with particular attention to editor Mort Weisinger's period, drawn mostly by Superman artists Curt Swan and Kurt Schaffenberger. Shortly after Rosa started to collect Superman comics, he also began to trade in the comics he had inherited from his older sister for old Superman comics. By the 1970s Rosa's comic trading had ended up with him only having two Barks duck comics issues left from the collection his sister originally passed on to him. One of them being \"Dell Comics' Four Color Comics #386\" (also known as Dell Comics' One shot's) issue titled: \"Uncle Scrooge in Only a Poor Old Man\", which was unknown to him to be the first issue of the new Carl Barks Uncle Scrooge Title. The second issue is his other favorite Barks Comic from his youth, Dell's Donald Duck in \"The Golden Helmet\". Later when Rosa became a serious collector of all comics of the post-war years, he particularly enjoyed and collected the classic E.C. Comics of the horror and science fiction genres published in the early 1950s, Will Eisner's \"The Spirit\", Walt Kelly's \"Pogo\", and virtually all other comics from 1945 and onward.\nRosa entered the University of Kentucky in 1969. He graduated in 1973 with a Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering.\nCareer.\nIn 1969, while still in college, Rosa won an award as \"best political cartoonist in the nation in a college paper\". \"I'm not really an editorial cartoonist. I'd much rather be doing comedy adventure. But I must have done something right, for at one point \"The Journal of Higher Education\" named me one of the five or six best college newspaper cartoonists in the nation.\"\nRosa's first published comic (besides the spot illustrations in his grade school and high school newspapers) was a comic strip featuring his own character, Lancelot Pertwillaby, titled \"The Pertwillaby Papers\". He created the strip in 1971 for \"The Kentucky Kernel\", a college newspaper of the University of Kentucky, which wanted the strip to focus on political satire.\nRosa later switched the strip to comedy-adventure, his favorite style of comics, and drew the story \"Lost in (an alternative section of) the Andes\". (The title is a reference to \"Lost in the Andes!\", a Donald Duck story by Carl Barks, first published in April 1949.) The so-called \"Pertwillaby Papers\" included 127 published episodes by the time Rosa graduated in 1973.\nMeanwhile, Rosa participated in contributing art and articles to comic collector fanzines. One contribution was \"An Index of Uncle Scrooge Comics\". According to his introduction: \"Scrooge being my favorite character in comic history and Barks my favorite pure cartoonist, I'll try not to get carried away too much.\" In 1970, he drew a Donald Duck fancomic titled \"Return to Duckburg Place\", depicting a dark and dystopian vision of the future of Duckburg, and unsuccessfully submitted it to a fanzine for publication.\nAfter attaining his bachelor's degree, Rosa continued to draw comics purely as a hobby, his only income came from working in the \"Keno Rosa Tile and Terrazzo Company\", a company founded by his paternal grandfather.\nRosa authored and illustrated the monthly \"Information Center\" column in the fanzine \"Rocket's Blast Comicollector\" from 1974 to 1979. This was a question-and-answer feature dealing with readers' queries on all forms of pop entertainment of which Rosa was a student, including comics, TV and movies. He also revived the \"Pertwillaby Papers\" in this \"RBCC\" fanzine as a comic book style story rather than a newspaper comic strip from 1976 to 1978.\nRosa accepted an offer from the editor of the local newspaper to create a weekly comic strip. This led to his creation of the comic strip character Captain Kentucky for the Saturday edition of the local newspaper \"Louisville Times\". Captain Kentucky was the superhero alter ego of Lancelot Pertwillaby. The pay was $25/week and not worth the 12+ hours each week's strip entailed, but Rosa did it as part of his hobby. Publication started on October 6, 1979. The comic strip ended on August 15, 1982, after the publication of 150 episodes. After three years with Captain Kentucky, Don decided that it was not worth the effort. He retired from cartooning and did not draw a single line for the next four years. Years later, as his fame grew, his non-Disney work was published by the Norwegian publisher Gazette Bok in 2001, in the two hard cover \"Don Rosa Archives\" volumes, \"The Pertwillaby Papers\" and \"The Adventures of Captain Kentucky\".\nGladstone.\nIn 1986, Rosa discovered a Gladstone Comics comic book. This was the first American comic book that contained Disney characters since Western Publishing's discontinuation of their Whitman Comics in the 1970s. Since early childhood Don Rosa had been fascinated by Carl Barks' stories about Donald Duck and Scrooge McDuck. He immediately called the editor, Byron Erickson, and told him that he was the only American who was born to write and draw one Scrooge McDuck adventure. Erickson agreed to let him send a story, and Don Rosa started drawing his first Duck story, \"The Son of the Sun,\" the very next day.\n\"The Son of the Sun\" was a success and Rosa's very first professional comic story was nominated for a Harvey Award \"Best Story of the Year\". The plot of the story was the same as his earlier story, \"Lost in (an alternative section of) the Andes\". As Don Rosa explained it, he was just \"(...) turning that old Pertwillaby Papers adventure back into the story it originally was in my head, starring Scrooge, Donald, the nephews, and Flintheart Glomgold.\"\nRosa created a few more comics for Gladstone until 1989. He then stopped working for them, because the policies of their licensor, Disney, did not allow for the return of original art for a story to its creators.\nAfter making some stories for the Dutch publisher Oberon, the publishers of an American Disney children's magazine called \"DuckTales\" (based on the animated series of the same name) offered Rosa employment. They even offered him a much higher salary than the one he received at Gladstone. Rosa made just one script (\"Back in Time for a Dime\"). The publishers never asked him to make more, and due to problems with receiving the payment, he did not care.\nEgmont.\nAfter working with the \"DuckTales\" magazine, Rosa found out that the Denmark-based International publisher Egmont (at that time called Gutenberghus) was publishing reprints of his stories and wanted more. Rosa joined Egmont in 1990. Two years later, at Rosa's suggestion, Byron Erickson, the former editor at Gladstone, also went to work for Egmont and has been working there ever since as an editor and later as a freelancer.\nIn 1991 Rosa started creating \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", a 12 chapter story about his favorite character. The series was a success, and in 1995 he won an Eisner Award for best continuing series. After the end of the original series, Rosa sometimes produced additional \"missing\" chapters. Some of the extra chapters were turned down by Egmont, because they were not interested in any more episodes. Fortunately, the French magazine \"Picsou\" was eager to publish the stories. From 1999, Rosa started working freelance for Picsou magazine as well. All of these chapters were compiled as \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck Companion\".\nOn strike.\nDuring early summer 2002, Rosa suddenly laid down work. As an artist, he could not live under the conditions Egmont was offering him but he did not want to give up making Scrooge McDuck comics either. So, his only choice was to go on hiatus and try to come to an agreement with Egmont. His main issues were that he had no control over his works. Rosa had discovered too often that his stories were printed with incorrect pages of art, improper colors, poor lettering, or pixelated computer conversions of the illustrations. Rosa has never, nor has any other artist working on Disney-licensed characters, received royalties for the use or multi-national reprinting of any of his stories worldwide.\nRosa came to an agreement with Egmont in December of the same year, which gave him more control over the stories and the manner in which they were publicized.\nQuitting.\nRosa, who had poor eyesight since childhood, experienced a severe retinal detachment in March 2008, which required emergency eye surgery. However, the surgery was only partially successful, and Rosa had to undergo further surgery in both eyes, making drawing even more challenging. In an interview at the Danish Komiks.dk fair on June 2, 2008, Rosa announced his decision not to continue creating comics due to various reasons such as his eye troubles, low pay, and the use of his stories by international Disney licensees in special hardback or album editions without payment of royalties or permission for the use of his name.\nIn 2012, Rosa wrote an essay about his retirement for Egmont's 9-volume \"Don Rosa Collection\", which was to be published in Finland, Norway, Germany and Sweden. The essay, posted at \"career-end.donrosa.de\", cites the above reasons, with special emphasis on the \"Disney comics system\" for paying writers and artists a flat per-page rate, and then allowing publishers around the world to print the stories without payment to the creators.\nRosa is more popular with readers in Europe than in his native United States. According to him, even his next-door neighbors do not know his profession.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1980, Rosa married Ann Payne. Payne is a retired social studies middle school teacher.\nCharacter.\nDon Rosa describes himself as an introvert due to being socially isolated as a child. Also, he thinks of himself as a workaholic.\nRosa suffered from depression during the years before he quit. He believes that it was caused by working hard while taking little time for leisure, a result of his self-imposed work regimen due to his enthusiasm for Barks' characters.\nHobbies.\nRosa is an avid collector of many things, including comic books, \"TV Guide\", \"National Geographic\", and movie magazines, fanzines, books, White Castle memorabilia, pinball machines and movies and more.\nRosa also grows exotic chili plants and tends nearly 30 acres of a private nature preserve with wildflower fields and numerous forest trails. That and taking semi-annual European signing tours to visit his fellow BarksDucks fans, takes up all of his time. He is also working to complete his collections of all American comic books published between 1945 and 1970.\nWork.\nIn Europe, Rosa is recognized as one of the best Disney comics creators. Carl Barks and Rosa are among the few artists who have their name written on the covers of Disney magazines when their stories are published. Rosa enjoys including subtle references to his favourite movies and comics as well as his own previous work. He normally uses about twelve panels per page, instead of the more common eight.\nRosa has an especially large following in Finland, and in 1999, he created a special 32-page adventure featuring Scrooge McDuck for his Finnish fans called; \"Sammon Salaisuus\" (translates to \"The secret of the Sampo\", but it is officially named \"The Quest for Kalevala\" in English), based on the Finnish national epic, the Kalevala. The publication of this story created a national sensation in Finland where Donald Duck and the Kalevala are important aspects of culture. It was published in many other countries as well. The cover for the comic book was a spoof of a famous painting by Akseli Gallen-Kallela.\nThe latest work that Rosa has worked on is a cover for the album \"Music Inspired by the Life and Times of Scrooge\" by Tuomas Holopainen from Nightwish who is a fan of Rosa's comics.\nDrawing style.\nWith a Bachelor of Arts degree in civil engineering as his only real drawing education, Rosa has some unusual drawing methods, as he writes: \"I suspect \"nothing\" I do is done the way anyone else does it.\"\nBecause of being self-taught in making comics, Rosa relies mostly on the skills he learned in engineering school, which means using technical pens and templates extensively. He applies templates and other engineering tools to draw what other artists draw freehand. He usually drew just under a page per day, but that depended on the amount of detail he puts in the picture.\nRosa's drawing style is considered much more detailed and \"dirtier\" than that of most Disney artists, living or dead, and often likened to that of underground artists, and he is frequently compared to Robert Crumb. When Rosa was first told of this similarity, he said that he \"drew that bad\" long before he discovered underground comics during college. He went on to explain these similarities to underground artists with a similar background of making comics as a hobby:\nCarl Barks.\n\"I want to take everything Barks wrote and forge it into a workable timeline. My original dream was to become the new Carl Barks. I wanted to write, draw, and letter all my own stories. People tell me that my pencils look just like Barks, but my inks are pure Rosa, and I can't letter properly! So I'll have to settle for being Don Rosa.\" \u2013 Don Rosa in 1987\n\"Don Rosa has often been called the heir of Carl Barks, especially for the way in which he has carried on the Ducks' Family Saga. But I don't think so: in my opinion Don Rosa [...] is an author who has used Barks' characters to make stories that are completely new, 'Donrosian' rather than 'Barksian', just like Barks can't be considered the heir of Al Taliaferro only because he has worked on the Ducks after him.\" \u2013 Carlo Chendi, Italian Disney comics writer\nRosa's idol when it comes to comics is Carl Barks. Rosa builds almost all his stories on characters and locations that Barks invented. Many of Rosa's stories contain references to some fact pointed out in a Barks story. At the request of publishers in response to reader demands, Rosa has even created sequels of old Barks stories. For example, his \"Return to Plain Awful\" is a sequel to \"Lost in the Andes!\", where the Ducks return to the same hidden country. To add more to his admiration and consistency to Barks and Barks' stories, Rosa makes all his ducks' stories set in the 1950s. This is because Barks writes most of the stories about Scrooge, Donald and all people of Duckburg in the 1950s (it also conveniently resolves potential continuity problems, such as Scrooge's age). As explained in text pages in the \"Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" and its companion volume, Rosa does intense research of time periods to ensure not only that he gets the physical details right, but also to ensure that all characters could have been present.\nBarks either created most of the characters used by Rosa or is credited for greatly developing their personalities. Rosa thus feels obliged to make his stories factually consistent. He has spent a lot of time in making lists of facts and anecdotes pointed out in different stories by his mentor. Especially \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\" was based mostly on the earlier works of Barks. Rosa admitted however that a scene of the first chapter was inspired by a story by Tony Strobl.\nAs most of the characters Rosa uses were created by Barks, and because Rosa considers Scrooge rather than Donald to be the main character of the Duck universe, he does not regard himself as a pure Disney artist, nor the characters really as Disney's. \"Rosa prefers to say that the characters he uses are Barks's, Barks having reshaped Donald Duck's personality and creating everything else we know of Duckburg while working as a freelancer in 1942\u20131967 for an independent licensed publisher (Dell/Western Comics). Barks even claimed to have also created Huey, Dewey, and Louie while working as a writer on Donald Duck animated cartoons in 1937.\" Because of his idolization of Barks, he repeatedly discourages his fans to use an absolutist way of saying his clearly different drawing style would be better than Barks's, and he found that notion confirmed when Barks himself spoke about Rosa's style in a critical tone though it is uncertain whether those comments were Barks's or those of his temporary \"business managers\" who filtered his communications.\n\"I usually don't like my stories. I mean I try really hard, but I know I don't draw that well. I know people like it because it's got lots of extra details, but art directors know good artwork, and they know mine is not good artwork. Now, people always say, 'You're being too modest, you're being too modest', and I say, 'What?' They just have to ask me the right question. I know it's not good artwork and I don't know if it's well-drawn, but I know it's entertaining.\" \u2013 Don Rosa, Torino Comics Festival, April 2011\n\"Don Rosa has a style that is a little bit different from the Disney style. I know that there is a great deal of people that like that style, which is extremely detailed. So, there is room in the business for artists like Don Rosa and for others like Van Horn. They have a different style. But if they have a good story and tell it properly, then people are going to like it.\" \u2013 Carl Barks, interview given at Disneyland Paris, July 7, 1994\nBeside Rosa's constant effort to remain faithful to the universe Barks created, there is also a number of notable differences between the two artists. The most obvious of these is Rosa's much more detailed drawing style, often with many background gags, which has been credited as being a result of Rosa's love of the Will Elder stories of \"MAD\" comics and magazines. While Barks himself discouraged the use of extreme grimacing and gesturing in any other panel for comical or dramatic effect, Rosa's stories are rich with exaggerated facial expressions and physical slapstick. Barks had over 600 Duck stories to his name while Rosa only created 85 until his eye trouble set in, but whereas Barks made many short one and two-pagers centered around a subtle, compact gag, Rosa's oeuvre consists almost exclusively of long adventure stories.\nAndrea \"Bramo\" Bramini identifies the following four differences between Barks's and Rosa's way of storytelling:\nD.U.C.K..\nMost of Rosa's stories have the letters D.U.C.K. hidden within either the first panel or, if Rosa has created the cover art, within the cover art itself. D.U.C.K. is a backronym for \"Dedicated to Unca Carl from Keno\" (Carl being Carl Barks and Keno being Rosa's given first name). Due to Disney's refusal to allow artists to sign their work, early Rosa dedications to Barks were deleted as they seemed to be a form of a signature. Later Rosa began hiding the dedication acronym from his editors in various and unlikely places within his drawings.\nRosa has drawn covers for reprints of Carl Barks stories and has included his D.U.C.K. dedication within them as well.\nMickey.\nAnother curiosity is his Hidden Mickeys. Rosa is only interested in creating stories featuring the Duck family, but he often hides small Mickey Mouse heads or figures in the pictures, sometimes in a humiliating or unwanted situation. An example of this is in the story \"The Terror of the Transvaal\" where a flat Mickey can be seen under an elephant's foot. Rosa has admitted to neither liking nor disliking Mickey Mouse, but being indifferent to him.\nIn the story \"Attack of the Hideous Space-Varmints\", the asteroid with Uncle Scrooge's money bin on it crashes into the Moon along with two missiles, creating a large Mickey Mouse head on the surface. When Huey, Dewey, and Louie tell Donald that the missiles hit the \"dark\" (far) side of the Moon, Donald is thankful no one is going to see it\u00a0 \u2014 \"For a minute there, I thought we were going to have some legal problems.\"\nIn the second Rosa story featuring The Three Caballeros, Donald Duck is shocked by the sight of a capybara standing on its hind legs, with shrubs, leaves and fruit in front of its body, coincidentally making it look like Mickey Mouse. Jos\u00e9 Carioca and Panchito Pistoles, never having seen Mickey Mouse, ask Donald what is wrong, but Donald replies he is just tired. Later in the same story, the Caballeros free several animals from a poacher. One panel shows the animals fleeing; Mickey can be seen among them.\nIn \"The Quest for Kalevala\" this running gag can be seen on the original, Akseli Gallen-Kallela-inspired cover art. In the original work, Louhi is depicted as bare-chested, but the Disneyfied version has been drawn a top, of fabric patterned with Mickey Mouse heads.\nAwards.\nHis work has won Rosa a great deal of recognition in the industry, including nominations for the Comics' Buyer's Guide Award for Favorite Writer in 1997, 1998, and 1999. Heidi MacDonald of Comics Buyer's Guide also mentioned Rosa's 1994 story \"Guardians of the Lost Library\" as \"possibly the greatest comic book story of all time\".\nIn 1995, Rosa was awarded the Eisner Award for Best Serialized Story for \"The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\". In 1997 he won an Eisner for Best Artist/Writer \u2013 Humor Category. He was awarded the Inkpot Award in 2014.\nRosa's story \"The Black Knight GLORPS Again!\" was nominated for the 2007 Eisner Award in the category Best Short Story. While \"The Prisoner of White Agony Creek\", Rosa's latest Duck story to-date, was published in 2006, he was also nominated for the 2007 Harvey Awards in five categories (more than any other creator was that year) for his Uncle Scrooge comics: \"Best Writer\", \"Best Artist\", \"Best Cartoonist\", \"Best Cover Artist\", and \"Special Award for Humor in Comics.\" In 2013 Rosa received the Bill Finger Award which recognizes excellence in comic book writing for writers who have not received their rightful reward and/or recognition.\nInternational \"Best Cartoonist of the Year\" awards include:\nBiographies.\nIn 1997 the Italian publishing house Editrice ComicArt published a lavish volume about Rosa's biography and work related to the Disney characters. It was titled \"Don Rosa e il Rinascimento Disneyano\" (\"Don Rosa and the Disneyean Renaissance\") and written by famous Disney and Rosa scholars, Alberto Becattini, Leonardo Gori and Francesco Stajano. This work not only discusses all of Rosa's creative life up to 1997, but it also gives a comprehensive biography, lists up to that date his Disney work and presents an extensive interview with Rosa.\nIn 2009, Danish director Sebastian S. Cordes shot a 75-minute documentary called \"The Life and Times of Don Rosa\", consisting of exclusive interviews with Rosa himself on his farm near Louisville, Kentucky. According to the project's Facebook group, the English-language DVD was released in Denmark on April 16, 2011.\nIn 2011, Italian Disney fan forum \"papersera.net\" published \"Don Rosa: A Little Something Special\" (edited by Italian Rosa fan Paolo Castagno), a large folio format, bilingual (Italian and English) book about Rosa's life and work, containing interviews with Rosa and articles by many Italian and European Disney artists, Disney scholars, and established art critics commenting on Rosa's work and career, also including many exclusive, rare Rosa drawings and illustrations. The book was originally made as a gift by \"papersera.net\" for Rosa himself upon the occasion of Rosa's April 2011 visit to Turin, Italy.\nIn 2017 the book, \"I Still Get Chills!\", featuring text by German journalist Alex Jakubowski and photographs by Lois Lammerhuber, was published by Edition Lammerhuber in honour of Rosa's 66th birthday and the 70th anniversary of the first appearance of Scrooge McDuck.\nA feature documentary about Don Rosa and Scrooge McDuck by French director Morgann Gicquel titled \"The Scrooge Mystery\" was released in December 2017 and was released on DVD and Blu-ray in 2018.\nComic collections.\nOther countries.\nApart from the \"Don Rosa Collection\" in Germany and \"Don Rosas Samlade/Samlede Verk\" and \"Don Rosan kootut\" in the Nordic nations, the following collections only contain Rosa's work for Disney."}
{"id": "8928", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8928", "title": "Denis Arkadievich Kaufman", "text": ""}
{"id": "8929", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8929", "title": "Denis Abramovich Kaufman", "text": ""}
{"id": "8930", "revid": "42103389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8930", "title": "Dziga Vertov", "text": "Dziga Vertov (, born David Abelevich Kaufman, , and also known as Denis Kaufman; \u2013 12 February 1954) was a Soviet pioneer documentary film and newsreel director, as well as a cinema theorist. His filming practices and theories influenced the cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 style of documentary movie-making and the Dziga Vertov Group, a radical film-making cooperative which was active from 1968 to 1972. He was a member of the Kinoks collective, with Elizaveta Svilova and Mikhail Kaufman.\nIn the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, critics voted Vertov's \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (1929) the eighth-greatest film ever made.\nVertov's younger brothers Boris Kaufman and Mikhail Kaufman were also noted filmmakers, as was his wife, Yelizaveta Svilova. He worked with Boris Kaufman and cinematographer Mikhail Kaufman on his most famous film \"Man with a Movie Camera\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nVertov was born David Abelevich Kaufman into a Jewish family in Bia\u0142ystok, Poland, then a part of the Russian Empire. He Russified his Jewish name and patronymic, David Abelevich, to Denis Arkadievich at some point after 1918. Vertov studied music at Bia\u0142ystok Conservatory until his family fled from the invading German Army to Moscow in 1915. The Kaufmans soon settled in Petrograd, where Vertov began writing poetry, science fiction, and satire. In 1916\u20131917 Vertov was studying medicine at the Psychoneurological Institute in Saint Petersburg and experimenting with \"sound collages\" in his free time. He eventually adopted the name \"Dziga Vertov\", which translates loosely from Ukrainian as 'spinning top'.\nEarly writings.\nVertov is known for many early writings, mainly while still in school, that focus on the individual versus the perceptive nature of the camera lens, which he was known to call his \"second eye\".\nMost of Vertov's early work was unpublished, and few manuscripts survived after the Second World War, though some material surfaced in later films and documentaries created by Vertov and his brothers, Boris Kaufman and Mikhail Kaufman.\nVertov is known for quotes on perception, and its ineffability, in relation to the nature of qualia (sensory experiences).\nAfter the October Revolution.\nAfter the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, at the age of 22, Vertov began editing for \"Kino-Nedelya\" (, the Moscow Cinema Committee's weekly film series, and the first newsreel series in Russia), which first came out in June 1918. While working for \"Kino-Nedelya\" he met his future wife, the film director and editor, Elizaveta Svilova, who at the time was working as an editor at Goskino. She began collaborating with Vertov, beginning as his editor but becoming assistant and co-director in subsequent films, such as \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (1929), and \"Three Songs About Lenin\" (1934).\nVertov worked on the \"Kino-Nedelya\" series for three years, helping establish and run a film-car on Mikhail Kalinin's agit-train during the ongoing Russian Civil War between Communists and counterrevolutionaries. Some of the cars on the agit-trains were equipped with actors for live performances or printing presses; Vertov's had equipment to shoot, develop, edit, and project film. The trains went to battlefronts on agitation-propaganda missions intended primarily to bolster the morale of the troops; they were also intended to stir up revolutionary fervor of the masses.\nIn 1919, Vertov compiled newsreel footage for his documentary \"Anniversary of the Revolution;\" he also supervised the filming of his project \"The Battle for Tsaritsyn\" (1919). in 1921 he compiled \"History of the Civil War.\" The so-called \"Council of Three,\" a group issuing manifestoes in LEF, a radical Russian newsmagazine, was established in 1922; the group's \"three\" were Vertov, his (future) wife and editor Elizaveta Svilova, and his brother and cinematographer Mikhail Kaufman. Vertov's interest in machinery led to a curiosity about the mechanical basis of cinema.\nHis statement \"We: Variant of a Manifesto\" was published in the first issue of Kino-Fot, published by Aleksei Gan in 1922. It commenced with a distinction between \"kinoks\" and other approaches to the emergent cinematic industry:\n\"Kino-Pravda\".\nIn 1922, the year that \"Nanook of the North\" was released, Vertov started the \"Kino-Pravda\" series. The series took its title from the official government newspaper \"Pravda\". \"Kino-Pravda\" (literally translated, \"film truth\") continued Vertov's agit-prop bent. \"The Kino-Pravda group began its work in a basement in the centre of Moscow\", Vertov explained. He called it damp and dark. There was an earthen floor and holes one stumbled into at every turn. Vertov said, \"This dampness prevented our reels of lovingly edited film from sticking together properly, rusted our scissors and our splicers.\nVertov's driving vision, expounded in his frequent essays, was to capture \"film truth\"\u2014that is, fragments of actuality which, when organized together, have a deeper truth that cannot be seen with the naked eye. In the \"Kino-Pravda\" series, Vertov focused on everyday experiences, eschewing bourgeois concerns and filming marketplaces, bars, and schools instead, sometimes with a hidden camera, without asking permission first. Usually, the episodes of \"Kino-Pravda\" did not include reenactments or stagings. (One exception is the segment about the trial of the Social Revolutionaries: the scenes of the selling of the newspapers on the streets and the people reading the papers in the trolley were both staged for the camera.) The cinematography is simple, functional, unelaborate\u2014perhaps a result of Vertov's disinterest in both \"beauty\" and the \"grandeur of fiction\". Twenty-three issues of the series were produced over a period of three years; each issue lasted about twenty minutes and usually covered three topics. The stories were typically descriptive, not narrative, and included vignettes and expos\u00e9s, showing for instance the renovation of a trolley system, the organization of farmers into communes, and the trial of Social Revolutionaries; one story shows starvation in the nascent Communist state. Propagandistic tendencies are also present, but with more subtlety, in the episode featuring the construction of an airport: one shot shows the Tsar's tanks helping prepare a foundation, with an intertitle reading \"Tanks on the labor front\".\nVertov clearly intended an active relationship with his audience in the series\u2014in the final segment he includes contact information\u2014but by the 14th episode the series had become so experimental that some critics dismissed Vertov's efforts as \"insane\". Vertov responded to their criticisms with the assertion that the critics were hacks nipping \"revolutionary effort\" in the bud, and concluded an essay with a promise to \"explode art's tower of Babel\". In Vertov's view, \"art's tower of Babel\" was the subservience of cinematic technique to narrative\u2014what film theorist No\u00ebl Burch terms the institutional mode of representation\u2014which would come to dominate the classical Hollywood cinema.\nBy this point in his career, Vertov was clearly and emphatically dissatisfied with narrative tradition, and expresses his hostility towards dramatic fiction of any kind both openly and repeatedly; he regarded drama as another \"opiate of the masses\". Vertov freely admitted one criticism leveled at his efforts on the \"Kino-Pravda\" series\u2014that the series, while influential, had a limited release.\nBy the end of the \"Kino-Pravda\" series, Vertov made liberal use of stop motion, freeze frames, and other cinematic \"artificialities\", giving rise to criticisms not just of his trenchant dogmatism, but also of his cinematic technique. Vertov explains himself in \"On 'Kinopravda' \": in editing \"chance film clippings\" together for the Kino-Nedelia series, he \"began to doubt the necessity of a literary connection between individual visual elements spliced together... This work served as the point of departure for 'Kinopravda' \". Towards the end of the same essay, Vertov mentions an upcoming project which seems likely to be \"Man with a Movie Camera\" (1929), calling it an \"experimental film\" made without a scenario; just three paragraphs above, Vertov mentions a scene from \"Kino Pravda\" which should be quite familiar to viewers of \"Man with the Movie Camera\": the peasant works, and so does the urban woman, and so too, the woman film editor selecting the negative... \"\n\"Man with a Movie Camera\".\nWith Lenin's admission of limited private enterprise through the New Economic Policy (NEP) of 1921, Russia began receiving fiction films from afar, an occurrence that Vertov regarded with undeniable suspicion, calling drama a \"corrupting influence\" on the proletarian sensibility (\"On 'Kinopravda' \", 1924). By this time Vertov had been using his newsreel series as a pedestal to vilify dramatic fiction for several years; he continued his criticisms even after the warm reception of Sergei Eisenstein's \"Battleship Potemkin\" (1925). \"Potemkin\" was a heavily fictionalized film telling the story of a mutiny on a battleship which came about as a result of the sailors' mistreatment; the film was an obvious but skillful propaganda piece glorifying the proletariat. Vertov lost his job at Sovkino in January 1927, possibly as a result of criticizing a film which effectively preaches the line of the Communist Party. He was fired for making \"A Sixth Part of the World: Advertising and the Soviet Universe\" for the State Trade Organization into a propaganda film, selling the Soviet as an advanced society under the NEP, instead of showing how they fit into the world economy.\nThe Ukraine State Studio hired Vertov to create \"Man with a Movie Camera\". Vertov says in his essay \"The Man with a Movie Camera\" that he was fighting \"for a decisive cleaning up of film-language, for its complete separation from the language of theater and literature\". By the later segments of \"Kino-Pravda\", Vertov was experimenting heavily, looking to abandon what he considered film clich\u00e9s (and receiving criticism for it); his experimentation was even more pronounced and dramatic by the time of \"Man with a Movie Camera\", which was filmed in Ukraine. Some have criticized the obvious stagings in this film as being at odds with Vertov's creed of \"life as it is\" and \"life caught unawares\": the scene of the woman getting out of bed and getting dressed is obviously staged, as is the reversed shot of the chess pieces being pushed off a chess board and the tracking shot that films Mikhail Kaufman riding in a car filming a third car.\nHowever, Vertov's two credos, often used interchangeably, are in fact distinct, as Yuri Tsivian comments in the commentary track on the DVD for \"Man with the Movie Camera:\" for Vertov, \"life as it is\" means to record life as it would be without the camera present. \"Life caught unawares\" means to record life when surprised, and perhaps provoked, by the presence of a camera. This explanation contradicts the common assumption that for Vertov \"life caught unawares\" meant \"life caught unaware of the camera\". All of these shots might conform to Vertov's credo \"caught unawares\". His slow motion, fast motion, and other camera techniques were a way to dissect the image, Mikhail Kaufman stated in an interview. It was to be the honest truth of perception. For example, in \"Man with a Movie Camera\", two trains are shown almost melting into each other. Although we are taught to see trains as not riding that close, Vertov tried to portray the actual sight of two passing trains. Mikhail spoke about Eisenstein's films as being different from his and his brother's in that Eisenstein \"came from the theatre, in the theatre one directs dramas, one strings beads\". \"We all felt...that through documentary film we could develop a new kind of art. Not only documentary art, or the art of chronicle, but rather an art based on images, the creation of an image-oriented journalism\", Mikhail explained. More than even film truth, \"Man with a Movie Camera\" was supposed to be a way to make those in the Soviet Union more efficient in their actions. He slowed down his movements, such as the decision whether to jump or not. You can see the decision in his face, a psychological dissection for the audience. He wanted a peace between the actions of man and the actions of a machine, for them to be, in a sense, one.\n\"Cine-Eye\".\n\"Cine-Eye\" is a montage method developed by Dziga Vertov and first formulated in his work \"WE: Variant of a Manifesto\" in 1919.\nDziga Vertov believed his concept of \"Kino-Glaz\", or \"Cine Eye\" in English, would help contemporary \"man\" evolve from a flawed creature into a higher, more precise form. He compared man unfavorably to machines: \"In the face of the machine we are ashamed of man's inability to control himself, but what are we to do if we find the unerring ways of electricity more exciting than the disorderly haste of active people [...]\" As he put it in a 1923 credo, \"I am the Cine-Eye. I am the mechanical eye. I the machine show you the world as only I can see it. I emancipate myself henceforth and forever from human immobility. \"I am in constant motion...\" My path leads towards the creation of a fresh perception of the world. I can thus decipher a world that you do not know.\"\nLike other Russian filmmakers, he attempted to connect his ideas and techniques to the advancement of the aims of the Soviet Union. Whereas Sergei Eisenstein viewed his montage of attractions as a creative tool through which the film-viewing masses could be subjected to \"emotional and psychological influence\" and therefore able to perceive \"the ideological aspect\" of the films they were watching, Vertov believed the Cine-Eye would influence the actual evolution of man, \"from a bumbling citizen through the poetry of the machine to the perfect electric man\".\nVertov surrounded himself with others who were also firm believers in his ideas. These were the Kinoks, other Russian filmmakers who would assist him in his hopes of making \"cine-eye\" a success.\nVertov believed film was too \"romantic\" and \"theatricalised\" due to the influence of literature, theater, and music, and that these psychological film-dramas \"prevent man from being as precise as a stopwatch and hamper his desire for kinship with the machine\". He desired to move away from \"the pre-Revolutionary 'fictional' models\" of filmmaking to one based on the rhythm of machines, seeking to \"bring creative joy to all mechanical labour\" and to \"bring men closer to machines\".\nIn May 1927 Vertov moved to Ukraine, and the Cine-Eye movement broke up.\nLate career.\nVertov's successful career continued into the 1930s. \"Enthusiasm: Symphony of the Donbass\" (1931), an examination into Soviet miners, has been called a 'sound film', with sound recorded on location, and these mechanical sounds woven together, producing a symphony-like effect. Many Soviet critics did not receive the film positively, but critics abroad lauded its sonic experimentation. \nThree years later, \"Three Songs About Lenin\" (1934) looked at the revolution through the eyes of the Russian peasantry. For his film, Vertov had been hired by Mezhrabpomfilm. The film, finished in January 1934 for Lenin's obit, was only publicly released in the Soviet Union in November of that year. From July 1934 it was shown at private screenings to various high-ranking Soviet officials and also to prominent foreigners including H. G. Wells, William Bullitt, and others, and it was screened at the Venice Film Festival in August 1934. A new version of the film was released in 1938, including a longer sequence to reflect Stalin's achievements at the end of the film and leaving out footage of \"enemies\" of that time. Today there exists a 1970 reconstruction by Yelizaveta Svilova. With the rise and official sanction of socialist realism in 1934, Vertov was forced to cut his personal artistic output significantly, eventually becoming little more than an editor for Soviet newsreels. \"Lullaby\", perhaps the last film in which Vertov was able to maintain his artistic vision, was released in 1937.\nDziga Vertov died of cancer in Moscow in 1954.\nFamily.\nVertov's brother Boris Kaufman was a cinematographer who worked with Jean Vigo on \"L'Atalante\" (1934) and much later for directors such as Elia Kazan in the United States who won an Oscar for his work on \"On the Waterfront\". His other brother, Mikhail Kaufman, worked with Vertov on his films until he became a documentarian in his own right. Mikhail Kaufman's directorial debut was the film \"In Spring\" (1929).\nIn 1923, Vertov married his long-time collaborator Elizaveta Svilova.\nAfter the October Revolution, Vertov's parents returned to Bia\u0142ystok, which became part of Poland. They were later murdered by the Nazis during the Holocaust.\nInfluence and legacy.\nVertov's legacy still lives on today. His ideas are echoed in cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9, the movement of the 1960s named after Vertov's \"Kino-Pravda\". The 1960s and 1970s saw an international revival of interest in Vertov.\nThe independent, exploratory style of Vertov influenced and inspired many filmmakers and directors like the Situationist Guy Debord and independent companies such as Vertov Industries in Hawaii. The Dziga Vertov Group borrowed his name. In 1960, Jean Rouch used Vertov's filming theory when making \"Chronicle of a Summer\". His partner Edgar Morin coined the term \"cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9\" when describing the style, using direct translation of Vertov's \"KinoPravda\".\nThe Free Cinema movement in the United Kingdom during the 1950s, the Direct Cinema in North America in the late 1950s and early 1960s, and the \"Candid Eye\" series in Canada in the 1950s all essentially owed a debt to Vertov.\nThis revival of Vertov's legacy included rehabilitation of his reputation in the Soviet Union, with retrospectives of his films, biographical works, and writings. In 1962, the first Soviet monograph on Vertov was published, followed by another collection, \"Dziga Vertov: Articles, Diaries, Projects\". In 1984, to recall the 30th anniversary of Vertov's death, three New York cultural organizations put on the first American retrospective of Vertov's work.\nNew Media theorist Lev Manovich suggested Vertov as one of the early pioneers of database cinema genre in his essay \"Database as a symbolic form\".\nVertov's work has inspired notable artist and filmmaker William Kentridge.\nFilmography.\nLost films.\nSome early Vertov's films were lost for many years. Only 12 minutes of his 1918 \"Anniversary of the Revolution\" were known; in 2018 Russian film historian Nikolai Izvolov found lost film in the Russian State Documentary Film &amp; Photo Archive and restored it. In 2022 he reconstructed another lost film, 1921 \"The History of the Civil War\" using archive materials."}
{"id": "8932", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8932", "title": "Deimos", "text": "Deimos, a Greek word for \"dread\", may refer to:"}
{"id": "8933", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8933", "title": "Delaware General Corporation Law", "text": "The Delaware General Corporation Law (sometimes abbreviated DGCL), officially the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (Title 8, Chapter 1 of the Delaware Code), is the statute of the Delaware Code that governs corporate law in the U.S. state of Delaware. The statute was adopted in 1899. Since the 1913 anti-corporation reforms in New Jersey under the governorship of Woodrow Wilson, Delaware has become the most prevalent jurisdiction in United States corporate law and has been described as the \"de facto\" corporate capital of the United States. \nDelaware is considered a corporate haven because of its business-friendly corporate laws compared to most other U.S. states. 66% of the \"Fortune\" 500, including Walmart and Amazon (two of the world's largest companies by revenue) are incorporated (and therefore have their domiciles for service of process purposes) in the state. Over half of all publicly traded corporations listed in the New York Stock Exchange (including its owner, Intercontinental Exchange) are incorporated in Delaware.\nThe statute has been credited with reducing the tax burdens on Delaware residents as revenues from the statute provide two-fifths of the state's budget, but has been controversial for facilitating tax dodging and money laundering by major corporations, as well as providing safe haven to money launderers, kleptocratic foreign rulers, and human traffickers.\nHistory.\nDelaware acquired its status as a corporate haven in the early 20th century. Following the example of New Jersey, which enacted corporate-friendly laws at the end of the 19th century to attract businesses from New York, Delaware adopted on March 10, 1899, a general incorporation act aimed at attracting more businesses. The group that pushed for this legislation intended to establish a corporation that would sell services to other businesses incorporating in Delaware. Before the rise of general incorporation acts, forming a corporation required a special act of the state legislature. General incorporation allowed anyone to form a corporation by simply raising money and filing articles of incorporation with the state's Secretary of State.\nOther legal aspects.\nBecause of the extensive experience of the Delaware courts, Delaware has a more well-developed body of case law than other states, which serves to give corporations and their counsel greater guidance on matters of corporate governance and transaction liability issues. Disputes over the internal affairs of Delaware corporations are usually filed in the Delaware Court of Chancery, which is a separate court of equity, as opposed to a court of law. Because it is a court of equity, there are no juries; its cases are heard by judges, called chancellors. Since 2018, the court has consisted of one chancellor and six vice-chancellors. The court is a trial court, with one chancellor hearing each case. Litigants may appeal final decisions of the Court of Chancery to the Delaware Supreme Court.\nDelaware has also attracted major credit card banks because of its relaxed rules regarding interest. Many U.S. states have usury laws limiting the amount of interest a lender can charge. Federal law allows a national bank to \"import\" these laws from the state in which its principal office is located. Delaware (among others) has relatively relaxed interest laws, so several national banks have decided to locate their principal office in Delaware. National banks are, however, corporations formed under federal law, not Delaware law. A corporation formed under Delaware state law benefits from the relaxed interest rules to the extent it conducts business in Delaware, but is subject to restrictions of other states' laws if it conducts business in other states.\nPursuant to the \"internal affairs doctrine\", corporations which act in more than one state are subject only to the laws of their state of incorporation with regard to the regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation. As a result, Delaware corporations are subject almost exclusively to Delaware law, even when they do business in other states.\nWhile most states require a for-profit corporation to have at least one director and two officers, Delaware laws do not have this restriction. All offices may be held by a single person who also can be the sole shareholder. The person, who does not need to be a U.S. citizen or resident, may also operate anonymously with only the listing agent through whom the company is registered named.\nTax benefits and burdens.\nDelaware charges no income tax on corporations not operating within the state, so taking advantage of Delaware's other benefits does not result in taxation. At the same time, Delaware has a particularly aggressive tax on banks that locate in the state. However, in general, the state is viewed as a positive location for corporate tax purposes because favorable laws of incorporation allow companies to minimize corporate expenditures (achieved through legal standardization of corporate legal processes), creating a nucleus in Delaware with operating companies often in other states.\nIn addition, Delaware has used its position as the state of incorporation to generate revenue from its abandoned and unclaimed property laws. Under U.S. Supreme Court precedent, the state of incorporation gets to keep any abandoned and unclaimed property, such as uncashed checks and unredeemed gift certificates, if the corporation does not have information about the location of the owner of the property. Abandoned property provides Delaware with about half a billion dollars annually.\nDelaware charges a franchise tax on the corporations incorporated in it. Franchise taxes in Delaware are higher than in most other states which typically get revenue from corporate income taxes on the portion of the corporation's business done in that state. Delaware's franchise taxes supply about one-fifth of its state revenue.\nIn February 2013, \"The Economist\" published an article on tax-friendly jurisdictions, commenting that Delaware stood for \"Dollars and Euros Laundered And Washed At Reasonable Expense\". Jeffrey W. Bullock, Delaware's Secretary of State, insists that the state has struck the right balance between curbing criminality and \"paying deference to the millions of legitimate businesspeople who benefit\" from hassle-free incorporation.\n2013 amendments.\nOn June 30, 2013, Delaware Governor Jack Markell signed amendments to the Delaware General Corporation Law. The new legislation took effect on August 1, 2013, except for the ratification of the defective corporate acts amendment which took effect in 2014.\nSecurities law.\nIn 2020, the Delaware Supreme Court upheld a provision allowing companies to require in their certificates of incorporation all Securities Act of 1933 claims to be filed in federal court.\nDGCL 203 is particularly known as an antitakeover law."}
{"id": "8935", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8935", "title": "Detroit River", "text": "The Detroit River is an international river in North America. The river, which forms part of the border between the U.S. state of Michigan and the Canadian province of Ontario, flows west and south for from Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie as a strait in the Great Lakes system. The river divides the metropolitan areas of Detroit, Michigan, and Windsor, Ontario\u2014an area collectively referred to as Detroit\u2013Windsor. The Ambassador Bridge, the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel, and the Michigan Central Railway Tunnel connect the cities.\nThe river's English name comes from the French (translated as \"River of the Strait\"). The Detroit River has served an important role in the history of Detroit and Windsor, and is one of the world's busiest waterways. It is an important transportation route connecting Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, and Lake Superior to Lake Erie and eventually to Lake Ontario, the St. Lawrence Seaway and the Erie Canal. When Detroit underwent rapid industrialization at the turn of the 20th century, the Detroit River became notoriously polluted and toxic. Since the late 20th century, however, a vast restoration effort has been undertaken because of the river's ecological importance.\nIn the early 21st century, the river today has a wide variety of economic and recreational uses. There are numerous islands in the Detroit River, and much of the lower portion of the river is part of the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge. The portion of the river in the city of Detroit has been organized into the Detroit International Riverfront and the William G. Milliken State Park and Harbor. The Detroit River is designated both an American Heritage River and a Canadian Heritage River\u2014the only river to have this dual designation.\nGeography.\nThe Detroit River flows for from Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie. By definition, this classifies it as both a river and a strait\u200a\u2014\u200aa strait being a narrow passageway connecting two large bodies of water, which is how the river earned its name from early French settlers. However, today, the Detroit River is rarely referred to as a strait, because bodies of water referred to as straits are typically much wider relative to their length. The river forms the southern portion of the waterway connecting Lake Huron to the north and Lake Erie to the south, with other portions including the St. Clair River and Lake St. Clair.\nThe Detroit River is only wide. It begins with an east-to-west flow from Lake St. Clair, but curves and runs north to south. The deepest portion of the Detroit River is in its northern portion. At its source, the river is at an elevation of above sea level. The river is relatively level, dropping only before entering Lake Erie at . As the river contains no dams and no locks, it is easily navigable by even the smallest of vessels. The watershed basin for the Detroit River is approximately . \nSince the river is fairly short, it has few tributaries, the largest being the River Rouge in Michigan; this is four times longer than the Detroit River and contains most of the watershed. The only other major American tributary to the Detroit River is the much smaller Ecorse River. Tributaries on the Canadian side include Little River, Turkey Creek, and the River Canard. The discharge for the Detroit River is relatively high for a river of its size. The river's discharge averaged over the year is , and the river's flow is relatively constant.\nThe Detroit River forms a major element of the international border between the United States and Canada. The river on the American side is all under the jurisdiction of Wayne County, Michigan, and the Canadian side is under the administration of Essex County, Ontario. The largest city along the Detroit River is Detroit, and most of the population along the river lives in Michigan. The Detroit River has two automobile traffic crossings connecting the United States and Canada: the Ambassador Bridge and the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel. Both of these are strongly protected by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection and the Canada Border Services Agency.\nThe upper portion of the river is one of the two places where a Canadian city lies directly south of an American city. In this case, the city of Detroit is directly north of the city of Windsor, Ontario. The only other location where this occurs is Fort Erie, Ontario, which lies south of several cities in Niagara County, New York. The cities and communities southwest of Detroit along the American side of the river are popularly referred to as the Downriver area, because those areas are said to be \"down the river\" from Detroit. Several of these communities do not border the Detroit River but the term \"Downriver\" refers broadly to the cluster of 18 suburban communities that lie to the southwest of the city of Detroit and to the west of the Detroit River.\nIslands.\nThe Detroit River contains 31 charted islands. The majority of the islands are located on the American side of the river. Many of the islands are small and uninhabited, and none are divided by the international border, as the two countries do not share a land border along the river. Grosse Ile is the largest and most populated of all islands, and Fighting Island is the largest Canadian island. Most islands are located in the southern portion of the river.\nHistory.\nEuropeans first recorded navigating the Detroit River in the 17th century. The Iroquois traded furs with the Dutch colonists at New Amsterdam by traveling through the Detroit River. The French later claimed the area for New France. The famed sailing ship \"Le Griffon\" reached the mouth of the Detroit River in mid-August 1679 on its maiden voyage through the Great Lakes. Later, when the French began settling in the area, they navigated the river using canoes made of birch or elm bark. Handcrafted vessels were a common mode of travel across the river, and pirogues and bateaux were also used. \nAs the North American fur trade intensified, European settlers expanded their trade westward into uncharted territories. French explorer Antoine Laumet de La Mothe, sieur de Cadillac sailed up the Detroit River on July 23, 1701. The next day, he established Fort Pontchartrain du D\u00e9troit, which developed as Detroit. The French named the river as \"Rivi\u00e8re D\u00e9troit\". \"D\u00e9troit\" is French for \"strait\". The river was known literally as the \"River of the Strait\".\nWhen Great Britain defeated the French in the Seven Years' War (known as the French and Indian War on the American front), it took over control of the Detroit River, as well as other French territory east of the Mississippi River. The newly formed United States claimed this territory during the American Revolution, but the British did not transfer it until 1796. \nDuring the War of 1812, the Detroit River served as a major barrier between the American Michigan Territory and British Upper Canada, especially during the Battle of Fort Detroit in August 1812. Detroit briefly fell to the British. After the completion of the Erie Canal in 1817, which opened up easier travel to Lake Erie from the East Coast of the United States, connecting the Great Lakes to the Hudson River and the port of New York City, the Detroit River became a route for many migrating settlers traveling to northern Michigan. Detroit rapidly attracted a share of new residents. Following the Patriot War, in which British regulars and Michigan militia nearly came to armed conflict on the ice-covered Detroit River, the United States built Fort Wayne at Detroit to counter Britain's riverside Fort Malden at Amherstburg across the river.\nThe Detroit River served as a final stop on the Underground Railroad and was the most active entry point along the United States\u2013Canada border for fugitive slaves. \nEscaping slaves often chose to cross through the Detroit River rather than flee to Mexico because of the river's location near free states made it less risky than traveling through slaveholding states that border Mexico. The strong Underground Railroad networks in the Canadian border region also assisted Blacks hoping to flee from the U.S. once the Fugitive Slave Act was strengthened in 1850. Canada also granted legal immigration status to Blacks, while Mexico did not for many years. \nIndividuals and organizations assisted escaping slaves hoping to cross the Detroit River from the United States into Canada. The Second Baptist Church of Detroit and First Baptist Church of Amherstburg coordinated ferrying thousands of Blacks across the Detroit River into Canada, and Detroit's Colored Vigilant Committee assisted over 1,500 fugitives in crossing into Canada. Famous abolitionists and Underground Railroad conductors including George DeBaptiste and William Lambert worked individually and with these organizations to assist fleeing slaves and condemn slavery. \u00a0\nThere was considerable transnational fluidity between the Canadian and American sides of the river until the middle of the 19th century. The 1833 Blackburn Riots in Detroit, which erupted after slave hunters detained couple Lucie and Thornton Blackburn, marked the end of hundreds of years of a nearly porous border between Canada and the United States on the Detroit River. Detroit's African American population protested and helped the Blackburns escape across the Detroit River to Upper Canada, where the British colonial government in Canada declared former slaves could not be extradited to be returned to their owners. With their freedom in Canada secured, crossing the Detroit River out of the United States became an imperative for escaping slaves. \nDuring the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), the Union feared the seceded Confederate States of America (CSA) would plan a northerly attack from Canada, which was controlled by the British Empire and remained neutral in the war. The Union feared the CSA would cross the Detroit River to launch this attack. For that reason, Union forces regularly patrolled the Detroit River and the fortification at Fort Wayne improved, although it was far removed from any major combat. A Confederate plot to capture the U.S. Navy warship, USS \"Michigan\", and liberate Confederate prisoners from Johnson Island, in western Lake Erie, was narrowly averted only after the Confederates had captured two passenger steamships.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, Detroit's industrialization took off on an unprecedented scale. The Detroit River became the world's busiest commercial river and in 1908 was dubbed \"the Greatest Commercial Artery on Earth\" by \"The Detroit News\". In 1907, the Detroit River carried 67,292,504 tons (61 billion kg) of shipping commerce through Detroit to markets all over the world. By comparison, London shipped 18,727,230 tons (16 billion kg), and New York shipped 20,390,953 tons (18 billion kg).\nProhibition.\nFrom 1920 to 1933, the United States (US) enforced the Prohibition era. The sale, manufacture, and transportation of alcohol for consumption were nationally banned. Detroit, as the largest city bordering Canada, where alcohol remained legal during Prohibition, became the center of a new industry known as rum-running, smuggling liquor into the US.\nNo bridges connected Ontario, Canada and Michigan, US, until the Ambassador Bridge was finished in 1929 and the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel in 1930. Smugglers used boats of varying sizes to transport alcohol across the river during the summer, and during the winter months, rum-runners traveled back and forth across the frozen Detroit River by car. In some cases, overloaded cars fell through the ice. In the 21st century, car parts from this era are occasionally still found on the bottom of the river. Rum-running in Windsor and production of bootleg liquor became common practices. American mobsters such as the Purple Gang of Detroit used violence to control the route known as the \"Detroit-Windsor Funnel,\" and continue to gain lucrative returns from the trade. The name parodied the newly built tunnel between the cities and nations. The Detroit River, Lake St. Clair, and the St. Clair River are estimated to have carried 75% of all liquor smuggled into the United States during Prohibition. Government officials were unable or unwilling to deter the flow.\nThe rum-running industry died when prohibition was repealed in 1933 by the Twenty-first Amendment.\nSubmerged objects.\nBecause of the booming businesses and long history of Metro Detroit and Windsor, Ontario, the Detroit River has been the site of many artifacts, some lost with sunken ships and others abandoned, such as murder weapons or stolen bronze statues. A DMC DeLorean has also been recovered from the river. The artifacts recovered are well preserved due to the river's fresh water but low visibility makes them difficult to find.\nA 1940s-era bronze statue depicting a classical nude woman was originally installed to overlook a reflecting pool in the Grosse Pointe War Memorial. It was nicknamed \"The Nude,\" and, in 2001, was believed to have been successfully stolen for display in some art collector's private cache. During a police diving exercise near a submerged Jeep, the statue was found in 2009, restored, and returned to the memorial.\nAnchors from the \"SS Greater Detroit,\" a luxury steamship that toured the Detroit River from 1924 to 1950, and the famed \"SS Edmund Fitzgerald\", a lake freighter that sank in a terrible 1975 storm, have notably both been recovered from the river. The 6,000-pound anchor of the \"SS Greater Detroit\" was raised in November 2016. It was installed at the Detroit/Wayne County Port Authority Building. The lost anchor of the \"SS Edmund Fitzgerald\" was recovered during a July 1992 project, and the anchor was installed in the yard of the Dossin Great Lakes Museum on Belle Isle.\nSince the 1980s, divers have recovered a total of six 1700s-era cannons from the river. The last was found in 2011 near the Cobo Center. They are believed to have been part of the pre-War of 1812 inventory kept by the British garrison in this area. Historians believe another three cannon may still be in the river. Inventory documents record a total of 17 cannons and 14 have been accounted for. It is believed that the British dragged the cannons onto the frozen river so they would sink with the spring thaw, and be kept from use by the American enemy. Another seven, larger cannons may have fallen off a barge closer to Amherstburg, Ontario, and may yet be found in the river.\nPollution and conservation efforts.\nMuch of the land that surrounds the Detroit River is urbanized and, in some places, has been used for industrial purposes for more than 100 years. There has been excessive water pollution of the river from the long-term, unregulated dumping of chemicals, industrial waste, garbage, and sewage. Much of the Detroit River and its shoreline were polluted and unsafe for recreational use. Thousands of migrating birds died each year because of the oil slicks and contaminated water around the mouth of the Detroit River at Lake Erie. The river's oxygen levels were depleted to the point where fish could not inhabit its waters. Because this pollution often drained into and affected Lake Erie, the lake was considered \"dead\" and unable to support aquatic life.\nIn 1961, a congressional order founded the Wyandotte National Wildlife Refuge. That began the government's placing tighter restrictions on industries; substantial government funding at various levels has been allocated to clean up the river. In this early period, opponents believed that such efforts would adversely affect Detroit's industry and economy. In 1970, toxic levels of mercury in the water resulted in the total closing of the fishing industry in the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, the Detroit River, and Lake Erie. Finally, a massive conservation effort was initiated to clean up the Detroit River. For years, the multi-million dollar cost of removing pollutants from the river and the political influence of nearby industries, hindered conservation efforts.\nIn 1998, the Detroit River was designated as an American Heritage River by the US Environmental Protection Agency and in 2001 as a Canadian Heritage River.\u200a It is the only river in North America to have such dual designations.\nIn 2001, the Wyandotte National Wildlife Refuge was absorbed into the larger Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge, a cooperative effort between the United States and Canada to preserve the area as an ecological refuge. The millions of dollars spent since that time to dredge pollutants out of the Detroit River has led to a remarkable restoration, although problems remain. Today, many species of native animals that had been driven out by human development are returning to the area. The river is home to a growing number of bird species such as eagles (including reintroduced bald eagles), ospreys, and peregrine falcons. Large numbers of lake whitefish, sturgeon, silver bass, black bass, salmon, perch, and walleye are again thriving in the river. \nThe Detroit River and its recovery efforts were listed as a Michigan State Historic Site in 2007. A historic marker was erected along the river in a park that now serves as the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge visitor center in the city of Trenton.\nEconomy.\nThe Detroit River is used for shipping and trading. The earliest use of the river for these economic activities was the shipping of furs for trade as early as the 17th century. By the time the fur trade decreased, Michigan had begun to exploit the lumber-rich areas of Northern Michigan and the Upper Peninsula. Detroit turned into a major industrial region, largely because of the Detroit River. The only way a ship could travel out of the upper Great Lakes system was to travel down the Detroit River. From there, ships could travel anywhere in the world out of the St. Lawrence Seaway or the Erie Canal to New York City. At the beginning of the 20th century, the automotive industry boomed, and the many manufacturers imported abundant supplies of iron ore, sand, limestone and wood.\nThe Detroit River provides substantial revenue for the local economies. A 1991 study showed $20.1 million came from sales related to waterfowl hunting along the Detroit River. The same year, bird watching, photography, and other non-consumptive uses of waterfowl contributed another $192.8 million to Michigan's economy. Local economies benefit through boating registrations and fishing licenses. It is estimated walleye fishing alone brings in $1 million to the economy of communities along the lower Detroit River each spring. Other fish caught by recreational fisherman include white bass, bluegill, crappie, freshwater drum, smallmouth bass, northern pike and muskie. There are over 800,000 recreation boats in Michigan, and more than half of them are regularly used on or near the Detroit River. Popular river destinations in Detroit include the Detroit International Riverfront and Belle Isle Park\u200a\u2014\u200aboth of which host events throughout the year. Several restaurants on the river have docks for boaters. Tour boats and dinner cruises travel through the sights of Detroit and the undeveloped islands downriver. Cruise ships support tourism on the Great Lakes and dock at the Port Detroit passenger terminal downtown. The iconic Renaissance Center is on the banks of the Detroit River.\nBridges and crossings.\nAccording to a 2004 study, 150,000 jobs and $13 billion in annual production depend on the river crossings connecting Detroit to Windsor. In 2004, the American trade with Ontario alone was $407 billion, in which 28% ($113.3 billion) crossed the Detroit River.\nThere are two automobile traffic routes that completely cross the river: the Detroit\u2013Windsor tunnel and the privately owned Ambassador Bridge, both of which connect Detroit, Michigan, to Windsor, Ontario. A railway tunnel and a commercial truck ferry service also travel between Detroit and Windsor. In Michigan, there are two bridges connecting the mainland to Grosse Ile, as well as the MacArthur Bridge that connects the mainland Detroit to Belle Isle. All ports of entry on the American side are secured by the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and the Canadian side is secured by the Canada Border Services Agency; all areas between the American ports of entry and on the American side of the river are secured by the United States Border Patrol.\nThe Gordie Howe International Bridge is a new bridge project which began construction in 2019; it will directly connect Highway 401 in Canada to Interstate 75 in the United States."}
{"id": "8936", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8936", "title": "Drunkeness", "text": ""}
{"id": "8937", "revid": "46629044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8937", "title": "Dsungaripterus", "text": "Dsungaripterus is a genus of dsungaripterid pterosaur which lived during the Early Cretaceous in what is now China and possibly South Korea. Its fossils come from the Wuerho Pterosaur Fauna group (WPF) of the Tugulu Group, comprising sections of the (Lianmuqin and Shengjinkou Formations) of the Junggar Basin. Both formations have seen various age estimates, with data suggest at least some of the WPF dates to the middle Valanginian, but the upper and lower bounds of these pterosaur bearing deposits remains unclear.\nDescription.\n\"Dsungaripterus weii\" had a wingspan of . Like most dsungaripteroids it had a rather robust skeleton with thick walls and stouty bodily proportions, suggesting a mostly terrestrial lifestyle. The flight style of these animals is unclear, but it was probably punctuated by abrupt landings and extensive flapping.\nThe skull of \"Dsungaripterus\", measuring over long, bore a low bone crest that ran down from the base of the skull to halfway to the beak. \"Dsungaripterus\"'s head and neck were together almost long. Its most notable feature are its long, narrow, upcurved jaws with a pointed tip. It had no teeth in the front part of its jaws, which were probably used to remove prey from cracks in rocks and/or the sandy, muddy inland environments it inhabited. It had knobbly flat teeth more to the back of the jaw that were well suited for crushing the armor of shellfish or other hard objects. Thus, it is commonly interpreted that dsungaripterids were durophagous and possibly piscivorous pterosaurs. Additionally, \"Dsungaripterus\" also had a palate similar to that of azhdarchoids.\nHistory of discovery.\n\"Dsungaripterus\" was described in 1964 named by Yang Zhongjian. The genus name combines a reference to the Junggar Basin with a Latinized Greek \"pteron\", \"wing\". The type species is \"Dsungaripterus weii\", the specific name honoring paleontologist C.M. Wei of the Palaeontological Division, Institute of Science, Bureau of Petroleum of Xinjiang. The holotype is IVPP V-2776, a partial skull and skeleton from the Lianmuqin Formation. In 1973, more material has been found within the Shengjinkou Formation, which includes almost complete skulls.\nIn 1980 Peter Galton renamed \"Pterodactylus brancai\" (Reck 1931) from the Tendaguru Formation into \"Dsungaripterus brancai\", but the identification is now commonly rejected. In 1982 Natasha Bakhurina named a new species, \"Dsungaripterus parvus\", based on a smaller skeleton from Mongolia. Later, this was renamed into \"Phobetor\", a preoccupied name, and in 2009 concluded to be identical to \"Noripterus\". A dsungaripterid wing finger phalanx was reported in 2002 from the Hasandong Formation of South Korea, and was identified in 2015 and 2018 as \"Dsungaripterus\"? cf. \"D. weii\".\nClassification.\n\"Dsungaripterus\" was classified by Yang as a member of the Dsungaripteridae. Below is a cladogram showing the results of a phylogenetic analysis presented by Andres and colleagues in 2014. They recovered \"Dsungaripterus\" within the clade Dsungaripteromorpha (a subgroup within the Azhdarchoidea), more specifically within the Dsungaripteridae, sister taxon to \"Domeykodactylus\". Their cladogram is shown below.\nIn 2019, a different topology, this time by Kellner and colleagues, was published. In this study, \"Dsungaripterus\" was recovered outside the Azhdarchoidea, within the larger group Tapejaroidea, sister taxon to \"Noripterus\". The cladogram of the analysis is shown below."}
{"id": "8940", "revid": "12406635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8940", "title": "David Huffman", "text": "David Oliver Huffman (May 10, 1945 \u2013 February 27, 1985) was an American actor and producer.\nPersonal life.\nHuffman was born on May 10, 1945, in Berwyn, Illinois, to Clarence and Opal Huffman (n\u00e9e Dippel).\nHuffman married casting director Phyllis Huffman (\"nee\" Grennan) in 1967, whom he had met as a student at Webster University in St. Louis, Missouri. The couple had two sons and remained married until Huffman's death in 1985.\nHuffman was an avid sailor, recreational painter, and country\u2010and\u2010western guitarist.\nMurder.\nOn the morning of February 27, 1985, 16-year-old Genaro Samano Villanueva was taken into San Diego police custody after attempting to steal a radio from a car near his home. Released into the custody of his high school vice principal, Villanueva left school and went to Balboa Park. There he was spotted by Canadian tourist Jack Beamer prowling around inside the motor home of Beamer's friends. After Beamer accosted him, Villanueva fled the scene.\nHuffman, who was cast in the play \"Of Mice and Men\" at the Old Globe Theatre and was set to begin work on the television miniseries \"North and South\" the following week, had visited the theatre shortly before noon to share cookies with the cast and crew and was sitting in his van near the theatre playing his bagpipes when he saw Beamer confront Villanueva. He gave chase in his vehicle, parking the van near the Spreckels Organ Pavilion and following Villanueva into the park. When he caught up with Villanueva, the two became involved in a physical altercation, during which Villanueva stabbed Huffman twice in the chest with a screwdriver. Huffman died of exsanguination, likely within 30 to 45 seconds. His body was found less than an hour later in a Palm Canyon crevice by a group of children, although it was not positively identified until later that night.\nOn March 2 and 3, Crime Stoppers produced a reenactment of the crime that was shown on San Diego television and published in several national newspapers. The Canadian tourists whose motor home was burglarized saw Huffman's photo and death announcement in the newspaper and called police.\nVillanueva was arrested on March 12 after a police officer recognized Villanueva from a composite sketch given to police by the Canadian tourist. On June 24, 1986, Villanueva was sentenced to 26 years to life in prison and admitted to the California State Prison, Centinela. On December 9, 2011, he was denied parole for 15 years."}
{"id": "8941", "revid": "1194710187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8941", "title": "Dagome iudex", "text": "Dagome iudex is one of the earliest historical documents relating to Poland. Although Poland is not mentioned by name, it refers to \"Dagome\" and \"Ote\" (Mieszko I and his wife, Oda von Haldensleben) and their sons in 991, placing their land (called \"Civitas Schinesghe\") under the protection of the Apostolic See. The document's name derives from its opening words.\nHistory.\nThe \"Dagome iudex\" survives in the form of a summary, completed . It was found in a register compiled by a curial cardinal during the papacy of Gregory VII.\nMost historians believe that the word \"Dagome\" is a melding of two names: the Christian \"Dago\", for \"Dagobert\" (Mieszko's hypothetical baptismal name), and the \"Me,\" for pagan \"Mieszko.\" The Latin word (\"judge\") could refer to \"prince.\" Another interpretation is that \"Dagome iudex\" is a corruption of \"Ego Mesco dux\" (\"I, Prince Mieszko\"). In the Vatican copy, the e of Dagome might have an \"s adscriptum\" (similar to cedilla), although the Vatican copyist read \"iudex\" literally, relating it to Sardinia and its four \"judges\".\nPlace names are misspelled by the writer who made the summary. He was apparently unaware that the document related to territory later called Poland.\nThe boundaries of the \"Gniezno\" state are described as those that extended to the \"Long Sea\" (the Baltic), Prussia, Rus', Krak\u00f3w, Moravia and the Oder River. Lesser Poland is included by the mention of its capital, Krak\u00f3w (\"craccoa\"). Between \"alemura\", probably Olomouc and Upper Lusatia region of the Milceni (\"terra mileze\") a straightened border could include Silesia.\nThe text seems to use \"civitas schinesghe\" as a synonym of Greater Poland. Otherwise, the boundary description would be more logical if \"schenisghe\" meant the city of Szczecin. Of the other regions and places in Mieszko's territory, it mentioned only Krak\u00f3w and Lusatia, both without \"fines\" (border). The regions outside Mieszko's rule, \"pruzze\" (Prussia) and \"russe\" (Ruthenia) were mentioned with the word \"fines\".\nThe \"Dagome iudex\" is of critical importance to Polish history, since it provided a general description of the future Polish state in that period. It, however, left many questions unanswered. First, it did not explain \"why\" Mieszko I placed his state under the Pope's protection. Also, it is unclear why the document did not mention Mieszko's eldest son, Boles\u0142aw I the Brave. Instead, his sons by his second wife (except the third), Oda, were mentioned instead. Finally, Mieszko I is not referred to as \"Dagome\" in any other document.\nHistorians suppose that Boles\u0142aw's absence from the document might be explained by an old custom whereby children received their inheritance as soon as they reached the age of majority. Thus, Boles\u0142aw the Brave might have received Krak\u00f3w as his part of his father's legacy before the \"Dagome iudex\" was written.\nNotes.\nNotes based on interpretations by the Polish historian Gerard Labuda:\n\"a.\" When Lusatia came in sight of medieval writers, the lived only in Lower Lusatia, the Milceni in Upper Lusatia. Later on, the term \"Lusatia\" (Lausitz, Lu\u017eice) was spread to the south. Therefore, nowaday's term Lusatian Mountains does not totally fit with the history of settlement.\n\"b.\" \"Dagome\" is commonly identified as Mieszko I. However, the question remains open whether this was a misspelling or his Christian name. If the latter, it might correspond to the names \"Dago\", \"Dagon\" or \"Dagobert\".\n\"c.\" In classical Latin, the term \"iudex\" was used to refer to \"a person who is ordered to do some work on behalf of others\" and was identical in meaning to the Byzantine \"archont\". However, in medieval Latin \"iudex\" could also mean a sovereign ruler. Princes of Slavic tribes were sometimes referred to as \"iudices\". Nevertheless, some historians claim that this was a misspelling of the Latin \"dux\" (\"duke\" or \"prince\").\n\"d.\" Literally, \"lady-senator\". Cf. \"senate\".\n\"e.\" It is unclear why Boles\u0142aw I the Brave, Mieszko's eldest son and his successor, is not mentioned while the children from Mieszko's marriage to Ote are.\n\"f.\" Scribe's note, only in the Vatican copy; the four is written non-classical as iiii.\n\"g.\" The origin of the name \"Schinesghe\" is unclear. Some historians argue that it is a corruption of \"Gniezno\", then Poland's capital. Others identify it with the town of Szczecin.\n\"h.\" \"Long sea\": Some historians identify it with the Baltic Sea, others with the province of Pomerania (the Baltic coast), a part of Poland ca. 990.\n\"i.\" \"Alemure\" might be the city of Olomouc, in Moravia. However, this is uncertain."}
{"id": "8942", "revid": "34432956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8942", "title": "DA", "text": "Da, DA, dA, D\u00c4 and other variants may refer to:"}
{"id": "8945", "revid": "43010624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8945", "title": "Derek Walcott", "text": "Sir Derek Alton Walcott OM (23 January 1930 \u2013 17 March 2017) was a Saint Lucian poet and playwright. \nHe received the 1992 Nobel Prize in Literature. His works include the Homeric epic poem \"Omeros\" (1990), which many critics view \"as Walcott's major achievement.\" In addition to winning the Nobel Prize, Walcott received many literary awards over the course of his career, including an Obie Award in 1971 for his play \"Dream on Monkey Mountain\", a MacArthur Foundation \"genius\" award, a Royal Society of Literature Award, the Queen's Medal for Poetry, the inaugural OCM Bocas Prize for Caribbean Literature, the 2010 T.\u00a0S. Eliot Prize for his book of poetry \"White Egrets\" and the Griffin Trust For Excellence in Poetry Lifetime Recognition Award in 2015.\nEarly life and childhood.\nWalcott was born and raised in Castries, Saint Lucia, in the West Indies, the son of Alix (Maarlin) and Warwick Walcott. He had a twin brother, the playwright Roderick Walcott, and a sister, Pamela Walcott. His family is of English, Dutch and African descent, reflecting the complex colonial history of the island that he explores in his poetry. His mother, a teacher, loved the arts and often recited poetry around the house. His father was a civil servant and a talented painter. He died when Walcott and his brother were one year old, and were left to be raised by their mother. Walcott was brought up in Methodist schools. His mother, who was a teacher at a Methodist elementary school, provided her children with an environment where their talents could be nurtured. Walcott's family was part of a minority Methodist community, who felt overshadowed by the dominant Catholic culture of the island established during French colonial rule.\nAs a young man Walcott trained as a painter, mentored by Harold Simmons, whose life as a professional artist provided an inspiring example for him. Walcott greatly admired C\u00e9zanne and Giorgione and sought to learn from them. Walcott's painting was later exhibited at the Anita Shapolsky Gallery in New York City, along with the art of other writers, in a 2007 exhibition named \"The Writer's Brush: Paintings and Drawing by Writers\".\nHe studied as a writer, becoming \"an elated, exuberant poet madly in love with English\" and strongly influenced by modernist poets such as T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound. Walcott had an early sense of a vocation as a writer. In the poem \"Midsummer\" (1984), he wrote:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nForty years gone, in my island childhood, I felt that \nthe gift of poetry had made me one of the chosen, \nthat all experience was kindling to the fire of the Muse.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAt 14, Walcott published his first poem, a Miltonic, religious poem, in the newspaper \"The Voice of St Lucia\". An English Catholic priest condemned the Methodist-inspired poem as blasphemous in a response printed in the newspaper. By 19, Walcott had self-published his first two collections with the aid of his mother, who paid for the printing: \"25 Poems\" (1948) and \"Epitaph for the Young: XII Cantos\" (1949). He sold copies to his friends and covered the costs. He later commented:\nI went to my mother and said, \"I'd like to publish a book of poems, and I think it's going to cost me two hundred dollars.\" She was just a seamstress and a schoolteacher, and I remember her being very upset because she wanted to do it. Somehow she got it\u2014a lot of money for a woman to have found on her salary. She gave it to me, and I sent off to Trinidad and had the book printed. When the books came back I would sell them to friends. I made the money back.\nThe influential Bajan poet Frank Collymore critically supported Walcott's early work.\nAfter attending high school at Saint Mary's College, he received a scholarship to study at the University College of the West Indies in Kingston, Jamaica.\nCareer.\nAfter graduation, Walcott moved to Trinidad in 1953, where he became a critic, teacher and journalist. He founded the Trinidad Theatre Workshop in 1959 and remained active with its board of directors.\nExploring the Caribbean and its history in a colonialist and post-colonialist context, his collection \"In a Green Night: Poems 1948\u20131960\" (1962) attracted international attention. His play \"Dream on Monkey Mountain\" (1970) was produced on NBC-TV in the United States the year it was published. Makak is the protagonist in this play; and \"Makak\"s condition represents the condition of the colonized natives under the oppressive forces of the powerful colonizers\". In 1971 it was produced by the Negro Ensemble Company off-Broadway in New York City; it won an Obie Award that year for \"Best Foreign Play\". The following year, Walcott won an OBE from the British government for his work.\nHe was hired as a teacher by Boston University in the United States, where he founded the Boston Playwrights' Theatre in 1981. That year he also received a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in the United States. Walcott taught literature and writing at Boston University for more than two decades, publishing new books of poetry and plays on a regular basis. Walcott retired from his position at Boston University in 2007. He became friends with other poets, including the Russian expatriate Joseph Brodsky, who lived and worked in the U.S. after being exiled in the 1970s, and the Irishman Seamus Heaney, who also taught in Boston.\nWalcott's epic poem \"Omeros\" (1990), which loosely echoes and refers to characters from the \"Iliad\", has been critically praised as his \"major achievement.\" The book received praise from publications such as \"The Washington Post\" and \"The New York Times Book Review\", which chose \"Omeros\" as one of its \"Best Books of 1990\".\nWalcott was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1992, the second Caribbean writer to receive the honour after Saint-John Perse, who was born in Guadeloupe, received the award in 1960. The Nobel committee described Walcott's work as \"a poetic oeuvre of great luminosity, sustained by a historical vision, the outcome of a multicultural commitment\". He won an Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for Lifetime Achievement in 2004.\nHis later poetry collections include \"Tiepolo's Hound\" (2000), illustrated with copies of his watercolours; \"The Prodigal\" (2004), and \"White Egrets\" (2010), which received the T. S. Eliot Prize and the 2011 OCM Bocas Prize for Caribbean Literature.\nDerek Walcott held the Elias Ghanem Chair in Creative Writing at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas in 2007. In 2008, Walcott gave the first Cola Debrot Lectures In 2009, Walcott began a three-year distinguished scholar-in-residence position at the University of Alberta. In 2010, he became Professor of Poetry at the University of Essex.\nAs a part of St Lucia's Independence Day celebrations, in February 2016, he became one of the first knights of the Order of Saint Lucia.\nWriting.\nThemes.\nMethodism and spirituality have played a significant role from the beginning in Walcott's work. He commented: \"I have never separated the writing of poetry from prayer. I have grown up believing it is a vocation, a religious vocation.\" Describing his writing process, he wrote: \"the body feels it is melting into what it has seen\u2026 the 'I' not being important. That is the ecstasy... Ultimately, it's what Yeats says: 'Such a sweetness flows into the breast that we laugh at everything and everything we look upon is blessed.' That's always there. It's a benediction, a transference. It's gratitude, really. The more of that a poet keeps, the more genuine his nature.\" He also notes: \"if one thinks a poem is coming on... you do make a retreat, a withdrawal into some kind of silence that cuts out everything around you. What you're taking on is really not a renewal of your identity but actually a renewal of your anonymity.\"\nInfluences.\nWalcott said that his writing was influenced by the work of the American poets Robert Lowell and Elizabeth Bishop, who were also friends.\nPlaywriting.\nHe published more than twenty plays, the majority of which have been produced by the Trinidad Theatre Workshop and have also been widely staged elsewhere. Many of them address, either directly or indirectly, the liminal status of the West Indies in the post-colonial period. Through poetry he also explores the paradoxes and complexities of this legacy.\nEssays.\nIn his 1970 essay \"What the Twilight Says: An Overture\", discussing art and theatre in his native region (from \"Dream on Monkey Mountain and Other Plays\"), Walcott reflects on the West Indies as a colonized space. He discusses the problems for an artist of a region with little in the way of truly Indigenous forms, and with little national or nationalist identity. He states: \"We are all strangers here... Our bodies think in one language and move in another\". The epistemological effects of colonization inform plays such as \"Ti-Jean and his Brothers\". Mi-Jean, one of the eponymous brothers, is shown to have much information but truly knows nothing. Every line Mi-Jean recites is rote knowledge gained from the coloniser; he is unable to synthesize it or apply it to his life as a colonised person.\nWalcott notes of growing up in West Indian culture:\nWhat we were deprived of was also our privilege. There was a great joy in making a world that so far, up to then, had been undefined... My generation of West Indian writers has felt such a powerful elation at having the privilege of writing about places and people for the first time and, simultaneously, having behind them the tradition of knowing how well it can be done\u2014by a Defoe, a Dickens, a Richardson.\nWalcott identified as \"absolutely a Caribbean writer\", a pioneer, helping to make sense of the legacy of deep colonial damage. In such poems as \"The Castaway\" (1965) and in the play \"Pantomime\" (1978), he uses the metaphors of shipwreck and Crusoe to describe the culture and what is required of artists after colonialism and slavery: both the freedom and the challenge to begin again, salvage the best of other cultures and make something new. These images recur in later work as well. He writes: \"If we continue to sulk and say, Look at what the slave-owner did, and so forth, we will never mature. While we sit moping or writing morose poems and novels that glorify a non-existent past, then time passes us by.\"\n\"Omeros\".\nWalcott's epic book-length poem \"Omeros\" was published in 1990 to critical acclaim. The poem very loosely echoes and references Homer and some of his major characters from \"The Iliad\". Some of the poem's major characters include the island fishermen Achille and Hector, the retired English officer Major Plunkett and his wife Maud, the housemaid Helen, the blind man Seven Seas (who symbolically represents Homer), and the author himself.\nAlthough the main narrative of the poem takes place on the island of St. Lucia, where Walcott was born and raised, Walcott also includes scenes from Brookline, Massachusetts (where Walcott was living and teaching at the time of the poem's composition), and the character Achille imagines a voyage from Africa onto a slave ship that is headed for the Americas; also, in Book Five of the poem, Walcott narrates some of his travel experiences in a variety of cities around the world, including Lisbon, London, Dublin, Rome, and Toronto.\nComposed in a variation on \"terza rima\", the work explores the themes that run throughout Walcott's oeuvre: the beauty of the islands, the colonial burden, the fragmentation of Caribbean identity, and the role of the poet in a post-colonial world.\nIn this epic, Walcott speaks in favour of unique Caribbean cultures and traditions to challenge the modernity that existed as a consequence of colonialism.\nCriticism and praise.\nWalcott's work has received praise from major poets including Robert Graves, who wrote that Walcott \"handles English with a closer understanding of its inner magic than most, if not any, of his contemporaries\", and Joseph Brodsky, who praised Walcott's work, writing: \"For almost forty years his throbbing and relentless lines kept arriving in the English language like tidal waves, coagulating into an archipelago of poems without which the map of modern literature would effectively match wallpaper. He gives us more than himself or 'a world'; he gives us a sense of infinity embodied in the language.\" Walcott noted that he, Brodsky, and the Irish poet Seamus Heaney, who all taught in the United States, were a band of poets \"outside the American experience\".\nThe poetry critic William Logan critiqued Walcott's work in a \"New York Times\" book review of Walcott's \"Selected Poems\". While he praised Walcott's writing in \"Sea Grapes\" and \"The Arkansas Testament\", Logan had mostly negative things to say about Walcott's poetry, calling \"Omeros\" \"clumsy\" and \"Another Life\" \"pretentious\". Logan concluded with: \"No living poet has written verse more delicately rendered or distinguished than Walcott, though few individual poems seem destined to be remembered.\"\nMost reviews of Walcott's work are more positive. For instance, in \"The New Yorker\" review of \"The Poetry of Derek Walcott\", Adam Kirsch had high praise for Walcott's oeuvre, describing his style in the following manner:\nBy combining the grammar of vision with the freedom of metaphor, Walcott produces a beautiful style that is also a philosophical style. People perceive the world on dual channels, Walcott's verse suggests, through the senses and through the mind, and each is constantly seeping into the other. The result is a state of perpetual magical thinking, a kind of \"Alice in Wonderland\" world where concepts have bodies and landscapes are always liable to get up and start talking.\nKirsch calls \"Another Life\" Walcott's \"first major peak\" and analyzes the painterly qualities of Walcott's imagery from his earliest work through to later books such as \"Tiepolo's Hound\". Kirsch also explores the post-colonial politics in Walcott's work, calling him \"the postcolonial writer par excellence\". Kirsch calls the early poem \"A Far Cry from Africa\" a turning point in Walcott's development as a poet. Like Logan, Kirsch is critical of \"Omeros\", which he believes Walcott fails to successfully sustain over its entirety. Although \"Omeros\" is the volume of Walcott's that usually receives the most critical praise, Kirsch believes \"Midsummer\" to be his best book.\nIn 2013 Dutch filmmaker Ida Does released \"Poetry is an Island\", a feature documentary film about Walcott's life and the ever-present influence of his birthplace of St Lucia.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1954 Walcott married Fay Moston, a secretary, and they had a son, the St. Lucian painter Peter Walcott. The marriage ended in divorce in 1959. Walcott married a second time to Margaret Maillard in 1962, who worked as an almoner in a hospital. Together they had two daughters, Elizabeth Walcott-Hackshaw and Anna Walcott-Hardy, before divorcing in 1976. In 1976, Walcott married for a third time, to actress Norline Metivier; they divorced in 1993. His companion until his death was Sigrid Nama, a former art gallery owner.\nWalcott was also known for his passion for travelling to countries around the world. He split his time between New York, Boston, and St. Lucia, and incorporated the influences of different locations into his pieces of work.\nAllegations of sexual harassment.\nIn 1982, a Harvard sophomore accused Walcott of sexual harassment in September 1981. She alleged that after she refused a sexual advance from him, she was given the only C in the class. In 1996 a student at Boston University sued Walcott for sexual harassment and \"offensive sexual physical contact\". The two reached a settlement.\nIn 2009, Walcott was a leading candidate for the position of Oxford Professor of Poetry. He withdrew his candidacy after reports of the accusations against him of sexual harassment from 1981 and 1996.\nWhen the media learned that pages from an American book on the topic were sent anonymously to a number of Oxford academics, this aroused their interest in the university's decisions. Ruth Padel, also a leading candidate, was elected to the post. Within days, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that she had alerted journalists to the harassment cases. Under severe media and academic pressure, Padel resigned. Padel was the first woman to be elected to the Oxford post, and some journalists attributed the criticism of her to misogyny and a gender war at Oxford. They said that a male poet would not have been so criticized, as she had reported published information, not rumour.\nNumerous respected poets, including Seamus Heaney and Al Alvarez, published a letter of support for Walcott in \"The Times Literary Supplement,\" and criticized the press furore. Other commentators suggested that both poets were casualties of the media interest in an internal university affair because the story \"had everything, from sex claims to allegations of character assassination\". Simon Armitage and other poets expressed regret at Padel's resignation.\nDeath.\nWalcott died at his home in Cap Estate, St. Lucia, on 17 March 2017. He was 87. He was given a state funeral on Saturday, 25 March, with a service at the Cathedral Basilica of the Immaculate Conception in Castries and burial at Morne Fortune.\nLegacy.\nIn 1993, a public square and park located in central Castries, Saint Lucia, was named Derek Walcott Square. A documentary film, \"Poetry Is an Island: Derek Walcott\", by filmmaker Ida Does, was produced to honour him and his legacy in 2013.\nThe Saint Lucia National Trust acquired Walcott's childhood home at 17 Chauss\u00e9e Road, Castries, in November 2015, renovating it before opening it to the public as Walcott House in January 2016.\nIn 2019, Arrowsmith Press, in partnership with The Derek Walcott Festival in Port-of-Spain, Trinidad, and the Boston Playwrights' Theatre, began awarding the annual Derek Walcott Prize for Poetry to a full-length book of poems by a living poet who is not a US citizen published in the previous calendar year.\nIn January 2020, the Sir Arthur Lewis Community College in St. Lucia announced that Walcott's books on Caribbean Literature and poetry have been donated to its Library."}
{"id": "8946", "revid": "46846351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8946", "title": "Decipherment", "text": "In philology and linguistics, decipherment is the discovery of the meaning of the symbols found in extinct languages and/or alphabets. Decipherment is possible with respect to languages and scripts. One can also study or try to decipher how spoken languages that no longer exist were once pronounced, or how living languages used to be pronounced in prior eras.\nNotable examples of decipherment include the decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts and the decipherment of cuneiform. A notable decipherment in recent years is that of the Linear Elamite script. Today, at least a dozen languages remain undeciphered. Historically speaking, decipherments do not come suddenly through single individuals who \"crack\" ancient scripts. Instead, they emerge from the incremental progress brought about by a broader community of researchers.\nDecipherment should not be confused with cryptanalysis, which aims to decipher special written codes or ciphers used in intentionally concealed secret communication (especially during war). It should also not be confused with determining the meaning of ambiguous text in a known language (interpretation).\nCategories.\nAccording to Gelb and Whiting, the approach of decipherment depends on four categories of situations in an undeciphered language:\nMethods.\nThere is no single recipe or linear method for decipherment, however: instead, philologists and linguists must rely on a set of heuristic devices that have been established. Broadly, it is important to be familiar with the relevant texts where the script or language occurs in, access to accurate drawings or photographs of these texts, information about their relative chronology, and background information on where the texts occur in (their geography, perhaps being found in the context of a funerary monument, etc). \nThese methods can be divided into approaches utilizing external or internal information.\nExternal information.\nMany successful encipherments have proceeded from the discovery of external information, a common example being through the use of multilingual inscriptions, such as the Rosetta Stone (with the same text in three scripts: Demotic, hieroglyphic, and Greek) that enabled the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphic. In principle, multilingual text may be insufficient for a decipherment as translation is not a linear and reversible process, but instead represents an encoding of the message in a different symbolic system. Translating a text from one language into a second, and then from the second language back into the first, rarely reproduces exactly the original writing. Likewise, unless a significant number of words are contained in the multilingual text, limited information can be gleaned from it.\nInternal information.\nInternal approaches are multi-step: one must first ensure that the writing they are looking at represents real writing, as opposed to a grouping of pictorial representations or a modern-day forgery without further meaning. This is commonly approached with methods from the field of grammatology. Prior to decipherment of meaning, one can then determine the number of distinct graphemes (which, in turn, allows one to tell if the writing system is alphabetic, syllabic, or logo-syllabic; this is because such writing systems typically do not overlap in the number of graphemes they use), the sequence of writing (whether it be from left to right, right to left, top to bottom, etc.), and the determination of whether individual words are properly segmented when the alphabet is written (such as with the use of a space or a different special mark) or not. If a repetitive schematic arrangement can be identified, this can help in decipherment. For example, if the last line of a text has a small number, it can be reasonably guessed to be referring to the date, where one of the words means \"year\" and, sometimes, a royal name also appears. Another case is when the text contains many small numbers, followed by a word, followed by a larger number; here, the word likely means \"total\" or \"sum\". After one has exhausted the information that can be inferentially derived from probable content, they must transition to the systematic application of statistical tools. These include methods concerning the frequency of appearance of each symbol, the order in which these symbols typically appear, whether some symbols appear at the beginning or end of words, etc. There are situations where orthographic features of a language make it difficult if not impossible to decipher specific features (especially without certain outside information), such as when an alphabet does not express double consonants. Additional, and more complex methods, also exist. Eventually, the application of such statistical methods becomes exceedingly laborious, in which computers might be used to apply them automatically.\nComputational approaches.\nComputational approaches towards the decipherment of unknown languages began to appear in the late 1990s. Typically, there are two types of computational approaches used in language decipherment: approaches meant to produce translations in known languages, and approaches used to detect new information that might enable future efforts at translation. The second approach is more common, and includes things such as the detection of cognates or related words, discovery of the closest known language, word alignments, and more.\nArtificial intelligence.\nIn recent years, there has been a growing emphasis on methods utilizing artificial intelligence for the decipherment of lost languages, especially through natural language processing (NLP) methods. Proof-of-concept methods have independently re-deciphered Ugaritic and Linear B using data from similar languages, in this case Hebrew and Ancient Greek.\nDeciphering pronunciation.\nRelated to attempts to decipher the meaning of languages and alphabets, include attempts to decipher how extinct writing systems, or older versions of contemporary writing systems (such as English in the 1600s) were pronounced. Several methods and criteria have been developed in this regard. Important criteria include (1) Rhymes and the testimony of poetry (2) Evidence from occasional spellings and misspellings (3) Interpretations of material in one language from authors in foreign languags (4) Information obtained from related languages (5) Grammatical changes in spelling over time.\nFor example, analysis of poetry focuses on the use of wordplay or literary techniques between words that have a similar sound. Shakespeare's play \"Romeo and Juliet\" contains wordplay that relies on a similar sound between the words \"soul\" and \"soles\", allowing confidence that the similar pronunciation between the terms today also existed in Shakespeare's time. Another common source of information on pronunciation is when earlier texts use rhyme, such as when consecutive lines in poetry end in the similar or the same sound. This method does have some limitations however, as texts may use rhymes that rely on visual similarities between words (such as 'love' and 'remove') as opposed to auditory similarities, and that rhymes can be imperfect. Another source of information about pronunciation comes from explicit description of pronunciations from earlier texts, as in the case of the \"Grammatica Anglicana\", such as in the following comment about the letter &lt;o&gt;: \"In the long time it naturally soundeth sharp, and high; as in ch\u00f3sen, h\u00f3sen, h\u00f3ly, f\u00f3lly [. . .] In the short time more flat, and a kin to u; as c\u00f2sen, d\u00f2sen, m\u00f2ther, br\u00f2ther, l\u00f2ve, pr\u00f2ve\". Another example comes from detailed comments on pronunciations of Sanskrit from the surviving works of Sanskrit grammarians.\nChallenges.\nMany challenges exist in the decipherment of languages, including when:\nRelationship to cryptanalysis.\nDecipherment overlaps with another technical field known as cryptanalysis, a field that aims to decipher writings used in secret communication, known as ciphertext. A famous case of this was in the cryptanalysis of the Enigma during the World War II. Many other ciphers from past wars have only recently been cracked. Unlike in language decipherment, however, actors using ciphertext intentionally lay obstacles to prevent outsiders from uncovering the meaning of the communication system.\nHistory.\nInterest in ancient scripts and dead languages began to arise by the Renaissance, if not earlier. Extensive information began to be collected about these scripts in the 16th and 17th centuries, and a typology of writing was established in the 17th century. The first serious decipherments, however, did not take place until the 18th century. In 1754, Swinton and Barth\u00e9lemy independently deciphered the Aramaic script as represented in Palmyrene inscriptions from the 3rd century AD. In 1787, Silvestre de Sacy deciphered the Sasanian script, which was the script used in Ancient Persia to write down the Middle Iranian language used in the Sasanian empire. Both decipherments relied on bilingual texts where Greek was included as the second script. It was also in the 18th century when the methodological framework for deciphering scripts and languages began to be established. For example, in 1714, Leibniz advocated that parallel content in bilingual inscriptions could be specified by correlating where personal names occur in both inscriptions. By the 19th century, the prerequisites for decipherment began to become widely available. These included extensive knowledge about the scripts themselves, adequate editions of known texts from that script, philological skills, and the ability to reconstruct linguistic forms from the limited available evidence. The 19th century saw two major successes in decipherment: that of Egyptian hieroglyphic and cuneiform."}
{"id": "8949", "revid": "1960685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8949", "title": "Decca Navigator System", "text": "The Decca Navigator System was a hyperbolic radio navigation system that allowed ships and aircraft to determine their position by using radio signals from a dedicated system of static radio transmitters. The system used phase comparison between pairs of low frequency signals between 70 and 129\u00a0kHz, as opposed to pulse timing systems like Gee and LORAN. This made it much easier to design receivers using 1940s electronics, and operation was simplified by giving a direct readout of Decca coordinates without the complexity of a cathode-ray tube and highly skilled operator.\nThe system was invented and developed by Decca in the UK. It was first deployed by the Royal Navy during World War II for the vital task of clearing the minefields to enable the D-Day landings. The Allied forces needed an accurate system not known to the Germans and thus free of jamming. After the war, it came off the secret list and was commercially developed by the Decca Company and deployed around UK and later used in many areas around the world. At its peak there were about 180 transmitting stations using \"chains\" of three or four transmitters each to allow position fixing by plotting intersecting electronic lines. Decca's primary use was for ship navigation in coastal waters, offering much better accuracy than the competing LORAN system. Fishing vessels were major post-war users, but it was also used on some aircraft, including a very early (1949) application of moving map displays. The system was deployed extensively in the North Sea and was used by helicopters operating to oil platforms.\nThe opening of the more accurate Loran-C system to civilian use in 1974 offered stiff competition, but Decca was well established by this time and continued operations to 2000. Decca Navigator, along with Loran and similar systems, was eventually replaced by the GPS in 2000, when that became available for public use.\nPrinciples of operation.\nOverview.\nThe Decca Navigator System consisted of individual groups of land-based radio transmitters organised into \"chains\" of three or four stations. Each chain consisted of a master station and three (occasionally two) secondary stations, termed Red, Green and Purple. Ideally, the secondaries would be positioned at the vertices of an equilateral triangle with the master at the centre. The baseline length, that is, the master\u2013secondary distance, was typically .\nEach station transmitted a continuous wave signal; comparing the relative phases of the signals from the master and one of the secondaries produced a relative phase measure that was presented on a clock-like display. The phase difference was caused by the relative distance between the stations as seen by the receiver. As the receiver moves these distances change and those changes are represented by the movement of the hands on the displays.\nIf one selects a particular phase difference, say 30 degrees, and plots all the locations where that phase difference occurs, the result is a set of hyperbolic \"lines of position\" called a \"pattern\". As there were three secondaries there were three patterns, also termed Red, Green and Purple. The patterns were drawn on nautical charts as a set of hyperbolic lines in the appropriate colour.\nNavigators determined their location by reading the phase difference from two or more of the patterns from the displays. They could then look at the chart to find where the two closest charted hyperbolas crossed. The accuracy of this measurement was improved by choosing the set of two patterns that resulted in the lines crossing at as close to a right angle as possible.\nDetailed principles of operation.\nWhen two stations transmit at the phase-locked frequency, the difference in phase between the two signals is constant along a hyperbolic locus. However, if two stations transmit on the same frequency, it is impossible for the receiver to separate them. Instead, each chain was allocated a nominal frequency, known as 1\"f\", and each station in the chain transmitted at a harmonic of this base frequency, as follows:\nThe frequencies given are those for Chain 5B, known as the English Chain, but all chains used similar frequencies between 70\u00a0kHz and 129\u00a0kHz.\nDecca receivers multiplied the signals received from the Master and each Slave by different values to arrive at a common frequency (least common multiple, LCM) for each Master/Slave pair, as follows:\nIt was phase comparison at this common frequency that resulted in the hyperbolic lines of position. The interval between two adjacent hyperbolas on which the signals are in phase was called a \"lane\". Since the wavelength of the common frequency was small compared with the distance between the Master and Slave stations there were many possible lines of position for a given phase difference, and so a unique position could not be arrived at by this method.\nOther receivers, typically for aeronautical applications, divided the transmitted frequencies down to the basic frequency (1\"f\") for phase comparison, rather than multiplying them up to the LCM frequency.\nLanes and zones.\nEarly Decca receivers were fitted with three rotating \"Decometers\" that indicated the phase difference for each pattern. Each Decometer, which could be read to a resolution of a centilane, drove a second indicator that counted the number of lanes traversed \u2013 each 360 degrees of phase difference was one lane traversed. In this way, assuming the point of departure was known, a more or less distinct location could be identified.\nThe lanes were grouped into \"zones\", with 18 green, 24 red, or 30 purple lanes in each zone. This meant that on the baseline (the straight line between the Master and its Slave) the zone width was the same for all three patterns of a given chain. Typical lane and zone widths on the baseline are shown in the table below (for chain 5B):\nThe lanes were numbered 0 to 23 for red, 30 to 47 for green and 50 to 79 for purple. The zones were labelled A to J, repeating after J. A Decca position coordinate could thus be written: Red I 16.30; Green D 35.80. Later receivers incorporated a microprocessor and displayed a position in latitude and longitude.\nMultipulse.\n\"Multipulse\" provided an automatic method of lane and zone identification by using the same phase comparison techniques described above on lower frequency signals.\nThe nominally continuous wave transmissions were in fact divided into a 20-second cycle, with each station in turn simultaneously transmitting all four Decca frequencies (5\"f\", 6\"f\", 8\"f\" and 9\"f\") in a phase-coherent relationship for a brief period of 0.45 seconds each cycle. This transmission, known as Multipulse, allowed the receiver to extract the 1\"f\" frequency and so to identify the lane that the receiver was in (to a resolution of a zone).\nAs well as transmitting the Decca frequencies of 5\"f\", 6\"f\", 8\"f\" and 9\"f\", an 8.2\"f\" signal, known as Orange, was also transmitted. The beat frequency between the 8.0\"f\" (Red) and 8.2\"f\" (Orange) signals allowed a 0.2\"f\" signal to be derived and so resulted in a hyperbolic pattern in which one cycle (360\u00b0) of phase difference equates to 5 zones.\nAssuming that one's position was known to this accuracy, this gave an effectively unique position.\nRange and accuracy.\nDuring daylight, ranges of around could be obtained, reducing at night to 200 to , depending on propagation conditions.\nThe accuracy depended on:\nBy day these errors could range from a few meters on the baseline up to a nautical mile at the edge of coverage. At night, skywave errors were greater and, on receivers without multipulse capabilities, it was not unusual for the position to jump a lane, sometimes without the navigator knowing.\nAlthough in the days of differential GPS this range and accuracy may appear poor, in its day the Decca system was one of the few, if not the only, position fixing system available to many mariners. Since the need for an accurate position is less when the vessel is further from land, the reduced accuracy at long ranges was not a great problem.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nIn 1936 William J. O'Brien, an engineer, contracted tuberculosis that put his career on hold for a period of two years. During this period he had the idea of position fixing by means of phase comparison of continuous wave transmissions. This was not the first such system, but O'Brien apparently developed his version without knowledge of the others, and made several advancements in the art that would prove useful. He initially imagined the system being used for aircraft testing, specifically the accurate calculation of ground speed. Some experiments were carried out in California in 1938, selecting frequencies with harmonic \"beats\" that would allow for station identification in a network of transmitters. Both the U.S. Army and Navy considered the idea too complicated and work ended in 1939.\nO\u2019Brien's friend, Harvey F. Schwarz, was chief engineer of the Decca Record company in England. In 1939 O\u2019Brien sent him details of the system so it could be put forward to the British military. Initially Robert Watson-Watt reviewed the system but he did not follow it up, deeming it too easily jammed (and likely due to the existing work on the Gee system, being carried out by Watt's group). However, in October 1941 the British Admiralty Signal Establishment (ASE) became interested in the system, which was then classified as \"Admiralty Outfit QM\". The first marine trials were conducted between Anglesey and the Isle of Man, at frequencies of 305/610\u00a0kHz, on 16 September 1942.\nFurther trials were conducted in the northern Irish Sea in April 1943 at 70/130\u00a0kHz. It was decided that the original frequencies were not ideal, and a new system using a 14\u00a0kHz inter-signal spacing was selected. This led to the common 5, 6, 8 and 9\"f\" frequencies, used throughout the life of the Decca system. 7\"f\" was reserved for a Loran-C-like extension, but never developed. A follow-up test was carried out in the Irish Sea in January 1944 to test a wide variety of upgrades and production equipment. By this time the competing Gee system was known to the Admiralty and the two systems were tested head-to-head under the code names QM and QH. QM was found to have better sea-level range and accuracy, which led to its adoption.\nD-Day landings.\nA three-station trial was held in conjunction with a large-scale assault and landing exercise in the Moray Firth in February/March 1944. The success of the trials and the relative ease of use and accuracy of the system resulted in Decca receiving an order for 27 \"Admiralty Outfit QM\" receivers. The receiver consisted of an electronics unit with two dials and was known to its operators as the \"Blue Gasmeter Job\". A Decca chain was set up, consisting of a master station at Chichester and slaves at Swanage and Beachy Head. A fourth decoy transmitter was located in the Thames Estuary as part of the deception that the invasion would be focussed on the Calais area.\n21 minesweepers and other vessels were fitted with \"Admiralty Outfit QM\" and, on 5 June 1944, 17 of these ships used it to accurately navigate across the English Channel and to sweep the minefields in the planned areas. The swept areas were marked with buoys in preparation for the Normandy Landings.\nAfter the initial ship tests, Decca conducted tests in cars, driving in the Kingston By-Pass area to verify receiver accuracy. In the car installation, it was found possible to navigate within an individual traffic lane. The company entertained high hopes that the system could be used in aircraft, to permit much more precise navigation in the critical airspace around airports and urban centres where traffic density was highest.\nCommercial deployment.\nAfter the end of World War II the Decca Navigator Co. Ltd. was formed (1945) and the system expanded rapidly, particularly in areas of British influence; at its peak it was deployed in many of the world's major shipping areas. More than 15,000 receiving sets were in use aboard ships in 1970. There were 4 chains around England, 1 in Ireland and 2 in Scotland, 12 in Scandinavia (5 each in Norway and Sweden and 1 each in Denmark and Finland), a further 4 elsewhere in northern Europe and 2 in Spain.\nCanada was another early user, with branch offices set up in Toronto in 1953. The first chain was installed in southwest Newfoundland in 1956 as part of a joint Canada-US Navy surveying program. This led to commercial deployments the next year in Nova Scotia and an inland system for air traffic in the busy Quebec City-Montreal area. A fourth chain covering eastern Newfoundland was added in 1958. When meetings in Montreal in 1958 led to VOR and DME being selected as the standard aviation navigation systems, the Montreal system was moved eastward to cover the Anticosti Island area of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and the western Newfoundland chain was later repositioned to better cover the Cabot Strait. A series of chains was also proposed to cover the Northwest Passage had oil tanker traffic used the area, but this never came to be. Another was briefly set up covering Lake Ontario in 1971 for the International Field Year for the Great Lakes. The last Canadian chain shut down in 1986, after Loran-C became widespread.\nIn the late 1950s an experimental Decca chain was set up in the United States, in the New York area, to be used for navigating the Vertol 107 helicopters of New York Airways. These helicopters were operating from the principal local airports\u2014Idlewild Airport on Long Island, Newark Airport in New Jersey, LaGuardia Airport in the Borough of Queens, nearer to Manhattan, and a site on the top of the (then) PanAm Building on Park Avenue. Use of Decca was essential because its signals could be received down to sea level, were not subject to the line-of-sight limitations of VOR/DME and did not suffer the slant-range errors that create problems with VOR/DME close to the transmitters. The Decca installations in the New York Airways helicopters included the unique Decca 'roller map' displays that enabled the pilot to see his or her position at a glance, a concept infeasible with VOR/DME.\nThis chain installation was considered highly controversial at the time, for political reasons. This led to the U.S. Coast Guard, under instructions from the Treasury Department to which it reported, banning the use of Decca receivers in ships entering New York harbour for fear that the system might create a de facto standard (as it had become in other areas of the world). It also served to protect the marketing interests of the Hoffman Electronics division of ITT, a principal supplier of VOR/DME systems, that Decca might have been poised to usurp.\nThis situation was exacerbated by the workload problems of the Air Traffic Controllers Association (ATCA), under its executive director Francis McDermott, whose members were forced to use radar data on aircraft positions, relaying those positions by radio to the aircraft from their control locations. An example of the problem, cited by experts, was the collision of a Douglas DC8 and a Lockheed Constellation over Staten Island, New York, that\u2014according to some experts\u2014could have been avoided if the aircraft had been Decca-equipped and could not only have determined their positions more precisely but would not have suffered from the rho-theta position errors inherent in VOR/DME.\nOther chains were established in Japan (6 chains); Namibia and South Africa (5 chains); India and Bangladesh (4 chains); North-West Australia (2 chains); the Persian Gulf (1 chain with stations in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates and a second chain in the north of the Gulf with stations in Iran) and the Bahamas (1 chain). Four chains were planned for Nigeria but only two were built and these did not enter into public service. Two chains in Vietnam were used during the Vietnam War for helicopter navigation, with limited success.\nDuring the Cold War period, following WWII, the R.A.F. established a confidential chain in Germany. The Master station was in Bad Iburg near Osnabr\u00fcck and there were two Slaves. The purpose of this chain was to provide accurate air navigation for the corridor between Western Germany and Berlin in the event that a mass evacuation of allied personnel may be required. In order to maintain secrecy, frequencies were changed at irregular intervals.\nDecca, Racal, and the closedown.\nThe headquarters of Decca Navigator were at New Malden, Surrey, just off the Kingston by-pass. There was a Decca School, at Brixham, Devon, where employees were sent on courses from time to time. Racal, the UK weapons and communications company, acquired Decca in 1980. Merging Decca's radar assets with their own, Racal began selling off the other portions of the company, including avionics and Decca Navigator.\nA significant amount of income from the Decca system was due to the receivers being leased to users, not sold outright. This guaranteed predictable annual income. When the patents on the original technology lapsed in the early 1980s, new receivers were quickly built by a number of companies. In particular, Aktieselskabet Dansk Philips ('Danish Philips', \"ap\") introduced receivers that could be purchased outright, and were much smaller and easier to use than the current Decca counterparts. The \"ap\" versions directly output the longitude and latitude to two decimals (originally in datum ED50 only) instead of using the \"deco meter\" displays, offering accuracy better than \u00b19.3 m, much better than the Decca units. This also eliminated the need for the special charts printed with Decca lanes and zones.\nDecca sued ap for infringement and, in the ensuing court battle, Decca lost the monopoly. That signalled the beginning of the end for the company. Income dwindled and eventually, the UK Ministry of Transport stepped in, having the lighthouse authorities take responsibility for operating the system in the early 1990s.\nA ruling from the European Union forced the UK government to withdraw funding. The general lighthouse authority ceased Decca transmissions at midnight on 31 March 2000. The Irish chain provided by B\u00f3rd Iascaigh Mhara continued transmitting until 19 May 2000. Japan continued operating their Hokkaid\u014d chain until March 2001, the last Decca chain in operation.\nOther applications.\nDelrac.\nIn the immediate post-war era, Decca began studying a long-range system like Decca, but using much lower frequencies to enable reception of skywaves at long distances. In February 1946 the company proposed a system with two main stations located at Shannon Airport in Ireland and Gander International Airport in Newfoundland (today part of Canada). Together, these stations would provide navigation over the main great circle route between London and New York. A third station in Bermuda would provide general ranging information to measure progress along the main track.\nWork on this concept continued, and in 1951 a modified version was presented that offered navigation over very wide areas. This was known as Delrac, short for \"Decca Long Range Area Cover\". A further development, including features of the General Post Office's POPI system, was introduced in 1954, proposing 28 stations that provided worldwide coverage. The system was predicted to offer accuracy at range 95% of the time. Further development was ended in favour of the Dectra system.\nDectra.\nIn the early 1960s the Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA), as part of a wider ICAO effort, began the process of introducing a standard long-range radio navigation system for aviation use. Decca proposed a system that could offer both high accuracy at short ranges and transatlantic navigation with less accuracy, using a single receiver. The system was known as Dectra, short for \"Decca Track\".\nUnlike the Delrac system, Dectra was essentially the normal Decca Navigator system with the modification of several existing transmitter sites. These were located at the East Newfoundland and Scottish chains, which were equipped with larger antennas and high-power transmitters, broadcasting 20 times as much energy as normal chain stations. Given that the length of the chain baselines did not change, and were relatively short, at long distance the signal offered almost no accuracy. Instead, Dectra operated as a track system; aircraft would navigate by keeping themselves within the signal defined by a particular Decca lane.\nThe main advantage of Dectra compared to other systems being proposed for the RTCA solution was that it could be used for both medium-range navigation over land, as well as long-range navigation over the Atlantic. In comparison, the VOR/DME system that ultimately won the competition offered navigation over perhaps a 200-mile radius, and could not offer a solution to the long-distance problem. Additionally, as the Decca system provided an X and Y location, as opposed to the angle-and-range VOR/DME, Decca proposed offering it with their Decca Flight Log moving map display to further improve ease of navigation. In spite of these advantages, the RTCA ultimately chose VOR/DME for two primary reasons; VOR offered coverage over about the same range as Decca, about 200\u00a0miles, but did so with a single transmitter instead of Decca's four, and Decca's frequencies proved susceptible to interference from static due to lightning, while VOR's higher frequencies were not quite as sensitive.\nDecca continued to propose that Dectra be used for the long-range role. In 1967 they installed another transmitter in Iceland to provide ranging along the Scotland-Newfoundland track, with a second proposed to be installed on the Azores. They also installed Dectra receivers with Omnitrac computers and a lightweight version of the Flight Log on a number of commercial airliners, notably a BOAC Vickers VC10. The Omnitrac could take inputs from Decca (and Dectra), Loran-C, VOR/DME, an air data computer and doppler radars and combine them all to produce a latitude/longitude output along with bearing, distance-to-go, bearing and an autopilot coupling. Their efforts to standardize this were eventually abandoned as inertial navigation systems began to be installed for these needs.\nHi-Fix.\nA more accurate system named Hi-Fix was developed using signalling in the 1.6\u00a0MHz range. It was used for specialised applications such as precision measurements involved with oil-drilling and by the Royal Navy for detailed mapping and surveying of coasts and harbours. The Hi-Fix equipment was leased for a period with temporary chains established to provide coverage of the area required, Hi-Fix was commercialised by Racal Survey in the early 1980s. An experimental chain was installed with coverage of central London and receivers placed in London buses and other vehicles to demonstrate an early vehicle location and tracking system. Each vehicle would report its location automatically via a conventional VHF two-way radio link, the data added to a voice channel.\nAnother application was developed by the Bendix Pacific division of Bendix Corporation, with offices in North Hollywood, California, but not deployed: PFNS\u2014Personal Field Navigation System\u2014that would enable individual soldiers to ascertain their geographic position, long before this capability was made possible by the satellite-based GPS (Global Positioning System).\nA further application of the Decca system was implemented by the U.S. Navy in the late 1950s and early 1960s for use in the Tongue of the Ocean/Eleuthera Sound area near The Bahamas, separating the islands of Andros and New Providence. The application was for sonar studies made possible by the unique characteristics of the ocean floor.\nAn interesting characteristic of the Decca VLF signal discovered on BOAC, later British Airways, test flights to Moscow, was that the carrier switching could not be detected even though the carrier could be received with sufficient strength to provide navigation. Such testing, involving civilian aircraft, is quite common and may well not be in the knowledge of a pilot.\nThe 'low frequency' signalling of the Decca system also permitted its use on submarines. One 'enhancement' of the Decca system was to offer the potential of keying the signal, using Morse code, to signal the onset of nuclear war. This option was never taken up by the UK government. Messages were clandestinely sent, however, between Decca stations thereby bypassing international telephone calls, especially in non-UK chains."}
{"id": "8953", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8953", "title": "Dana Rohrabacher", "text": "Dana Tyrone Rohrabacher ( ; born June 21, 1947) is an American former politician who served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1989 to 2019. A Republican, he represented for the last three terms of his House tenure. Rohrabacher was defeated by Democrat Harley Rouda in 2018. Rohrabacher has expressed strong pro-Russia and pro-Putin opinions which have raised questions about his relationship with Vladimir Putin and the Russian government. \"Politico\" dubbed him as \"Putin's favorite congressman\".\nEarly life, education, and early career.\nDana Tyrone Rohrabacher was born on June 21, 1947, in Coronado, California, the son of Doris M. (n\u00e9e Haring) and Donald Tyler Rohrabacher. Rohrabacher graduated from Palos Verdes High School in Palos Verdes Estates, California, attended Los Angeles Harbor College, and earned a bachelor's degree in history at California State University, Long Beach in 1969. He received his master's degree in American Studies at the University of Southern California.\nWhile in graduate school and during the early 1970s, Rohrabacher had a side activity as a folk singer. He was also a writer for the \"Orange County Register\".\nRohrabacher served as assistant press secretary to Ronald Reagan during his 1976 and 1980 presidential campaigns. Rohrabacher then worked as a speechwriter and special assistant to President Reagan from 1981 to 1988. During his tenure at the White House, Rohrabacher played a leading role in the formulation of the Reagan Doctrine.\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nElections.\nRohrabacher left the Reagan administration in 1988 to pursue Dan Lungren's recently vacated House seat. With his friend Oliver North's fundraising help, Rohrabacher won the Republican primary with a plurality of 35%. He won the general election with 64% of the vote. He twice experienced serious primary competition, in 1992 and 1998. After redistricting, he won a three-candidate primary election in 1992 with a plurality of 48%. In 1998, he won an open primary with 54% of the vote.\n2008.\nIn 2008, Rohrabacher defeated Democratic nominee Debbie Cook, 53\u201343%.\n2010.\nIn 2010, Rohrabacher defeated Democratic nominee Ken Arnold, 62\u201338%.\n2012.\nAfter redistricting, Rohrabacher announced in 2012 that he would run in the newly redrawn 48th Congressional district. He said \"The new 48th District is a good fit and something that will enable me to serve my constituents and the country well.\" He won election in the 48th district with 61% of the vote.\n2014.\nRohrabacher won re-election with 64% of the vote.\n2016.\nRohrabacher won re-election with 59% of the vote.\n2018.\nIn March 2018, CNN reported that Erik Prince, a former intern of Rohrabacher while he was freshman congressman in 1990 and very close ally of Rohrabacher, hosted a fundraiser at Prince's Virginia home with expected attendees including Oliver North on March 18, 2018. On October 12, 2018, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that the Congressional Leadership Fund, a Super PAC closely associated with House Speaker Paul Ryan, had passed over Rohrabacher in its initial round of broadcast television advertising across Southern California. Rohrabacher's campaign denied this, saying that CLF had spent \"about $2.4 million and they have an additional $1 million in media buys scheduled\" for Rohrabacher.\nDemocrat Harley Rouda defeated Rohrabacher on Election Day.\nTenure.\nElection fraud and conviction.\nRohrabacher was charged with improper use of campaign contributions in connection with a 1995 state assembly election. Rohrabacher provided some of his campaign funds to his campaign manager (and future wife), Rhonda Carmony, to promote a decoy Democratic candidate to draw away votes from another Democratic candidate. Rohrabacher was found guilty and fined $50,000.\nPayment for 30-year-old screenplay.\nOn November 4, 2005, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that Rohrabacher was paid $23,000 for a 30-year-old screen play he had written. At issue was whether the producer paid him for the screenplay or for introductions to congressional and federal officials. Rohrabacher said that the introductions were made in good faith, were nothing that was not done regularly for legitimate causes, and that the introductions had only become an issue because of Joseph Medawar's alleged misdeeds. In May 2006, Rohrabacher announced through his press secretary that he would return the $23,000 (~$ in ). The decision was made public shortly before Medawar took responsibility in a United States District Court for bilking $3.4 million from about 50 investors.\n2011 visit to Iraq.\nDuring a trip to Iraq in June 2011, Rohrabacher said that when Iraq becomes a wealthy nation, it should pay back the US for all the money it had spent since the Iraq invasion. Rohrabacher also commented that he would be holding a hearing with the Sub-Committee on Oversight and Investigations into whether Iraq committed \"crimes against humanity\" during an attack on Camp Ashraf in April 2011. The incident left 34 residents killed and over 300 wounded. The delegation was denied access to the camp by Iraqi government, citing their sovereignty. Rohrabacher's delegation was subsequently asked to leave the country.\n2012 FBI warning.\nRohrabacher was warned in 2012 in a secure room at the Capitol building by an agent from the FBI that Russian spies may have been trying to recruit him to act on Russia's behalf as an \"agent of influence\", after he met with a member of the Russian foreign ministry privately in Moscow. Following the ISIS terrorist attacks in Tehran on June 7, 2017, in which 17 innocent civilians were killed, he suggested that the attack could be viewed as 'a good thing', and surmised that President Trump might have been behind the coordination of this terrorist attack. An article in \"The Atlantic\" suggested that there was serious concern in the State Department of ties between Rohrabacher and the Russian government.\nJack Wu.\nIn June 2015, Rohrabacher released a statement accusing former treasurer of his reelection committee, Jack Wu, of embezzling more than $170,000 from his campaign. Rohrabacher's attorney, Charles H. Bell Jr., stated that the congressman had filed criminal charges against Wu with the Orange County district attorney and state attorney general.\n2016 consideration for Secretary of State.\nFollowing the election of Donald Trump in 2016, Rohrabacher was on the shortlist for Secretary of State along with Mitt Romney and eventual pick Rex Tillerson.\nCommittee assignments.\nRohrabacher chaired the Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee of the House Science Committee from 1997 until January 2005; he received a two-year waiver to serve beyond the six-year term limit.\nAs a senior member of the International Relations Committee, Rohrabacher led the effort to deny Most Favored Nation trading status to the People's Republic of China, citing that nation's dismal human rights record and opposition to democracy. His subcommittee assignments were East Asia and Pacific, and Middle East and South Asia.\nForeign and security policy positions.\nIn foreign policy, Rohrabacher supported withdrawing U.S. troops from Afghanistan, called for Trump to punish Turkish President Erdo\u011fan on embassy violence, sided with Russia in the Russia\u2013Georgia war, and gave a qualified defense of the annexation of Crimea in 2014.\nRussia.\nRohrabacher has expressed strong pro-Russia and pro-Putin opinions&lt;ref name=\"Tau_Nicholas_Hughes_9/15/2017\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which have raised questions about his relationship with Vladimir Putin and the Russian government. \"Politico\" and others have dubbed him \"Putin's favorite congressman\".\nEarly in Rohrabacher's congressional career in 1990 or 1991, KGB agent and deputy mayor of Saint Petersburg Vladimir Putin and two other Russians entered Rohrabacher's congressional office in Washington, D.C. In a 2013 interview, Rohrabacher asserted that he and Putin later became close friends.\nAccording to Erik Prince, Prince, as an intern on Rohrabacher's staff, travelled around the world on fact finding missions to support Rohrabacher's interests.\nRohrabacher called the Russian banker Aleksandr Torshin, a Putin ally, \"sort of the conservatives' favorite Russian\".\nOn September 8, 2008, at a House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Committee meeting, Rohrabacher argued that the Georgians had initiated a recent military confrontation in the ongoing Russia\u2013Georgia war.\nIn 2012, the FBI warned Rohrabacher that his support for Russia's interests was allowing Russia to cultivate him for its purposes.\nIn February 2013, Rohrabacher gave a speech urging the right to self-determination for the Baloch people in Pakistan at an UNPO conference in London.\nIn April 2014, he tweeted that \"If majority of people legally residing in Alaska want to be part of Russia then it's OK with me.\"\nIn April 2016, Rohrabacher and a member of his staff, Paul Behrends, traveled to Russia and returned with Yuri Chaika's confidential talking points memo about incriminating information on Democratic donors. The talking points paper used at the Trump Tower meeting on June 9, 2016 by Natalia Veselnitskaya was very similar to the document Rohrabacher had obtained from Chaika in April.\nRohrabacher is known for his longtime friendship with Putin and for his defense of \"the Russian point of view\". On June 15, 2016, then-House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told a group of Republicans, \"'There's two people I think Putin pays: Rohrabacher and Trump. Swear to God'\". Then-House Speaker Paul Ryan ended the conversation by saying \"'No leaks. This is how we know we're a real family here'\". The Republicans present were sworn to secrecy. Brendan Buck, counselor to Paul Ryan, initially denied these reports, but was then told that \"The Washington Post\" had a recording. After the recording was leaked by the \"Post\" in May 2017, McCarthy said the comment was intended as a joke.\nAround that time, Rohrabacher planned\u2014in his capacity as chair of the Europe subcommittee\u2014to hold a hearing on the Magnitsky Act, which bars certain Russian officials from entering the United States or holding any financial assets in American banks. Rohrabacher reportedly wanted Bill Browder, the American-born investor who had lobbied for the act's passage after what he claims was the illegal appropriation of his hedge fund's assets and the subsequent murder of his Russian lawyer, to testify. Rohrabacher planned to subject him to what was described as a \"show trial\". In addition to questioning Browder closely and skeptically about his claims, Rohrabacher intended to show a feature-length documentary film critical of the Magnitsky claims. Another scheduled witness was Russian lawyer Natalia Veselnitskaya, a longtime lobbyist against the Magnitsky Act who attended the June 9 Trump Tower meeting. In July 2017, Browder testified to the Senate Judiciary Committee that persons supporting the interests of foreign governments or acting on their behalf, especially Russia, must comply with Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA) requirements, and that no one behind the screening of the Andrei Nekrasov film had met the disclosure filings under FARA.\nWhen Foreign Affairs Committee chairman Ed Royce learned of Rohrabacher's plans, he canceled the hearing and forbade Rohrabacher from showing the film. In its stead, he held a full committee hearing on U.S.-Russia relations at which Rohrabacher was allowed to submit some of the pro-Russian claims into evidence. The film was ultimately shown at the Newseum, and an intern in Rohrabacher's office who later worked for the Trump transition team sent emails promoting the film from the subcommittee offices.\nAfter Donald Trump won the 2016 presidential election, Rohrabacher defended his approach to improving Russian\u2013American relations. He had previously met at least twice with Rinat Akhmetshin, a former Soviet spy \"who met with President Trump's son, son-in-law and campaign manager in June 2016\", to discuss Russian sanctions.\nIn a May 2017 interview with CNN, Rohrabacher said, \"'We have a huge double standard with Russia when it comes to prisoners and other things'\". Rohrabacher added that interference by the Russian intelligence services' in the 2016 U.S. election was the same as the National Security Agency (NSA) bugging German Chancellor Angela Merkel's phone.\nIn July 2017, Rohrabacher voted to impose sanctions on Iran, North Korea, and Russia.\nOn 16 August 2017, Rohrabacher visited Julian Assange in the Ecuadorian Embassy in London and told him that Trump would pardon him on the condition that he would agree to say that Russia was not involved in the 2016 Democratic National Committee email leaks. At his extradition hearings in 2020, Assange's defense team alleged in court that this offer was made \"on instructions from the president\". Trump and Rohrabacher subsequently said they had never spoken about the offer, and Rohrabacher said he had made the offer on his own initiative.&lt;ref name=\"Bowcott_Borger_19/2/2020\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Mai-Duc_17/8/2017\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn October 2017, the House Committee on Foreign Affairs placed restrictions on Rohrabacher's ability to use committee money to pay for foreign travel due to concerns over his interest in Russia.\nOn November 21, 2017, \"The New York Times\" reported that Rohrabacher had come under scrutiny from special counsel Robert Mueller and the Senate Intelligence Committee for his close ties to the Kremlin.&lt;ref name=\"Fandos_11/21/2017\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn an interview with Fox Business Channel on August 24, 2018, Rohrabacher attacked Attorney General Jeff Sessions because Sessions had refused to fire Robert Mueller and shut down the Russia collusion investigation. He said: \"'The fact that Jeff Sessions has not quit is a disloyalty to this president and to the country, the fact is, if he disagrees with what the president wants him to do, he should resign'\".\nIn February 2020, Rohrabacher told Yahoo News that his goal during his 2017 meeting with Julian Assange was to find evidence for a widely debunked conspiracy theory that WikiLeaks' real source was not Russian intelligence agents for the DNC emails but former DNC staffer Seth Rich. Stephanie Grisham, a White House spokesperson for President Trump, stated that Trump barely knew Rohrabacher and had not spoken with Rohrabacher \"'on this subject or almost any subject'\".\nOn February 19, 2020, Edward Fitzgerald, Julian Assange's barrister, asserted at Westminster Magistrates' Court in London that Rohrabacher had been sent on behalf of President Trump in August 2017 to offer Assange a pardon from Trump if Assange could release material to show that Russian intelligence were not involved in the 2016 United States election interference.\nTerrorism.\nIn 2006, Rohrabacher chaired the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations of the U.S. House Committee on International Relations, which investigated whether the Oklahoma City bombers had assistance from foreign sources; the committee determined there was no conclusive evidence of a foreign connection. In the 113th Congress, Rohrabacher was chair of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia and Emerging Threats.\nSpeaking about Islam, he said during a hearing in April 2013, \"I hope we all work together against a religion that will motivate people to murder children and other threats to us as a civilization.\"\nIn the wake of the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting, Rohrabacher put out a press release stating that he felt \"outrage\" and a \"renewed commitment to defeat and destroy the radical Islamic movement that fosters such mayhem.\" He stressed that Americans must \"be sure not to label all Muslims as terrorist murderers.\" Rohrabacher met Seddique Mateen, the father of the shooter, in 2014 during routine meetings with constituents. He called Mateen an \"estranged individual.\"\nIn a statement to clarify his position, Rohrabacher wrote that he opposes \"the use of force against unarmed civilians no matter who is the victim or who is doing the killing\" but he is also against \"Iran's vicious Mullah monarchy\" and \"when it comes to Sunni terrorists or Shiite terrorists, I prefer them to target each other rather than any other victims, especially innocent civilians and Americans.\" He added that it will \"require support for those proud Iranians who want to win their freedom and heritage from Mullahs and are willing to fight for it. That does not include Isis, but it may include a lot of Iranians who see blowing up Khomeini's mausoleum as an expression of freedom from the yolk [sic] of Islamic terror.\"\nDefense of interrogation techniques and extraordinary rendition.\nOn April 17, 2007, during a House hearing on trans-Atlantic relations, Rohrabacher defended the Bush administration's program of extraordinary rendition. He said that the unfair treatment of one innocent suspect is an acceptable \"unfortunate consequence\" of holding others who would otherwise be free to commit terror acts. After he received boos and groans from the gallery, Rohrabacher responded, \"Well, I hope it's your families, I hope it's your families that suffer the consequences,\" and \"I hope it's your family members that die.\" Rohrabacher was subsequently interrupted by protesters wearing orange jumpsuits who were removed from the gallery. For his comment that imprisoning and torturing one innocent person was a fair price to pay for locking up 50 terrorists who would \"go out and plant a bomb and kill 20,000 people\", on April 25 Rohrabacher was named \"Countdown with Keith Olbermann's\" \"Worst Person in the World\".\nAfghanistan.\nRohrabacher's interest in Afghanistan extends back at least to the late 1980s, before his time in office, when he entered the country in the company of Afghan mujahideen fighters who were fighting Soviet occupation forces. Reportedly, these fighters \"actually engaged Soviet troops in combat near the city of Jalalabad during the two months Rohrabacher was with them.\" In the years after the Soviet\u2013Afghan War (1979\u20131989), Rohrabacher said his \"passion\" was to bring back the country's exiled king, Muhammad Zahir Shah.\nIn 2003, Rohrabacher defended the new Afghan constitution against those who saw in it mainly empowerment of warlords, saying:\nRohrabacher has since become a proponent of withdrawing from Afghanistan. He protested against the troop build-up in Afghanistan by President Obama, saying \"If the Taliban is going is be defeated, it's got to be by the Afghan people themselves, not by sending more U.S. troops, which could actually be counterproductive.\" When Congressman Jim McGovern offered an amendment in 2011 requiring the Pentagon to draw up an exit plan from Afghanistan, Rohrabacher was just one of six Republicans to sign on. Rohrabacher voted for McGovern's Amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act, requiring an exit plan from Afghanistan. The bill failed by a 204\u2013215 margin.\nRohrabacher was against former President Obama's gradual drawdown of troops, instead supporting a full withdrawal. Saying \"If we're going to leave, we should leave.\" Rohrabacher has said that \"The centralized system of government foisted upon the Afghan people is not going to hold after we leave.\" And \"So let's quit prolonging the agony and inevitable. Karzai's regime is corrupt and non representative of Afghanistan's tribal culture. This failed strategy is not worth one more drop of American blood. Under the current strategy, our military presence alienates more Afghans that it pacifies. So if you're going to pull the plug, then we need to get the hell out now.\" Rohrabacher has repeatedly raised high-level concerns in the US Congress and Washington, D.C., about the significant corruption in Afghanistan, including the Kabul Bank scandal, where hundreds of millions of U.S. taxpayers' dollars allegedly disappeared in a short period of time at the apparent hands of close Karzai family members, including brothers Mahmoud Karzai (a.k.a. Mahmood Karzai) and Ahmed Wali Karzai. Rohrabacher worked to bring attention to the systemic corruption in the Karzai government and cut U.S. taxpayers' funding for these wasteful projects and programs, involving corruption within the Hamid Karzai government.\nIn April 2012, CNN reported that \"A top Republican on the House Foreign Affairs committee was asked by the State Department not to go to Afghanistan because President Hamid Karzai objected to the visit. ... Dana Rohrabacher, R-California, told Security Clearance he was readying to travel with five other Republicans from Dubai to Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, when the State Department requested he stay behind.\"\nBosnia and Kosovo independence.\nRohrabacher was opposed to the involvement of American ground troops in the Yugoslav Wars. He advocated for the direct bombing of the military on Yugoslav soil, criticizing the ineffectiveness of western forces against the Bosnian Serbs. (NATO was limited to small fixed attacks, as these Serbs penetrated UN safe areas and attacked Bosniak forces.) Rohrabacher said they \"should bomb Serbia's military infrastructure, in Serbia \u2013 get that, in Serbia \u2013 rather than dropping a couple of duds on tents, which only proves the West's gutlessness, and emboldens Serbian cutthroats.\" Rohrabacher considered the events in Bosnia to constitute genocide. In 1995, Rohrabacher personally visited Sarajevo in Bosnia, criticizing the devastation Serb forces inflicted on the city, saying \"This is a loss to all mankind, not just to the people of Sarajevo.\" He also encountered vagabond children asking for money.\nIn 2001, the leader of the Albanian American Civic League ethnic lobby group, Joseph J. DioGuardi, praised Rohrabacher for his support to the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), a militia that was once labeled by Bill Clinton's special envoy to the Balkans Robert Gelbard as a terrorist organization, saying \"He was the first member of Congress to insist that the United States arm the Kosova Liberation Army, and one of the few members who to this day publicly supports the independence of Kosova.\" Also in 2001, Rohrabacher gave a speech in support of American equipping the KLA with weaponry, comparing it to French support of America in the Revolutionary War, saying \"Based on our own experience, the Kosova Liberation Army should have been armed. ... If the U.S. had armed the KLA in 1998, we would not be where we are today. The 'freedom fighters' would have secured their freedom and Kosova would be independent.\"\nChina.\nAfter a reconnaissance flight over the Spratly Islands in 1998, Rohrabacher said, \"We can't ignore this bullying by the Communist Chinese in the Spratlys. The presence of the Chinese military troops...is not only a concern of the Philippines. It is also a concern of the U.S. and other democratic countries in the world.\"\nIn July 1999, Rohrabacher led the House floor in opposition to legislation normalizing trade ties between the United States and China. The following year, as the House weighed another China trade bill, Rohrabacher said the trade bill was a giveaway to a select number of American billionaires and the Beijing regime, adding that President Bill Clinton could call \"communist China 'our strategic partner' until his face turns blue, but it won't make them any less red.\"\nIn 2011 interviews, Rohrabacher described the Chinese government under the leadership of Hu Jintao as \"a gangster regime that murders its own people\" and described the Chinese government as Nazis.\nIn December 2016, after President-elect Trump had a phone call with President of Taiwan Tsai Ing-wen, Rohrabacher said the call had \"showed the dictators in Beijing that he's not a pushover\" and that China \"has had an enormously aggressive foreign policy\".\nOrgan harvesting in China.\nIn 2012 Rohrabacher stated,\nand\nIraq War.\nRohrabacher voted in support of the Authorization for the Use of Military Force Against Iraq in 2002, a position that he later said was \"a mistake\".\nIran.\nIn August 2012, Rohrabacher noted on his official website that he had written a letter addressed to the U.S. State Department, noting his support of U.S. sponsorship of separatist movements in Iran. This elicited criticism from the Iranian-American community, which included challenging Rohrabacher's understanding of the historical background alluded to in his letter to the Department of State.\nIn June 2017, a day after an ISIL attack in Tehran, during a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing, Rohrabacher stated: \"Isn't it a good thing for us to have the United States finally backing up Sunnis who will attack Hezbollah and the Shiite threat to us, isn't that a good thing?\" This comment was strongly criticized by the National Iranian American Council, which wrote, \"Rohrabacher has a long history of bizarre and offensive statements on Iran, but his callousness toward the Iranian victims of ISIS terror might be his most callous and extreme thus far.\"\nRohrabacher supported removing the People's Mujahedin of Iran (MEK) from the United States State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations; it was included on the list from 1997 to 2012.\nAid to Pakistan.\nIn May 2011, in the wake of Osama Bin Laden's death, Rohrabacher introduced a bill to stop aid to Pakistan, stating that members of the government and of Pakistan's security force, the ISI, were either sheltering Bin Laden or completely incompetent. \"We can no longer afford this foolishness. ... The time has come for us to stop subsidizing those who actively oppose us. Pakistan has shown itself not to be America's ally.\" Rohrabacher also demanded the return of the US helicopter that crashed in the operation to kill Bin Laden, stating \"If this is not done immediately, it is probable, given Pakistan's history, that our technology has already found its way into the hands of the Communist Chinese military that is buying, building, and stealing the necessary military technology to challenge the United States.\"\nIn June 2017, while speaking to Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs Tina Kaidanow, Rohrabacher said, \"We need to go on the record here, in this part of our government, to say that we're not going to be providing weapons systems to Pakistan that we're afraid are going to shoot down our own people. And we know they're engaged in terrorism.\"\nSupport for Mohiuddin Ahmed.\nIn 2007, Rohrabacher supported Mohiuddin Ahmed, a detainee in the U.S., who was said to be involved in an attempted coup in Bangladesh, during which several people were murdered. He was convicted of the assassination of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the first President of Bangladesh. Bangladesh's extradition request was halted as Rohrabacher voiced concern about his legal rights, saying that he should be sent somewhere with no death penalty. His support was applauded by both Amnesty International and the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. Mohiuddin Ahmed was found guilty of being a participant in the assassinations and was executed on January 28, 2010.\nTaiwan.\nAfter President-elect Donald Trump answered a congratulatory phone call from democratically elected President of Taiwan Tsai Ing-wen on December 2, 2016, Rohrabacher said Trump's phone call with Taiwan's president was \"terrific\" because of the diplomatic warning it sent to China. \"He showed the dictators in Beijing that he's not a pushover.\" He emphasized, \"China has had an enormously aggressive foreign policy and by him actually going to Taiwan, he's showing the people in Beijing that they cannot have this aggressive foreign policy and expect to be treated just the same by an American president.\"\nUkraine.\nRohrabacher gave a \"qualified defense\" of the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014. On March 6, 2014, he was one of 23 members of the House of Representatives to vote against a $1\u00a0billion loan guarantee to support the new government of Ukraine. On March 11, 2014, Rohrabacher voted \"present\", the only member to do so, on a resolution condemning Russian military actions in Ukraine; the resolution passed 402-7. Commenting on the issue, he stated, \"Starting with our own American Revolution, groups of people have declared themselves, rightfully, to be under a different government or a government of their choosing. People forget that's what our Declaration of Independence is all about.\" He also said, \"The sanctions are an abomination of hypocrisy. This is ridiculous: What we were doing with the violence and military action we took to secure the Kosovars' right to self-determination was far more destructive and had far more loss of life than what Putin's done trying to ensure the people of Crimea are not cut off from what they would choose as their destiny with Russia.\"\nUzbekistan.\nDuring a US Congressional delegation's visit to Uzbekistan in February 2013, Rohrabacher made several controversial statements. The chief among those statements was that the United States should treat Uzbekistan like Saudi Arabia by disregarding the former's human rights abuses in achieving America's national interests, particularly in selling armaments and drones to Uzbekistan.\nNorth Macedonia.\nIn 2017, in an interview for an Albanian TV channel Vizion Plus Rohrabacher suggested that Macedonia \"is not a country\" and that the \"Kosovars and Albanians from Macedonia should be part of Kosovo and the rest of Macedonia should be part of Bulgaria or any other country to which they believe they are related\", which provoked a response from the Macedonian foreign ministry which accused him of inflaming \"nationalistic rhetoric\".\nTurkey.\nIn the wake of the clashes at the Turkish Ambassador's Residence in May 2017, Rohrabacher called Donald Trump to never invite Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan again to the United States, and to bar Americans from purchasing Turkish government debt.\nEritrea.\nIn August 2017, Rohrabacher proposed amending the Department of Defense budget whereby the United States would establish military ties with Eritrea. Rohrabacher suggested that the two countries should cooperate in fighting the War on Terror, curbing Iranian influence in the Yemeni Civil War, and securing the Red Sea region. At the time of Rohrabacher's proposal, Eritrea was subject to international sanctions due to its alleged support of Al-Shabaab in Somalia, and to U.S. sanctions against the Eritrean Navy following an alleged shipment of North Korean military hardware to Eritrea.\nJulian Assange.\nIn August 2017, Rohrabacher attended a meeting in London with Julian Assange organized and attended by right-wing political activist Charles C. Johnson. Rohrabacher said that the discussion was about the possibility of a presidential pardon in exchange for Assange supplying information on the theft of emails from the Democratic National Committee, which were published by WikiLeaks before the 2016 presidential election. In October 2017, Rohrabacher and Johnson met with Senator Rand Paul (R-Kentucky) to discuss Assange supplying information about the source of leaked emails. However, Assange responded to news accounts of the meeting, tweeting, \"WikiLeaks never has and never will reveal a source. Offers have been made to me\u2014not the other way around. I do not speak to the public through third parties.\"\nOther foreign policy.\nIn March 2005, Rohrabacher introduced HR 1061, the American Property Claims Against Ethiopia Act, which would \"prohibit United States assistance to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia until the Ethiopian government returns all property of United States citizens\". The bill was introduced by Rohrabacher at the behest of Gebremedhin Berhane, a former Eritrean national and friend of the Rohrabacher family, after his business was expropriated by the Ethiopian government.\nOn March 7, 2006, Rohrabacher introduced HR 4895, an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, \"to limit the provision of the United States military assistance and the sale, transfer, or licensing of United States military equipment or technology to Ethiopia\".\nDuring an appearance on MSNBC's \"The Ed Show\", Rohrabacher accused Barack Obama of allowing violence in Iran to get out of hand because he did not speak forcefully enough against the country's leadership. He also said that Gorbachev tore down the Berlin Wall because Reagan told him to (\"Tear down this wall\").\nIn early 2010, he went to Honduras to commend the election of the new president. His entourage included a group of Californian property investors and businessmen, a dealer in rare coins, and CEOs from San Diego biofuels corporation (which is headed by a family friend).\nDomestic political positions.\nRohrabacher voted to repeal Obamacare, disputed evidence of man-made global warming, was a staunch opponent of illegal immigration, and favored the legalization of cannabis.\nRohrabacher had drawn public criticism for some of his positions. His controversial statements included the conspiracy theory, first promoted by the politically-biased conspiracy theory website InfoWars, that Democrats secretly organized the Unite the Right Rally in Charlottesville to provoke violence by the alt-right to discredit President Trump.\nHe had been a staunch supporter of Donald Trump.\nNational Endowment for the Arts.\nIn 1990, Rohrabacher opposed the National Endowment of the Arts and joined Mel Hancock in demanding its abolition. In a February letter to other members of Congress, Rohrabacher sent a photograph by artist and AIDS activist David Wojnarowicz.\nIn April, liberal constitutional rights group People for the American Way announced its intent to launch a newspaper advert campaign against Rohrabacher. Western vice president of the organization Michael Hudson stated, \"'Americans overwhelmingly reject censorship of the arts and support the NEA'\". Rohrabacher welcomed the announcement, stating that his constituents \"don't want federal dollars to go to sacrilegious or obscene art'\" and that it would help voters to understand the issue. Explaining his position, Rohrabacher stated that he did not believe \"'anyone should be prevented from seeing what they want to see or painting what they want to paint...on their own time and their own dime. But if you get a government subsidy, that's another question'\".\nIn October, the House passed a bill to reauthorize funds for the NEA with the directive that the organization could not fund obscene art. Rohrabacher introduced an amendment that would include specific guidelines on the kind of art projects that could not be funded, such as works that were sexually explicit or denigrated the American flag or religions; the amendment was rejected by a vote of 249-175. Rohrabacher stated his amendment was supposed to ensure that the federal government was \"\"not subsidizing obscenity, child pornography, attacks on religion, desecration of the American flag or any other of the outrages we have seen in the past'\". By the time the House passed the bill, Rohrabacher had become known as \" the House's most outspoken critic of the NEA\".\nRace quotas.\nIn October 1991, Rohrabacher wrote a letter to the civil rights division of the Education Department after seven Filipino students complained to the media that they were denied admission to the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). Rohrabacher requested the department conduct a federal civil rights investigation on what seemed to be \"a quota based upon race that illegally discriminates against Filipino-Americans and possibly applicants of other races\". UCSD vice chancellor for undergraduate affairs Joseph Watson refuted the letter, dismissing Rohrabacher as \"wrong when he says that 40% of admissions are reserved for certain races\". He stated that the school ranks all applicants using a grade-based formula. Watson charged Rohrabacher with fanning hysteria over discrimination: \"The Rohrabacher approach is to play to public fears that something fishy is going on. We don't want anyone to feel we're not giving everyone a fair and equitable review that can stand up to any scrutiny.\"\nImpeachment of Bill Clinton.\nIn November 1997, Rohrabacher was one of eighteen Republicans in the House to co-sponsor a resolution by Bob Barr that sought to launch an impeachment inquiry against President Bill Clinton. The resolution did not specify any charges or allegations. This was an early effort to impeach Clinton, predating the eruption of the Clinton\u2013Lewinsky scandal. The eruption of that scandal would ultimately lead to a more serious effort to impeach Clinton in 1998. On October 8, 1998, Rohrabacher voted in favor of legislation that was passed to open an impeachment inquiry. On December 19, 1998, Rohrabacher voted in favor of all four proposed articles of impeachment against Clinton (only two of which received the majority of votes needed to be adopted).\nFirearms.\nIn 2018, Sacha Baron Cohen's television program \"Who Is America?\" premiered, showing Rohrabacher supporting a hoax \"kinderguardians program\" which supported training toddlers with firearms. Rohrabacher claims that he never spoke to Cohen, that he was taken out of context, and that he spoke, \"broadly of making sure young people could get training in self-defense\".\nGlobal warming.\nRohrabacher doubts the scientific consensus that global warming is caused by humans. During a congressional hearing on climate change on February 8, 2007, Rohrabacher mused that previous warming cycles may have been caused by carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by \"dinosaur flatulence\": \"Politico\" and \"The New York Times\" reported that on May 25, 2011, Rohrabacher expressed further skepticism regarding the existence of man-made global warming and suggested that, if global warming is an issue, a possible solution could be clear-cutting rain forests, and replanting. These reports sparked strong criticism by some scientists, including Oliver Phillips, a geography professor at the University of Leeds. They noted the consensus that intact forests act as net absorbers of carbon, reducing global warming.\nRohrabacher does not believe that global warming is a problem. At a town hall meeting with the Newport Mesa Tea Party in August 2013, Rohrabacher said \"global warming is a total fraud\" and part of a \"game plan\" by liberals to \"create global government\".\nHealthcare.\nOn May 4, 2017, Rohrabacher voted in favor of repealing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) and passing the American Health Care Act. During his 2018 re-election campaign, Rohrabacher pledged to protect protections for individuals with preexisting conditions. Rohrabacher voted for his party's Obamacare replacement bill that included state waivers from rules that prohibit charging higher prices to people with pre-existing conditions.\nImmigration.\nRohrabacher was an advocate for the state of California's Proposition 187, which prohibited illegal immigrants from acquiring government services. In 2004, he sponsored an amendment that would have prohibited federal reimbursement of hospital-provided emergency care and certain transportation services to undocumented aliens unless the hospital provided information about the aliens' citizenship, immigration status, financial data, and employer to the Secretary of Homeland Security. Aliens who were in the country illegally would receive reimbursement only after they were deported. The proposed bill was defeated, 331\u201388.\nIn 2005, Rohrabacher opined that the Republican Party was split on the issue of immigration: \"There are those of us who identify with the national wing and patriotic wing of the party who have always been adamant on the illegal immigration issues. And, on the other side, you have those people who believe in the business and global marketplace concept. So, you have a party with two different views on one of the major issues of the day.\"\nIn early 2008, Rohrabacher endorsed Mitt Romney in the Republican presidential primary, citing his positions on stemming illegal immigration and criticizing John McCain. About McCain, he said: \"He's been the enemy of those of us who have stemmed the flow of illegals into our country, whereas Romney has made some very tough commitments.\"\nIn 2011, Rohrabacher proposed the bill H.R. 787 known as the \"No Social Security for Illegal Immigrants Act of 2011\". The bill: \"Amends title II of the Social Security Act to exclude from creditable wages and self-employment income any wages earned for services by aliens performed in the United States, and self-employment income derived from a trade or business conducted in the United States, while the alien was not authorized to be so employed or to perform a function or service in such a trade or business.\"\nIn 2013, an 18-year-old student visited Rohrabacher's office to discuss immigration reform. At some point their conversation became disagreeable, and the student said the congressman yelled at her: \"I hate illegals!\" He also allegedly threatened to deport her family. Rohrabacher's spokesperson has disputed both statements, averring that it was actually the student who started the confrontation by yelling at the spokesperson and telling her to \"butt out\".\nIn September 2017, Rohrabacher supported the Trump administration's rescinding of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, saying that those \"in Congress must work to prevent such cynical loopholes from being created again by executive fiat\" despite their possible empathy for the immigrants.\nThe organization NumbersUSA has given Rep. Rohrabacher an A+ rating in accordance to his stance on illegal immigration.\nLGBT issues.\nRohrabacher has drawn controversy over his views on LGBT rights. He opposed same-sex marriage and endorsed Proposition 8, the ballot initiative in 2008 that would have prohibited same-sex marriage in California, during a debate at Orange Coast College, stating he \"would suggest not changing the definition of marriage in our society to make a small number of people feel more comfortable\".\nRohrabacher voted in favor of the Federal Marriage Amendment in both 2004 and 2006, a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution that would have defined marriage as between a man and a woman and forbade states from recognizing or legalizing same-sex marriage. After the Supreme Court issued its decision in \"Hollingsworth v. Perry\" in 2013, that legalized same-sex marriage in California, Rohrabacher criticized the decision, stating that the decision was \"not based on the merits of the issue but on a technicality\". However, Rohrabacher has appeared to have endorsed the idea of leaving marriage to religious institutions only, stating on Twitter that churches should be solely responsible for conducting marriages but that the government should only recognize them.\nIn May 2018, Rohrabacher provoked severe criticism after telling a meeting of the Orange County Association of Realtors that homeowners \"should be able to make a decision not to sell their home to someone (if) they don't agree with their lifestyle.\" Though the statement did not explicitly refer to LGBT people, it was widely interpreted as such. LGBT groups denounced Rohrabacher for the remarks, and the National Association of Realtors, which had previously donated to Rohrabacher's re-election campaigns, condemned Rohrabacher, halted all of its financial support for him and repudiated its past donations to him. After Rohrabacher's constituents unseated him in favor of Harley Rouda, \"The Advocate\" praised the results and condemned Rohrabacher.\nDespite criticism from the LGBT community later in his career, early in his political career, Rohrabacher supported a proposal by gays to move to a rural California county and take leadership roles. Rohrabacher's \"California Libertarian Alliance endorsed the project. 'Your main resources are the freedom you offer plus the environment you are locating in,' Dana Rohrabacher, one of the libertarian group\u2019s founders and later speechwriter to then-President Reagan, wrote in a letter to GLF. 'The economic goods are perfect for some kind of a combination ski gambling resort.'\" \nCannabis.\nRohrabacher supported the legalization of cannabis for both medical and recreational purposes. He spoke against the policy of cannabis prohibition as early as May 2013, calling it a \"colossal failure\" in an op-ed penned for the \"Orange County Register\". He further outlined his views in a May 2014 op-ed in \"National Review\", arguing that the prohibition of cannabis has incurred a number of undesirable costs upon free society, such as an increase in gang violence, soaring incarceration rates, unconstitutional seizure of private property through civil forfeiture, corruption and militarization of police forces, and negative impacts on minority communities and relationships with Latin-American countries. Rohrabacher has called on fellow Republicans to reconsider their stance towards cannabis, citing core conservative principles such as limited government, individual liberty, respect for the Tenth Amendment, and respect for the doctor\u2013patient relationship that Rohrabacher says lend support to loosening current laws. He also notes conservative leaders such as Milton Friedman, William F. Buckley, and Grover Norquist that have espoused similar drug policy views. In April 2016, Rohrabacher announced his endorsement of California's Proposition 64, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act.\nRohrabacher is a strong proponent of states' rights when it comes to cannabis policy. He has introduced the Rohrabacher\u2013Farr amendment for a number of years beginning in 2003, to prohibit the Justice Department from spending funds to interfere with the implementation of state medical cannabis laws. The amendment passed the House for the first time in May 2014, becoming law in December 2014 as part of an omnibus spending bill. Additional legislation that Rohrabacher has introduced includes the Respect State Marijuana Laws Act and the Veterans Equal Access Act. Rohrabacher has called on the DEA / DOJ to remove cannabis from the list of Schedule I drugs. In February 2017, Rohrabacher co-founded the Congressional Cannabis Caucus \u2013 along with Reps. Don Young (R\u2013AK), Jared Polis (D\u2013CO), and Earl Blumenauer (D\u2013OR) \u2013 to help advance policy change regarding cannabis at the federal level. Rohrabacher earned an \"A+\" rating from NORML for his voting record regarding cannabis-related matters.\nPatent reform.\nRohrabacher was an opponent of the America Invents Act, a bill that is attempting to change the current Patent System. Rohrabacher opposes changing from a \"first to invent system\" to a \"first to file system\" saying it \"hurts the little guy\". Rohrabacher commented: \"Make no mistake, 'first to file' weakens patent protection. It is likely to make vulnerable individual and small inventors, who don't have an army of lawyers on retainer. These 'little guys' have been the lifeblood of American progress and competitiveness for more than 200 years. Our system was designed to protect individual rights, and it has worked for all \u2013 not just the corporate elite.\" Rohrabacher went on to comment in a \"Politico\" op-ed: \"We're told this is necessary to harmonize with Japanese and European patent law. But those systems were established by elitists and economic shoguns interested in corporate power, not individual rights.\"\nSpace.\nRohrabacher was chairman of the Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1997 to January 2005 and has been active on space-related issues. In 2000, Space.com described Rohrabacher as \"a strident advocate for supremacy in space, a philosophy shaped along a winding road from libertarian activist to White House speech writer in the Reagan administration\". In 2007, Rohrabacher introduced a bill that would direct NASA to develop a strategy \"for deflecting and mitigating potentially hazardous near-Earth objects\". Rohrabacher has applauded the Apollo astronauts, calling them unofficial ambassadors. Rohrabacher stated \"I applaud their efforts and accomplishments over the past fifty years. And I encourage all Americans to join with me in thanking them for their accomplishments and for the international role they have played in serving as unofficial Ambassadors to the world on our behalf.\"\nOn July 18, 2017, Rohrabacher asked a panel of space experts testifying before the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology if civilizations could have existed on Mars in the past. Kenneth Farley, a project scientist on NASA's Mars Rover 2020 Project, said: \"I would say that is extremely unlikely.\"\nTax reform.\nRohrabacher voted against the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Despite efforts made by Republicans to change the bill to be more generous regarding cap deductions on new home mortgages, Rohrabacher remained staunch at voting nay on the bill, as the more than half of the new mortgages in his district are above the $750,000 cap. He stated on his Facebook page that \"Due to the pressure of several members like me, the bill was improved, but not enough for my constituents.\"\n2020 presidential election.\nAfter leaving office, Rohrabacher participated in \"Stop the Steal\" rallies in support of Donald Trump. On January 6, 2021, Rohrabacher was filmed breaching a United States Capitol Police barricade during the January 6 United States Capitol attack, although he was not charged with an offense.\nPost-congressional endeavors.\nIn May 2019, Rohrabacher announced his appointment to the advisory board of BudTrader.com, a company that provides cannabis-related advertising services.\nPersonal life.\nRohrabacher has been married to his wife, Rhonda Carmony, since 1997. In 2004, they became parents of triplets.\nRohrabacher is Protestant. He was described by the \"Los Angeles Times\" as \"an avid surfer\".\nRohrabacher revealed in May 2016 that he uses a cannabis-infused topical rub to treat his arthritis pain, allowing him to sleep through the night. The product is legal under California state law, but remains a banned substance under federal law.\nIn December 2018, a month after losing his bid for re-election, Rohrabacher announced that he intended to move to Maine and to write film scripts."}
{"id": "8954", "revid": "15906885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8954", "title": "Deutsche Marine", "text": ""}
{"id": "8955", "revid": "985855021", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8955", "title": "DoD", "text": ""}
{"id": "8957", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8957", "title": "DARPA", "text": "The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is a research and development agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of emerging technologies for use by the military. Originally known as the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), the agency was created on February 7, 1958, by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in response to the Soviet launching of Sputnik 1 in 1957. By collaborating with academia, industry, and government partners, DARPA formulates and executes research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, often beyond immediate U.S. military requirements. The name of the organization first changed from its founding name, ARPA, to DARPA, in March 1972, changing back to ARPA in February 1993, then reverted to DARPA in March 1996.\n\"The Economist\" has called DARPA \"the agency that shaped the modern world,\" with technologies like \"Moderna's COVID-19 vaccine ... weather satellites, GPS, drones, stealth technology, voice interfaces, the personal computer and the internet on the list of innovations for which DARPA can claim at least partial credit.\" Its track record of success has inspired governments around the world to launch similar research and development agencies.\nDARPA is independent of other military research and development and reports directly to senior Department of Defense management. DARPA comprises approximately 220 government employees in six technical offices, including nearly 100 program managers, who together oversee about 250 research and development programs. The agency's current director, appointed in March 2021, is Stefanie Tompkins.\nMission.\n, their mission statement is \"to make pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies for national security\".\nHistory.\nEarly history (1958\u20131969).\nThe Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was suggested by the President's Scientific Advisory Committee to President Dwight D. Eisenhower in a meeting called after the launch of Sputnik. ARPA was formally authorized by President Eisenhower in 1958 for the purpose of forming and executing research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, and able to reach far beyond immediate military requirements. The two relevant acts are the Supplemental Military Construction Authorization (Air Force) (Public Law 85-325) and Department of Defense Directive 5105.15, in February 1958. It was placed within the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and counted approximately 150 people. Its creation was directly attributed to the launching of Sputnik and to U.S. realization that the Soviet Union had developed the capacity to rapidly exploit military technology. Initial funding of ARPA was $520 million. ARPA's first director, Roy Johnson, left a $160,000 management job at General Electric for an $18,000 job at ARPA. Herbert York from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was hired as his scientific assistant.\nJohnson and York were both keen on space projects, but when NASA was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of ARPA's funding were transferred to it. Johnson resigned and ARPA was repurposed to do \"high-risk\", \"high-gain\", \"far out\" basic research, a posture that was enthusiastically embraced by the nation's scientists and research universities. ARPA's second director was Brigadier General Austin W. Betts, who resigned in early 1961 and was succeeded by Jack Ruina who served until 1963. Ruina, the first scientist to administer ARPA, managed to raise its budget to $250 million. It was Ruina who hired J. C. R. Licklider as the first administrator of the Information Processing Techniques Office, which played a vital role in creation of ARPANET, the basis for the future Internet.\nAdditionally, the political and defense communities recognized the need for a high-level Department of Defense organization to formulate and execute R&amp;D projects that would expand the frontiers of technology beyond the immediate and specific requirements of the Military Services and their laboratories. In pursuit of this mission, DARPA has developed and transferred technology programs encompassing a wide range of scientific disciplines that address the full spectrum of national security needs.\nFrom 1958 to 1965, ARPA's emphasis centered on major national issues, including space, ballistic missile defense, and nuclear test detection. During 1960, all of its civilian space programs were transferred to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the military space programs to the individual services.\nThis allowed ARPA to concentrate its efforts on the Project Defender (defense against ballistic missiles), Project Vela (nuclear test detection), and Project AGILE (counterinsurgency R&amp;D) programs, and to begin work on computer processing, behavioral sciences, and materials sciences. The DEFENDER and AGILE programs formed the foundation of DARPA sensor, surveillance, and directed energy R&amp;D, particularly in the study of radar, infrared sensing, and x-ray/gamma ray detection.\nARPA at this point (1959) played an early role in Transit (also called NavSat) a predecessor to the Global Positioning System (GPS). \"Fast-forward to 1959 when a joint effort between DARPA and the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory began to fine-tune the early explorers' discoveries. TRANSIT, sponsored by the Navy and developed under the leadership of Richard Kirschner at Johns Hopkins, was the first satellite positioning system.\"\nDuring the late 1960s, with the transfer of these mature programs to the Services, ARPA redefined its role and concentrated on a diverse set of relatively small, essentially exploratory research programs. The agency was renamed the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1972, and during the early 1970s, it emphasized direct energy programs, information processing, and tactical technologies.\nConcerning information processing, DARPA made great progress, initially through its support of the development of time-sharing. All modern operating systems rely on concepts invented for the Multics system, developed by a cooperation among Bell Labs, General Electric and MIT, which DARPA supported by funding Project MAC at MIT with an initial two-million-dollar grant.\nDARPA supported the evolution of the ARPANET (the first wide-area packet switching network), Packet Radio Network, Packet Satellite Network and ultimately, the Internet and research in the artificial intelligence fields of speech recognition and signal processing, including parts of Shakey the robot. DARPA also supported the early development of both hypertext and hypermedia. DARPA funded one of the first two hypertext systems, Douglas Engelbart's NLS computer system, as well as The Mother of All Demos. DARPA later funded the development of the Aspen Movie Map, which is generally seen as the first hypermedia system and an important precursor of virtual reality.\nLater history (1970\u20131980).\nThe Mansfield Amendment of 1973 expressly limited appropriations for defense research (through ARPA/DARPA) only to projects with direct military application.\nThe resulting \"brain drain\" is credited with boosting the development of the fledgling personal computer industry. Some young computer scientists left the universities to startups and private research laboratories such as Xerox PARC.\nBetween 1976 and 1981, DARPA's major projects were dominated by air, land, sea, and space technology, tactical armor and anti-armor programs, infrared sensing for space-based surveillance, high-energy laser technology for space-based missile defense, antisubmarine warfare, advanced cruise missiles, advanced aircraft, and defense applications of advanced computing.\nMany of the successful programs were transitioned to the Services, such as the foundation technologies in automatic target recognition, space-based sensing, propulsion, and materials that were transferred to the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO), later known as the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), now titled the Missile Defense Agency (MDA).\nRecent history (1981\u2013present).\nDuring the 1980s, the attention of the Agency was centered on information processing and aircraft-related programs, including the National Aerospace Plane (NASP) or Hypersonic Research Program. The Strategic Computing Program enabled DARPA to exploit advanced processing and networking technologies and to rebuild and strengthen relationships with universities after the Vietnam War. In addition, DARPA began to pursue new concepts for small, lightweight satellites (LIGHTSAT) and directed new programs regarding defense manufacturing, submarine technology, and armor/anti-armor.\nIn 1981, two engineers, Robert McGhee and Kenneth Waldron, started to develop the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV) nicknamed the \"Walker\" at the Ohio State University, under a research contract from DARPA. The vehicle was 17 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 10.5 feet high, and had six legs to support its three-ton aluminum body, in which it was designed to carry cargo over difficult terrains. However, DARPA lost interest in the ASV, after problems with cold-weather tests.\nOn February 4, 2004, the agency shut down its so called \"LifeLog Project\". The project's aim would have been, \"to gather in a single place just about everything an individual says, sees or does\".\nOn October 28, 2009, the agency broke ground on a new facility in Arlington County, Virginia a few miles from The Pentagon.\nIn fall 2011, DARPA hosted the 100-Year Starship Symposium with the aim of getting the public to start thinking seriously about interstellar travel.\nOn June 5, 2016, NASA and DARPA announced that it planned to build new X-planes with NASA's plan setting to create a whole series of X planes over the next 10 years.\nBetween 2014 and 2016, DARPA shepherded the first machine-to-machine computer security competition, the Cyber Grand Challenge (CGC),\nbringing a group of top-notch computer security experts to search for security vulnerabilities, exploit them, and create fixes that patch those vulnerabilities in a fully automated fashion. It is one of DARPA prize competitions to spur innovations.\nIn June 2018, DARPA leaders demonstrated a number of new technologies that were developed within the framework of the GXV-T program. The goal of this program is to create a lightly armored combat vehicle of not very large dimensions, which, due to maneuverability and other tricks, can successfully resist modern anti-tank weapon systems.\nIn September 2020, DARPA and the US Air Force announced that the Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept (HAWC) are ready for free-flight tests within the next year.\nVictoria Coleman became the director of DARPA in November 2020.\nIn recent years, DARPA officials have contracted out core functions to corporations. For example, during fiscal year 2020, Chenega ran physical security on DARPA's premises, System High Corp. carried out program security, and Agile Defense ran unclassified IT services. General Dynamics runs classified IT services. Strategic Analysis Inc. provided support services regarding engineering, science, mathematics, and front office and administrative work.\nOrganization.\nCurrent program offices.\nDARPA has six technical offices that manage the agency's research portfolio, and two additional offices that manage special projects. All offices report to the DARPA director, including:\nFormer offices.\nA 1991 reorganization created several offices which existed throughout the early 1990s:\nA 2010 reorganization merged two offices:\nProjects.\nA list of DARPA's active and archived projects is available on the agency's website. Because of the agency's fast pace, programs constantly start and stop based on the needs of the U.S. government. Structured information about some of the DARPA's contracts and projects is publicly available.\nNotable fiction.\nDARPA is well known as a high-tech government agency, and as such has many appearances in popular fiction. Some realistic references to DARPA in fiction are as \"ARPA\" in \"Tom Swift and the Visitor from Planet X\" (DARPA consults on a technical threat), in episodes of television program \"The West Wing\" (the ARPA-DARPA distinction), the television program \"Numb3rs\", and the Netflix film \"Spectral\"."}
{"id": "8958", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8958", "title": "Dunstan", "text": "Dunstan ( \u2013 19 May 988), was an English bishop and Benedictine monk. He was successively Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey, Bishop of Worcester, Bishop of London and Archbishop of Canterbury, later canonised. His work restored monastic life in England and reformed the English Church. His 11th-century biographer Osbern, himself an artist and scribe, states that Dunstan was skilled in \"making a picture and forming letters\", as were other clergy of his age who reached senior rank.\nDunstan served as an important minister of state to several English kings. He was the most popular saint in England for nearly two centuries, having gained fame for the many stories of his greatness, not least among which were those concerning his famed cunning in defeating the Devil.\nEarly life (909\u2013943).\nBirth and relatives.\nAccording to Dunstan's earliest biographer, known only as 'B', his parents were called Heorstan and Cynethryth and they lived near Glastonbury. B states that Dunstan was \"\"oritur\" in the days of King \u00c6thelstan, 924 to 939. \"Oritur\"\" has often been taken to mean \"born\", but this is unlikely as another source states that he was ordained during \u00c6thelstan's reign, and he would have been under the minimum age of 30 if he was born no earlier than 924. It is more likely that \"oritur\" should be taken as \"emerged\" and that he was born around 910. B states that he was related to \u00c6lfheah the Bald, the Bishop of Winchester and Cynesige, Bishop of Lichfield. According to a later biographer, Adelard of Ghent, he was a nephew of Athelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, but this is less certain as it is not mentioned by B, who should have known as he had been a member of Dunstan's household.\nSchool to the king's court.\nAs a young boy, Dunstan studied under the Irish monks who then occupied the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey. Accounts tell of his youthful optimism and of his vision of the abbey being restored. While still a boy, Dunstan was stricken with a near-fatal illness and effected a seemingly miraculous recovery. Even as a child, he was noted for his devotion to learning and for his mastery of many kinds of artistic craftsmanship. With his parents' consent he was tonsured, received minor orders and served in the ancient church of St Mary. He became so well known for his devotion to learning that he is said to have been summoned by Athelm to enter his service. He was later appointed to the court of King \u00c6thelstan.\nDunstan soon became a favourite of the king and was the envy of other members of the court. A plot was hatched to disgrace him and Dunstan was accused of being involved with witchcraft and black magic. The king ordered him to leave the court and as Dunstan was leaving the palace his enemies physically attacked him, beat him severely, bound him, and threw him into a cesspool. He managed to crawl out and make his way to the house of a friend. From there, he journeyed to Winchester and entered the service of his kinsman \u00c6lfheah, Bishop of Winchester.\nThe bishop tried to persuade him to become a monk, but Dunstan was doubtful whether he had a vocation to a celibate life. The answer came in the form of an attack of swelling tumours all over Dunstan's body. This ailment was so severe that it was thought to be leprosy. It was more probably some form of blood poisoning caused by being beaten and thrown in the cesspool. Whatever the cause, it changed Dunstan's mind. He took Holy Orders in 943, in the presence of \u00c6lfheah, and returned to live the life of a hermit at Glastonbury. Against the old church of St Mary he built a small cell long and deep. It was there that Dunstan studied, worked at his art, and played on his harp. It is at this time, according to a late 11th-century legend, that the Devil is said to have tempted Dunstan and to have been held by the face with Dunstan's tongs.\nMonk and abbot (943\u2013957).\nLife as a monk.\nDunstan worked as a silversmith and in the scriptorium while he was living at Glastonbury. It is thought likely that he was the artist who drew the well-known image of Christ with a small kneeling monk beside him in the \"Glastonbury Classbook\", \"one of the first of a series of outline drawings which were to become a special feature of Anglo-Saxon art of this period.\" Dunstan became famous as a musician, illuminator, and metalworker. Lady \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, King \u00c6thelstan's niece, made Dunstan a trusted adviser and on her death, she left a considerable fortune to him. He used this money later in life to foster and encourage a monastic revival in England. About the same time, his father Heorstan died and Dunstan inherited his fortune as well. He became a person of great influence, and on the death of King \u00c6thelstan in 940, the new King, Edmund, summoned him to his court at Cheddar and made him a minister.\nAgain, royal favour fostered jealousy among other courtiers and again Dunstan's enemies succeeded in their plots. The King was prepared to send Dunstan away. There were then at Cheddar certain envoys from the \"Eastern Kingdom\", which probably meant East Anglia. Dunstan implored the envoys to take him with them when they returned to their homes. They agreed to do so, but it never happened. The story is recorded:\nAbbot of Glastonbury.\nDunstan, now Abbot of Glastonbury, went to work at once on the task of reform. He had to re-create monastic life and to rebuild the abbey. He began by establishing Benedictine monasticism at Glastonbury. The Rule of St. Benedict was the basis of his restoration according to the author of 'Edgar's Establishment of the Monasteries' (written in the 960s or 970s) and according to Dunstan's first biographer, who had been a member of the community at Glastonbury. Their statements are also in accordance with the nature of his first measures as abbot, with the significance of his first buildings, and with the Benedictine leanings of his most prominent disciples.\nNevertheless, not all the members of Dunstan's community at Glastonbury were monks who followed the Benedictine Rule. In fact, Dunstan's first biographer, 'B.', was a cleric who eventually joined a community of canons at Li\u00e8ge after leaving Glastonbury.\nDunstan's first care was to rebuild the Church of St. Peter, rebuild the cloister, and re-establish the monastic enclosure. The secular affairs of the house were committed to his brother, Wulfric, \"so that neither himself nor any of the professed monks might break enclosure.\" A school for the local youth was founded and soon became the most famous of its time in England. A substantial extension of the irrigation system on the surrounding Somerset Levels was also completed.\nWithin two years of Dunstan's appointment, in 946, King Edmund was assassinated. His successor was Eadred. The policy of the new government was supported by the Queen mother, Eadgifu of Kent, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Oda, and by the East Anglian nobles, at whose head was the powerful ealdorman \u00c6thelstan the \"Half-king\". It was a policy of unification and conciliation with the Danish half of the kingdom. The goal was a firm establishment of royal authority. In ecclesiastical matters it favoured the spread of Catholic observance, the rebuilding of churches, the moral reform of the clergy and laity, and the end of the religion of the Danes in England. These policies made Dunstan popular in the North of England, but unpopular in the South. Against all these reforms were the nobles of Wessex, who included most of Dunstan's own relatives, and who had an interest in maintaining established customs. For nine years Dunstan's influence was dominant, during which time he twice refused the office of bishop (that of Winchester in 951 and Crediton in 953), affirming that he would not leave the king's side so long as the king lived and needed him.\nChanges in fortune.\nIn 955, Eadred died, and the situation was at once changed. Eadwig, the elder son of Edmund, who then came to the throne, was a headstrong youth wholly devoted to the reactionary nobles. According to one legend, the feud with Dunstan began on the day of Eadwig's coronation, when he failed to attend a meeting of nobles. When Dunstan eventually found the young monarch, he was cavorting with a noblewoman named \u00c6lfgifu and her mother, and refused to return with the bishop. Infuriated by this, Dunstan dragged Eadwig back to the royal gathering.\nLater realising that he had provoked the king, Dunstan saw that his life was in danger. He fled England and crossed the channel to Flanders, where he found himself ignorant of the language and of the customs of the locals. The count of Flanders, Arnulf I, received him with honour and lodged him in the Abbey of Mont Blandin, near Ghent. This was one of the centres of the Benedictine revival in that country, and Dunstan was able for the first time to observe the strict observance that had seen its rebirth at Cluny at the beginning of the century. His exile was not of long duration. Before the end of 957, the Mercians and Northumbrians revolted and drove out Eadwig, choosing his brother Edgar as king of the country north of the Thames. The south remained faithful to Eadwig. At once Edgar's advisers recalled Dunstan.\nBishop and archbishop (957\u2013978).\nBishop of Worcester and of London.\nOn Dunstan's return, Archbishop Oda consecrated him a bishop and, on the death of Coenwald of Worcester at the end of 957, Oda appointed Dunstan to the see.\nIn the following year the see of London became vacant and was conferred on Dunstan, who held it simultaneously with Worcester. In October 959, Eadwig died and his brother Edgar was readily accepted as ruler of Wessex. One of Eadwig's final acts had been to appoint a successor to Archbishop Oda, who died on 2 June 958. The chosen candidate was \u00c6lfsige of Winchester, but he died of cold in the Alps as he journeyed to Rome for the pallium. In his place Eadwig then nominated one of his supporters, the Bishop of Wells, Byrhthelm. As soon as Edgar became king, he reversed this second choice on the ground that Byrhthelm had not been able to govern even his first diocese properly. The archbishopric was then conferred on Dunstan.\nArchbishop of Canterbury.\nDunstan went to Rome in 960, and received the pallium from Pope John XII. On his journey there, Dunstan's acts of charity were so lavish as to leave nothing for himself and his attendants. His steward complained, but Dunstan seems to have suggested that they trust in Jesus Christ.\nOn his return from Rome, Dunstan at once regained his position as virtual prime minister of the kingdom. By his advice \u00c6lfstan was appointed to the Bishopric of London, and Oswald to that of Worcester. In 963, \u00c6thelwold, the Abbot of Abingdon, was appointed to the See of Winchester. With their aid and with the ready support of King Edgar, Dunstan pushed forward his reforms in the English Church. The monks in his communities were taught to live in a spirit of self-sacrifice, and Dunstan actively enforced the law of celibacy whenever possible. He forbade the practices of simony (selling ecclesiastical offices for money) and ended the custom of clerics appointing relatives to offices under their jurisdiction. Monasteries were built, and in some of the great cathedrals, monks took the place of the secular canons; in the rest the canons were obliged to live according to rule. The parish priests were compelled to be qualified for their office; they were urged to teach parishioners not only the truths of the Christian faith, but also trades to improve their position. The state saw reforms as well. Good order was maintained throughout the realm and there was respect for the law. Trained bands policed the north, and a navy guarded the shores from Viking raids.\nIn 973, Dunstan's statesmanship reached its zenith when he officiated at the coronation of King Edgar. Edgar was crowned at Bath in an imperial ceremony planned not as the initiation, but as the culmination of his reign (a move that must have taken a great deal of preliminary diplomacy). This service, devised by Dunstan himself and celebrated with a poem in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" forms the basis of the present-day British coronation ceremony. There was a second symbolic coronation held later. This was an important step, as other kings of Britain came and gave their allegiance to Edgar at Chester. Six kings in Britain, including the kings of Scotland and of Strathclyde, pledged their faith that they would be the king's liege-men on sea and land.\nEdgar ruled as a strong and popular king for 16 years. Edgar's reign, and implicitly his governing partnership with Dunstan, was praised by early chroniclers and historians who regarded it as a golden age. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" caveated the acclaim with one complaint, criticising the high level of immigration that took place at that time. It would appear from William of Malmesbury's later history that the objection was limited to the mercenary seaman, employed from around the North Sea littoral, to assist in the defence of the country.\nIn 975, Edgar was succeeded by his eldest son Edward \"the Martyr\". His accession was disputed by his stepmother, \u00c6lfthryth, who wished her own son \u00c6thelred to reign. Through the influence of Dunstan, Edward was chosen and crowned at Winchester. Edgar's death had encouraged the reactionary nobles, and at once there was a determined attack upon the monks, the protagonists of reform. Throughout Mercia they were persecuted and deprived of their possessions. Their cause, however, was supported by \u00c6thelwine, the ealdorman of East Anglia, and the realm was in serious danger of civil war. Three meetings of the Witan were held to settle these disputes, at Kyrtlington, at Calne, and at Amesbury. At the second of them the floor of the hall where the Witan was sitting gave way, and all except Dunstan, who clung to a beam, fell into the room below; several men were killed.\nFinal years (978\u201388).\nIn March 978, King Edward was assassinated at Corfe Castle, possibly at the instigation of his stepmother, and \u00c6thelred the Unready became king. The coronation took place on Low Sunday 31 March 978. According to William of Malmsesbury, writing over a century later, when the young king took the usual oath to govern well, Dunstan addressed him in solemn warning. He criticised the violent act whereby he became king and prophesied the misfortunes that were shortly to fall on the kingdom, but Dunstan's influence at court was ended. Dunstan retired to Canterbury, to teach at the cathedral school.\nOnly three more public acts are known. In 980, Dunstan joined \u00c6lfhere of Mercia in the solemn translation of the relics of King Edward, soon to be regarded as a saint, from their grave at Wareham to a shrine at Shaftesbury Abbey. In 984, he persuaded King \u00c6thelred to appoint \u00c6lfheah as Bishop of Winchester in succession to \u00c6thelwold. In 986, Dunstan induced the king, by a donation of 100 pounds of silver, to stop his persecution of the See of Rochester.\nDunstan's retirement at Canterbury consisted of long hours, both day and night, spent in private prayer, as well as his regular attendance at Mass and the daily office. He visited the shrines of St Augustine and St \u00c6thelberht. He worked to improve the spiritual and temporal well-being of his people, to build and restore churches, to establish schools, to judge suits, to defend widows and orphans, to promote peace, and to enforce respect for purity. He practised his crafts, made bells and organs and corrected the books in the cathedral library. He encouraged and protected European scholars who came to England, and was active as a teacher of boys in the cathedral school. On Ascension Day 988, Dunstan said Mass and preached three times to the people: at the Gospel, at the benediction, and after the Agnus Dei. In this last address, he announced his impending death and wished his congregation well. That afternoon he chose the spot for his tomb, then went to his bed. His strength failed rapidly, and on Saturday morning, 19 May, he caused the clergy to assemble. Mass was celebrated in his presence, then he received Extreme Unction and the Viaticum, and died. Dunstan's final words are reported to have been, \"He hath made a remembrance of his wonderful works, being a merciful and gracious Lord: He hath given food to them that fear Him.\"\nThe English people accepted him as a saint shortly thereafter. He was formally canonised in 1029. That year at the Synod of Winchester, St Dunstan's feast was ordered to be kept solemnly throughout England.\nLegacy.\nUntil Thomas Becket's fame overshadowed Dunstan's, he was the favourite saint of the English people. Dunstan had been buried in his cathedral. In 1180 his relics were translated to a tomb on the south side of the high altar, when that building was restored after being partially destroyed by a fire in 1174.\nThe monks of Glastonbury used to claim that during the sack of Canterbury by the Danes in 1012, Dunstan's body had been carried for safety to their abbey. This story was disproved by Archbishop William Warham, who opened the tomb at Canterbury in 1508. They found Dunstan's relics still to be there. However, his shrine was destroyed during the English Reformation.\nPatronage and feast day.\nDunstan became patron saint of English goldsmiths and silversmiths because he worked as a silversmith making church plate. The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church mark his feast day on 19 May. Dunstan is also honoured in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 19 May.\nIn 2023, a pastoral area of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Clifton was named in honour of Dunstan.\nIn literature and folklore.\nEnglish literature contains many references to him: for example, in \"A Christmas Carol\" by Charles Dickens, and in this folk rhyme: \n&lt;poem&gt;St Dunstan, as the story goes,\nOnce pull'd the devil by the nose\nWith red-hot tongs, which made him roar,\nThat he was heard three miles or more.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThis folk story is already shown in an initial in the \"Life of Dunstan\" in the Canterbury \"Passionale\", from the second quarter of the 12th century (British Library, Harley MS 315, f. 15v.).\nDaniel Anlezark has tentatively suggested that Dunstan may be the medieval author of the poem \"Solomon and Saturn\", citing the style, word choice, and Hiberno-Latin used in the texts. However, Clive Tolley examines this claim from a linguistic point-of-view and disagrees with Anlezark's claim.\nAnother story relates how Dunstan nailed a horseshoe to the Devil's foot when he was asked to re-shoe the Devil's cloven hoof. This caused the Devil great pain, and Dunstan only agreed to remove the shoe and release the Devil after he promised never to enter a place where a horseshoe is over the door. This is claimed as the origin of the lucky horseshoe.\nA further legend relating to Dunstan and the Devil seeks to explain the phenomena of Franklin nights, late frosts which occur around his Feast Day. The story goes that Dunstan was a great brewer and negotiated an agreement whereby the Devil could blast the blossom of local apple trees with frost, damaging the cider crop so that Dunstan's own beer would sell more readily.\nAn East London saint.\nAs Bishop of London, Dunstan was also Lord of the Manor of Stepney, and may, like subsequent bishops, have lived there. Dunstan is recorded as having founded (or rebuilt) Stepney's church, in 952 AD. This church was dedicated to All Saints, but was rededicated to Dunstan after his canonisation in 1029, making Dunstan the patron saint of Stepney."}
{"id": "8960", "revid": "10156438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8960", "title": "Deprogramming", "text": "Deprogramming is a controversial tactic that seeks to dissuade someone from \"strongly held convictions\" such as religious beliefs. Deprogramming purports to assist a person who holds a particular belief system\u2014of a kind considered harmful by those initiating the deprogramming\u2014to change those beliefs and sever connections to the group associated with them. Typically, people identifying themselves as deprogrammers are hired by a person's relatives, often parents of adult children. The subject of the deprogramming is usually forced to undergo the procedure, which might last days or weeks, against their will.\nMethods and practices of deprogramming are varied but have often involved kidnapping and false imprisonment, which have sometimes resulted in criminal convictions. The practice has led to controversies over freedom of religion, civil rights, criminality, and the use of violence. Proponents of deprogramming present the practice as a necessary counter-measure to the systematic \"brainwashing\" procedures allegedly employed by religious groups, which they claim deprive the individual of their capacity for free choice.\nBackground.\nIn the United States in the early 1970s, there was an increasing number of New Religious Movements. Ted Patrick, the \"father of deprogramming\", formed an organization he called \"The Citizens' Freedom Foundation\" and began offering 'deprogramming' services to people who wanted to break a family member's connection to an NRM. Patrick's methods involved abduction, physical restraint, detention over days or weeks while maintaining a constant presence with the victim, food and sleep deprivation, prolonged verbal and emotional abuse, and desecration of the symbols of the victim's faith.\nDeprogrammers justified their actions by applying a theory of \"brainwashing\" to New Religious Movements. Brainwashing theory denied the possibility of authentic spiritual choice for an NRM member, proposing instead that such individuals were subject to systematic mind control programs that overrode their capacity for independent volition. Ted Patrick's theory of brainwashing was that individuals were hypnotized by brainwaves projected from a recruiter's eyes and fingertips, after which the state was maintained by constant indoctrination, a totalistic environment, and self-hypnosis. Most academic research, however, indicated that the reasons for people joining, remaining in, or leaving NRMs were complex, varied from group to group and individual to individual, and generally reflected the continued presence of a capacity for individual responsibility and choice.\nThe Citizens' Freedom Foundation, which later became known as the Cult Awareness Network, became the most prominent group in the emerging national anti-cult movement of the 1970s and 80s. The anti-cult movement lobbied for state and national legislative action to legitimize its activities, and although this had very limited success, the movement was nevertheless able to forge alliances with a number of governmental agencies. This was primarily on the back of its propagation of the brainwashing/mind control ideology, which succeeded in turning affiliation with NRMs into an issue of public\u2014rather than private\u2014concern and gave a pseudo-legitimacy to the anti-cultists more extreme claims and actions.\nAlthough the CFF and CAN were in favor of deprogramming, they distanced themselves from the practice from the late 1970s onwards. Despite this apparent repudiation, however, they continued the practice. CFF and CAN referred thousands of paying clients to activist members who kept lists of deprogrammers. The total number that occurred is unknown, but in 1980 Ted Patrick claimed to have been hired over 2000 times as a professional abductor. Many other operators emerged both during and after the period in which he was active, many of them trained by him. The practice of deprogramming was an integral part of the anti-cult ideology and economy, and was seen as an effective response to the demand emanating from people who wanted a family member extracted, but it also clashed with the need for anti-cult organizations to present themselves as \"educational\" associations (the CFF, for example, received tax-exempt status as an educational trust). This, along with its tenuous legal and moral status, meant that deprogramming tended to be publicly disavowed, while its practice continued clandestinely.\nUse of violence.\nDeprogramming became a controversial practice due to the violent and illegal nature of some of its methods. Various academics have commented on the practice. Sociologist Anson D. Shupe and others wrote that deprogramming is comparable to exorcism in both methodology and manifestation. Professor of Sociology and Judicial Studies James T. Richardson described deprogramming as a \"private, self-help process whereby participants in unpopular new religious movements (NRMs) were forcibly removed from the group, incarcerated, and put through radical resocialization processes that were supposed to result in their agreeing to leave the group.\" Law professor Douglas Laycock, author of \"Religious Liberty: The Free Exercise Clause\", wrote:\nBeginning in the 1970s, many parents responded to the initial conversion with \"deprogramming.\" The essence of deprogramming was to physically abduct the convert, isolate him and physically restrain him, and barrage him with continuous arguments and attacks against his new religion, threatening to hold him forever until he agreed to leave it.\nDeprogrammers generally operated on the presumption that the people they were paid to extract from religious organizations were victims of mind control or brainwashing. Since the theory was that such individuals were incapable of rational thought, extreme measures were thought to be justified for their own good, up to and including the use of criminal violence. Ted Patrick was eventually tried and convicted of multiple felonies relating to kidnapping and false imprisonment of deprogramming subjects.\nViolence of one degree or another is common to all anecdotal accounts of deprogramming. There are numerous testimonies from people who describe being threatened with a gun, beaten, denied food and sleep, and sexually assaulted. In these accounts, the deprogramming usually begins with the victim being forced into a vehicle and taken to a place where they are isolated from everyone but their captors. Told that they would not be released until they renounce their beliefs, they are then subjected to days and sometimes weeks of verbal, emotional, psychological, and/or physical pressure until the demands of their abductors are satisfied.\nAccording to sociologist Eileen Barker, \"One does not have to rely on the victims for stories of violence: Ted Patrick, one of the most notorious deprogrammers used by CAGs [cult-awareness groups] (who has spent several terms in prison for his exploits) openly boasts about some of the violence he employed.\" A number of other prominent members of \"cult-awareness groups\" have been convicted of violent crimes committed in the course of deprogrammings.\nCarol Giambalvo, who worked for the Cult Awareness Network in the 1980s (later advocating for \"voluntary exit counseling\" and \"thought reform consultation\") said that although abductions certainly occurred, the more common practice was to forcefully detain people in their own homes, or in a cabin or motel room. Giambalvo tells of \"horror stories\" of restraint, beatings, use of handcuffs and weapons, sexual abuse, and even rape, although she claims that these were only used in a minority of cases and that deprogramming \"helped to free many individuals\".\nRationale and effectiveness.\nCarol Giambalvo described the reasoning behind deprogramming thus:It was believed that the hold of the brainwashing over the cognitive processes of a cult member needed to be broken \u2013 or \"snapped\" as some termed it \u2013 by means that would shock or frighten the cultist into thinking again. For that reason, in some cases cult leader's pictures were burned or there were highly confrontational interactions between deprogrammers and cultist. What was often sought was an emotional response to the information, the shock, the fear, and the confrontation.\nAnother associate of Ted Patrick, Sylvia Buford, identified five stages in the deprogramming which would, ideally, bring the subject to a recognition of their condition:\nAccording to Giambalvo and others, however, deprogramming frequently failed completely to achieve the desired outcome and often caused significant harm. While some advocates claimed a high success rate, studies show that natural attrition rates are actually higher than those achieved by deprogramming interventions.\nProfessor of psychiatry Saul V. Levine suggests that it is doubtful that deprogramming helps many people and goes on to say that it actually causes harm to the victim by the very nature of deprogramming. For deprogramming to work, the victim must be convinced that they joined a religious group against their will. They then must renounce responsibility and accept that in some mysterious way that their minds were controlled. He argues that deprogramming destroys a person's identity and is likely to create permanent anxiety about freedom of choice and leave the deprogrammed subject dependent upon the guidance and advice of others.\nThe Dialog Center International (DCI) a major Christian counter-cult organization founded in 1973 by a Danish professor of missiology and ecumenical theology, Johannes Aagaard, rejects deprogramming, believing that it is counterproductive, ineffective, and can harm the relationship between a cult member and concerned family members.\nGovernment.\nDeprogrammers have sometimes operated with overt or tacit support of law enforcement and judicial officials. Richardson sees government involvement in deprogramming as existing on a continuum from implicit approval to active involvement. In the United States, where there are First Amendment protections for religious groups, government officials and agencies frequently \"turned a blind eye\" to the activities of deprogrammers. In China, government agencies have at times promoted activities resembling deprogramming to enforce official views of \"correct\" beliefs and behaviors, for example in the suppression of the Falun Gong movement. This can involve \"vigorous, even violent, efforts to dissuade people from participating in groups deemed unacceptable to the government\" and have been \"given legal sanction by the passage of laws that make illegal the activities or even the beliefs of the unpopular movement or group being targeted\".\nIn the United States\u2014in New York, Kansas, Nebraska, Connecticut, Illinois, New Jersey, Ohio, Oregon and Texas\u2014lawmakers unsuccessfully attempted to legalize involuntary deprogramming, either through a deprogramming bill or conservatorship legislation. In New York, two bills were actually passed by the legislature (in 1980 and 1981), but both were vetoed by Governor Hugh Carey because of their violation of religious and other constitutional freedoms. In other states the bills failed to pass the legislature.\nControversy and related issues.\nIn the United States, from the mid-1970s and throughout the 1980s mind control was a widely accepted theory in public opinion, and the vast majority of newspaper and magazine accounts of deprogrammings assumed that recruits' relatives were well justified to seek conservatorships and to hire deprogrammers.\nOne disturbing aspect from a civil rights point of view, was that people hiring deprogrammers would use deception or other ethically questionable methods\u2014including kidnapping\u2014to get their relative into deprogrammers' hands, without allowing them any recourse to a lawyer or psychiatrist of their own choosing. Previously, there would be a sanity hearing first, and only then a commitment to an asylum or involuntary therapy. But with deprogramming, judges routinely granted parents legal authority over their adult children without a hearing.\nCritics contend that deprogramming and exit counseling begin with a false premise. Lawyers for some groups who have lost members due to deprogramming, as well as some civil liberties advocates, sociologists and psychologists, argue that it is not the religious groups but rather the deprogrammers who are the ones who deceive and manipulate people.\nDuring the 1990s, deprogrammer Rick Ross was sued by Jason Scott, a former member of a Pentecostal group called the Life Tabernacle Church, after an unsuccessful deprogramming attempt. In 1995, the jury awarded Scott US$875,000 in compensatory damages and US$2,500,000 in punitive damages against Ross, which were later settled for US$5,000 and 200 hours of services. More significantly, the jury also found that the leading anti-cult group known as the Cult Awareness Network (CAN) was a co-conspirator in the crime and fined CAN around US$1,000,000 in punitive damages, forcing the group into bankruptcy. This case is often seen as effectively closing the door on the practice of involuntary deprogramming in the United States.\nReferral and kickback system.\nAnti-cult groups play a central role in maintaining the underground network of communications, referrals, transportation, and housing necessary for continued deprogramming.\nThe Cult Awareness Network operated a referral scheme (NARDEC) in which they would refer people to deprogrammers in return for a \"kickback\" in the form of a donation or as a commission. Deprogrammers such as Rick Alan Ross, Steven Hassan and Carol Giambalvo were among the CAN-referred deprogrammers.\nExit counseling.\nProponents of \"Exit counseling\" distinguish it from coercive forms of deprogramming. The fundamental difference is that involuntary deprogramming involves forced confinement of the individual whereas in exit counseling they are free to leave at any time. The absence of physical coercion is thought to increase the likelihood of establishing a rapport and of not alienating, enraging or terrifying the subject. Exit counsellors are typically brought in during a \"family Intervention\", where they explain their role and seek to change the subject's attitude to their religious group through reasoning and persuasion.\nLangone, writing in 1993, estimated that deprogramming costs typically rise to at least US$10,000, compared to exit counseling which typically costs US$2,000 to US$4,000, although cases requiring extensive research of little-known groups can cost much more. Deprogramming, especially when it fails, also entails considerable legal risk and psychological risk (for example, a permanent alienation of the subject from their family). In exit counseling, these psychological and legal risks are reduced. Although deprogrammers prepare family members (other than the subject) for the process, exit counselors tend to work with such family members directly, expecting those requesting the intervention to contribute to the process. Exit counseling requires that families establish a reasonable and respectful level of communication with their loved one before the program itself can begin. Because deprogramming relies on coercion (which is illegal except in the case of conservatorship and is generally viewed as unethical) deprogrammers' critiques of the religious organization tend to be less credible to the subject than the arguments of exit counselors."}
{"id": "8964", "revid": "45033072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8964", "title": "Daily Planet", "text": "The Daily Planet is a fictional newspaper appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics, commonly in association with Superman. The newspaper was first mentioned in \"Action Comics\" #9 (November 13, 1939) \u2013 Underworld Politics, War on Crime. The \"Daily Planet\" building's distinguishing feature is the enormous globe that sits on top of the building.\nBased in the fictional city of Metropolis, the paper employs Clark Kent, Lois Lane, Jimmy Olsen, and Perry White as its editor-in-chief. The building's original features were inspired by the Old Toronto Star Building where Superman's co-creator, Joe Shuster, was a newsboy when the \"Toronto Star\" was still called the \"Daily Star\". Shuster has claimed that Metropolis was visually inspired by Toronto. Over the years, however, Metropolis has come to serve as an analogue to New York City.\nFictional history.\nGolden and Silver Age.\nWhen Superman first appeared in comics (specifically 1938's \"Action Comics\" #1), his alter ego Clark Kent worked for a newspaper named the \"Daily Star\", under editor George Taylor. Joe Shuster named the \"Daily Star\" after the \"Toronto Daily Star\" newspaper in Toronto, Ontario, which had been the newspaper that Shuster's parents received and for which Shuster had worked as a newsboy. It was not until later years that the fictional paper became the \"Daily Planet.\" (The real-world newspaper was called the \"Evening Star\" prior to 1899; the \"Toronto Daily Star\" is now known as the \"Toronto Star\".)\nWhile choosing a name for the fictitious newspaper, consideration was given to combining the names of \"The Globe and Mail\" (another Toronto newspaper) and the \"Daily Star\" to become \"The Daily Globe\". But when the comic strip appeared, the newspaper's name was permanently made the \"Daily Planet\" to avoid a name conflict with real newspapers. In \"Superman\" #5 (Summer 1940), the publisher of the \"Daily Planet\" is shown to be Burt Mason, a man who is determined to print the truth even when corrupt politician Alex Evell threatens him. In \"Superman\" #6 (September\u2013October 1940), Mason gives free printing equipment to \"The Gateston Gazette\" after its editor, Jim Tirrell, is killed and its equipment is destroyed by racketeers that Tirrell insisted on reporting.\nWhen DC made use of its multiverse means of continuity tracking between the early 1960s and mid-1980s, it was declared that the \"Daily Star\" was the newspaper's name in the Golden Age or \"Earth-Two\" versions of Clark Kent, Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen, while the \"Daily Planet\" was used in the Silver Age or \"Earth-One\" versions. The Clark Kent of Earth-Two eventually became the editor-in-chief of the \"Daily Star\", something his Earth-One counterpart did not achieve.\nIn the Silver and Bronze Age universes, Clark's first contact with the \"Daily Planet\" came when reporter (and future editor) Perry White came to Smallville to write a story about Superboy, and wound up getting an interview where the Boy of Steel first revealed his extraterrestrial origins. The story resulted in Perry earning a Pulitzer Prize. During Clark Kent's years in college, Perry White was promoted to editor-in-chief upon the retirement of the \"Daily Planet\"'s previous editor, the Earth-One version of George Taylor.\nAfter graduating from Metropolis University with a degree in journalism, Clark Kent went to work at the \"Planet\", and quickly met Lois Lane (who had been working there for some time already). After Clark was hired, Jimmy Olsen joined the paper's staff.\nIn 1971, the \"Daily Planet\" was purchased by Morgan Edge, president of the Galaxy Broadcasting System. Edge proceeded to integrate Metropolis television station WGBS-TV's studios into the \"Daily Planet\" building, and named Clark Kent as the anchor for the WGBS evening news. Eventually, Clark's former schoolmate from Smallville Lana Lang joined Clark as a co-anchor.\nAfter the 1985\u20131986 miniseries \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", many of these elements, including Morgan Edge buying the \"Daily Planet\", were retroactively changed or eliminated from the Superman canon.\nPost-Crisis.\nIn the post-Crisis comics' canon, years before Clark or Lois began working for the paper, Lex Luthor owned the \"Daily Planet.\" When Luthor, deciding to sell the paper, began taking bids for the \"Planet\", Perry White convinced an international conglomerate, TransNational Enterprises, to buy the paper. They agreed to this venture with only one stipulation: that Perry White would become editor-in-chief. White had served as the \"Planet\" editor-in-chief ever since, barring the few times he was absent. During those times people such as Sam Foswell and Clark Kent have looked after the paper. Franklin Stern, an old friend of White's, became the \"Daily Planet\"'s publisher.\nThe \"Planet\" saw its share of rough times during White's tenure. For example, it had many violent worker strikes. The building itself, along with most of the city, was destroyed during the \"Fall of Metropolis\" storyline; it is only much later that it was restored by the efforts of various superheroes. The \"Planet\" building sustained heavy damages after the villain Doomsday's rampage. Later, Franklin Stern decided to put the paper up for sale. Lex Luthor, disliking the heavy criticism of himself and his company that the \"Planet\" became noted for, purchased the \"Daily Planet\" and subsequently closed the paper down. Luthor fired every employee of the newspaper except for four people: Simone D'Neige, Dirk Armstrong, Jimmy Olsen, and Lois Lane. As a final insult, Luthor saw to it that the \"Planet\" globe was unceremoniously dumped in the Metropolis landfill. In the \"Planet\"'s place emerged \"LexCom,\" a news-oriented Internet website that primarily catered to Luthor's views of \"quality journalism.\"\nAfter Lois Lane made a deal with Luthor where, in exchange for him returning the \"Planet\" to Perry, she would kill one story of his choosing with no questions asked, Luthor sold the \"Daily Planet\" to Perry White for the token sum of one dollar. The paper was quickly reinstated, rehiring all of its old staff. Sometime later, ownership of the \"Planet\" fell into the hands of Bruce Wayne, where it has remained ever since. In the \"\" storyline, it is named a subsidiary of Wayne Entertainment.\nDuring the \"Y2K\" storyline (involving the city of Metropolis being infused with futuristic technology thanks to a descendant of the villain Brainiac), the \"Daily Planet\" building was \"upgraded\" along with the rest of Metropolis, and a holographic globe replaced the physical one. Eventually due to temporal instabilities caused by the B13 Virus, Metropolis and the Daily Planet building, globe and all, were restored to their former states.\nIn the current comics and media spinoffs, the \"Daily Planet\" is presented as a thoroughly modern news operation, including operating an Internet website much like most large newspapers. The \"Planet\"'s reporters also have access to the best modern equipment to aid their work, though Perry White has often been shown as still favoring his manual typewriter. In 2008, it was said that Clark (at least in this era/continuity) uses a typewriter at his desk due to his powers causing minor interference in regular desktop computers.\nDuring this era, the \"Planet\"'s major competitors in Metropolis include the tabloid newspaper the \"Daily Star\", WGBS-TV (which also employed Jimmy Olsen and Cat Grant for a time), and Lex Luthor's various media operations. A contemporary publication is \"Newstime\" Magazine, where Clark Kent worked as the editor for a time. The publisher of \"Newstime\" is Colin Thornton, who is secretly the demon Satanus, an enemy of Superman's.\n\"Superman: Birthright\".\nIn the ' limited series, the \"Daily Planets publisher was Quentin Galloway, an abrasive overbearing loudmouth who bullied Jimmy Olsen, and later Clark Kent, before being told off by Lois Lane, whom Galloway could not fire because of her star status. This was meant to be a new origin for Superman but one that applied to the Post-Crisis continuity, so later \"Planet\" history concerning Luthor temporarily owning it and other events still applied.\nPost-Infinite Crisis.\nDuring the story \"Infinite Crisis\", parts of the Post-Crisis history were altered. These changes were explained gradually over the next several years. The 2009 mini-series \"\" clarified the earlier history of the \"Planet\" in the new continuity. The story established that while Lex Luthor, in the revised history, owns every media in Metropolis and uses it to enforce his public image as a wealthy benefactor, the \"Planet\" had always stood free, refusing him ownership and even condemning his actions in editorials signed by Perry White himself. As a result, when Clark Kent is first inducted into the \"Planet\", the newspaper was almost bankrupt, dilapidated and unable to afford new reporters. This changed after Superman begins his career. Thanks to Superman granting exclusive interviews and photographs to Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen when he debuts, the paper's circulation increased 700%.\nGeneral Sam Lane (Lois' father) attempted to capture Superman, seeing him as an alien threat. When he failed to do so, he forcibly shut down the \"Planet\" as part of an attempt to force Perry White and Lois to turn over any information they had on Superman that they haven't released to the public. Eventually, Superman turned the public to his favor and Sam Lane was seen in a bad light after his soldier John Corben AKA Metallo ruthlessly endangered civilians. These events lead to the people of Metropolis no longer looking at Lex Luthor as a savior and \"The Daily Planet\" becomes the city's top-selling paper, as well as a major player in media.\nIn \"Final Crisis\" #2, the villain Clayface triggers an explosion in The \"Daily Planet\" building, greatly damaging the offices, leaving many injured and at least one person dead. Lois Lane is hospitalized. Despite the chaos of \"Final Crisis\" and more than half of humanity being enslaved by evil, the newspaper continues to spread news and inform the public via a printing press in Superman's Fortress of Solitude. In \"Final Crisis\" #7, it is shown functioning once again.\nThe New 52.\nWith the reboot of DC's line of comics in 2011, the \"Daily Planet\" was shown in the \"Superman\" comics as being bought by Morgan Edge and merged with the Galaxy Broadcasting System, similar to the Silver/Bronze Age continuity. In \"Action Comics\", it is revealed that in the new history/universe, Clark Kent begins his journalism career in Metropolis roughly six years before Galaxy Broadcasting merges with the \"Daily Planet\". Along with being a writer for \"The Daily Star\", partly because editor George Taylor was a friend of his adopted parents, Clark is an active blogger who speaks against political corruption and reports on the troubles of everyday citizens who are not often the focus of news media. While working at the \"Star\", Clark meets \"Planet\" photographer Jimmy Olsen and the two become friends despite working at rival publications. Clark is also a great fan of Lois Lane's work at the \"Daily Planet\", eventually meeting her through Jimmy. Months after Superman makes his public debut, Clark leaves \"The Daily Star\" on good terms and accepts a position at \"The Daily Planet\".\nAfter the merger with Galaxy Broadcasting, Lois was promoted to run the TV division, with Clark acting as an on-the-scene reporter for the TV division. Clark is later assigned the \"Superman beat.\" But after rising tension between himself and Lois, as well as with Galaxy Broadcasting head Morgan Edge, Clark concludes that the \"Daily Planet\" is now more concerned with ratings and internet page views than actual journalism. He quits and goes off to begin an independent, internet news site with fellow journalist Cat Grant. Though Lois and Jimmy consider this to be a bad and risky decision, they continue to act as Clark's friends and confidants, offering aid when they can.\nAt the conclusion of the New 52, following the New 52 Superman's death, Lex Luthor buys the \"Daily Planet\".\n30th and 31st Centuries.\nIn virtually every incarnation of the era inhabited by the Legion of Super-Heroes, the \"Daily Planet\" is depicted as a fixture in Metropolis, and one of Earth's major media sources. Frequently, the Flash's wife Iris West Allen (a native of the era) is depicted as a member of its staff or editorial board.\nFictional employees.\n\"Daily Planet's\" staff at various times included:"}
{"id": "8965", "revid": "28438779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8965", "title": "Digital Private Network Signalling System", "text": "The Digital Private Network Signalling System (DPNSS) is a network protocol used on digital trunk lines for connecting to PABX. It supports a defined set of inter-networking facilities.\nDPNSS was originally defined by British Telecom. The specification for the protocol is defined in BTNR188. The specification currently comes under the Network Interoperability Consultative Committee.\nHistory.\nDPNSS was developed in the early 1980s by BT, or its forerunner, Post Office Telecommunications in recognition that the emerging Digital Private Circuit Primary Rate product 'Megastream' had to address the market for both data and voice, the latter being significantly greater because of the market for PBXs. At the time, BT dictated what signalling could be used on its leased lines and, whilst it only had a minority interest in the sales of PBXs, was requested by the PBX manufacturers to produce a standard to prevent the creation of a plethora of conflicting PBX protocols being developed. Under the liberalization rules of the day (1979), BT was barred from manufacturing, selling or supplying PBXs of more than 200 extensions. Digital (PCM-based) PBXs were just starting to come into the marketplace with the Plessey PDX (a licensed version of the ROLM CBX) and the GEC SL1 (a licensed version of the Northern Telecom SL1). It was recognised that corporate customers would wish to network these systems across the country. At the time, 'CAS' inter node signaling was slow and inter-register signaling MF5, developed from PSTN signalling protocols, was complex and would not support sufficient features.\nThe support for DPNSS as BT's own signalling protocol also differentiated BT's private circuit's services from those of its emerging rival Mercury Communications.\nDPNSS was an active (and successful) collaboration between PBX manufacturers and BT which started relatively slowly (BT &amp; Plessey) but quickly snowballed with MITEL, GEC, Ericsson, Philips and eventually Nortel all joining to create a powerful and feature rich protocol.\nBT and some of the UK manufacturers championed DPNSS into ECMA and CCITT (ITU) but it was eventually deprecated by the standards bodies in favour of Q931 and QSig. Nevertheless, the elegance of the protocol and its compatibility with PBX features ensured the adoption DPNSS actually grew in Europe, compared to the much slower take-up of Qsig.\nThere were also attempts (during 1984) to take DPNSS into North America. Unfortunately the structures for the creation of standards in North America seemed to prevent manufacturer collaboration as a route forward and the ANSI standards body was not interested in creating PBX interworking standards.\nVersion 1 of BTNR188 (DPNSS) was issued in 1983; the last version of DPNSS to be released 6 in 1995 included compatibility with ISDN features released in V5. A lightweight version of DPNSS 'APNSS' was developed using analogue trunks (Sometimes compressed) and a modem to support D channel signalling.\nOverview of the Protocol.\nLayer 1(CCITT) ITU-G703 defines the physical and electrical interface. G704 defines the Frame structure of the 2,048 Mbs sent across the link. G732 defines the allocation of that frame structure into the 32 discrete 64\u00a0Kbit 'channels', of which 0 is used for alignment of the frames and 16 is (by convention only) allocated to common channel signalling. Speech is carried as G711.\nLayer 2 Timeslot 16, 64Kbs operates as HDLC LAPB, to support up to 60 PVCs or DLCs (data link connections) (30 directly associated with the bearer channels and 30 for unrelated messages) as the specification describes them. Therefore, at maximum operation, each potential traffic channel can have two simultaneous data channels available for messages. Note that HDLC operates as a statistical multiplexing system. When traffic deltas are low, a single call establishment message will have access to the full 64Kbs (allowing for overheads).\nDPNSS is a layer 3 protocol functioning as common channel signalling. The functionality is divided into Levels (confusingly nothing to do with OSI layers.) Levels 1-6 deal with simple call establishment (make call/break call) and are the minimum requirements by which a PBX can be said to be DPNSS compatible. The remaining levels are allocated to telephony features, supplementary services or to administrative features. Note that support of 'levels' by a PBX is not necessarily incremental. Some levels are interdependent but a PBX may omit support of some levels (above 6) and support others.\nDPNSS is a compelled protocol in that each instruction issued must be met with an appropriate response from the other PBX otherwise the message is re-transmitted (until timer expiry). This means that when interworking two PBXs features invoked on PBX A must be acknowledged by PBX B even if that feature is not supported.\nDPNSS carries its protocol messages as short strings of IA5 text. It is therefore much easier to interpret in its native form than Q931/Qsig or H323/H450 and a precursor to the plain language format of SIP.\nPractical Considerations.\nAs HDLC can operate successfully in quite poor (errored) data environments, DPNSS will work over a 2\u00a0Mbit/s link running without proper synchronisation (plesiochronously) and over poor quality connections (including badly terminated connectors). When setting up PBXs to run a DPNSS connection one end must be defined as the primary or 'A' end. This is a protocol requirement and has nothing to do with link synchronisation. However, such badly synchronised links were frowned upon because of the problems associated with sending faxes and/or other modem based communication which were not specifically identified within the protocol.\nDPNSS and VoIP.\nFor a protocol that began life in the 1980s, DPNSS is natively a long way from VoIP. However, many of the hybrid VoIP PBXs available from manufacturers worldwide provide on-board DPNSS trunk cards. Where they do not, a protocol converter is necessary. Commercially available equipment offers the ability to convert from DPNSS to Q.Sig. Note that it is also possible to tunnel DPNSS and its associated PCM (G711) over an IP network. This can be point to point where the IP network carries packetised voice N x 64 Kbs speech and a separate IP signalling channel to carry the notional 64 Kbs of DPNSS signalling. A more sophisticated solution uses intelligence on the edge of the IP network to route voice to the correct node. This is a Voice VPN.\nNote that this should not be confused with the pre-VOIP 'Voice VPN' deployed by routing calls intelligently in a TDM switching platform, often Nortel DMS100 and customers PBX nodes.\nCriticisms.\nSome critics of DPNSS suggest that it is too loosely defined and allows too much latitude in its interpretation of message formats and timers. It is also sometimes mistakenly believed that DPNSS is semi proprietary and that it is only possible to connect PBXs from the same manufacturer. i.e. Siemens will connect to Siemens, Mitel to Mitel etc. Experience indicates that this is not the case and BT's FeatureNet platform (Nortel's DMS100) running DPNSS, has interconnected successfully to many PBX types available in the UK. In addition, as part of the first commercial implementation of DPNSS (in the Government Telephone Network or GTN in 1983), BT insisted that the core of the network be made from PBXs of different manufacture to prove the interoperability in real life."}
{"id": "8966", "revid": "5532431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8966", "title": "Digital Access Signalling System 1", "text": "Digital Access Signalling System 1 (DASS1) is a proprietary protocol defined by British Telecom to provide ISDN services in the United Kingdom. It is now obsolete, having been replaced by DASS2. This too will become obsolete over the coming years as Q.931, a European standard, becomes widely adopted in the EU."}
{"id": "8967", "revid": "47186597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8967", "title": "Digital Access Signalling System 2", "text": "Digital Access Signalling System 2 (DASS2) is an obsolescent protocol defined by British Telecom (BT) for digital links to PSTN based on ISDN. Although still available on request, it has been superseded by ETS 300 102 (\"EuroISDN\").\nDASS2 is an improved version over DASS1, based on experiences with DPNSS. \nIn the UK, the ISDN concept was first introduced to customers by BT with their\nDASS2 connections. DASS2 (Digital Access Signalling System) is a BT-designed\nsignalling standard, and was introduced before the Q.931 standard was finalised\nby the international community. British Telecom used the term ISDN when\ndescribing their DASS2 lines.\nDASS2 lines are provided to customers on a 2\u00a0Mbit/s link and can handle 30 simultaneous calls (64\u00a0kbit/s each). DASS2 is still offered by BT and other UK carriers. Q.931 is the name of the CCITT document that describes the agreed signalling format for International ISDN. CCITT had previously been known as \"International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee\". The organisation set out the internationally agreed standards for telecommunications, and subsequently evolved into the ITU. In the United Kingdom, the Q.931-based protocol is ETS 300 102 (also known as EuroISDN). This is a very close implementation of the original CCITT specification. It is a 2\u00a0Mbit/s service as\nwith DASS2, but the feature capability is far greater and has negated the problems associated with DASS2, including echo problems and circuit spikes. In the UK, both DASS 2 and EuroISDN (ETS 300 102) lines are available to customers with EuroISDN as the preferred signalling type. Customers normally choose the desired signalling system, as this will be dictated by their CPE (Customer Premises Equipment),\nusually a PABX.\nMost modern PABXs can handle many different types of signalling system, however\nthe trend seems to be away from the DASS2 (which is no longer being developed by\nBT and has been known to deny problems with their DASS2 circuits), and towards the internationally recognised Q.931 standard, which is utilised by many countries' telephony service providers.\nThe CCITT specify the standards for the layers 1, 2 and 3 signalling messages. Layer 3 messages are the messages which actually control the call setup, teardown, and routing.\nThe layer 3 messages or \"call control messages\" are the minimum messages that must be understood by the interfacing equipment. Individual service providers may\npublish their own documentation which details further messages that will be\ntransported in addition to Q.931 messages. There are a number of additional\nEuropean documents that cover supplementary services. These cover features that may be instigated by exchanges via the ISDN and require a higher degree of layer 3 implementation."}
{"id": "8968", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8968", "title": "Devanagari", "text": "Devanagari ( ; , , ) is an Indic script used in the Indian subcontinent. Also simply called N\u0101gar\u012b (), it is a left-to-right abugida (a type of segmental ), based on the ancient \"Br\u0101hm\u012b\" script. It is one of the official scripts of the Republic of India and Nepal. It was developed and in regular use by the 8th century CE and achieved its modern form by 1000 CE. The Devan\u0101gar\u012b script, composed of 48 primary characters, including 14 vowels and 34 consonants, is the fourth most widely adopted writing system in the world, being used for over 120 languages.\nThe orthography of this script reflects the pronunciation of the language. Unlike the Latin alphabet, the script has no concept of letter case. It is written from left to right, has a strong preference for symmetrical rounded shapes within squared outlines, and is recognisable by a horizontal line, known as a , that runs along the top of full letters. In a cursory look, the Devan\u0101gar\u012b script appears different from other Indic scripts, such as Bengali-Assamese or Gurmukhi, but a closer examination reveals they are very similar except for angles and structural emphasis.\nAmong the languages using it as a primary or secondary script are Marathi, P\u0101\u1e37i, Sanskrit, Hindi, Boro, Nepali, Sherpa, Prakrit, Apabhramsha, Awadhi, Bhojpuri, Braj Bhasha, Chhattisgarhi, Haryanvi, Magahi, Nagpuri, Rajasthani, Khandeshi, Bhili, Dogri, Kashmiri, Maithili, Konkani, Sindhi, Nepal Bhasa, Mundari, Angika, Bajjika and Santali. The Devan\u0101gar\u012b script is closely related to the Nandin\u0101gar\u012b script commonly found in numerous ancient manuscripts of South India, and it is distantly related to a number of southeast Asian scripts.\nEtymology.\n is formed by the addition of the word () to the word (). is an adjective derived from (), a Sanskrit word meaning \"town\" or \"city\", and literally means \"urban\" or \"urbane\". The word (implicitly modifying , \"script\") was used on its own to refer to a North Indian script, or perhaps a number of such scripts, as Al-Biruni attests in the 11th century; the form is attested later, at least by the 18th century. The name of the Nandin\u0101gar\u012b script is also formed by adding a prefix to the generic script name . The precise origin and significance of the prefix remains unclear.\nHistory.\nDevan\u0101gar\u012b is part of the Brahmic family of scripts of India, Nepal, Tibet, and Southeast Asia. It is a descendant of the 3rd century\u00a0BCE Br\u0101hm\u012b script, which evolved into the Nagari script which in turn gave birth to Devan\u0101gar\u012b and Nandin\u0101gar\u012b. Devan\u0101gar\u012b has been widely adopted across India and Nepal to write Sanskrit, Marathi, Hindi, Central Indo-Aryan languages, Konkani, Boro, and various Nepalese languages.\nSome of the earliest epigraphic evidence attesting to the developing Sanskrit N\u0101gar\u012b script in ancient India is from the 1st to 4th century\u00a0CE inscriptions discovered in Gujarat. Variants of script called , recognisably close to Devan\u0101gar\u012b, are first attested from the 1st century\u00a0CE Rudradaman inscriptions in Sanskrit, while the modern standardised form of Devan\u0101gar\u012b was in use by about 1000\u00a0CE. Medieval inscriptions suggest widespread diffusion of N\u0101gar\u012b-related scripts, with biscripts presenting local script along with the adoption of N\u0101gar\u012b scripts. For example, the mid 8th-century Pattadakal pillar in Karnataka has text in both Siddha Matrika script, and an early Telugu-Kannada script; while, the Kangra Jawalamukhi inscription in Himachal Pradesh is written in both Sharada and Devan\u0101gar\u012b scripts.\nThe N\u0101gar\u012b script was in regular use by the 7th century\u00a0CE, and it was fully developed by about the end of first millennium. The use of Sanskrit in N\u0101gar\u012b script in medieval India is attested by numerous pillar and cave-temple inscriptions, including the 11th-century Udayagiri inscriptions in Madhya Pradesh, and an inscribed brick found in Uttar Pradesh, dated to be from 1217\u00a0CE, which is now held at the British Museum. The script's prototypes and related versions have been discovered with ancient relics outside India, in places such as Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Indonesia. In East Asia, the script (considered as the closest precursor to N\u0101gar\u012b) was in use by Buddhists. N\u0101gar\u012b has been the of the Indic scripts. It has long been used traditionally by religiously educated people in South Asia to record and transmit information, existing throughout the land in parallel with a wide variety of local scripts (such as Mo\u1e0d\u012b, Kaithi, and Mahajani) used for administration, commerce, and other daily uses.\nSharada remained in parallel use in Kashmir. An early version of Devan\u0101gar\u012b is visible in the Kutila inscription of Bareilly dated to VS\u00a01049 (992\u00a0CE), which demonstrates the emergence of the horizontal bar to group letters belonging to a word. One of the oldest surviving Sanskrit texts from the early post-Maurya period consists of 1,413 N\u0101gar\u012b pages of a commentary by Patanjali, with a composition date of about 150\u00a0BCE, the surviving copy transcribed about 14th century\u00a0CE.\nIn Sinja Valley, mid-western Nepal where the Nepali language originates from, the earliest examples of the Devanagari script from the 13th century were found on the cliffs and in nearby Dullu.\nEast Asia.\nIn the 7th century, under the rule of Songtsen Gampo of the Tibetan Empire, Thonmi Sambhota was sent to Nepal to open marriage negotiations with a Nepali princess and to find a writing system suitable for the Tibetan language. He then invented the Tibetan script based on the N\u0101gar\u012b used in Kashmir. He added 6 new characters for sounds that did not exist in Sanskrit.\nOther scripts closely related to N\u0101gar\u012b (such as Siddha\u1e43) were introduced throughout East and Southeast Asia from the 7th to the 10th centuries\u00a0CE: notably in Indonesia, Vietnam, and Japan.\nMost of the Southeast Asian scripts have roots in Dravidian scripts, but a few found in south-central regions of Java and isolated parts of southeast Asia resemble Devan\u0101gar\u012b or its prototypes. The Kawi script in particular is similar to the Devan\u0101gar\u012b in many respects, though the morphology of the script has local changes. The earliest inscriptions in the Devan\u0101gar\u012b-like scripts are from around the 10th century\u00a0CE, with many more between the 11th and 14th centuries.\nSome of the old-Devan\u0101gar\u012b inscriptions are found in Hindu temples of Java, such as the Prambanan temple. The Ligor and the Kalasan inscriptions of central Java, dated to the 8th century, are also in the N\u0101gar\u012b script of north India. According to the epigraphist and Asian Studies scholar Lawrence Briggs, these may be related to the 9th century copper plate inscription of Devapaladeva (Bengal) which is also in early Devan\u0101gar\u012b script. The term kawi in Kawi script is a loan word from (poetry). According to anthropologists and Asian studies scholars John Norman Miksic and Goh Geok Yian, the 8th century version of early N\u0101gar\u012b or Devan\u0101gar\u012b script was adopted in Java, Bali, and Khmer around the 8th\u20139th centuries, as evidenced by the many contemporaneous inscriptions of this period.\nLetters.\nThe letter order of Devan\u0101gar\u012b, like nearly all Br\u0101hmic scripts, is based on phonetic principles that consider both the manner and place of articulation of the consonants and vowels they represent. This arrangement is usually referred to as the (\"garland of letters\"). The format of Devan\u0101gar\u012b for Sanskrit serves as the prototype for its application, with minor variations or additions, to other languages.\nVowels.\nThe vowels and their arrangement are:\nConsonants.\nThe table below shows the consonant letters (in combination with inherent vowel ) and their arrangement. To the right of the Devan\u0101gar\u012b letter it shows the Latin script transliteration using International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration, and the phonetic value (IPA) in Hindi.\nVowel diacritics.\nThe table below shows consonants with common vowel diacritics and their ISO 15919 transliteration. Vowels in their independent form on the top and in their corresponding dependent form (vowel sign) combined with the consonant \" on the bottom. \" is without any added vowel sign, where the vowel \" is inherent.\nA vowel combines with a consonant in their diacritic form. For example, the vowel () combines with the consonant () to form the syllabic letter (), with halant (cancel sign) removed and added vowel sign which is indicated by diacritics. The vowel () combines with the consonant () to form () with halant removed. But the diacritic series of , , , (, respectively) is without any added vowel sign, as the vowel () is inherent.\n The combinations of all Sanskrit consonants and vowels, each in alphabetical order, are laid out in the () or () table. In the following table, the IAST transliteration of each combination will appear on mouseover:\nOld forms.\nThe following letter variants are also in use, particularly in older texts and in specific regions:\nConjunct consonants.\nAs mentioned, successive consonants lacking a vowel in between them may physically join as a conjunct consonant or ligature. When Devan\u0101gar\u012b is used for writing languages other than Sanskrit, conjuncts are used mostly with Sanskrit words and loan words. Native words typically use the basic consonant and native speakers know to suppress the vowel when it is conventional to do so. For example, the native Hindi word is written (). The government of these clusters ranges from widely to narrowly applicable rules, with special exceptions within. While standardised for the most part, there are certain variations in clustering, of which the Unicode used on this page is just one scheme. The following are a number of rules:\nAccent marks.\nThe pitch accent of Vedic Sanskrit is written with various symbols depending on shakha. In the Rigveda, is written with a bar below the line (), with a stroke above the line () while is unmarked.\nPunctuation.\nThe end of a sentence or half-verse may be marked with the \"\" symbol (called a , meaning \"bar\", or called a , meaning \"full stop/pause\"). The end of a full verse may be marked with a double-, a \" symbol. A comma (called an \", meaning \"short stop/pause\") is used to denote a natural pause in speech. Punctuation marks of Western origin, such as the colon, semicolon, exclamation mark, dash, and question mark have been in use in Devan\u0101gar\u012b script since at least the 1900s, matching their use in European languages.\nFonts.\nA variety of Unicode fonts are in use for Devan\u0101gar\u012b. These include Akshar, Annapurna, Arial, CDAC-Gist Surekh, CDAC-Gist Yogesh, Chandas, Gargi, Gurumaa, Jaipur, Jana, Kalimati, Kanjirowa, Lohit Devanagari, Mangal, Kokila, ,Preeti, Raghu, Sanskrit2003, Santipur OT, Siddhanta, and Thyaka.\nThe form of Devan\u0101gar\u012b fonts vary with function. According to Harvard College for Sanskrit studies: \nThe Google Fonts project has a number of Unicode fonts for Devan\u0101gar\u012b in a variety of typefaces in serif, sans-serif, display and handwriting categories.\nTransliteration.\nThere are several methods of Romanisation or transliteration from Devan\u0101gar\u012b to the Roman script.\nHunterian system.\nThe Hunterian system is the national system of romanisation in India, officially adopted by the Government of India.\nISO 15919.\nA standard transliteration convention was codified in the ISO 15919 standard of 2001. It uses diacritics to map the much larger set of Br\u0101hmic graphemes to the Latin script. The Devan\u0101gar\u012b-specific portion is nearly identical to the academic standard for Sanskrit, IAST.\nIAST.\nThe International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration (IAST) is the academic standard for the romanisation of Sanskrit. IAST is the de facto standard used in printed publications, like books, magazines, and electronic texts with Unicode fonts. It is based on a standard established by the \"Congress of Orientalists\" at Athens in 1912. The ISO 15919 standard of 2001 codified the transliteration convention to include an expanded standard for sister scripts of Devan\u0101gar\u012b.\nThe National Library at Kolkata romanisation, intended for the romanisation of all Indic scripts, is an extension of IAST.\nHarvard-Kyoto.\nCompared to IAST, Harvard-Kyoto looks much simpler. It does not contain all the diacritic marks that IAST contains. It was designed to simplify the task of putting large amount of Sanskrit textual material into machine readable form, and the inventors stated that it reduces the effort needed in transliteration of Sanskrit texts on the keyboard. This makes typing in Harvard-Kyoto much easier than IAST. Harvard-Kyoto uses capital letters that can be difficult to read in the middle of words.\nITRANS.\nITRANS is a lossless transliteration scheme of Devan\u0101gar\u012b into ASCII that is widely used on Usenet. It is an extension of the Harvard-Kyoto scheme. In ITRANS, the word is written \"devanaagarii\" or \"devanAgarI\". ITRANS is associated with an application of the same name that enables typesetting in Indic scripts. The user inputs in Roman letters and the ITRANS pre-processor translates the Roman letters into Devan\u0101gar\u012b (or other Indic languages). The latest version of ITRANS is version 5.30 released in July 2001. It is similar to Velthuis system and was created by Avinash Chopde to help print various Indic scripts with personal computers.\nVelthuis.\nThe disadvantage of the above ASCII schemes is case-sensitivity, implying that transliterated names may not be capitalised. This difficulty is avoided with the system developed in 1996 by Frans Velthuis for TeX, loosely based on IAST, in which case is irrelevant.\nALA-LC Romanisation.\nALA-LC romanisation is a transliteration scheme approved by the Library of Congress and the American Library Association, and widely used in North American libraries. Transliteration tables are based on languages, so there is a table for Hindi, one for Sanskrit and Prakrit, etc.\nWX.\nWX is a Roman transliteration scheme for Indian languages, widely used among the natural language processing community in India. It originated at IIT Kanpur for computational processing of Indian languages. The salient features of this transliteration scheme are as follows.\nEncodings.\nISCII.\nISCII is an 8-bit encoding. The lower 128 codepoints are plain ASCII, the upper 128 codepoints are ISCII-specific.\nIt has been designed for representing not only Devan\u0101gar\u012b but also various other Indic scripts as well as a Latin-based script with diacritic marks used for transliteration of the Indic scripts.\nISCII has largely been superseded by Unicode, which has, however, attempted to preserve the ISCII layout for its Indic language blocks.\nUnicode.\nThe Unicode Standard defines four blocks for Devan\u0101gar\u012b: Devanagari (U+0900\u2013U+097F), Devanagari Extended (U+A8E0\u2013U+A8FF), Devanagari Extended-A (U+11B00\u201311B5F), and Vedic Extensions (U+1CD0\u2013U+1CFF).\nDevan\u0101gari keyboard layouts.\nInScript layout.\nInScript is the standard keyboard layout for Devan\u0101gar\u012b as standardized by the Government of India. It is inbuilt in all modern major operating systems. Microsoft Windows supports the InScript layout, which can be used to input unicode Devan\u0101gar\u012b characters. InScript is also available in some touchscreen mobile phones.\nTypewriter.\nThis layout was used on manual typewriters when computers were not available or were uncommon. For backward compatibility some typing tools like Indic IME still provide this layout.\nPhonetic.\nSuch tools work on phonetic transliteration. The user writes in the Latin alphabet and the IME automatically converts it into Devan\u0101gar\u012b. Some popular phonetic typing tools are Akruti, Baraha IME and Google IME.\nThe Mac OS X operating system includes two different keyboard layouts for Devan\u0101gar\u012b: one resembles the INSCRIPT/KDE Linux, while the other is a phonetic layout called \"Devan\u0101gar\u012b QWERTY\".\nAny one of the Unicode fonts input systems is fine for the Indic language Wikipedia and other wikiprojects, including Hindi, Bhojpuri, Marathi, and Nepali Wikipedia. While some people use InScript, the majority uses either Google phonetic transliteration or the input facility provided on Wikipedia. On Indic language wikiprojects, the phonetic facility provided initially was java-based, and was later supported by Narayam extension for phonetic input facility. Currently Indic language Wiki projects are supported by , that offers both phonetic keyboard (Aksharantaran, Marathi: , Hindi: ) and InScript keyboard (Marathi: ).\nThe Ubuntu Linux operating system supports several keyboard layouts for Devan\u0101gar\u012b, including Harvard-Kyoto, WX notation, Bolanagari and phonetic. The 'remington' typing method in Ubuntu IBUS is similar to the Krutidev typing method, popular in Rajasthan. The 'itrans' method is useful for those who know English (and the English keyboard) well but are not familiar with typing in Devan\u0101gar\u012b.\nReferences.\nCensus and catalogues of manuscripts in Devan\u0101gar\u012b.\nThousands of manuscripts of ancient and medieval era Sanskrit texts in Devan\u0101gar\u012b have been discovered since the 19th century. Major catalogues and census include:"}
{"id": "8970", "revid": "6140513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8970", "title": "Diplomatic mission", "text": "A diplomatic mission or foreign mission is a group of people from a state or organization present in another state to represent the sending state or organization officially in the receiving or host state. In practice, the phrase usually denotes an embassy or high commission, which is the main office of a country's diplomatic representatives to another country; it is usually, but not necessarily, based in the receiving state's capital city. Consulates, on the other hand, are smaller diplomatic missions that are normally located in major cities of the receiving state (but can be located in the capital, typically when the sending country has no embassy in the receiving state). As well as being a diplomatic mission to the country in which it is situated, an embassy may also be a nonresident permanent mission to one or more other countries.\nThe term embassy is sometimes used interchangeably with chancery, the physical office or site of a diplomatic mission. Consequently, the terms \"embassy residence\" and \"embassy office\" are used to distinguish between the ambassador's residence and the chancery.\nTerminology.\nA country may have several different types of diplomatic missions in another country.\nThe head of an embassy is known as an ambassador or high commissioner. The term \"embassy\" is commonly used also as a section of a building in which the work of the diplomatic mission is carried out, but strictly speaking, it is the diplomatic delegation itself that is the embassy, while the office space and the diplomatic work done is called the \"chancery\". Therefore, the embassy operates in the chancery.\nThe members of a diplomatic mission can reside within or outside the building that holds the mission's chancery, and their private residences enjoy the same rights as the premises of the mission as regards inviolability and protection.\nAll missions to the United Nations are known simply as \"permanent missions\", while EU member states' missions to the European Union are known as \"permanent representations\", and the head of such a mission is typically both a permanent representative and an ambassador. European Union missions abroad are known as EU delegations. Some countries have more particular nomenclature for their missions and staff: a Vatican mission is headed by a \"nuncio\" (Latin for \"envoy\") and consequently known as an \"apostolic nunciature\". Under the rule of Muammar Gaddafi, Libya's missions used the name \"people's bureau\", headed by a secretary.\nMissions between Commonwealth countries are known as \"high commissions\", and their heads are high commissioners. Generally speaking, ambassadors and high commissioners are regarded as equivalent in status and function, and embassies and high commissions are both deemed to be diplomatic missions.\nIn the past, a diplomatic mission headed by a lower-ranking official (an \"envoy\" or \"minister resident\") was known as a \"legation\". Since the ranks of envoy and minister resident are effectively obsolete, the designation of \"legation\" is no longer among the diplomatic ranks used in diplomacy and international relations.\nA consulate is similar to, but not the same as a diplomatic office, but with focus on dealing with individual persons and businesses, as defined by the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations. A consulate or consulate general is generally a representative of the embassy in locales outside of the capital city. For instance, the Philippines has its embassy to the United States in the latter's capital, Washington, D.C., but also maintains seven consulates-general in major US cities. The person in charge of a consulate or consulate-general is known as a consul or consul-general, respectively. Similar services may also be provided at the embassy (to serve the region of the capital) in what is normally called a consular section.\nIn cases of dispute, it is common for a country to recall its head of mission as a sign of its displeasure. This is less drastic than cutting diplomatic relations completely, and the mission will still continue operating more or less normally, but it will now be headed by a \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\" (usually the deputy chief of mission) who may have limited powers. A \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires ad interim\" also heads the mission during the interim between the end of one chief of mission's term and the beginning of another.\nExtraterritoriality.\nContrary to popular belief, diplomatic missions sometimes do not enjoy full extraterritorial status and are generally not sovereign territory of the represented state. The sending state can give embassies sovereign status but this only happens with a minority of countries. Rather, the premises of an embassy remain under the jurisdiction of the host state while being afforded special privileges (such as immunity from most local laws) by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Diplomats themselves still retain full diplomatic immunity, and (as an adherent to the Vienna Convention) the authorities of the host country may not enter the premises of the mission (which means the head of mission's residence) without permission of the represented country, even to put out a fire. International rules designate an attack on an embassy as an attack on the country it represents. The term 'extraterritoriality' is often applied to diplomatic missions, but normally only in this broader sense.\nAs the host country's authorities may not enter the representing country's embassy without permission, embassies are sometimes used by refugees escaping from either the host country or a third country. For example, North Korean nationals, who would be arrested and deported from China upon discovery, have sought sanctuary at various third-country embassies in China. Once inside the embassy, diplomatic channels can be used to solve the issue and send the refugees to another country. See the list of people who took refuge in a diplomatic mission for a list of some notable cases.\nNotable violations of embassy extraterritoriality include repeated invasions of the British Embassy in Beijing (1967), the hostage crisis at the American embassy in Tehran, Iran (1979\u20131981), and the hostage crisis at the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima, Peru (1996\u20131997).\nRole.\nThe basic role of a diplomatic mission is to represent and safeguard the interests of the home country and its citizens in the host country. According to the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which establishes the framework of diplomacy among sovereign states:The functions of a diplomatic mission consist, \"inter alia\", in representing the sending State in the receiving State; protecting in the receiving State the interests of the sending State and of its nationals, within the limits permitted by international law; negotiating with the Government of the receiving State; ascertaining by all lawful means conditions and developments in the receiving State, and reporting thereon to the Government of the sending State; promoting friendly relations between the sending State and the receiving State, and developing their economic, cultural and scientific relations.\nDiplomatic missions between members of the Commonwealth of Nations are not called embassies, but high commissions, for Commonwealth nations share a special diplomatic relationship. It is generally expected that an embassy of a Commonwealth country in a non-Commonwealth country will do its best to provide diplomatic services to citizens from other Commonwealth countries if the citizen's country does not have an embassy in that country. Canadian and Australian nationals enjoy even greater cooperation between their respective consular services, as outlined in the Canada-Australia Consular Services Sharing Agreement. The same kind of procedure is also followed multilaterally by the member states of the European Union (EU). European citizens in need of consular help in a country without diplomatic or consular representation of their own country may turn to any consular or diplomatic mission of another EU member state (art. 23 TFEU).\nMultiple missions in a city.\nSome cities may host more than one mission from the same country.\nIn Rome, many states maintain separate missions to both Italy and the Holy See. It is not customary for these missions to share premises nor personnel. At present, only the Iraqi and United States embassies to Italy and the Holy See share premises; however, separate ambassadors are appointed, one to each country. In the case of the UN's Food Agencies, the sending country's ambassador to the Italian Republic is usually accredited as permanent representative. The United States maintains a separate mission to the UN agencies, led by its own ambassador, but is located in the compound that houses its embassies to Italy and the Holy See.\nSeveral cities host both embassies/consulates and permanent representatives to international organizations, such as New York City (United Nations), Washington, D.C. (Organization of American States), Jakarta (ASEAN) and Brussels (European Union and North Atlantic Treaty Organization).\nIn some cases, an embassy or consulate is divided between multiple locations in the same city. For example, the Bangladeshi Deputy High Commission in Kolkata, has two locations: one at Park Circus and another, opened later, at Mirza Ghalib Street, to reduce overcrowding.\nNon-diplomatic offices.\nGovernments of states not recognized by the receiving state and of territories that make no claim to be sovereign states may set up offices abroad that do not have official diplomatic status as defined by the Vienna Convention. Examples are the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices that represent the government of the Republic of China; Somaliland's Representative Offices in London, Addis Ababa, Rome, Taipei, and Washington, D.C.; the Hong Kong and Macau economic and trade offices that represent the governments of those two territories. Such offices assume some of the non-diplomatic functions of diplomatic posts, such as promoting trade interests and providing assistance to its citizens and residents. They are nevertheless not diplomatic missions, their personnel are not diplomats and do not have diplomatic visas, although there may be legislation providing for personal immunities and tax privileges, as in the case of the Hong Kong offices in London and Toronto or the Macau office in Lisbon, for example."}
