{"id": "10193", "revid": "9384868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10193", "title": "Enter the Dragon", "text": "Enter the Dragon () is a 1973 martial arts film directed by Robert Clouse and written by Michael Allin. The film stars Bruce Lee, John Saxon, Ahna Capri, Bob Wall, Shih Kien and Jim Kelly. \"Enter the Dragon\" was Bruce Lee's final completed film appearance before his death on 20 July 1973 at the age of 32. An American-Hong Kong co-production, the film was premiered in Los Angeles on 19 August 1973, one month after Lee's death.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was estimated to have grossed over worldwide (equivalent to an estimated adjusted for inflation ) against a budget of $850,000. It is the most successful martial arts film ever and is widely regarded as one of the greatest martial arts films of all time. In 2004, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Among the first films to combine martial arts action with spy film elements and the emerging blaxploitation genre, its success led to a series of similar productions combining the martial arts and blaxploitation genres. The film's themes have generated scholarly debate about the changes taking place within post-colonial Asian societies following the end of World War II.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" is also considered one of the most influential action films of all time, with its success contributing to mainstream worldwide interest in the martial arts as well as inspiring numerous fictional works, including action films, television shows, action games, comic books, manga and anime.\nPlot.\nLee, a martial artist and instructor from Shaolin temple, Hong Kong, is approached by British intelligence agent Braithwaite, who asks for his help in an undercover mission to investigate suspected crime lord Han, who was one of the students in Shaolin temple. Lee is persuaded to attend a high-profile martial arts tournament on Han's private island to gather evidence that will prove Han's involvement and suspicions to in drug trafficking and prostitution.\nSince Han's island is only partly in their jurisdiction, they are unable to conduct any formal investigations. Han does not allow firearms on the island to prevent assassination attempts and raids from international authorities. Han runs a martial arts school as cover for his illegal operations and holds the tournament to recruit martial artists to expand his illegal business. Lee agrees to help Braithwaite, believing his efforts will also redeem the honor of the Shaolin temple that was tarnished by Han. Shortly before his departure, Lee also learns that Han's bodyguard O'Hara is responsible for the death of his sister Su Lin.\nLee arrives on Han's island and receives a warm reception. Joining him are other competitors, including Roper, an American playboy and gambler, who is indebted and on the run from the mob, and Williams, an African-American activist, who is on the run after defending himself against two racist police officers in Los Angeles. Roper and Williams are former Karate brothers and fellow Vietnam veterans, who also have a betting scam going: one will underperform until the other can get a bet on the outcome at good odds. Roper and Williams win their first fights easily.\nThe rules of Han's tournament are simple: competitors compete in one-on-one matches against each other, the opponent, who gets knocked to the ground loses each round. Any weapons are strictly prohibited in the fighting arena. At the end of the first day, the competitors are all offered girls of their choice by Han's assistant Tania. Williams chooses several women, while Roper cunningly chooses Tania as a mutual attraction grows between them. Lee chooses a girl, which he saw in Han's entourage, who is Mei Ling, a covert agent whom Braithwaite had placed on the island to gather intelligence. However, Mei Ling has been unable to escape Han's strict observation never to leave their rooms.\nThat night, Lee begins to stealthily search and infiltrate the island for evidence and finds a secret entrance to an underground compound base where drugs are being manufactured and tested on unwitting prisoners. Lee runs into Han's guards, but manages to take them down and flee before they can identify him. Lee is seen by Williams, who is outside for some fresh air and practice, despite strict rules against being outside after night. The next morning, Han warns the competitors about wandering out of their rooms at night. Han punishes his guards for their inability to fulfill their duties by leaving them to be killed by Bolo, Han's giant enforcer and chief bodyguard. After the execution, the competition resumes as Lee is called to his first match, which is against O'Hara.\nDuring the fight, Han warns O'Hara to step down as Lee keeps outclassing him in a humiliating fashion. Lee kills O'Hara after he tries to attack him with a pair of half-shattered glass bottles, thus avenging Su Lin's death. An embarrassed Han abruptly ends the day's competition after stating that O'Hara's treachery has disgraced them. Later, Han summons Williams in his office and accuses him of attacking the guards the previous night. Williams denies this and decides to leave the island. Han brutally beats Williams to death with his iron prosthetic left hand.\nHan takes Roper on a tour of his underground base and invites him to be his representative for his illegal operations in US. Han also implicitly threatens to imprison Roper with other martial artists who joined Han's tournaments in the past. Roper reluctantly accepts after Han throws the mutilated corpse of Williams over a pit of acid, hinting that Roper will face the same fate if he refuses to cooperate. The same night, Lee infiltrates the underground base again to gather sufficient evidence to warrant Han's arrest and manages to send a message to Braithwaite. After a prolonged battle with Han's guards, Lee is eventually lured into a door trap to get imprisoned and captured.\nThe next morning, Han commands Roper to fight Lee, but Roper refuses and Han has him fight Bolo. Roper manages to overpower and beat Bolo after a gruelling battle. Han orders all his men to kill Lee and Roper. Despite facing insurmountable odds, the island's prisoners, released by Mei Ling, and the other invited martial artists aid Lee and Roper in defeating Han's guards. Amid the chaos, Han attempts to fight his way out to escape, only to have Lee pursue and corner him in his museum, where Han retrieves a bladed-talon replacement for his hand to prepare for a brutal fight. Han retreats into a room full of mirrors, which proves disorientating for Lee until Lee keeps a strategy in mind and smashes all the mirrors to spoil Han's illusions. Lee kicks Han, who gets impaled on his own spear that was halfway harpooned through a wall.\nLee returns to Roper and they exchange a weary thumbs-up as the military finally arrives to take control of the island.\nProduction.\nDue to the success of his earlier films, Warner Bros. began helping Bruce Lee with the film in 1972. They brought in producers Fred Weintraub and Paul Heller. The film was produced on a tight production budget of $850,000. Fighting sequences were staged by Bruce Lee.\nWriting.\nThe screenplay title was originally named \"Blood and Steel\". The story features heroic protagonists who are Asian, white, and Black, as the producers wanted a film that would appeal to the widest possible international audience. The scene in which Lee states that his style is \"Fighting Without Fighting\" is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden.\nCasting.\nRod Taylor was first choice for playing the down-on-his-luck martial artist Roper. Director Robert Clouse had already worked with Taylor in the 1970 film \"Darker than Amber\". However, Taylor was dropped after Bruce Lee deemed him to be too tall for the role. John Saxon, who was a black belt in Judo and Shotokan Karate (he studied under grandmaster Hidetaka Nishiyama for three years), became the preferred choice. During contractual negotiations, Saxon's agent told the film's producers that if they wanted him they would have to change the plot so that the character of Williams is killed instead of Roper. They agreed and the script was changed. In a six decade career, the character would become one of Saxon's best known roles.\nRockne Tarkington was originally cast in the role of Williams. However, he unexpectedly dropped out days before the production was about to begin in Hong Kong. Producer Fred Weintraub knew that karate world champion Jim Kelly had a training dojo in Crenshaw, Los Angeles, so he hastily arranged a meeting. Weintraub was immediately impressed, and Kelly was cast in the film. The success of Kelly's appearance launched his career as a star: after \"Enter the Dragon\", he signed a three-film deal with Warner Bros and went on to make several martial arts-themed blaxploitation films in the 1970s.\nJackie Chan has uncredited roles as various guards during the fights with Lee. However, Yuen Wah was Lee's main stunt double for the film, responsible for the gymnastics stunts such as the cartwheels and jumping back flip in the opening fight.\nSammo Hung also has an uncredited role in the opening fight scene against Lee at the start of the film.\nA rumour surrounding the making of \"Enter The Dragon\" claims that actor Bob Wall did not like Bruce Lee and that their fight scenes were not choreographed. However, Wall has denied this, stating he and Lee were good friends.\nFilming.\nThe film was shot on location in Hong Kong. In keeping with local film-making practices, scenes were filmed without sound: dialogue and sound effects were added or dubbed in during post-production. Bruce Lee, after he had been goaded or challenged, fought several real fights with the film's extras and some set intruders during filming. The scenes on Han's Island were filmed at a residence known as Palm Villa near the coastal town of Stanley. The villa is now demolished and the area heavily redeveloped around Tai Tam Bay where the martial artists were filmed coming ashore.\nSoundtrack.\nArgentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film's musical score. While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores, he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film's soundtrack. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies, earning a gold record.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was heavily advertised in the United States before its release. The budget for advertising was over . It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before, and was extremely comprehensive. To advertise the film, the studio offered free Karate classes, produced thousands of illustrated flip books, comic books, posters, photographs, and organised dozens of news releases, interviews, and public appearances for the stars. \"Esquire\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"Time\", and \"Newsweek\" all wrote stories on the film.\nBox office.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was one of the most successful films of 1973. Upon release in Hong Kong, the film grossed , which was huge business for the time, but less than Lee's previous 1972 films \"Fist of Fury\" and \"The Way of the Dragon\".\nIn North America, the film was receiving offers of from American distributors by April 1973 for the distribution rights, several months before release. Upon its limited release in August 1973 in four theatres in New York, the film entered the weekly box office charts at number 17 with a gross of in 3 days. Upon its expansion the following week, it topped the charts for two weeks. Over the next four weeks, it remained in the top 10 while competing with other kung fu films, including \"Lady Kung Fu\", \"The Shanghai Killers\" and \"Deadly China Doll\" which held the top spot for one week each.\nIn October, \"Enter the Dragon\" regained the top spot in its eighth week. It sold tickets and grossed from its initial US release, making it the year's fourth highest-grossing film in the market. It was repeatedly re-released throughout the 1970s, with each re-release entering the top five in the box office charts. The film's US gross had increased to by 1982, and more than (equivalent to $ million adjusted for inflation) by 1998.\nIn Europe, the film initially monopolised several London West End cinemas for five weeks, before becoming a sellout success across Britain and the rest of Europe. In England, it grossed over $2.5 million. In Spain, it was the seventh top-grossing film of 1973, selling 2,462,489 tickets. In France, it was one of the top five highest-grossing films of 1974 (above two other Lee films, \"The Way of the Dragon\" at and \"Fist of Fury\" at ), with 4,444,582 ticket sales. In Germany, it was one of the top 10 highest-grossing films of 1974, with ticket sales. In Greece, the film earned in its first year of release.\nIn Japan, it was the second highest-grossing film of 1974 with distributor rental earnings of . It was the highest-grossing film of all-time in the Philippines. In South Korea, the film sold 229,681 tickets in the capital city of Seoul. In India, the movie was released in 1975 and opened to full houses; in one Bombay theatre, New Excelsior, it had a packed 32-week run. The film was also a success in Iran, where there was a theatre which played it daily up until the 1979 Iranian Revolution.\nAgainst a tight budget of $850,000, the film grossed upon its initial 1973 worldwide release, making it one of the world's highest-grossing films of all time up until then. The film went on to have multiple re-releases around the world over the next several decades, significantly increasing its worldwide gross. The film went on to gross over internationally by 1981, making it the highest-grossing martial arts film of all time. It was reportedly still among the all-time highest-grossing films in 1990.\nIn 1998, it had grossed more than worldwide. , it has grossed an estimated total of over worldwide, having earned more than 400 times its original budget. The film's cost-to-profit ratio makes it one of the most commercially successful and profitable films of all time. Adjusted for inflation, the film's worldwide gross is estimated to be the equivalent of over .\nCritical reception.\nUpon release, the film was initially received mixed reviews from several critics, including a favourable review from \"Variety\" magazine. The film eventually went on to be well-received by most critics, and it is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1973. Critics have referred to \"Enter the Dragon\" as \"a low-rent James Bond thriller\", a \"remake of \"Dr. No\"\" with elements of Fu Manchu. J.C. Ma\u00e7ek III of PopMatters wrote, \"Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here, Bruce Lee, whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer. While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist, Lee proves to be a master of both fields.\"\nMany acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film. \"Variety\" described it as \"rich in the atmosphere\", the music score as \"a strong asset\" and the photography as \"interesting\". \"The New York Times\" gave the film a rave review: \"The picture is expertly made and well-meshed; it moves like lightning and brims with color. It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand-hacker (not a gun in it) you will ever see anywhere.\"\nThe film holds an 88% approval rating on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on 78 reviews, with an average rating of 7.80/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Badass to the max, \"Enter the Dragon\" is the ultimate kung-fu movie and fitting (if untimely) Bruce Lee swan song.\" On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 83 out of 100 based on reviews from 16 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In 2004, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was selected as the best martial arts film of all time, in a 2013 poll of \"The Guardian\" and \"The Observer\" critics. The film also ranks No. 474 on \"Empire\" magazine's 2008 list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\nHome video.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has remained one of the most popular martial arts films since its premiere and has been released numerous times worldwide on multiple home video formats. For almost three decades, many theatrical and home video versions were censored for violence, especially in the West. In the UK alone, at least four different versions have been released. Since 2001, the film has been released uncut in the UK and most other territories. Most DVDs and Blu-rays come with a wide range of extra features in the form of documentaries, interviews, etc. In 2013, a second, remastered HD transfer appeared on Blu-ray, billed as the \"40th Anniversary Edition\".\nIn 2020, new 2K digital restorations of the theatrical cut and special edition were included as part of the \"Bruce Lee: His Greatest Hits\" box set by The Criterion Collection (under licensed from Warner Bros. Home Entertainment through the physical home media joint venture in US and Canada named Studio Distribution Services, LLC. and Fortune Star Media Limited), which featured all of Lee's films, as well as \"Game of Death II\".\nLegacy.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", the satirical publication \"The Onion\", the Japanese game-show \"Takeshi's Castle\", and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film \"The Kentucky Fried Movie\" (in its lengthy \"A Fistful of Yen\" sequence, basically a comedic, note for note remake of \"Dragon\") and also in the film \"Balls of Fury\". It was also parodied on television in \"That '70s Show\" during the episode \"Jackie Moves On\" with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role. Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in \"The Last Dragon\". Lee's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring \"Almost Live!\" sketch \"Mind Your Manners with\" \"Billy Quan\". Ram Gopal Varma directed the martial-arts film \"\" after being heavily inspired by the film.\nIn August 2007, the now-defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir-style thriller entitled \"Awaken the Dragon\" with Korean singer-actor Rain. It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee would work on the remake. In March 2015, Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake. In July 2018, David Leitch was in early talks to direct the remake. As of 2024, there are no further updates on this project.\nCultural impact.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has been cited as one of the most influential action films of all time. Sascha Matuszak of \"Vice\" called it the most influential kung fu film and said it \"is referenced in all manner of media, the plot line and characters continue to influence storytellers today and the impact was particularly felt in the revolutionizing way the film portrayed African-Americans, Asians and traditional martial arts.\" Joel Stice of \"Uproxx\" called it \"arguably the most influential kung fu movie of all time.\" Kuan-Hsing Chen and Beng Huat Chua cited its fight scenes as influential as well as its \"hybrid form and its mode of address\" which pitches \"an elemental story of good against evil in such a spectacle-saturated way.\" Quentin Tarantino cited \"Enter the Dragon\" as a formative influence on his career.\nAccording to Scott Mendelson of \"Forbes\", \"Enter the Dragon\" contains spy film elements similar to the \"James Bond\" film series. \"Enter the Dragon\" was the most successful action-spy film to not be part of the \"James Bond\" film series; \"Enter the Dragon\" had an initial global box office comparable to the \"James Bond\" films of that era, and a lifetime gross surpassing every \"James Bond\" film up until \"GoldenEye\". Mendelson argues that, had Bruce Lee lived after \"Enter the Dragon\" was released, the film had the potential to launch an action-spy film franchise starring Bruce Lee that could have rivalled the success of the \"James Bond\" franchise.\nThe film had an impact on MMA. In the opening fight sequence, where Lee fights Sammo Hung, Lee demonstrated elements of what would later become known as MMA. Both fighters wore what would later become common MMA clothing items, including kempo gloves and small shorts, and the fight ends with Lee utilising an armbar (then used in judo and jiu-jitsu) to submit Hung. According to UFC Hall of Fame fighter Urijah Faber, \"that was the moment\" that MMA was born.\nThe \"Dragon Ball\" manga and anime franchise, debuted in 1984, was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", which \"Dragon Ball\" creator Akira Toriyama was a fan of. The title \"Dragon Ball\" was also inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\" and the piercing eyes of Goku's Super Saiyan transformation was based on Bruce Lee's paralysing glare.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" inspired early beat 'em up brawler games. It was cited by game designer Yoshihisa Kishimoto as a key inspiration behind Techn\u014ds Japan's brawler \"Nekketsu K\u014dha Kunio-kun\", released as \"Renegade\" in the West. Its spiritual successor \"Double Dragon\" also drew inspiration from \"Enter the Dragon\", with the game's title being a homage to the film. \"Double Dragon\" also features two enemies named Roper and Williams, a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from \"Enter the Dragon\". The sequel \"\" includes opponents named Bolo and Oharra.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was the foundation for fighting games. The film's tournament plot inspired numerous fighting games, such as the \"Tekken\" series, for example. The \"Street Fighter\" video game franchise, debuted in 1987, was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", with the gameplay centered around an international fighting tournament, and each character having a unique combination of ethnicity, nationality and fighting style. \"Street Fighter\" went on to set the template for all fighting games that followed. The little-known 1985 Nintendo arcade game \"Arm Wrestling\" contains voice leftovers from the film, as well as their original counterparts. The popular fighting game \"Mortal Kombat\" borrows multiple plot elements from \"Enter the Dragon\" as does its movie adaptation."}
{"id": "10201", "revid": "14984434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10201", "title": "Exothermic process", "text": "In thermodynamics, an exothermic process () is a thermodynamic process or reaction that releases energy from the system to its surroundings, usually in the form of heat, but also in a form of light (e.g. a spark, flame, or flash), electricity (e.g. a battery), or sound (e.g. explosion heard when burning hydrogen). The term \"exothermic\" was first coined by 19th-century French chemist Marcellin Berthelot.\nThe opposite of an exothermic process is an endothermic process, one that absorbs energy, usually in the form of heat. The concept is frequently applied in the physical sciences to chemical reactions where chemical bond energy is converted to thermal energy (heat).\nTwo types of chemical reactions.\nExothermic and endothermic describe two types of chemical reactions or systems found in nature, as follows:\nExothermic.\nAn exothermic reaction occurs when heat is released to the surroundings. According to the IUPAC, an exothermic reaction is \"a reaction for which the overall standard enthalpy change \u0394\"H\"\u26ac is negative\". Some examples of exothermic process are fuel combustion, condensation and nuclear fission, which is used in nuclear power plants to release large amounts of energy.\nEndothermic.\nIn an endothermic reaction or system, energy is taken from the surroundings in the course of the reaction, usually driven by a favorable entropy increase in the system. An example of an endothermic reaction is a first aid cold pack, in which the reaction of two chemicals, or dissolving of one in another, requires calories from the surroundings, and the reaction cools the pouch and surroundings by absorbing heat from them.\nPhotosynthesis, the process that allows plants to convert carbon dioxide and water to sugar and oxygen, is an endothermic process: plants absorb radiant energy from the sun and use it in an endothermic, otherwise non-spontaneous process. The chemical energy stored can be freed by the inverse (spontaneous) process: combustion of sugar, which gives carbon dioxide, water and heat (radiant energy).\nEnergy release.\nExothermic refers to a transformation in which a closed system releases energy (heat) to the surroundings, expressed by\nWhen the transformation occurs at constant pressure and without exchange of electrical energy, heat is equal to the enthalpy change, i.e.\nwhile at constant volume, according to the first law of thermodynamics it equals internal energy () change, i.e.\nIn an adiabatic system (i.e. a system that does not exchange heat with the surroundings), an otherwise exothermic process results in an increase in temperature of the system.\nIn exothermic chemical reactions, the heat that is released by the reaction takes the form of electromagnetic energy or kinetic energy of molecules. The transition of electrons from one quantum energy level to another causes light to be released. This light is equivalent in energy to some of the stabilization energy of the energy for the chemical reaction, i.e. the bond energy. This light that is released can be absorbed by other molecules in solution to give rise to molecular translations and rotations, which gives rise to the classical understanding of heat. In an exothermic reaction, the activation energy (energy needed to start the reaction) is less than the energy that is subsequently released, so there is a net release of energy.\nExamples.\nSome examples of exothermic processes are:\nImplications for chemical reactions.\nChemical exothermic reactions are generally more spontaneous than their counterparts, endothermic reactions.\nIn a thermochemical reaction that is exothermic, the heat may be listed among the products of the reaction."}
{"id": "10204", "revid": "917223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10204", "title": "Elihu Yale", "text": "Elihu Yale (5 April 1649 \u2013 8 July 1721) was a British-American colonial administrator.\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, Yale lived in America only as a child, and spent the rest of his life in England, Wales, and India.\nHe became a clerk for the East India Company at Fort St. George, later Madras, and eventually rose to the Presidency of the settlement. He was later removed from the post under charges of corruption for self-dealing, and required to pay a fine.\nIn 1699, he returned to Britain with a considerable fortune, around \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in ), mostly made by selling diamonds, and spent his time and wealth in philanthropy and art collecting.\nHe was the primary benefactor of Yale College, now Yale University, which was named in his honor, following a donation of books, portraits, and textiles at the request of Rev. Cotton Mather, a Harvard University graduate. He had no male heir, and no descendants of his have survived past his grandchildren.\nIn the 21st century, Yale's connections to slavery in India began to be more closely explored, a process assisted by the digitalisation and online publication of the East India Company's records. In 2020, Peter Salovey, president of Yale University, launched the Yale and Slavery Research Project to explore the university's historical links with slavery and colonialism, including Elihu Yale's role.\nEarly life.\nYale was born in Boston, Massachusetts, to David Yale (1613\u20131690), a wealthy Boston merchant and attorney to Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick, and Ursula Knight; he was the grandson of Ann Yale (born Lloyd), daughter of Bishop George Lloyd. After the death of her first husband, Thomas Yale Sr. (1587\u20131619), son of Chancellor David Yale, Anne Yale married Theophilus Eaton, ambassador to Denmark. Eaton was the co-founder of two of the Thirteen British Colonies, which are represented on the Flag of the United States, mainly through the Massachusetts Bay Colony and the New Haven Colony, and was the brother of Nathaniel Eaton, Harvard's first Headmaster and President designate, at the founding of Harvard in 1636.\nHis son, Samuel Eaton, the uncle of Elihu, was also involved in the foundation of Harvard, being one of the seven founder members of the Harvard Corporation, the governing board and charter that incorporated the college in 1650. It was they, along with Elihu's uncle and aunt, Thomas Yale Jr., and Anne Yale Jr., who brought the reconstituted Eaton/Yale family to America, while other members of the family stayed in England. Their estates in Wales were Plas-yn-Yale and Plas Grono, and Elihu's brother was London merchant Thomas Yale, later ambassador to the King of Siam for the East India Company.\nElihu's father, David Yale, would later come from London to New Haven Colony with his stepfather, Theophilus Eaton, in 1639. He moved to Boston in 1641 and met and married Elihu Yale's mother, Ursula, in 1643. In 1652, at the age of three, Elihu Yale left New England, as David Yale took his family back to London. While documentation of this period is sparse, a letter suggests that David Yale remained a successful merchant and settled his family in the Hanseatic merchant district \"Steelyard Court\". In 1662, at the age of thirteen, Elihu Yale entered the private school of William Dugard, but Dugard died a few months after Elihu Yale enrolled. Yale likely lived through the Great Plague of London and the Great Fire of London.\nEast India Company.\nIn 1670, Yale joined the British East India Company, starting as a clerk at East India House in London. Among the board was the Earl of Berkeley, Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Vice-Admiral John Robinson, and Chairman Sir Andrew Riccard. Yale's uncle, Connecticut Gov. Edward Hopkins, was also one of the shareholders. It is possible that Yale had business training in his father's merchant counting house beforehand. He then sailed to India in December 1671 on one of the East Indiamen, on a voyage that would take six months, with the eminent dangers of pirates, storms and diseases.\nHe landed in Madras on 23 June 1672, at Fort St. George, where Portuguese, English and Hindu lived. He then learned the rules of Gov. William Langhorne, some of which being the interdiction to start a duel, to desert the fort, or to blaspheme, and met with Father Ephrem de Nevers. At the time, the East India Company was already exporting to Europe spices, pepper, precious stones, Chinese porcelains, Japanese screens, and cotton cloth. In 1674, Yale was sent to negotiate the potential establishment of a new factory, and by February, was allowed to deal in private trade, which included pearls, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, neckcloths, cloves and nutmegs. By 1677, Gov. Langhorne was accused of corruption by competitors within the Company. The directors were always suspicious, and with huge fortune being made six months away from London, they easily mistrust their employees.\nHe was then replaced by Gov. Streynsham Master, the son-in-law of Richard Legh of Lyme Hall. In April 1678, Yale was promoted to the rank of Factor, doubling his salary. In June arrived the Welsh chaplain John Evans, future Bishop of Meath, who would become a lifelong friend. In 1679, Yale's duties now involved receiving and invoicing textiles worth about 100,000 pagodas, consisting of neckcloths, chintz, and longcloth of various grades. With the death of Joseph Hynmers, second-in-command, Yale was made Assistant to the Warehouse Keeper, and started courting his widow. They married at St. Mary's Church, the oldest Anglican Church in India, on 4 November 1680, with Sir Henry Oxenden, Governor of Bombay, as brideman. With his wife's capital, Yale learned the trade and became a specialist in diamonds and precious stones.\nMadras Council.\nIn January 1681, he was promoted to the office of Provisional Customer. In the same year, Gov. Streynsham Master was replaced by William Gyfford, and Yale was sent as a diplomat to meet the VOC Governor of Pulicat. Despite Master's loyalty, the directors once again believed the charges of bad management, fueled by enemies, who brought complaints after complaints to the board in London. According to Madras historian Arthur Pringle, the official records are full of invented circumstantial charges of injustice and fraud. Yale was then promoted to the office of Mintmaster, and was given a seat on the council, occupying the fifth position on a board of six, as the directors were \"pleased with Elihu's behavior and ability\". In 1682, he was sent to Porto Novo on the Coromandel Coast to find investment opportunities for the sale of longcloth. During his mission, a great storm struck the coast, and 14,000 persons died. He made assessments of harbor facilities and fortifications, and was welcomed with coconuts as gifts of diplomacy.\nYale then negotiated with Sikandar Shah, the Sultan of Bijapur, and obtained permission for the gold trade in his territory. In 1683, as a member of Gov. Gyfford's council, he became a cofounder of the Madras Bank, the oldest in India. On 12 February, the second-in-command was dismissed for his \"language that was too independent and not sufficiently subservient in his letters\". The Councilmen rose in rank, with Yale becoming Warehouse Keeper. When Gov. Gyfford was sent to inspect factories in the Bay of Bengal, Yale became acting governor for a few months, and procured three elephants from King Narai of Siam, to be sent to the Sultan of Gingee as war elephants. In peace time, they were used with a Howdah as status symbols, while at war, they were the prototypes of the modern tank. Yale then obtained a house and garden at St. Thomas Mount for the sickly and their convalesce. Thereafter, he received 3 princes from Sumatra, Indonesia, bringing a letter from Sultanah Inayat Syah, Queen of Acheen, resulting in a trade agreement. About this time, King Charles II of England died, with James II ascending to the throne. The change was well welcomed by the company, as the chairman, Sir Josiah Child, had spent a fortune on James's ascension. Yale then organized the official ceremony at Fort St. George, with Gov. Gyfford resuming his office, and received the ambassadors of Persia and Siam.\nPresidency of Madras.\nIn July 1687, Yale was appointed President of Madras and Governor of Fort St. George, replacing William Gyfford. A difficulty of the office was to deal with the native rulers through firmans, as Madras was surrounded by the Mughal Empire, with rulers always asking for bribes. When their demands were refused, they would seized the food supplies, half starving the company's servants with a blockade. In terms of size, Madras consisted of about 300,000 people, or around 6% of England's population at the time. Yale had previously been popular with both the Europeans and native Indians, and reverted to the former practice of living and dining in the Fort House with merchants, writers and factors.\nWith Yale's nomination, Sir Josiah Child hoped that Madras would be less critical of London. As the East India Company's headquarters were thousands of miles away, the board implemented policies that were not well adapted to the conditions in Madras. Letters took 6 months to be received, sometimes over a year, making communications difficult. One of these policies was the creation of a new tax upon Madras inhabitants that Yale had now to carry out, which caused a local rebellion. During this time, they accused him of not cutting expenses down, such as keeping a Bengal tiger at the fort, among other things. Those who were taxed the most were the owners of the 128 houses within the fort, which half belonged to the Portuguese merchants. The company's chairman sent a letter to Yale, writing that \"your elaborate arguments to persuade us not to impose a moderate duty upon the Portuguese and other inhabitants of our city of Madras, whom we do protect and exceedingly encourage in their several vocations, have no weight at all with us\".\nYale had received similar letters during the Great Famine under Gov. Gyfford, where they had refused to collect taxes, with the directors replying that \"you are still fencing against our creating revenue at the Fort, with slight, insignificant arguments, wherein the worst is that you should have so mean an opinion of us, as to think such sophistical reasons will make any impressions on our judgment\". The directors also gave the order to close the Garden House, which was used for those who were resting outside the city, having a place to eat. Yale didn't follow this order and kept Gov. Gyfford there as his health was fragile. During August 1687, Yale is then recorded corresponding with the Ambassador of Shah Suleiman of Persia, regarding his arrival with a Koran to try to convert the Siamese king to Mohammedanism, which the latter refused. Being bankrupt after his failed mission, Yale loaned him money, which was never repaid.\nAnglo-Siamese War.\nFor many years, merchants of Madras and Siam were trading partners in the Andaman Sea, trading in rhinoceros horns, elephant tusks, copper and other commodities. Yale's brother, Thomas Yale, became ambassador to King Narai of Siam, and during this time, Elihu would entertain at his house the French ambassador and musketeer, Count Claude de Forbin, drinking to the health of the royal families of England and France. But around August 1687, disputes regarding Siam's strategic importance emerged among European powers, and Gov. Yale was charged by King Narai's agents regarding the sale of jewels, which they estimated having overpaid by 25%. The man behind the charges was a Greek named Constantine Phaulkon, who wanted to lower English's influence over King Narai, and get him closer to Louis XIV of France through Chevalier de Chaumont.\nThis trading dispute started the Anglo-Siamese War, with Yale acting on behalf of King James II of England, which resulted in number of casualties for the company, as cities were now being robbed by Siameses. Some English merchants at Siam sided with the enemy, and became involved in acts of piracy, which had Yale send warships in retaliation against Englishmen who changed sides. No peace treaty was ever signed, but the war against the Company will eventually stop around 1688. In London, the directors investigated the accusations of the Siameses on Yale and cleared his name, declaring that \"you can not be ignorant that Phaulkon himself in the King of Siam's name, began the war... upon a pretense that Mr. Yale injured the King of Siam in a bargain\". Phaulkon's alliance with France would later cost him his life, being assassinated by the Siameses nobles during the Siamese revolution of 1688. On 11 August 1687, Yale approved the recall of several Englishmen to Madras detained by Prussian Wolf Henrik von Kalnein, governor of Tranquebar under the Danish East India Co..\nSiege of Golconda.\nAbout a month later, on 22 September 1687, Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb conquered the nearby Kingdom of Golconda, defeating Sultan Abul Shah at the Siege of Golconda, ending the Qutb Shahi dynasty. Aurangzeb was a member of Tamerlane's dynasty, and his parents, founders of the Taj Mahal, were direct descendants of Genghis Khan. As Yale expected the Mughal's revenge for the Anglo-Mughal War started by the directors in Bengal, he prepared for war and raised a Portuguese militia, but as the Mughal had thousands of war elephants, he and the council had no choice but to pay him 50,000 pagodas to keep the Company's activities in Madras. Gov. Yale was now under the overlordship of the Islamic Mughal Empire. He sent diplomats to pay Emperor Aurangzeb, one of which was his friend Daniel Chardin, diamond merchant and brother of Sir Jean Chardin, Yale's partner in England. He also sent letters to Mughal general Mahabat Khan, and complied with the ceremonies of prince Muhammad Bakhs and prime minister Asad Khan. The situation was delicate as the Dutch and Louis XIV at Versailles were also trying to get the Mughal in their favor, and the directors would hold Yale responsible if anything went wrong, including failing to keep the Golconda diamonds trade from the Kollur Mines.\nAt the time, India was the world producer of diamonds, with Golconda producing 60% of its total output. Most of Yale's private fortune will be obtained from this trade with the Moghul, who received royalties, while Yale used his expertise and capital to hold on these stones until they were faceted and polished in Amsterdam, on their way to London. The process took on average 3 years before getting a return on investment, and Yale had 50 trained men to protect the goods from robbers during transportation. By 1688, Sir Josiah Child, the Company's largest shareholder, retired with a fortune of about \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in ), and married his daughter to the son of the 1st Duke of Beaufort at Badminton House. During the same year, Yale welcomed the Armenian merchants to establish themselves at Fort St. George following their persecution in Europe. In July, he sent diplomats for the arrival of Dutch Gov. Johannes Camphuys, and on 29 September 1688, he inaugurated the Madras Corporation, where Nathaniel Higginson was elected its first mayor, with Amsterdam merchant Jacques de Paiva and others, elected on its board. Initially founded to restrain Yale's powers as governor, it became the oldest corporation in India, and the second oldest municipal body in the world after the City of London. Paiva's widow, Hieronima, would become Yale's mistress and bear him a son named Charles.\nAnglo-Dutch relations.\nFollowing the English Revolution of 1688, William of Orange, a Dutch, ascended to the throne of England, replacing James II, which was a fatal blow for Sir Josiah Child who had bet on the wrong side. The past wars between the Dutch and English merchants in Madras were now settled, and both started to form alliances through marriage. From then on, the directors' letters to Yale changed in tone. Sir Langhorne started complimenting him on his private trade in diamonds, as they now saw it as a way to expand the company to new markets without having to bear the risks themselves. Yale tried to build routes at Mindanao, the second largest island of the Philippines, getting from them Clove and Ironwood. He was then put on a secret committee with Sir John Child, governor of Bombay, and Nathaniel Higginson, mayor of Madras, to plan the establishment of a new fort near the South Seas, to engage in trade with China. On 17 March 1689, Yale received the arrival of Commander Job Charnock, with his staff and four companies of soldiers. He arrived from a failed mission that consisted of blocking and seizing the ships of Mughal Aurangzeb, who had attacked the company's ships in the Bay of Bengal, and taken control of Chittagong during the Anglo-Mughal War.\nCharnock stayed in Madras for a few months under Gov. Yale's protection, which caused dissensions in the council for fear of the Mughal's revenge. The Council eventually outvoted Yale, and Charnock was forced to leave, where he would found the city of Calcutta. In July, 1690, news of the war between William of Orange and Louis XIV of France arrived in Madras, and Yale prepared Fort St. George once more for war. On 15 August, the French sent seven warships to attack the Madras roads, along with one fireship. The fort was protected by a garrison of 700 soldiers under Gov. Yale, with the help of a Dutch fleet. Combat lasted a few hours, and the French were repulsed by the fort's guns, after which they didn't return. Yale then negotiated the release of Englishmen, dealing with Moghul general Shaista Khan, along with Daniel Chardin, who was sent to the King of Kandy. In 1690, Yale's brother negotiated with Rama Raja, the Chhatrapati of the Marathas, for the acquisition of a fort at Devanampatnam on behalf of the company, which was sold for 40,000 pagodas. They renamed the place Fort St. David in honor of a Welsh saint. On 28 December, they supplied ammunition to general Zulfiqar Khan, son of Grand Vizier Asad Khan, from which they obtained the firman for the territories of Vizagapatam, Gingee and Golconda. During this year, Yale was also instrumental to the development of the Government General Hospital for Madras soldiers.\nSlavery.\nRecords of the period indicate a flourishing slave trade in Madras. After English merchants began to kidnap young children and deport them to distant parts of the world, the administration of Fort St George stepped in and introduced laws to curb the practice. On 2 February 1688, Elihu Yale decreed that slaves should be examined by the judges of the choultry before being transported. Transportation of young children, in particular, was made unlawful. During his tenure as President of Madras, Yale ordered a minimum of 10 slaves sent on every ship going to Europe, and on a month in 1687, Fort St George exported at least 665 slaves. In his judicial capacity he also on several occasions sentenced so-called \"black criminals\" to whipping and enslavement. Evidence as to whether Yale personally owned slaves, or participated directly in their sale is inconclusive; the historian Steven Pincus suggests that he did not, while, in a 2016 article in the \"Journal of Global History\", Elizabeth Kuebler-Wolf stated that he enslaved one or two people as household servants, citing explorer Hiram Bingham's 1939 book \"Elihu Yale\". Historian Joseph Yannielli writes that although Yale \"probably did not own any of these people \u2013 the majority were held as the property of the East India Company \u2013 he certainly profited both directly and indirectly from their sale\", while the Sterling Professor David W. Blight suggests that Yale's personal ownership is \"not a key question [...] some portion of [his] considerable fortune derived from his myriad entanglements with the purchase and sale of human beings\" through his \"key leadership role in the business of human trafficking\".\nThe Groom.\nGov. Yale's story of having hanged his groom for taking his favorite horse on a day is a false story that was propagated by privateer Alexander Hamilton. The events were as follow: In August 1689, two soldiers of Fort St. George stole guns, horses, and other items, and left Madras as fugitives with a group of five confederates to join the enemy's army during war time. One was named George Isaac, and the other was named Charles Cross, the latter being not only a soldier but also one of the grooms of the fort's stables. They were captured by the Polligars on their way to the Mughal and surrendered to Madras on condition of showing them mercy, which was initially agreed, but once arrived, Gov. Yale and the Council decided to have them sentenced for treason and desertion. One was executed before the stables, the other was shot in front of the fort's gate. Thirty-eight years later, Capt. Hamilton wrote about the event in his memoirs, from a \"weal and treacherous memory\". As a past employee who became a Privateer, he never forgave the taxes the Company forced upon him during his private travels, and his depiction of the time, always critical of his past employer, are not considered faithful about the period.\nElihu Yale v. East India Co..\nThe later years of Yale's governance was marked by serious conflicts between his Presidency and the council, coming from Thomas Gray, Sir Josiah Child's servant, and lawyer William Fraser, a man known for his violent temper. They accused Yale of trying to get military power into his own hands. In 1691, Yale then received several Indian merchants and citizens who came to complain about Fraser's behaviour as new Mayor of Madras. Fraser had imprisoned four of their friends for refusing to sign an arbitration proceeding, and were stuck without food adapted to their religion. Yale ordered the marshal to temporarily release them to their private homes, and reversed other sentences made by the Mayor's Court. Yale wrote in his letter that \"he would have been unfaithful to his trust had he permitted an innocent man to starve to death in prison\". On 1 October 1692, letters arrived from London with accusations against Yale, making Nathaniel Higginson the new President of Madras. According to Madras historian Fanny Penny, the accusations were the same as with past governors, being the \"old story of private trade, jealousy on the part of his fellow-merchants, and suspicion and distrust at home as his wealth accumulated\".\nBy then, Yale's fortune was at \u00a3205,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in ), which was the same as the Company's former chairman and largest shareholder, Sir Josiah Child. On 23 November, Sir John Goldsborough and judge John Dolben arrived in Madras for Yale's investigation. The Councillors took the law into their own hands, and had the Yale brothers imprisoned, and fearing of being poisoned, Yale wrote a letter to be delivered to the King of England by his brother, who will leave Madras on 20 February 1694. The investigators then inspected the fortifications around Black Town, the Indian natives's neighborhood. Yale had built the walls with the company's fund to protect the town against invasions of the Mughal Emperor, but having not followed the directors's order to tax the natives for it, he was fined 3484 pagodas with interest by the Company. Goldsborough then sent a group of musketeers to Mrs. Nicks's house, Yale's friend, to investigate fraud charges regarding cloths, where she would be fined for her husband's mistakes. Not having enough money to pay the taxes to bring her children home to England, she would be forced to sail without them. For Yale's trial, William Fraser was first put on the court, but Yale had him temporarily displaced after Fraser had imprisoned a Portuguese merchant for four years upon suspicion alone. By July, Sir John Goldsborough concluded his investigation, and left the countercharges to Fraser, not finding any evidence that Yale had defrauded the East India Company. His fines were based for the most part on technicalities, where he had not followed orders or made errors of judgment.\nThe case reach London.\nTen months later, while still in prison, Yale's brother arrived in London in 1695, and reached directly to the King's Privy Council on 14 February at Kensington Palace, contesting the accusations. The Privy Council ordered a reply from the East India Company but were not impressed by their statements against Yale's activities, therefore they ordered, on behalf of the king, to stop all the company's ships that were ready to sail for Fort St. George in India. Yale's case was given to Sir Thomas Rawlinson, and was attended by the King of England, William of Orange, Prince George of Denmark, Archbishop Thomas Tenison and the principal ministers. They ordered that the Attorney General examine the charter granted to the whole Company, and to examine their powers in matters of judicature. Their investigation was brought to Parliament, where they discovered briberies made by Sir Josiah Child and Sir Thomas Cook to Tory members. Thereafter, the King of England, William of Orange, ordered on 15 March 1695, the liberation of Elihu Yale, so that he could come back to England whenever he chose, with the additional order of giving him the Great Cabin in the Company ship of his choosing when he would be ready to sail home. When the letter reached Madras ten months later on 8 January 1696, Yale was immediately offered a ship for Britain, but having already served the company for over 20 years, he decided to stay as Fraser was still on his case.\nFraser then suggested to Sir Josiah Child that Yale had poisoned four members of the Council over the years. Fraser's case relied on statements made by two Indian natives that were not sworn, where they said that they had heard someone, who is now dead, say that somebody else, who has now left Madras, that two of Yale's enemies were still alive, and that they would be dead soon. Based on native gossips, the directors dismissed the case. Thereafter, president Higginson was told by his servant of seven years that Fraser had threatened him twice, to which he replied that he had beaten him because he didn't like his Salams. Fraser was then charged and banned from the council. With Fraser removed, Yale stayed at Fort St. George for some years, and over time, cleared his name of all scandal and developed his diamond business. Gov. Thomas Pitt, who would find the Pitt Diamond, became Yale's partner, as the Company had now removed all restrictions on private trade. In 1699, after a 30 years career in India, Yale decided to sail home, and was granted the usual privilege of past governors to bring back five tons of goods, which he filled with diamonds, rubies, sapphires, Chinawares, Persian carpets, nutmegs, and other items. He decided to have Gov Pitt's ship as his vessel, and brought back with him the children of Mrs. Nicks. Over time, the old accusations against the company's officers enriching themselves at their expense appeared less frequently, as the directors learned that their employees could grow wealthy while advancing their commercial interests.\nReturn to Britain.\nYale arrived in Britain in 1699 with a fortune that amounted to \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in ), mostly made from his diamond business in the Golconda mines and Kollur mines in Southern India. In relation to GDP, his fortune amounted to 1/4 % of UK's GDP at the time, which translates to nearly 6 billion British pounds in 2021 money. Famous diamonds extracted from these mines over time have included the Orlov Diamond, belonging to Catherine the Great, the Hope Diamond, belonging to Louis XIV, the Wittelsbach-Graff Diamond, belonging to the Habsburgs, among others. Yale acquired rough stones from the Mughal Emperors of Golconda in exchange for a royalty, and were sent to Fort St. George, India, under the protection of 50 trained men. Thereafter, Yale would send the diamonds to Amsterdam to be faceted and polished, until ready to be shipped to London. The process took on average 3 years and needed large amounts of capital to endure setbacks, such as wars and political instability.\nDuring the War of the Spanish Succession, shipments would get stolen by pirates on their way to Europe, and once there, the Europeans princes and nobility would lack the funds to acquire them, forcing some merchants into bankruptcy. Demand followed the Coronations of monarchs, royal court events, war victories and other ceremonies. It became the most important branch of private trade of East India employees between Madras and London. Along with Sir Jean Chardin and Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, Yale became one of the largest European diamond traders in the world, as nearly all diamonds came from India during that period. Chardin, the past jewel merchant of the Shah of Persia, was also one his partners. He kept doing business with his friends Gov. Thomas Pitt, grandfather of prime minister William Pitt, and Sir Charles Cotterell, during the era where London became the international trading centre of diamonds, dislodging Portugal and the Netherlands. This new class of merchants who made their fortune in the East Indies would become known as the Nabobs in Britain.\nLondon life.\nDuring the Georgian era under King George I, Yale and other merchants would meet at London coffee houses as centres of social life. He kept his title of governor, and after the failures of his bankers, he opened a bank account in the newly created Bank of England, with deposits at C. Hoare &amp; Co of Sir Richard Hoare, now the oldest bank in Britain. He lived most of his remaining years at the Plas Grono estate in Wales, next to Erddig Hall, inherited from the line of his great-grandfather, Chancellor David Yale, and at his London house in Queen Square. His neighbors included the Duke of Powis at Powis House, Lord Chancellor Bathurst, Queen Anne and her son Prince William, and artists Charles Burney and Jonathan Richardson. In London society, Yale was associated with Sir Charles Cotterell, Master of the Ceremonies. He was then elected in December 1717 a Fellow of the Royal Society under Sir Isaac Newton. His candidature was introduced by Sir Hans Sloan, founder of the British Museum and compeer of Voltaire and Benjamin Franklin. In the same year, Yale was asked by Newton to deal with the donations of Dr. Thomas Paget, and later received a new map of the Netherlands dedicated to him by John Senex, royal geographer of Queen Anne.\nThereafter, his American godson David Yale entered Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge. Yale leased Latimer House from his son-in-law, Lord James Cavendish, son of the 1st Duke of Devonshire, to accommodate his daughter Ursula. He was elected High Sheriff of Denbighshire in Wales, gave money to Wrexham Church, and built a family gallery. He then became a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and met there the Bishop of London, John Robinson, and the Lt. Gov. of New England, Francis Nicholson. From Nicholson's influence, and with Jeremiah Dummer as intermediary, Yale would answer a donation request for Connecticut College through Harvard graduate Cotton Mather. While his initial plan was to bestow a charity at Oxford, he sent them books, along with Sir Isaac Newton. He also sent a newly painted portrait of King George I by artist Sir Godfrey Kneller, principal painter of the king at the time, and the institution changed its name to Yale College. The total sum gifted was about the same as John Harvard's to Harvard College. The painting is now at Yale University Gallery, while about 214 of the books are at Yale Library. Yale's will included donations to the poor of Wrexham in Wales, to Christ's Hospital in London, St Bartholomew's Hospital, St Thomas' Hospital, various workhouse and poorhouses, and to Connecticut College, later known as Yale.\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1680 Yale married Catherine Elford, widow of Joseph Hynmers, second-in-command of Fort St George, India as Deputy Governor for the East India Company. Her father was wealthy Levant merchant Walter Elford, son of Turkey merchant Walter Sr., the step-nephew of Admiral Sir Francis Drake of Buckland Abbey, the explorer, and the half-brother of Sir Francis Drake, the MP.\nWalter Elford Sr. was among the pioneers of the English Coffee Houses on Exchange Alley, next to the Royal Exchange, owning the Great Coffee House (Turk's Head) until the Great Fire of London, and was featured in Samuel Pepys's diaries. Catherine Elford's maternal grandfather was merchant Richard Chambers, Alderman and Sheriff of the City of London, family of Sir Amyas Bampfylde of Poltimore House and Barrington Court.\nTheir wedding took place at St Mary's Church, at Fort St George, where Yale was a vestryman and treasurer. The marriage was the first registered at the church. They had 4 children together. David Yale died young in 1687. Katherine Yale (died 1715), married to Dudley North of Glenham Hall, a cousin of Lord North, the prime minister who later lost the American War of Independence. Their daughter would marry Nicholas Herbert, son of Thomas Herbert, 8th Earl of Pembroke, and lived at Wilton House and Highclere Castle.\nAnne Yale (died 1734) married to Lord James Cavendish of Chatsworth House, son of the 1st Duke of Devonshire of Hardwick Hall, and Lady Mary Butler, the Duke of Ormond's daughter at Kilkenny Castle. Lord Cavendish was also a nephew of Earl John Cecil of Burghley House, and a grandson of Countess Elizabeth Cecil of Hatfield House.\nUrsula Yale, who never married, died in 1721 at Latimer House, a house rented by Yale from his son-in-law - who is buried in the church on the estate. In 1687, after the death of Jacques de Paiva, a Portuguese Jewish diamond merchant and mines owner, Yale formed a relationship with his widow Hieronima de Paiva and brought her to live with him, causing a scandal within Madras's colonial society. They had a son who died, along with his mother, in South Africa.\nDeath.\nYale died on 8 July 1721 in London. No descendants of his have survived past his grandchildren. His body was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St Giles' Church, Wrexham, Wales. His tomb bears an inscription:\nIn Boston, Massachusetts, a tablet to Yale was erected in 1927 at Scollay Square, near the site of Yale's birth. Yale president Arthur Twining Hadley penned the inscription, which reads: \"On Pemberton Hill, 255 Feet North of This Spot, Was Born on April Fifth 1649 Elihu Yale, Governor of Madras, Whose Permanent Memorial in His Native Land is the College That Bears His Name.\"\nAt his death, with no proper will, his heirs-at-law inherited the Plas Grono estate and sold it to Sir George Wynne.\nYale University.\nIn 1718, Cotton Mather contacted Yale and asked for his help. Mather represented a small institution of learning that had been founded in 1701 in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, as the Collegiate School of Connecticut, which needed money for a new building. In 1717, Isaac Newton gave the college a copy of his book \"Principia\", on Newton's laws of motion and Newton's law of universal gravitation, and in 1718, Yale sent Mather 417 books, a portrait of King George I of Britain, and nine bales of goods. These last were sold by the school for \u00a3800. In gratitude, officials named the new building Yale; eventually the entire institution became Yale College.\nYale was also a vestryman and treasurer of St Mary's Church at Fort St George. On 6 October 1968, the 250th anniversary of the naming of Yale College for Yale, the classmates of Chester Bowles, then the American ambassador to India and a graduate of Yale (1924), donated money for lasting improvements to the church and erected a plaque to commemorate the occasion. In 1970, a portrait of him, later renamed \"Elihu Yale with Members of his Family and an Enslaved Child\", was donated to the Yale Center for British Art from Chatsworth House. A portrait, painted during the 18th century, was also given to Yale University by U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower.\nOn 5 April 1999, Yale University recognised the 350th anniversary of Yale's birthday. An article that year in \"American Heritage\" magazine by John Steele Gordon described Yale as the \"most overrated philanthropist\" in American history, arguing that the college that became Yale University was successful largely because of the generosity of a man named Jeremiah Dummer, but that the trustees of the school did not want it known by the name \"Dummer College\". Of Yale's donation to the college, totalling just under \u00a31,162, Gordon suggested that \"never has so much immortality been purchased for so paltry a [...] sum.\"\nIn her article for \"The Atlantic\" about Skull and Bones, a secret society at Yale University, Alexandra Robbins alleges that Yale's headstone was stolen years ago from its proper setting in Wrexham. She further alleges that the tombstone is now displayed in a glass case in a room with purple walls.\n21st century re-appraisal.\nIn the 21st century Yale University's historic associations with the slave trade have been re-evaluated. In 2017, the university determined to rename Calhoun College, which honoured the white supremacist and pro-slavery leader John C. Calhoun. In respect of Elihu Yale, the process was assisted by the availability online of the relevant East India Company records. In 2020 Yale's president, Peter Salovey, launched the \"Yale and Slavery Research Project\" to explore the university's links with slavery and colonialism, including Elihu Yale's central role. The project was led by David W. Blight, director of the Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition, and published its findings in 2024. Blight identified \"Yale's key leadership role in the business of human trafficking\" and confirmed that part of Yale's fortune unquestionably derived from \"the purchase and sale of human beings [...] much of his growing wealth derived from the lucrative trade in cloth, silks, precious jewels, and other commodities, yet this commerce was inseparable from the slave trade\". In his foreword to the report, Salovey wrote of the importance of the study as providing a \"deeper, more honest understanding of who we are\" and of helping in \"coming to terms with injustices of the past and in confronting current wrongs\".\nA linked re-evaluation considered the artworks donated by, and related to, Elihu Yale, in particular, the painting \"Elihu Yale with Members of his Family and an Enslaved Child\". The picture, which shows Yale and his relations being served by a collared African child, was donated to the Yale Center for British Art in 1970 and regularly displayed at the university. In 2020 the artist Titus Kaphar produced a version of the painting, entitled \"Enough About You\", in which the main sitters are distorted beyond recognition and the image of the uncollared boy is set within a gold frame.\nThe Yale collection.\nYale arrived in England with Indian artworks, and used his new wealth to build a large European art collection of 10,000 items, including 7,000 paintings, which would become, after his death, the first art auction in Britain. During this era, the English country houses started to include goods from India and China, brought over the continent by the East India Company. As about 75% of all Indian exports were long-lasting and colorful textiles, it gave rise to the 1700\u20131750 Western fashion period, which included the use of tapestries. A new desire for collecting emerged among the English aristocracy under the Duke of Marlborough at Blenheim Palace, and the Duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth House. Yale followed their lead and became a famous collector in London, with artists visiting him at his Queen Square home to secure patronage, one of which would be Vanderbank, who worked at Kensington Palace and Castle Howard.\nMany of Yale's paintings came from Dutch Golden Age's artists, the most famous being Rembrandt, Bruegel, Van Dyck, Rubens, D\u00fcrer, Van de Velde, Teniers, Lely, Kneller and Rosa. Yale's collection was stored in four London houses, in addition to several coach houses and stables. Through the influence of the Royal Society under Isaac Newton, he collected instruments built on new science from dealers like George Willdey. He obtained the Leibniz\u2013Clarke correspondence and acquired books from Bernard de Montfaucon, one of the modern founders of archaeology at the time. With a rising middle class in search of status symbols, he acquired watches and clocks from Thomas Tompion, father of English clockmaking, along with works of engineer Henry Winstanley. When Queen Anne commissioned Nicolas Dorigny to produce large prints at Hampton Court, Yale and the Duke of Devonshire acquired several of them. He acquired one of the Jewels of Mary, Queen of Scots, along with works of Medici painter Adriaen van der Werff.\nOther paintings included those of philosopher Thomas Hobbes, astronomer Pierre Gassendi, Sir John Wynn, and Jacques Courtois, previously patroned by Mattias de' Medici. At Yale's death, his collection launched the auction concept in Britain, spacing the sales at a few months' intervals to not overload the art market. His European paintings were the largest group ever sold in England. Catalogues were available at various coffee houses such as Garraways. Van der Werff's painting was acquired by the Earl of Derby, while a bidding war ensued for Queen Mary's ring between the Earl of Oxford and the Earl of Pembroke. Yale's granddaughter married the latter's son, Nicholas Herbert, who lived at Wilton House and Highclere Castle. Inigo Jones's designs were acquired by the 2nd Duke of Devonshire, and are still at Chatsworth House. It is thought that some of Yale's missing paintings are now at the Hermitage Museum in Russia, dating back from Catherine the Great's acquisition of the Walpole collection at Houghton Hall. Numerous works would later be acquired by Yale University, while others went to Madryn Castle, seat of Deputy William Corbet Yale of the Yales of Plas yn Yale.\nAncestry and coats of arms.\nElihu's ancestry, as a member of the Yale family, originated from the Lordship of Yale in North Wales. The Yale name was adopted from the maternal line, while the coat of arms, later adopted by Yale College, came from the paternal line. The Yales derived from the 6th century prince of Powys, Brochwel Ysgithrog, and from the 4th century king Cunedda. Following the division of the Kingdom of Powys during the 12th century, a new principality will emerge named Northern Powys, which will be kept by Elihu's ancestors, the princes of Powys Fadog, Lords of Yale, with their seat at Castle Dinas Bran as members of the House of Mathrafal. They will submit to Edward Longshanks during the 13th century, with prince Gruffudd Fychan losing the lordship of Yale to the Earl of Surrey, William Wallace's rival at Sterling Bridge.\nAbout a century later, his descendant Owain Glyndwr, a cousin of the Tudors, would lose the War of Independence against Henry V, becoming the last Welsh Prince of Wales in 1415. Known by Shakespeare as Owen Glendower, he became the granduncle of baron Elissau ap Gruffudd, founder of the House of Yale in 1480, which Elihu belonged to. Elissau's mother, Lowry ap Tudor, was Glyndwr's niece, while his father, Griffith ap Einion, was a member of the House of Fitzgerald. Elissau would become co-heir of Glyndwr's claims through his mother, including those of Mathrafal (Powys Fadog), which featured the Lordship of Bromfield and Yale. From his marriage to an heiress within the lordship, he received the estate of Allt Llwyn Dragon, which he renamed Plas yn Yale (Yale Manor). The name would then be adopted by his grandson, Chancellor Thomas Yale (b. 1525), and by Elihu's great-grandfather, Chancellor David Yale, Thomas's nephew.\nWhile the Yale name was adopted from baron Elissau's maternal line, the Yale arms would be inherited from his father, a member of the Fitzgeralds of Corsygedol, from the line of Osborne Fitzgerald, initially a Desmond. This line was founded by the marriage of a Welsh princess named Nesta, daughter of Rhys ap Tudor, with Norman lord Gerald de Windsor, son of the first governor of Windsor Castle for William the Conqueror. Two branches will form over time, the Yales of Plas yn Yale, who stayed in Britain, and the Yales of Plas Grono, who went to America in 1637. As Elihu was heir of the Plas Gronos in 1689, his arms would be those later used for Yale College, as well as for the Yale schools of Public Health, Environment and Medicine.\nExternal links.\n \n "}
{"id": "10207", "revid": "1265834836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10207", "title": "\u00c9mile Baudot", "text": "Jean-Maurice-\u00c9mile Baudot (; 11 September 1845 \u2013 28 March 1903), French telegraph engineer and inventor of the first means of digital communication Baudot code, was one of the pioneers of telecommunications. He invented a multiplexed printing telegraph system that used his code and allowed multiple transmissions over a single line. The baud unit was named after him.\nEarly life.\nBaudot was born in Magneux, Haute-Marne, France, the son of farmer Pierre \u00c9mile Baudot, who later became the mayor of Magneux. His only formal education was at his local primary school, after which he carried out agricultural work on his father's farm before joining the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration as an apprentice operator in 1869.\nThe telegraph service trained him in the Morse telegraph and also sent him on a four-month course of instruction on the Hughes printing telegraph system, which was later to inspire his own system.\nAfter serving briefly during the Franco-Prussian War, he returned to civilian duties in Paris in 1872.\nTelegraphy.\nThe Telegraph Service encouraged Baudot to develop\u2014on his own time\u2014a system for time-multiplexing several telegraph messages using Hughes teleprinters. He realised that with most printing telegraphs of the period the line is idle for most of the time, apart from the brief intervals when a character is transmitted. Baudot devised one of the first applications of time-division multiplexing in telegraphy. Using synchronized clockwork-powered switches at the transmitting and receiving ends, he was able to transmit five messages simultaneously; the system was officially adopted by the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration five years later.\nBaudot invented his telegraph code in 1870 and patented it in 1874. It was a 5-bit code, with equal on and off intervals, which allowed telegraph transmission of the Roman alphabet, punctuation and control signals. By 1874 or 1875 (various sources give both dates) he had also perfected the electromechanical hardware to transmit his code. His inventions were based on the printing mechanism from Hughes' instrument, a distributor invented by Bernard Meyer in 1871, and the five-unit code devised by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber. Baudot combined these, together with original ideas of his own, to produce a complete multiplex system.\nBaudot system.\nOn 17 June 1874 Baudot patented his first printing telegraph (Patent no. 103,898 \"Syst\u00e8me de t\u00e9l\u00e9graphie rapide\"), in which the signals were translated automatically into typographic characters. Baudot's hardware had three main parts: the keyboard, the distributor, and a paper tape.\nEach operator - there were as many as four - was allocated a single sector. The keyboard had just five piano type keys, operated with two fingers of the left hand and three fingers of the right hand. The five unit code was designed to be easy to remember. Once the keys had been pressed they were locked down until the contacts again passed over the sector connected to that particular keyboard, when the keyboard was unlocked ready for the next character to be entered, with an audible click (known as the \"cadence signal\") to warn the operator. Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute.\nThe receiver was also connected to the distributor. The signals from the telegraph line were temporarily stored on a set of five electromagnets, before being decoded to print the corresponding character on paper tape.\nAccurate operation of this system depended on the distributor at the transmitting end keeping in synchronization with the one at the receiving end and operators only sending characters when the contacts passed over their allocated sector. This could be achieved at a speed of 30 wpm by strictly observing the \"cadence\" of rhythm of the system when the distributor gave the operator the use of the line.\nFirst use.\nThe Baudot system was accepted by the French Telegraph Administration in 1875, with the first online tests of his system occurring between Paris and Bordeaux on 12 November 1877. At the end of 1877, the Paris-Rome line, which was about , began operating a duplex Baudot.\nThe Baudot apparatus was shown at the Paris Exposition Universelle (1878) and won him the Exposition's gold medal, as well as bringing his system to worldwide notice.\nLater career.\nAfter the first success of his system, Baudot was promoted to Controller in 1880, and was named Inspector-Engineer in 1882.\nIn July 1887 he conducted successful tests on the Atlantic telegraph cable between Weston-super-Mare and Waterville, Nova Scotia operated by the Commercial Company, with a double Baudot installed in duplex, the Baudot transmitters and receivers substituted for the recorder.\nOn 8 August 1890 he established communications between Paris, Vannes, and Lorient over a single wire. On 3 January 1894 he installed a triplex apparatus on the telegraph between Paris and Bordeaux that had previously been operating with some difficulty on the Hughes telegraph system. On 27 April 1894 he established communications between the Paris stock exchange and the Milan stock exchange, again over a single wire, using his new invention, the retransmitter.\nIn 1897 the Baudot system was improved by switching to punched tape, which was prepared offline like the Morse tape used with the Wheatstone and Creed systems. A tape reader, controlled by the Baudot distributor, then replaced the manual keyboard. The tape had five rows of holes for the code, with a sixth row of smaller holes for transporting the tape through the reader mechanism. Baudot's code was later standardised as International Telegraph Alphabet Number One.\nBaudot received little help from the French Telegraph Administration for his system, and often had to fund his own research, even having to sell the gold medal awarded by the 1878 Exposition Universelle in 1880.\nThe Baudot telegraph system was employed progressively in France, and then was adopted in other countries, Italy being the first to introduce it, in its inland service, in 1887. The Netherlands followed in 1895, Switzerland in 1896, and Austria and Brazil in 1897. The British Post Office adopted it for a simplex circuit between London and Paris during 1897, then used it for more general purposes from 1898. In 1900 it was adopted by Germany, by Russia in 1904, the British West Indies in 1905, Spain in 1906, Belgium in 1909, Argentina in 1912, and Romania in 1913.\nFinal years.\nBaudot married Marie Josephine Adelaide Langrognet on 15 January 1890. She died only three months later, on 9 April 1890.\nSoon after starting work with the telegraph service, Baudot began to suffer physical discomfort and was frequently absent from work for this reason, for as long as a month on one occasion. His condition affected him for the rest of his life, until he died on 28 March 1903, at Sceaux, Hauts-de-Seine, near Paris, at the age of 57.\nMimault patent suit.\nIn 1874, French telegraph operator Louis Victor Mimault patented a telegraph system using five separate lines to transmit. After his patent was rejected by the Telegraph Administration, Mimault modified his device to incorporate features from the Meyer telegraph and obtained a new patent which was also rejected. In the meantime, Baudot had patented his prototype telegraph a few weeks earlier.\nMimault claimed priority of invention over Baudot and brought a patent suit against him in 1877. The Tribunal Civil de la Seine, which reviewed testimony from three experts unconnected with the Telegraph Administration, found in favor of Mimault and accorded him priority of invention of the Baudot code and ruled that Baudot's patents were simply improvements of Mimault's. Neither inventor was satisfied with this judgment, which was eventually rescinded with Mimault being ordered to pay all legal costs.\nMimault became unnerved because of the decision, and after an incident where he shot at and wounded two students of the \u00c9cole Polytechnique (charges for which were dropped), he demanded a special act to prolong the duration of his patents, 100,000 Francs, and election to the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. A commission directed by Jules Raynaud (head of telegraph research) rejected his demands. Upon hearing the decision, Mimault shot and killed Raynaud, and was sentenced to 10 years of forced labour and 20 years of exile."}
{"id": "10210", "revid": "6263999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10210", "title": "Emotion theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "10211", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10211", "title": "Economic security", "text": "Economic security or financial security is the condition of having stable income or other resources to support a standard of living now and in the foreseeable future. It includes:\nWithout such security, people may experience its opposite: economic insecurity and resulting economic anxiety.\nFinancial security more often refers to individual and family money management and savings. Economic security tends to include the broader effect of a society's production levels and monetary support for non-working citizens.\nComponents of individual economic security.\nIn the United States, children's economic security is indicated by the income level and employment security of their families or organizations. Economic security of people over 50 years old is based on Social Security benefits, pensions and savings, earnings and employment, and health insurance coverage.\nArizona.\nIn 1972, the state legislature of Arizona formed a Department of Economic Security with a mission to promote \"the safety, well-being, and self sufficiency of children, adults, and families\". This department combines state government activities previously managed by the Employment Security Commission, the State Department of Public Welfare, the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the State Office of Economic Opportunity, the Apprenticeship Council, and the State Office of Manpower Planning. The State Department of Mental Retardation (renamed the Division of Developmental Disabilities, House Bill 2213) joined the Department in 1974 . The purpose in creating the Department was to provide an integration of direct services to people in such a way as to reduce duplication of administrative efforts, services and expenditures. Family Connections became a part of the Department in January 2007.\nMinnesota.\nThe Minnesota Department of Economic Security was formed in 1977 from the departments of Employment Services and Vocational Rehabilitation, the Governor's Manpower Office, and the Economic Opportunity Office, which administered anti-poverty programs. In 1985, State Services for the Blind was included in this department. In 2003, the Minnesota Department of Economic Security and Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development were merged to form The Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development.\nNational economic security.\nIn the context of domestic politics and international relations, national economic security is the ability of a country to follow its choice of policies to develop the national economy in the manner desired. Historically, conquest of nations have made conquerors rich through plunder, access to new resources and enlarged trade through controlling of the economies of conquered nations. Today's complex system of international trade is characterized by multi-national agreements and mutual inter-dependence. Availability of natural resources and capacity for production and distribution are essential under this system, leading many experts to consider economic security to be as important a part of national security as military policy.\nEconomic security has been proposed as a key determinant of international relations, particularly in the geopolitics of petroleum in American foreign policy after 1973 oil crisis and September 11, 2001.\nIn Canada, threats to the country's overall economic security are considered economic espionage, which is \"illegal, clandestine or coercive activity by a foreign government in order to gain unauthorized access to economic intelligence, such as proprietary information or technology, for economic advantage.\"\nIn January 2021, the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) issued Strategic Action Plan to Counter the Threat Posed by China.\nIn October 2021 in Japan, prime minister Fumio Kishida created the first-ever ministerial post for economic security.\nAnd in April 2022, Japan's National Diet passed an economic security bill aimed at guarding technology and reinforcing critical supply chains, while also imposing tighter oversight of Japanese firms working in sensitive sectors or critical infrastructure.\nMeasures in the legislation, which is primarily aimed at warding off risks from China, will be implemented over two years once it is enacted, according to the bill.\nIn March 2023, Japan and Germany agreed to strengthen cooperation on economic security in the aftermath of tensions over global supply chains and the economic impact of Russian invasion of Ukraine. In the first high-ministerial government consultations held between the two countries, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz reached out to Tokyo to seek to reduce Germany's dependence on China for imports of raw materials.\nOn April 4, 2023, a G7 Trade Ministers' Meeting via video conference was held to discuss on enhancing economic security, and a G7 Trade Ministers' Statement was issued on the day.\nAlso in April 2023, Japan's Public Security Intelligence Agency (PSIA) launched a division dedicated to economic security. The agency also plans to set up such dedicated units in its regional bureaus nationwide to step up efforts to prevent cutting-edge technology and data from being leaked out of the country.\nOn 20 May 2023 on occasion of the G7 Hiroshima summit, economic security was discussed for the first time as the G7 agenda, and \"G7 Leaders' Statement on Economic Resilience and Economic Security\" was issued based on the discussion.\nOn 20 June 2023, the European Commission and the High Representative proposed a Joint Communication on a European Economic Security Strategy which will be discussed by EU leaders at their meeting.\nOther.\nIt is widely believed that there is a tradeoff between economic security and economic opportunity.\nSee also.\nIndividual economic security\nNational economic security"}
{"id": "10212", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10212", "title": "Evers, Charles", "text": ""}
{"id": "10213", "revid": "27888758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10213", "title": "Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution", "text": "Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE), also known as 2.75G, Enhanced GPRS (EGPRS), IMT Single Carrier (IMT-SC), and Enhanced Data rates for Global Evolution, is a 2G digital mobile phone technology for data transmission. It is a subset of General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) on the GSM network and improves upon it offering speeds close to 3G technology, hence the name 2.75G. It is also recognized as part of the International Mobile Telecommunications - 2000 (IMT-2000) standard.\nEDGE was deployed on GSM networks beginning in 2003 \u2013 initially by Cingular (now AT&amp;T) in the United States. Through the introduction of sophisticated methods of coding and transmitting data, EDGE delivers higher bit-rates per radio channel, resulting in a threefold increase in capacity and performance compared with an ordinary GSM/GPRS connection - originally a max speed of 384 kbit/s. EDGE can be used for any packet switched application, such as an Internet connection.\nEDGE is standardized also by 3GPP as part of the GSM family. A variant, so called Compact-EDGE, was developed for use in a portion of Digital AMPS network spectrum. EDGE is part of ITU's 3G definition. Evolved EDGE continues in release 7 of the 3GPP standard providing reduced latency and more than doubled performance e.g. to complement High-Speed Packet Access (HSPA). Peak bit-rates of up to 1\u00a0Mbit/s and typical bit-rates of 400\u00a0kbit/s can be expected.\nTechnology.\nEDGE/EGPRS is implemented as a bolt-on enhancement for 2.5G GSM/GPRS networks, making it easier for existing GSM carriers to upgrade to it. EDGE is a superset to GPRS and can function on any network with GPRS deployed on it, provided the carrier implements the necessary upgrade.\nEDGE requires no hardware or software changes to be made in GSM core networks. EDGE-compatible transceiver units must be installed and the base station subsystem needs to be upgraded to support EDGE. If the operator already has this in place, which is often the case today, the network can be upgraded to EDGE by activating an optional software feature. Today EDGE is supported by all major chip vendors for both GSM and WCDMA/HSPA.\nTransmission techniques.\nIn addition to Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK), EDGE uses higher-order PSK/8 phase-shift keying (8PSK) for the upper five of its nine modulation and coding schemes. EDGE produces a 3-bit word for every change in carrier phase. This effectively triples the gross data rate offered by GSM. EDGE, like GPRS, uses a rate adaptation algorithm that adapts the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) according to the quality of the radio channel, and thus the bit rate and robustness of data transmission. It introduces a new technology not found in GPRS, incremental redundancy, which, instead of retransmitting disturbed packets, sends more redundancy information to be combined in the receiver. This increases the probability of correct decoding.\nEDGE can carry a bandwidth up to 236\u00a0kbit/s (with end-to-end latency of less than 150\u00a0ms) for 4 timeslots (theoretical maximum is 473.6\u00a0kbit/s for 8 timeslots) in packet mode. This means it can handle four times as much traffic as standard GPRS. EDGE meets the International Telecommunication Union's requirement for a 3G network, and has been accepted by the ITU as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards. It also enhances the circuit data mode called HSCSD, increasing the data rate of this service.\nEDGE modulation and coding scheme (MCS).\nThe channel encoding process in GPRS as well as EGPRS/EDGE consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. In GPRS, the Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In GPRS Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In GPRS Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied.\nIn EGPRS/EDGE, the modulation and coding schemes MCS-1 to MCS-9 take the place of the coding schemes of GPRS, and additionally specify which modulation scheme is used, GMSK or 8PSK. MCS-1 through MCS-4 use GMSK and have performance similar (but not equal) to GPRS, while MCS-5 through MCS-9 use 8PSK. In all EGPRS modulation and coding schemes, a convolutional code of rate 1/3 is used, and puncturing is used to achieve the desired code rate. In contrast to GPRS, the Radio Link Control (RLC) and medium access control (MAC) headers and the payload data are coded separately in EGPRS. The headers are coded more robustly than the data.\nEvolved EDGE.\nEvolved EDGE, also called EDGE Evolution and 2.875G, is a bolt-on extension to the GSM mobile telephony standard, which improves on EDGE in a number of ways. Latencies are reduced by lowering the Transmission Time Interval by half (from 20 ms to 10 ms). Bit rates are increased up to 1\u00a0Mbit/s peak bandwidth and latencies down to 80 ms using dual carrier, higher symbol rate and higher-order modulation (32QAM and 16QAM instead of 8PSK), and turbo codes to improve error correction. This results in real world downlink speeds of up to 600\u00a0kbit/s. Further the signal quality is improved using dual antennas improving average bit-rates and spectrum efficiency.\nThe main intention of increasing the existing EDGE throughput is that many operators would like to upgrade their existing infrastructure rather than invest on new network infrastructure. Mobile operators have invested billions in GSM networks, many of which are already capable of supporting EDGE data speeds up to 236.8\u00a0kbit/s. With a software upgrade and a new device compliant with Evolved EDGE (like an Evolved EDGE smartphone) for the user, these data rates can be boosted to speeds approaching 1\u00a0Mbit/s (i.e. 98.6\u00a0kbit/s per timeslot for 32QAM). Many service providers may not invest in a completely new technology like 3G networks.\nConsiderable research and development happened throughout the world for this new technology. A successful trial by Nokia Siemens and \"one of China's leading operators\" was achieved in a live environment. However, Evolved EDGE was introduced much later than its predecessor, EDGE, coinciding with the widespread adoption of 3G technologies such as HSPA and just before the emergence of 4G networks. This timing significantly limited its relevance and practical application, as operators prioritized investment in more advanced wireless technologies like UMTS and LTE.\nMoreover, these newer technologies also targeted network coverage layers on low frequencies, further diminishing the potential advantages of Evolved EDGE. Coupled with the upcoming phase-out and shutdown of 2G mobile networks, it became very unlikely that Evolved EDGE would ever see deployment on live networks. As of 2016, no commercial networks supported the Evolved EDGE standard (3GPP Rel-7).\nTechnology.\nReduced Latency.\nWith Evolved EDGE come three major features designed to reduce latency over the air interface.\nIn EDGE, a single RLC data block (ranging from 23 to 148 bytes of data) is transmitted over four frames, using a single time slot. On average, this requires 20 ms for one way transmission. Under the RTTI scheme, one data block is transmitted over two frames in two timeslots, reducing the latency of the air interface to 10 ms.\nIn addition, Reduced Latency also implies support of Piggy-backed ACK/NACK (PAN), in which a bitmap of blocks not received is included in normal data blocks. Using the PAN field, the receiver may report missing data blocks immediately, rather than waiting to send a dedicated PAN message.\nA final enhancement is RLC-non persistent mode. With EDGE, the RLC interface could operate in either acknowledged mode, or unacknowledged mode. In unacknowledged mode, there is no retransmission of missing data blocks, so a single corrupt block would cause an entire upper-layer IP packet to be lost. With non-persistent mode, an RLC data block may be retransmitted if it is less than a certain age. Once this time expires, it is considered lost, and subsequent data blocks may then be forwarded to upper layers.\nHigher modulation schemes.\nBoth uplink and downlink throughput is improved by using 16 or 32 QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation), along with turbo codes and higher symbol rates.\nEnhanced CSD.\nA lesser-known version of the EDGE standard is Enhanced Circuit Switched Data (ECSD), which is circuit switched.\nNetworks.\nThe Global mobile Suppliers Association (GSA) states that, as of May 2013, there were 604 GSM/EDGE networks in 213 countries, from a total of 606 mobile network operator commitments in 213 countries."}
{"id": "10214", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10214", "title": "EDGE", "text": ""}
{"id": "10216", "revid": "5128741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10216", "title": "Eth", "text": "Eth ( , uppercase: \u27e8\u00d0\u27e9, lowercase: \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9; also spelled edh or e\u00f0), known as in Old English, is a letter used in Old English, Middle English, Icelandic, Faroese (in which it is called ), and Elfdalian. \nIt was also used in Scandinavia during the Middle Ages, but was subsequently replaced with , and later . \nIt is often transliterated as . \nThe lowercase version has been adopted to represent a voiced dental fricative (IPA: ) in the International Phonetic Alphabet.\nFaroese.\nIn Faroese, is not assigned to any particular phoneme and appears mostly for etymological reasons, but it indicates most glides. When appears before , it is in a few words pronounced . In the Faroese alphabet, follows .\nKhmer.\n is sometimes used in Khmer romanization to represent \"\".\nIcelandic.\nIn Icelandic, , called \"e\u00f0\", represents an alveolar non-sibilant fricative, voiced intervocalically and word-finally, and voiceless otherwise, which form one phoneme, . Generally, is represented by thorn at the beginning of words and by elsewhere. The in the name of the letter is devoiced in the nominative and accusative cases: . In the Icelandic alphabet, follows .\nNorwegian.\nIn Olav Jakobsen H\u00f8yem's version of based on , was always silent, and was introduced for etymological reasons.\nOld English.\nIn Old English, (called \"\") was used interchangeably with to represent the Old English dental fricative phoneme or its allophone , which exist in modern English as the voiceless and voiced dental fricatives both now spelled .\nUnlike the runic letter , is a modified Roman letter. Neither nor was found in the earliest records of Old English. A study of Mercian royal diplomas found that began to emerge in the early 8th century, with becoming strongly preferred by the 780s. Another source indicates that the letter is \"derived from Irish writing\". \nUnder the reign of King Alfred the Great, grew greatly in popularity and started to overtake , and did so completely by the Middle English period. in turn went obsolete by the Early Modern English period, mostly due to the rise of the printing press, and was replaced by the digraph .\nWelsh.\n has also been used by some in written Welsh to represent , which is normally represented as .\nComputer encoding.\nUpper and lower case forms of eth have Unicode encodings:\nThese Unicode codepoints were inherited from ISO/IEC 8859-1 (\"ISO Latin-1\") encoding."}
{"id": "10217", "revid": "96340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10217", "title": "Eth, Nord", "text": "Eth () is a commune in the Nord department in northern France.\nIt is about east-southeast of Valenciennes. Residents are called Ethois (feminine plural Ethoises)."}
{"id": "10221", "revid": "47126302", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10221", "title": "Euphrates", "text": "The Euphrates ( ; see below) is the longest and one of the most historically important rivers of Western Asia. Together with the Tigris, it is one of the two defining rivers of Mesopotamia (). Originating in Turkey, the Euphrates flows through Syria and Iraq to join the Tigris in the Shatt al-Arab in Iraq, which empties into the Persian Gulf.\nThe Euphrates is the fifteenth-longest river in Asia and the longest in Western Asia, at about , with a drainage area of that covers six countries.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Euphrates\" derives from the Greek \"Euphr\u00e1t\u0113s\" (), adapted from , itself from . The Elamite name is ultimately derived from cuneiform \ud808\udf13\ud808\udd12\ud808\ude63; read as \"Buranun\" in Sumerian and \"Purattu\" in Akkadian; many cuneiform signs have a Sumerian pronunciation and an Akkadian pronunciation, taken from a Sumerian word and an Akkadian word that mean the same. The Akkadian \"Purattu\" has been perpetuated in Semitic languages (cf. \"al-Fur\u0101t\"; \"P\u01ddr\u0101\u1e6f\", \"P\u01ddr\u0101\u1e6f\") and in other nearby languages of the time (cf. Hurrian \"Puranti\", Sabarian \"Uruttu\"). The Elamite, Akkadian, and possibly Sumerian forms are suggested to be from an unrecorded substrate language. Tamaz V. Gamkrelidze and Vyacheslav Ivanov suggest the proto-Sumerian \"*burudu\" \"copper\" (Sumerian \"urudu\") as an origin, with an explanation that Euphrates was the river by which copper ore was transported in rafts, since Mesopotamia was the center of copper metallurgy during the period.\nThe Euphrates is called \"Yeprat\" in Armenian (), \"Perat\" in modern Hebrew (), in Turkish and in Kurdish. The Mandaic name is (), and is often mentioned as (pronounced ) in Mandaean scriptures such as the \"Ginza Rabba\". In Mandaean scriptures, the Euphrates is considered to be the earthly manifestation of the heavenly yardna or flowing river (similar to the Yazidi concept of Lalish being the earthly manifestation of its heavenly counterpart, or the \u2018Sacred House\u2019 Kaaba in Mecca being the earthly manifestation of the heavenly Al-Bayt Al-Mamur).\nThe earliest references to the Euphrates come from cuneiform texts found in Shuruppak and pre-Sargonic Nippur in southern Iraq and date to the mid-3rd millennium BCE. In these texts, written in Sumerian, the Euphrates is called \"Buranuna\" (logographic: UD.KIB.NUN). The name could also be written KIB.NUN.(NA) or dKIB.NUN, with the prefix \"d\" indicating that the river was a divinity. In Sumerian, the name of the city of Sippar in modern-day Iraq was also written UD.KIB.NUN, indicating a historically strong relationship between the city and the river.\nCourse.\nThe Euphrates is the longest river of Western Asia. It emerges from the confluence of the Kara Su or Western Euphrates () and the Murat Su or Eastern Euphrates () upstream from the town of Keban in southeastern Turkey. Daoudy and Frenken put the length of the Euphrates from the source of the Murat River to the confluence with the Tigris at , of which is in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. The same figures are given by Isaev and Mikhailova. The length of the Shatt al-Arab, which connects the Euphrates and the Tigris with the Persian Gulf, is given by various sources as .\nBoth the Kara Su and the Murat Su rise northwest from Lake Van at elevations of and amsl, respectively. At the location of the Keban Dam, the two rivers, now combined into the Euphrates, have dropped to an elevation of amsl. From Keban to the Syrian\u2013Turkish border, the river drops another over a distance of less than . Once the Euphrates enters the Upper Mesopotamian plains, its grade drops significantly; within Syria the river falls while over the last stretch between H\u012bt and the Shatt al-Arab the river drops only .\nDischarge.\nThe Euphrates receives most of its water in the form of rainfall and melting snow, resulting in peak volumes during the months April through May. Discharge in these two months accounts for 36 percent of the total annual discharge of the Euphrates, or even 60\u201370 percent according to one source, while low runoff occurs in summer and autumn. The average natural annual flow of the Euphrates has been determined from early- and mid-twentieth century records as at Keban, at H\u012bt and at Hindiya. However, these averages mask the high inter-annual variability in discharge; at Birecik, just north of the Syro\u2013Turkish border, annual discharges have been measured that ranged from a low volume of in 1961 to a high of in 1963.\nThe discharge regime of the Euphrates has changed dramatically since the construction of the first dams in the 1970s. Data on Euphrates discharge collected after 1990 show the impact of the construction of the numerous dams in the Euphrates and of the increased withdrawal of water for irrigation. Average discharge at H\u012bt after 1990 has dropped to per second ( per year). The seasonal variability has equally changed. The pre-1990 peak volume recorded at H\u012bt was per second, while after 1990 it is only per second. The minimum volume at H\u012bt remained relatively unchanged, rising from per second before 1990 to per second afterward.\nTributaries.\nIn Syria, three rivers add their water to the Euphrates; the Sajur, the Balikh and the Khabur. These rivers rise in the foothills of the Taurus Mountains along the Syro\u2013Turkish border and add comparatively little water to the Euphrates. The Sajur is the smallest of these tributaries; emerging from two streams near Gaziantep and draining the plain around Manbij before emptying into the reservoir of the Tishrin Dam. The Balikh receives most of its water from a karstic spring near 'Ayn al-'Arus and flows due south until it reaches the Euphrates at the city of Raqqa. In terms of length, drainage basin and discharge, the Khabur is the largest of these three. Its main karstic springs are located around Ra's al-'Ayn, from where the Khabur flows southeast past Al-Hasakah, where the river turns south and drains into the Euphrates near Busayrah. Once the Euphrates enters Iraq, there are no more natural tributaries to the Euphrates, although canals connecting the Euphrates basin with the Tigris basin exist.\nDrainage basin.\nThe drainage basins of the Kara Su and the Murat River cover an area of and , respectively. Estimates of the area of the Euphrates drainage basin vary widely; from a low to a high . Recent estimates put the basin area at , and . The greater part of the Euphrates basin is located in Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. According to both Daoudy and Frenken, Turkey's share is 28 percent, Syria's is 17 percent and that of Iraq is 40 percent. Isaev and Mikhailova estimate the percentages of the drainage basin lying within Turkey, Syria and Iraq at 33, 20 and 47 percent respectively. Some sources estimate that approximately 15 percent of the drainage basin is located within Saudi Arabia, while a small part falls inside the borders of Kuwait. Finally, some sources also include Jordan in the drainage basin of the Euphrates; a small part of the eastern desert () drains toward the east rather than to the west.\nClimate change.\nIn 2021, the Iraqi Ministry of Water Resources reported that the Euphrates river could dry out by 2040 due to climate change and droughts.\nNatural history.\nThe Euphrates flows through a number of distinct vegetation zones. Although millennia-long human occupation in most parts of the Euphrates basin has significantly degraded the landscape, patches of original vegetation remain. The steady drop in annual rainfall from the sources of the Euphrates toward the Persian Gulf is a strong determinant for the vegetation that can be supported. In its upper reaches the Euphrates flows through the mountains of Southeast Turkey and their southern foothills which support a xeric woodland. Plant species in the moister parts of this zone include various oaks, pistachio trees, and \"Rosaceae\" (rose/plum family). The drier parts of the xeric woodland zone supports less dense oak forest and \"Rosaceae\". Here can also be found the wild variants of many cereals, including einkorn wheat, emmer, oat and rye.\nSouth of this zone lies a zone of mixed woodland-steppe vegetation. Between Raqqa and the Syro\u2013Iraqi border the Euphrates flows through a steppe landscape. This steppe is characterised by white wormwood (\"Artemisia herba-alba\") and Amaranthaceae. Throughout history, this zone has been heavily overgrazed due to the practicing of sheep and goat pastoralism by its inhabitants. Southeast of the border between Syria and Iraq starts true desert. This zone supports either no vegetation at all or small pockets of \"Chenopodiaceae\" or \"Poa sinaica\". Although today nothing of it survives due to human interference, research suggests that the Euphrates Valley would have supported a riverine forest. Species characteristic of this type of forest include the Oriental plane, the Euphrates poplar, the tamarisk, the ash and various wetland plants.\nAmong the fish species in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin, the family of the Cyprinidae are the most common, with 34 species out of 52 in total. Among the Cyprinids, the mangar has good recreational fishing qualities, leading the British to nickname it the \"Tigris salmon.\" The Euphrates softshell turtle is an endangered soft-shelled turtle that is limited to the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system.\nThe Neo-Assyrian palace reliefs from the 1st millennium BCE depict lion and bull hunts in fertile landscapes. Sixteenth to nineteenth century European travellers in the Syrian Euphrates basin reported on an abundance of animals living in the area, many of which have become rare or even extinct. Species like gazelle, onager and the now-extinct Arabian ostrich lived in the steppe bordering the Euphrates valley, while the valley itself was home to the wild boar. Carnivorous species include the wolf, the golden jackal, the red fox, the leopard and the lion. The Syrian brown bear can be found in the mountains of Southeast Turkey. The presence of Eurasian beaver has been attested in the bone assemblage of the prehistoric site of Tell Abu Hureyra in Syria, but the beaver has never been sighted in historical times.\nRiver.\nThe Hindiya Barrage on the Iraqi Euphrates, based on plans by British civil engineer William Willcocks and finished in 1913, was the first modern water diversion structure built in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system. The Hindiya Barrage was followed in the 1950s by the Ramadi Barrage and the nearby Abu Dibbis Regulator, which serve to regulate the flow regime of the Euphrates and to discharge excess flood water into the depression that is now Lake Habbaniyah. Iraq's largest dam on the Euphrates is the Haditha Dam; a earth-fill dam creating Lake Qadisiyah. Syria and Turkey built their first dams in the Euphrates in the 1970s. The Tabqa Dam in Syria was completed in 1973 while Turkey finished the Keban Dam, a prelude to the immense Southeastern Anatolia Project, in 1974. Since then, Syria has built two more dams in the Euphrates, the Baath Dam and the Tishrin Dam, and plans to build a fourth dam \u2013 the Halabiye Dam \u2013 between Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. The Tabqa Dam is Syria's largest dam and its reservoir (Lake Assad) is an important source of irrigation and drinking water. It was planned that should be irrigated from Lake Assad, but in 2000 only had been realized. Syria also built three smaller dams on the Khabur and its tributaries.\nWith the implementation of the Southeastern Anatolia Project (\"\", or \"GAP\") in the 1970s, Turkey launched an ambitious plan to harness the waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates for irrigation and hydroelectricity production and provide an economic stimulus to its southeastern provinces. GAP affects a total area of and approximately 7\u00a0million people; representing about 10 percent of Turkey's total surface area and population, respectively. When completed, GAP will consist of 22 dams \u2013 including the Keban Dam \u2013 and 19 power plants and provide irrigation water to of agricultural land, which is about 20 percent of the irrigable land in Turkey. C. of this irrigated land is located in the Euphrates basin. By far the largest dam in GAP is the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, located c. northwest of \u015eanl\u0131urfa. This dam was completed in 1992; thereby creating a reservoir that is the third-largest lake in Turkey. With a maximum capacity of , the Atat\u00fcrk Dam reservoir is large enough to hold the entire annual discharge of the Euphrates. Completion of GAP was scheduled for 2010 but has been delayed because the World Bank has withheld funding due to the lack of an official agreement on water sharing between Turkey and the downstream states on the Euphrates and the Tigris.\nApart from barrages and dams, Iraq has also created an intricate network of canals connecting the Euphrates with Lake Habbaniyah, Lake Tharthar, and Abu Dibbis reservoir; all of which can be used to store excess floodwater. Via the Shatt al-Hayy, the Euphrates is connected with the Tigris. The largest canal in this network is the Main Outfall Drain or so-called \"Third River;\" constructed between 1953 and 1992. This canal is intended to drain the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris south of Baghdad to prevent soil salinization from irrigation. It also allows large freight barges to navigate up to Baghdad.\nEnvironmental and social effects.\nThe construction of the dams and irrigation schemes on the Euphrates has had a significant impact on the environment and society of each riparian country. The dams constructed as part of GAP \u2013 in both the Euphrates and the Tigris basins \u2013 have affected 382 villages and almost 200,000 people have been resettled elsewhere. The largest number of people was displaced by the building of the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, which alone affected 55,300 people. A survey among those who were displaced showed that the majority were unhappy with their new situation and that the compensation they had received was considered insufficient. The flooding of Lake Assad led to the forced displacement of c. 4,000 families, who were resettled in other parts of northern Syria as part of a now abandoned plan to create an \"Arab belt\" along the borders with Turkey and Iraq.\nApart from the changes in the discharge regime of the river, the numerous dams and irrigation projects have also had other effects on the environment. The creation of reservoirs with large surfaces in countries with high average temperatures has led to increased evaporation; thereby reducing the total amount of water that is available for human use. Annual evaporation from reservoirs has been estimated at in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. Water quality in the Iraqi Euphrates is low because irrigation water tapped in Turkey and Syria flows back into the river, together with dissolved fertilizer chemicals used on the fields. The salinity of Euphrates water in Iraq has increased as a result of upstream dam construction, leading to lower suitability as drinking water. The many dams and irrigation schemes, and the associated large-scale water abstraction, have also had a detrimental effect on the ecologically already fragile Mesopotamian Marshes and on freshwater fish habitats in Iraq.\nThe inundation of large parts of the Euphrates valley, especially in Turkey and Syria, has led to the flooding of many archaeological sites and other places of cultural significance. Although concerted efforts have been made to record or save as much of the endangered cultural heritage as possible, many sites are probably lost forever. The combined GAP projects on the Turkish Euphrates have led to major international efforts to document the archaeological and cultural heritage of the endangered parts of the valley. Especially the flooding of Zeugma with its unique Roman mosaics by the reservoir of the Birecik Dam has generated much controversy in both the Turkish and international press. The construction of the Tabqa Dam in Syria led to a large international campaign coordinated by UNESCO to document the heritage that would disappear under the waters of Lake Assad. Archaeologists from numerous countries excavated sites ranging in date from the Natufian to the Abbasid period, and two minarets were dismantled and rebuilt outside the flood zone. Important sites that have been flooded or affected by the rising waters of Lake Assad include Mureybet, Emar and Abu Hureyra. A similar international effort was made when the Tishrin Dam was constructed, which led, among others, to the flooding of the important Pre-Pottery Neolithic B site of Jerf el Ahmar. An archaeological survey and rescue excavations were also carried out in the area flooded by Lake Qadisiya in Iraq. Parts of the flooded area have recently become accessible again due to the drying up of the lake, resulting not only in new possibilities for archaeologists to do more research, but also providing opportunities for looting, which has been rampant elsewhere in Iraq in the wake of the 2003 invasion.\nReligion.\nIslam.\nIn Islam, hadiths say Muhammad(Saw) said \"The Last Hour would not come before the Euphrates uncovers a mountain of gold, for which people would fight. Ninety-nine out of each one hundred would die but every man amongst them would say that perhaps he would be the one who would be saved\" and that \"he who finds it [the gold] should not take anything out of that.\" This is said to be one of the future minor signs of the coming of Judgement Day:\nChristianity.\nIn the Christian Bible, the Euphrates River is mentioned in Revelation 16:12, in the final book of the New Testament. Author, John of Patmos writes about the Euphrates river drying up as part of a series of events that foretell the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.\nThe river Phrath mentioned in Genesis 2:14 is also identified as the Euphrates.\nHistory.\nPalaeolithic to Chalcolithic periods.\nThe early occupation of the Euphrates basin was limited to its upper reaches; that is, the area that is popularly known as the Fertile Crescent. Acheulean stone artifacts have been found in the Sajur basin and in the El Kowm oasis in the central Syrian steppe; the latter together with remains of \"Homo erectus\" that were dated to 450,000 years old. In the Taurus Mountains and the upper part of the Syrian Euphrates valley, early permanent villages such as Abu Hureyra \u2013 at first occupied by hunter-gatherers but later by some of the earliest farmers, Jerf el Ahmar, Mureybet and Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori became established from the eleventh millennium BCE onward. In the absence of irrigation, these early farming communities were limited to areas where rainfed agriculture was possible, that is, the upper parts of the Syrian Euphrates as well as Turkey. Late Neolithic villages, characterized by the introduction of pottery in the early 7th millennium BCE, are known throughout this area. Occupation of lower Mesopotamia started in the 6th millennium and is generally associated with the introduction of irrigation, as rainfall in this area is insufficient for dry agriculture. Evidence for irrigation has been found at several sites dating to this period, including Tell es-Sawwan. During the 5th millennium BCE, or late Ubaid period, northeastern Syria was dotted by small villages, although some of them grew to a size of over . In Iraq, sites like Eridu and Ur were already occupied during the Ubaid period. Clay boat models found at Tell Mashnaqa along the Khabur indicate that riverine transport was already practiced during this period. The Uruk period, roughly coinciding with the 4th millennium BCE, saw the emergence of truly urban settlements across Mesopotamia. Cities like Tell Brak and Uruk grew to over in size and displayed monumental architecture. The spread of southern Mesopotamian pottery, architecture and sealings far into Turkey and Iran has generally been interpreted as the material reflection of a widespread trade system aimed at providing the Mesopotamian cities with raw materials. Habuba Kabira on the Syrian Euphrates is a prominent example of a settlement that is interpreted as an Uruk colony.\nAncient history.\nDuring the Jemdet Nasr (3600\u20133100 BCE) and Early Dynastic periods (3100\u20132350 BCE), southern Mesopotamia experienced a growth in the number and size of settlements, suggesting strong population growth. These settlements, including Sumero-Akkadian sites like Sippar, Uruk, Adab and Kish, were organized in competing city-states. Many of these cities were located along canals of the Euphrates and the Tigris that have since dried up, but that can still be identified from remote sensing imagery. A similar development took place in Upper Mesopotamia, Subartu and Assyria, although only from the mid 3rd millennium and on a smaller scale than in Lower Mesopotamia. Sites like Ebla, Mari and Tell Leilan grew to prominence for the first time during this period.\nLarge parts of the Euphrates basin were for the first time united under a single ruler during the Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132154 BC) and Ur III empires, which controlled \u2013 either directly or indirectly through vassals \u2013 large parts of modern-day Iraq and northeastern Syria. Following their collapse, the Old Assyrian Empire (1975\u20131750 BCE) and Mari asserted their power over northeast Syria and northern Mesopotamia, while southern Mesopotamia was controlled by city-states like Isin, Kish and Larsa before their territories were absorbed by the newly emerged state of Babylonia under Hammurabi in the early to mid 18th century BCE.\nIn the second half of the 2nd millennium BCE, the Euphrates basin was divided between Kassite Babylon in the south and Mitanni, Assyria and the Hittite Empire in the north, with the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365\u20131020 BC) eventually eclipsing the Hittites, Mitanni and Kassite Babylonians. Following the end of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the late 11th century BCE, struggles broke out between Babylonia and Assyria over the control of the Iraqi Euphrates basin. The Neo-Assyrian Empire (935\u2013605 BC) eventually emerged victorious out of this conflict and also succeeded in gaining control of the northern Euphrates basin in the first half of the 1st millennium BCE.\nIn the centuries to come, control of the wider Euphrates basin shifted from the Neo-Assyrian Empire (which collapsed between 612 and 599 BC) to the short lived Median Empire (612\u2013546 BC) and equally brief Neo-Babylonian Empire (612\u2013539 BC) in the last years of the 7th century BC, and eventually to the Achaemenid Empire (539\u2013333 BC). The Achaemenid Empire was in turn overrun by Alexander the Great, who defeated the last king Darius III and died in Babylon in 323 BCE.\nSubsequent to this, the region came under the control of the Seleucid Empire (312\u2013150 BC), Parthian Empire (150\u2013226 AD) (during which several Neo-Assyrian states such as Adiabene came to rule certain regions of the Euphrates), and was fought over by the Roman Empire, its succeeding Byzantine Empire and the Sassanid Empire (226\u2013638 AD), until the Islamic conquest of the mid 7th century AD. The Battle of Karbala took place near the banks of this river in 680 AD.\nIn the north, the river served as a border between Greater Armenia (331 BC\u2013428 AD) and Lesser Armenia (the latter became a Roman province in the 1st century BC).\nModern era.\nAfter World War I, the borders in Southwest Asia were redrawn in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), when the Ottoman Empire was partitioned. Clause 109 of the treaty stipulated that the three riparian states of the Euphrates (at that time Turkey, France for its Syrian mandate and the United Kingdom for its mandate of Iraq) had to reach a mutual agreement on the use of its water and on the construction of any hydraulic installation. An agreement between Turkey and Iraq signed in 1946 required Turkey to report to Iraq on any hydraulic changes it made on the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system, and allowed Iraq to construct dams on Turkish territory to manage the flow of the Euphrates.\nThe river featured on the coat of arms of Iraq from 1932 to 1959.\nTurkey and Syria completed their first dams on the Euphrates \u2013 the Keban Dam and the Tabqa Dam, respectively \u2013 within one year of each other and filling of the reservoirs commenced in 1975. At the same time, the area was hit by severe drought and river flow toward Iraq was reduced from in 1973 to in 1975. This led to an international crisis during which Iraq threatened to bomb the Tabqa Dam. An agreement was eventually reached between Syria and Iraq after intervention by Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. A similar crisis, although not escalating to the point of military threats, occurred in 1981 when the Keban Dam reservoir had to be refilled after it had been almost emptied to temporarily increase Turkey's hydroelectricity production. In 1984, Turkey unilaterally declared that it would ensure a flow of at least per second, or per year, into Syria, and in 1987 a bilateral treaty to that effect was signed between the two countries. Another bilateral agreement from 1989 between Syria and Iraq settles the amount of water flowing into Iraq at 60 percent of the amount that Syria receives from Turkey. In 2008, Turkey, Syria and Iraq instigated the Joint Trilateral Committee (JTC) on the management of the water in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin and on 3 September 2009 a further agreement was signed to this effect.\nOn 15 April 2014, Turkey began to reduce the flow of the Euphrates into Syria and Iraq. The flow was cut off completely on 16 May 2014 resulting in the Euphrates terminating at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border. This was in violation of an agreement reached in 1987 in which Turkey committed to releasing a minimum of of water per second at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border.\nDuring the Syrian civil war and the Iraqi Civil War, much of the Euphrates was controlled by the Islamic State from 2014 until 2017, when the terrorist group began losing land and was eventually defeated territorially in Syria at the Battle of Baghouz and in Iraq in the Western Iraq offensive respectively.\nEconomy.\nThroughout history, the Euphrates has been of vital importance to those living along its course. With the construction of large hydropower stations, irrigation schemes, and pipelines capable of transporting water over large distances, many more people now depend on the river for basic amenities such as electricity and drinking water than in the past. Syria's Lake Assad is the most important source of drinking water for the city of Aleppo, to the west of the river valley. The lake also supports a modest state-operated fishing industry. Through a newly restored power line, the Haditha Dam in Iraq provides electricity to Baghdad."}
{"id": "10223", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10223", "title": "Estonian language", "text": "Estonian ( ) is a Finnic language of the Uralic family. Estonian is the official language of Estonia. It is written in the Latin script and is the first language of the majority of the country's population; it is also an official language of the European Union. Estonian is spoken natively by about 1.1 million people: 922,000 people in Estonia and 160,000 elsewhere.\nClassification.\nEstonian belongs to the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family. Other Finnic languages include Finnish and some minority languages spoken around the Baltic Sea and in northwestern Russia. Estonian is typically subclassified as a Southern Finnic language, and it is the second-most-spoken language among all the Finnic languages. Alongside Finnish, Hungarian and Maltese, Estonian is one of the four official languages of the European Union that are not Indo-European languages. \nIn terms of linguistic morphology, Estonian is a predominantly agglutinative language. The loss of word-final sounds is extensive, and this has made its inflectional morphology markedly more fusional, especially with respect to noun and adjective inflection. The transitional form from an agglutinating to a fusional language is a common feature of Estonian typologically over the course of history with the development of a rich morphological system.\nWord order is considerably more flexible than in English, but the basic order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object.\nHistory.\nThe speakers of the two major historical languages spoken in Estonia, North and South Estonian, are thought by some linguists to have arrived in Estonia in at least two different migration waves over two millennia ago, both groups having spoken considerably different vernacular; South Estonian might be a Finnic language rather than a variety of Estonian. Modern standard Estonian evolved in the 18th and 19th centuries based on the dialects of northern Estonia.\nDuring the Medieval and Early Modern periods, Estonian accepted many loanwords from Germanic languages, mainly from Middle Low German (Middle Saxon) and, after the 16th-century Protestant Reformation, from the Standard German language. \nEstonia's oldest written records of the Finnic languages date from the 13th century. The \"Originates Livoniae\" in the \"Livonian Chronicle of Henry\" contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.\nEstonian literature.\nThe earliest extant samples of connected (north) Estonian are the so-called Kullamaa prayers dating from 1524 and 1528. In 1525 the first book published in Estonian was printed. The book was a Lutheran manuscript, which never reached the reader and was destroyed immediately after publication.\nThe first extant Estonian book is a bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism by S.Wanradt and J.Koell dating to 1535, during the Protestant Reformation period. An Estonian grammar book to be used by priests was printed in German in 1637. The New Testament was translated into the variety of South Estonian called V\u00f5ro in 1686 (northern Estonian, 1715). The two languages were united based on Northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle.\nWritings in Estonian became more significant in the 19th century during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840).\nThe birth of native Estonian literature was during the period 1810\u20131820, when the patriotic and philosophical poems by Kristjan Jaak Peterson were published. Peterson, who was the first student to acknowledge his Estonian origin at the then German-language University of Dorpat, is commonly regarded as a herald of Estonian national literature and considered the founder of modern Estonian poetry. His birthday, March 14, is celebrated in Estonia as Mother Tongue Day. A fragment from Peterson's poem \"Kuu\" expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language:\nIn English:\nIn the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in Estonian; by comparison, between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published.\nIn modern times A. H. Tammsaare, Jaan Kross, and Andrus Kivir\u00e4hk are Estonia's best-known and most translated writers.\nEstonians lead the world in book ownership, owning on average 218 books per house, and 35% of Estonians owning 350 books or more (as of 2018). \nOfficial language.\nWritings in Estonian became significant only in the 19th century with the spread of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment, during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840). Although Baltic Germans at large regarded the future of Estonians as being a fusion with themselves, the Estophile educated class admired the ancient culture of the Estonians and their era of freedom before the conquests by Danes and Germans in the 13th century.\nWhen the Republic of Estonia was established in 1918, Estonian became the official language of the newly independent country. Immediately after World War II, in 1945, over 97% of the then population of Estonia self-identified as native ethnic Estonians and spoke the language.\nWhen Estonia was invaded and reoccupied by the Soviet army in 1944, the status of Estonian effectively changed to one of the two official languages (Russian being the other one). Many immigrants from Russia entered Estonia under Soviet encouragement. In the 1970s, the pressure of bilingualism for Estonians was intensified. Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in local schools was formally compulsory, in practice, the teaching and learning of Estonian by Russian-speakers was often considered unnecessary by the Soviet authorities.\nIn 1991, with the restoration of Estonia's independence, Estonian went back to being the only official language in Estonia. Since 2004, when Estonia joined the European Union, Estonian is also one of the (now 24) official languages of the EU.\nThe return of former Soviet immigrants to their countries of origin at the end of the 20th century has brought the proportion of native Estonian-speakers in Estonia now back above 70%. Large parts of the first- and second-generation immigrants in Estonia have now adopted Estonian (over 50% as of the 2022 census).\nDialects.\nThe Estonian dialects are divided into two groups\u00a0\u2013 the northern and southern dialects, historically associated with the cities of Tallinn in the north and Tartu in the south, in addition to a distinct \"kirderanniku\" dialect, Northeastern coastal Estonian.\nThe northern group consists of the or central dialect that is also the basis for the standard language, the or western dialect, roughly corresponding to L\u00e4\u00e4ne County and P\u00e4rnu County, the (islands' dialect) of Saaremaa, Hiiumaa, Muhu and Kihnu, and the or eastern dialect on the northwestern shore of Lake Peipus.\nOne of the pronunciation features of the Saaremaa dialect is the lack of the '\u00f5' vowel. A five-metre monument erected in 2020, marking the \"border\" between the vowels '\u00f5' and '\u00f6', humorously makes reference to this fact.\nSouth Estonian consists of the Tartu, Mulgi, V\u00f5ro and Seto varieties. These are sometimes considered either variants of South Estonian or separate languages altogether. Also, Seto and V\u00f5ro distinguish themselves from each other less by language and more by their culture and their respective Christian confession.\nWriting system.\nAlphabet.\nEstonian employs the Latin script as the basis for its alphabet. The script adds the letters \"\u00e4\", \"\u00f6\", \"\u00fc\", and \"\u00f5\", plus the later additions \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\". The letters \"c\", \"q\", \"w\", \"x\" and \"y\" are limited to proper names of foreign origin, and \"f\", \"z\", \"\u0161\", and \"\u017e\" appear in loanwords and foreign names only. \"\u00d6\" and \"\u00dc\" are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German. Unlike in standard German but like Swedish (when followed by 'r') and Finnish, \"\u00c4\" is pronounced [\u00e6], as in English \"mat\". The vowels \u00c4, \u00d6 and \u00dc are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian, although the letter shapes come from German. The letter \"\u00f5\" denotes , unrounded , or a close-mid back unrounded vowel. It is almost identical to the Bulgarian \u044a and the Vietnamese \u01a1, and is also used to transcribe the Russian \u044b.\nAdditionally \"C\", \"Q\", \"W\", \"X\", and \"Y\" are used in writing foreign proper names. They do not occur in Estonian words, and are not officially part of the alphabet. Including all the foreign letters, the alphabet consists of the following 32 letters:\nOrthography.\nAlthough the Estonian orthography is generally guided by phonemic principles, with each grapheme corresponding to one phoneme, there are some historical and morphological deviations from this: for example preservation of the morpheme in declension of the word (writing b, g, d in places where p, k, t is pronounced) and in the use of 'i' and 'j'. Where it is very impractical or impossible to type \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\", they are replaced by \"sh\" and \"zh\" in some written texts, although this is considered incorrect. Otherwise, the \"h\" in \"sh\" represents a voiceless glottal fricative, as in \"Pasha\" (\"pas-ha\"); this also applies to some foreign names.\nModern Estonian orthography is based on the \"Newer orthography\" created by Eduard Ahrens in the second half of the 19thcentury based on Finnish orthography. The \"Older orthography\" it replaced was created in the 17thcentury by Bengt Gottfried Forselius and Johann Hornung based on standard German orthography. Earlier writing in Estonian had, by and large, used an \"ad hoc\" orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography. Some influences of the standard German orthography \u2013 for example, writing 'W'/'w' instead of 'V'/'v' \u2013 persisted well into the 1930s.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nThere are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs, 28 of which are native to Estonian.[1] All nine vowels can appear as the first component of a diphthong, but only /\u0251 e i o u/ occur as the second component. A vowel characteristic of Estonian is the unrounded back vowel /\u0264/, which may be close-mid back, close back, or close-mid central.\nConsonants.\nWord-initial \"b, d, g\" occur only in loanwords and some old loanwords are spelled with \"p, t, k\" instead of etymological \"b, d, g\": \"pank\" 'bank'. Word-medially and word-finally, \"b, d, g\" represent short plosives /p, t, k/ (may be pronounced as partially voiced consonants), \"p, t, k\" represent half-long plosives /p\u02d0, t\u02d0, k\u02d0/, and \"pp, tt, kk\" represent overlong plosives /p\u02d0\u02d0, t\u02d0\u02d0, k\u02d0\u02d0/; for example: \"kabi\" /k\u0251pi/ 'hoof' \u2014 \"kapi\" /k\u0251p\u02d0i/ 'wardrobe [gen sg] \u2014 \"kappi\" /k\u0251p\u02d0\u02d0i/ 'wardrobe [ptv sg]'.\nBefore and after \"b, p, d, t, g, k, s, h, f, \u0161, z, \u017e\", the sounds [p], [t], [k] are written as \"p, t, k\", with some exceptions due to morphology or etymology.\nRepresentation of palatalised consonants is inconsistent, and they are not always indicated.\n\u014b is an allophone of /n/ before /k/.\nWhile peripheral Estonian dialects are characterized by various degrees of vowel harmony, central dialects have almost completely lost the feature. Since the standard language is based on central dialects, it has no vowel harmony either. In the standard language, the front vowels occur exclusively on the first or stressed syllable, although vowel harmony is still apparent in older texts.\nGrammar.\nTypologically, Estonian represents a transitional form from an agglutinating language to a fusional language. The canonical word order is SVO (subject\u2013verb\u2013object), although often debated among linguists.\nIn Estonian, nouns and pronouns do not have grammatical gender, but nouns and adjectives decline in fourteen cases: nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive, abessive, and comitative, with the case and number of the adjective always agreeing with that of the noun (except in the terminative, essive, abessive and comitative, where there is agreement only for the number, the adjective being in the genitive form). Thus the illative for \"kollane maja\" (\"a yellow house\") is \"kollasesse majja\" (\"into a yellow house\"), but the terminative is \"kollase majani\" (\"as far as a yellow house\"). With respect to the Proto-Finnic language, elision has occurred; thus, the actual case marker may be absent, but the stem is changed, cf. \"maja \u2013 majja\" and the Ostrobothnia dialect of Finnish \"maja\u00a0\u2013 majahan\".\nThe verbal system has no distinct future tense (the present tense serves here) and features special forms to express an action performed by an undetermined subject (the \"impersonal\").\nVocabulary.\nAlthough Estonian and the Germanic languages have very different origins and the vocabulary is considered quite different from that of the Indo-European family, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and English, for example. This is primarily because Estonian has borrowed nearly one-third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22\u201325 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent. Prior to the wave of new loanwords from English in the 20th and 21st centuries, historically, Swedish and Russian were also sources of borrowings but to a much lesser extent. In borrowings, often 'b' and 'p' are interchangeable, for example 'baggage' becomes 'pagas', 'lob' (to throw) becomes 'loopima'. The initial letter 's' before another consonant is often dropped, for example 'skool' becomes 'kool', 'stool' becomes 'tool'.\n\"Ex nihilo\" lexical enrichment.\nEstonian language planners such as Ado Grenzstein (a journalist active in Estonia from the 1870s to the 1890s) tried to use formation \"ex nihilo\" (\"Ursch\u00f6pfung\"); i.e. they created new words out of nothing.\nThe most well-known reformer of Estonian, Johannes Aavik (1880\u20131973), used creations \"ex nihilo\" (cf. 'free constructions', Tauli 1977), along with other sources of lexical enrichment such as derivations, compositions and loanwords (often from Finnish; cf. Saareste and Raun 1965: 76). In Aavik's dictionary (1921) lists approximately 4000 words. About 40 of the 200 words created by Johannes Aavik allegedly \"ex nihilo\" are in common use today. Examples are * \"ese\" 'object', * \"kolp\" 'skull', * \"liibuma\" 'to cling', * \"naasma\" 'to return, come back', * \"n\u00f5me\" 'stupid, dull'. \nMany of the coinages that have been considered (often by Aavik himself) as words concocted \"ex nihilo\" could well have been influenced by foreign lexical items; for example, words from Russian, German, French, Finnish, English and Swedish. Aavik had a broad classical education and knew Ancient Greek, Latin and French. Consider \"roim\" 'crime' versus English \"crime\" or \"taunima\" 'to condemn, disapprove' versus Finnish \"tuomita\" 'to condemn, to judge' (these Aavikisms appear in Aavik's 1921 dictionary). These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item.\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Estonian and English:"}
{"id": "10224", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10224", "title": "E-Prime", "text": "E-Prime (short for English-Prime or English Prime, sometimes \u00c9 or E\u2032) denotes a restricted form of English in which authors avoid all forms of the verb \"to be\".\nE-Prime excludes forms such as \"be\", \"being\", \"been\", present tense forms (\"am\", \"is\", \"are\"), past tense forms (\"was\", \"were\") along with their negative contractions (\"isn't\", \"aren't\", \"wasn't\", \"weren't\"), and nonstandard contractions such as \"ain't\" and \"'twas\". E-Prime also excludes contractions such as \"I'm\", \"we're\", \"you're\", \"he's\", \"she's\", \"it's\", \"they're\", \"there's\", \"here's\", \"where's\", \"when's\", \"why's\", \"how's\", \"who's\", \"what's\", and \"that's\".\nSome scholars claim that E-Prime can clarify thinking and strengthen writing, while others doubt its utility.\nHistory.\nD. David Bourland Jr., who had studied under Alfred Korzybski, devised E-Prime as an addition to Korzybski's general semantics in the late 1940s. Bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled \"A Linguistic Note: Writing in E-Prime\" (originally published in \"General Semantics Bulletin\"). The essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field, partly because practitioners of general semantics sometimes saw Bourland as attacking the verb \"to be\" as such, and not just certain usages.\nBourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation. The first (1991), co-edited by Paul Dennithorne Johnston, bore the title: \"To Be or Not: An E-Prime Anthology\". For the second, \"More E-Prime: To Be or Not II\", published in 1994, he added a third editor, Jeremy Klein. Bourland and Johnston then edited a third book, \"E-Prime III: a third anthology\", published in 1997.\nFunctions of \"to be\".\nIn English, the verb 'to be' (also known as the \"copula\") has several distinct functions:\nBourland sees specifically the \"identity\" and \"predication\" functions as pernicious but advocates the exclusion of all forms for the sake of simplicity. In the case of the \"existence\" form or the \"location\" form, terms such as \"exist\", \"sit\" or \"lie\" could substitute for the copula.\nSome ergative verbs may substitute the copula, including \"taste\", \"feel\", \"smell\", \"sound\", \"grow\", \"hinge\", \"remain\", \"rest\", \"stay\", \"reside\", and \"turn\", among others.\nExamples.\nOne could rewrite the functions of \"to be\" as follows:\nRationale.\nBourland and other advocates also suggest that use of E-Prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict.\nKellogg and Bourland describe misuse of the verb \"to be\" as creating a \"deity mode of speech\", allowing \"even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-like pronouncements on the nature of things\".\nPsychological effects.\nWhile teaching at the University of Florida, Alfred Korzybski counseled his students to\neliminate the infinitive and verb forms of \"to be\" from their vocabulary, whereas a second group continued to use \"I am,\" \"You are,\" \"They are\" statements as usual. For example, instead of saying, \"I am depressed,\" a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else, such as, \"I feel depressed when ...\" or \"I tend to make myself depressed about ...\"\nKorzybski observed improvement \"of one full letter grade\" by \"students who did not generalize by using that infinitive\".\nAlbert Ellis advocated the use of E-Prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary (see also Solution focused brief therapy) and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements. According to Ellis, rational emotive behavior therapy \"has favored E-Prime more than any other form of psychotherapy and I think it is still the only form of therapy that has some of its main books written in E-Prime\". However, Ellis did not always use E-Prime because he believed it interferes with readability.\nCriticisms.\nMany authors have questioned E-Prime's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudice (Lakoff, 1992; Murphy, 1992; Parkinson, 1992; Kenyon, 1992; French, 1992, 1993; Lohrey, 1993). These authors observed that communication under the copula ban can remain obscure and imply prejudice, while losing important speech patterns, such as identities and identification. Further, prejudices and judgments may become more difficult to notice or refute.\nVarious arguments against E-Prime (in the context of general semantics) have been conjectured:\nAccording to an article (written in E-Prime and advocating a role for E-Prime in ESL and EFL programs) published by the Office of English Language Programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the State Department of the United States, \"Requiring students to avoid the verb to be on every assignment would deter students from developing other fundamental skills of fluent writing.\""}
{"id": "10225", "revid": "1266567473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10225", "title": "Elliptic curve", "text": "In mathematics, an elliptic curve is a smooth, projective, algebraic curve of genus one, on which there is a specified point . An elliptic curve is defined over a field and describes points in , the Cartesian product of with itself. If the field's characteristic is different from 2 and 3, then the curve can be described as a plane algebraic curve which consists of solutions for:\nfor some coefficients and in . The curve is required to be non-singular, which means that the curve has no cusps or self-intersections. (This is equivalent to the condition , that is, being square-free in .) It is always understood that the curve is really sitting in the projective plane, with the point being the unique point at infinity. Many sources define an elliptic curve to be simply a curve given by an equation of this form. (When the coefficient field has characteristic 2 or 3, the above equation is not quite general enough to include all non-singular cubic curves; see below.)\nAn elliptic curve is an abelian variety \u2013 that is, it has a group law defined algebraically, with respect to which it is an abelian group \u2013 and serves as the identity element.\nIf , where is any polynomial of degree three in with no repeated roots, the solution set is a nonsingular plane curve of genus one, an elliptic curve. If has degree four and is square-free this equation again describes a plane curve of genus one; however, it has no natural choice of identity element. More generally, any algebraic curve of genus one, for example the intersection of two quadric surfaces embedded in three-dimensional projective space, is called an elliptic curve, provided that it is equipped with a marked point to act as the identity.\nUsing the theory of elliptic functions, it can be shown that elliptic curves defined over the complex numbers correspond to embeddings of the torus into the complex projective plane. The torus is also an abelian group, and this correspondence is also a group isomorphism.\nElliptic curves are especially important in number theory, and constitute a major area of current research; for example, they were used in Andrew Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. They also find applications in elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and integer factorization.\nAn elliptic curve is \"not\" an ellipse in the sense of a projective conic, which has genus zero: see elliptic integral for the origin of the term. However, there is a natural representation of real elliptic curves with shape invariant as ellipses in the hyperbolic plane formula_2. Specifically, the intersections of the Minkowski hyperboloid with quadric surfaces characterized by a certain constant-angle property produce the Steiner ellipses in formula_2 (generated by orientation-preserving collineations). Further, the orthogonal trajectories of these ellipses comprise the elliptic curves with , and any ellipse in formula_2 described as a locus relative to two foci is uniquely the elliptic curve sum of two Steiner ellipses, obtained by adding the pairs of intersections on each orthogonal trajectory. Here, the vertex of the hyperboloid serves as the identity on each trajectory curve.\nTopologically, a complex elliptic curve is a torus, while a complex ellipse is a sphere.\nElliptic curves over the real numbers.\nAlthough the formal definition of an elliptic curve requires some background in algebraic geometry, it is possible to describe some features of elliptic curves over the real numbers using only introductory algebra and geometry.\nIn this context, an elliptic curve is a plane curve defined by an equation of the form\nafter a linear change of variables ( and are real numbers). This type of equation is called a Weierstrass equation, and said to be in Weierstrass form, or Weierstrass normal form.\nThe definition of elliptic curve also requires that the curve be non-singular. Geometrically, this means that the graph has no cusps, self-intersections, or isolated points. Algebraically, this holds if and only if the discriminant, formula_6, is not equal to zero.\nThe discriminant is zero when formula_8.\nThe real graph of a non-singular curve has \"two\" components if its discriminant is positive, and \"one\" component if it is negative. For example, in the graphs shown in figure to the right, the discriminant in the first case is 64, and in the second case is \u2212368. Following the convention at Conic_section#Discriminant, \"elliptic\" curves require that the discriminant is negative.\nThe group law.\nWhen working in the projective plane, the equation in homogeneous coordinates becomes :\nThis equation is not defined on the line at infinity, but we can multiply by formula_10 to get one that is :\nThis resulting equation is defined on the whole projective plane, and the curve it defines projects onto the elliptic curve of interest. To find its intersection with the line at infinity, we can just posit formula_12. This implies formula_13, which in a field means formula_14. formula_15 on the other hand can take any value, and thus all triplets formula_16 satisfy the equation. In projective geometry this set is simply the point formula_17, which is thus the unique intersection of the curve with the line at infinity.\nSince the curve is smooth, hence continuous, it can be shown that this point at infinity is the identity element of a group structure whose operation is geometrically described as follows:\nSince the curve is symmetric about the -axis, given any point , we can take to be the point opposite it. We then have formula_18, as formula_19 lies on the -plane, so that formula_20 is also the symmetrical of formula_19 about the origin, and thus represents the same projective point.\nIf and are two points on the curve, then we can uniquely describe a third point in the following way. First, draw the line that intersects and . This will generally intersect the cubic at a third point, . We then take to be , the point opposite .\nThis definition for addition works except in a few special cases related to the point at infinity and intersection multiplicity. The first is when one of the points is . Here, we define , making the identity of the group. If we only have one point, thus we cannot define the line between them. In this case, we use the tangent line to the curve at this point as our line. In most cases, the tangent will intersect a second point and we can take its opposite. If and are opposites of each other, we define . Lastly, If is an inflection point (a point where the concavity of the curve changes), we take to be itself and is simply the point opposite itself, i.e. itself.\nLet be a field over which the curve is defined (that is, the coefficients of the defining equation or equations of the curve are in ) and denote the curve by . Then the -rational points of are the points on whose coordinates all lie in , including the point at infinity. The set of -rational points is denoted by . is a group, because properties of polynomial equations show that if is in , then is also in , and if two of , , are in , then so is the third. Additionally, if is a subfield of , then is a subgroup of .\nAlgebraic interpretation.\nThe above groups can be described algebraically as well as geometrically. Given the curve over the field (whose characteristic we assume to be neither 2 nor 3), and points and on the curve, assume first that (case \"1\"). Let be the equation of the line that intersects and , which has the following slope:\nThe line equation and the curve equation intersect at the points , , and , so the equations have identical values at these values.\nwhich is equivalent to\nSince , , and are solutions, this equation has its roots at exactly the same values as\nand because both equations are cubics they must be the same polynomial up to a scalar. Then equating the coefficients of in both equations\nand solving for the unknown . \n follows from the line equation\nand this is an element of , because is.\nIf , then there are two options: if (case \"3\"), including the case where (case \"4\"), then the sum is defined as 0; thus, the inverse of each point on the curve is found by reflecting it across the -axis.\nIf , then and (case \"2\" using as ). The slope is given by the tangent to the curve at (\"x\"\"P\", \"y\"\"P\").\nA more general expression for formula_30 that works in both case 1 and case 2 is\nas formula_32, then formula_33, so formula_34.\nThe functional equation is\nAs we are only interested in the behaviour of formula_36, we can use a reduced zeta function\nand so\nwhich leads directly to the local L-functions\nThe Sato\u2013Tate conjecture is a statement about how the error term formula_41 in Hasse's theorem varies with the different primes \"q\", if an elliptic curve E over Q is reduced modulo q. It was proven (for almost all such curves) in 2006 due to the results of Taylor, Harris and Shepherd-Barron, and says that the error terms are equidistributed.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are notably applied in cryptography and for the factorization of large integers. These algorithms often make use of the group structure on the points of \"E\". Algorithms that are applicable to general groups, for example the group of invertible elements in finite fields, F*\"q\", can thus be applied to the group of points on an elliptic curve. For example, the discrete logarithm is such an algorithm. The interest in this is that choosing an elliptic curve allows for more flexibility than choosing \"q\" (and thus the group of units in F\"q\"). Also, the group structure of elliptic curves is generally more complicated.\nElliptic curves over a general field.\nElliptic curves can be defined over any field \"K\"; the formal definition of an elliptic curve is a non-singular projective algebraic curve over \"K\" with genus 1 and endowed with a distinguished point defined over \"K\".\nIf the characteristic of \"K\" is neither 2 nor 3, then every elliptic curve over \"K\" can be written in the form\nafter a linear change of variables. Here \"p\" and \"q\" are elements of \"K\" such that the right hand side polynomial \"x\"3 \u2212 \"px\" \u2212 \"q\" does not have any double roots. If the characteristic is 2 or 3, then more terms need to be kept: in characteristic 3, the most general equation is of the form\nfor arbitrary constants \"b\"2, \"b\"4, \"b\"6 such that the polynomial on the right-hand side has distinct roots (the notation is chosen for historical reasons). In characteristic 2, even this much is not possible, and the most general equation is\nprovided that the variety it defines is non-singular. If characteristic were not an obstruction, each equation would reduce to the previous ones by a suitable linear change of variables.\nOne typically takes the curve to be the set of all points (\"x\",\"y\") which satisfy the above equation and such that both \"x\" and \"y\" are elements of the algebraic closure of \"K\". Points of the curve whose coordinates both belong to \"K\" are called \"K\"-rational points.\nMany of the preceding results remain valid when the field of definition of \"E\" is a number field \"K\", that is to say, a finite field extension of Q. In particular, the group \"E(K)\" of \"K\"-rational points of an elliptic curve \"E\" defined over \"K\" is finitely generated, which generalizes the Mordell\u2013Weil theorem above. A theorem due to Lo\u00efc Merel shows that for a given integer \"d\", there are (up to isomorphism) only finitely many groups that can occur as the torsion groups of \"E\"(\"K\") for an elliptic curve defined over a number field \"K\" of degree \"d\". More precisely, there is a number \"B\"(\"d\") such that for any elliptic curve \"E\" defined over a number field \"K\" of degree \"d\", any torsion point of \"E\"(\"K\") is of order less than \"B\"(\"d\"). The theorem is effective: for \"d\" &gt; 1, if a torsion point is of order \"p\", with \"p\" prime, then\nAs for the integral points, Siegel's theorem generalizes to the following: Let \"E\" be an elliptic curve defined over a number field \"K\", \"x\" and \"y\" the Weierstrass coordinates. Then there are only finitely many points of \"E(K)\" whose \"x\"-coordinate is in the ring of integers \"O\"\"K\".\nThe properties of the Hasse\u2013Weil zeta function and the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture can also be extended to this more general situation.\nElliptic curves over the complex numbers.\nThe formulation of elliptic curves as the embedding of a torus in the complex projective plane follows naturally from a curious property of Weierstrass's elliptic functions. These functions and their first derivative are related by the formula\nHere, and are constants; is the Weierstrass elliptic function and its derivative. It should be clear that this relation is in the form of an elliptic curve (over the complex numbers). The Weierstrass functions are doubly periodic; that is, they are periodic with respect to a lattice ; in essence, the Weierstrass functions are naturally defined on a torus . This torus may be embedded in the complex projective plane by means of the map\nThis map is a group isomorphism of the torus (considered with its natural group structure) with the chord-and-tangent group law on the cubic curve which is the image of this map. It is also an isomorphism of Riemann surfaces from the torus to the cubic curve, so topologically, an elliptic curve is a torus. If the lattice is related by multiplication by a non-zero complex number to a lattice , then the corresponding curves are isomorphic. Isomorphism classes of elliptic curves are specified by the -invariant.\nThe isomorphism classes can be understood in a simpler way as well. The constants and , called the modular invariants, are uniquely determined by the lattice, that is, by the structure of the torus. However, all real polynomials factorize completely into linear factors over the complex numbers, since the field of complex numbers is the algebraic closure of the reals. So, the elliptic curve may be written as\nOne finds that\nand\nTo see that formula_56, note that the original isogeny formula_57 can be written as a composite\nand that since formula_57 is of degree formula_60, formula_61 is multiplication by formula_60 on formula_63\nAlternatively, we can use the smaller Picard group formula_64, a quotient of formula_65 The map formula_66 descends to an isomorphism, formula_67 The dual isogeny is\nNote that the relation formula_56 also implies the conjugate relation formula_70 Indeed, let formula_71 Then formula_72 But formula_73 is surjective, so we must have formula_74\nAlgorithms that use elliptic curves.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are used in some cryptographic applications as well as for integer factorization. Typically, the general idea in these applications is that a known algorithm which makes use of certain finite groups is rewritten to use the groups of rational points of elliptic curves. For more see also:\nReferences.\nSerge Lang, in the introduction to the book cited below, stated that \"It is possible to write endlessly on elliptic curves. (This is not a threat.)\" The following short list is thus at best a guide to the vast expository literature available on the theoretical, algorithmic, and cryptographic aspects of elliptic curves."}
{"id": "10229", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10229", "title": "Equidae", "text": "Equidae (commonly known as the horse family) is the taxonomic family of horses and related animals, including the extant horses, asses, and zebras, and many other species known only from fossils. The family evolved more than 50 million years ago, in the Eocene epoch, from a small, multi-toed ungulate into larger, single-toed animals. All extant species are in the genus \"Equus\", which originated in North America. Equidae belongs to the order Perissodactyla, which includes the extant tapirs and rhinoceros, and several extinct families. It is more specifically grouped within the superfamily Equoidea, the only other family being the extinct Palaeotheriidae.\nThe term equid refers to any member of this family, including any equine.\nEvolution.\nThe oldest known fossils assigned to Equidae were found in North America, and date from the early Eocene epoch, 54 million years ago. They were once assigned to the genus \"Hyracotherium\", but the type species of that genus is now regarded as a palaeothere. The other species have been split off into different genera. These early equids were fox-sized animals with three toes on the hind feet, and four on the front feet. They were herbivorous browsers on relatively soft plants, and already adapted for running. The complexity of their brains suggest that they already were alert and intelligent animals. Later species reduced the number of toes, and developed teeth more suited for grinding up grasses and other tough plant food.\nThe equids, like other perissodactyls, are hindgut fermenters. They have evolved specialized teeth that cut and shear tough plant matter to accommodate their fibrous diet. Their seemingly inefficient digestion strategy is a result of their size at the time of its evolution, as they would have already had to be relatively large mammals to be supported on such a strategy.\nThe family became relatively diverse during the Miocene epoch, with many new species appearing. By this time, equids were more truly horse like, having developed the typical body shape of the modern animals. Many of these species bore the main weight of their bodies on their central third toe, with the others becoming reduced and barely touching the ground, if at all. The sole surviving genus, \"Equus\", had evolved by the early Pleistocene epoch, and spread rapidly through the world."}
{"id": "10231", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10231", "title": "List of economists", "text": "This is an incomplete alphabetical list by surname of notable economists, experts in the social science of economics, past and present. For a history of economics, see the article History of economic thought. Only economists with biographical articles in Wikipedia are listed here."}
{"id": "10232", "revid": "18632153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10232", "title": "Empirical knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "10233", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10233", "title": "Encyclopedist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10235", "revid": "17678816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10235", "title": "ELIZA", "text": "ELIZA is an early natural language processing computer program developed from 1964 to 1967 at MIT by Joseph Weizenbaum. Created to explore communication between humans and machines, ELIZA simulated conversation by using a pattern matching and substitution methodology that gave users an illusion of understanding on the part of the program, but had no representation that could be considered really understanding what was being said by either party. Whereas the ELIZA program itself was written (originally) in MAD-SLIP, the pattern matching directives that contained most of its language capability were provided in separate \"scripts\", represented in a lisp-like representation. The most famous script, DOCTOR, simulated a psychotherapist of the Rogerian school (in which the therapist often reflects back the patient's words to the patient), and used rules, dictated in the script, to respond with non-directional questions to user inputs. As such, ELIZA was one of the first chatterbots (\"chatbot\" modernly) and one of the first programs capable of attempting the Turing test.\nELIZA's creator, Weizenbaum, intended the program as a method to explore communication between humans and machines. He was surprised and shocked that some people, including Weizenbaum's secretary, attributed human-like feelings to the computer program. Many academics believed that the program would be able to positively influence the lives of many people, particularly those with psychological issues, and that it could aid doctors working on such patients' treatment. While ELIZA was capable of engaging in discourse, it could not converse with true understanding. However, many early users were convinced of ELIZA's intelligence and understanding, despite Weizenbaum's insistence to the contrary. The original ELIZA source-code had been missing since its creation in the 1960s as it was not common to publish articles that included source code at that time. However, more recently the MAD-SLIP source-code has now been discovered in the MIT archives and published on various platforms, such as the Internet Archive. The source-code is of high historical interest since it demonstrates not only the specificity of programming languages and techniques at that time, but also the beginning of software layering and abstraction as a means of achieving sophisticated software programming.\nOverview.\nJoseph Weizenbaum's ELIZA, running the DOCTOR script, created a conversational interaction somewhat similar to what might take place in the office of \"a [non-directive] psychotherapist in an initial psychiatric interview\" and to \"demonstrate that the communication between man and machine was superficial\". While ELIZA is best known for acting in the manner of a psychotherapist, the speech patterns are due to the data and instructions supplied by the DOCTOR script. ELIZA itself examined the text for keywords, applied values to said keywords, and transformed the input into an output; the script that ELIZA ran determined the keywords, set the values of keywords, and set the rules of transformation for the output. Weizenbaum chose to make the DOCTOR script in the context of psychotherapy to \"sidestep the problem of giving the program a data base of real-world knowledge\", allowing it to reflect back the patient's statements in order to carry the conversation forward. The result was a somewhat intelligent-seeming response that reportedly deceived some early users of the program.\nWeizenbaum named his program ELIZA after Eliza Doolittle, a working-class character in George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\" (also appearing in the musical \"My Fair Lady\", which was based on the play and was hugely popular at the time). According to Weizenbaum, ELIZA's ability to be \"incrementally improved\" by various users made it similar to Eliza Doolittle, since Eliza Doolittle was taught to speak with an upper-class accent in Shaw's play. However, unlike the human character in Shaw's play, ELIZA is incapable of learning new patterns of speech or new words through interaction alone. Edits must be made directly to ELIZA's active script in order to change the manner by which the program operates.\nWeizenbaum first implemented ELIZA in his own SLIP list-processing language, where, depending upon the initial entries by the user, the illusion of human intelligence could appear, or be dispelled through several interchanges. Some of ELIZA's responses were so convincing that Weizenbaum and several others have anecdotes of users becoming emotionally attached to the program, occasionally forgetting that they were conversing with a computer. Weizenbaum's own secretary reportedly asked Weizenbaum to leave the room so that she and ELIZA could have a real conversation. Weizenbaum was surprised by this, later writing: \"I had not realized\u00a0... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\"\nIn 1966, interactive computing (via a teletype) was new. It was 11 years before the personal computer became familiar to the general public, and three decades before most people encountered attempts at natural language processing in Internet services like Ask.com or PC help systems such as Microsoft Office Clippit. Although those programs included years of research and work, ELIZA remains a milestone simply because it was the first time a programmer had attempted such a human-machine interaction with the goal of creating the illusion (however brief) of human\u2013\"human\" interaction.\nAt the ICCC 1972, ELIZA was brought together with another early artificial-intelligence program named PARRY for a computer-only conversation. While ELIZA was built to speak as a doctor, PARRY was intended to simulate a patient with schizophrenia.\nDesign and implementation.\nWeizenbaum originally wrote ELIZA in MAD-SLIP for CTSS on an IBM 7094 as a program to make natural-language conversation possible with a computer. To accomplish this, Weizenbaum identified five \"fundamental technical problems\" for ELIZA to overcome: the identification of key words, the discovery of a minimal context, the choice of appropriate transformations, the generation of responses in the absence of key words, and the provision of an editing capability for ELIZA scripts. Weizenbaum solved these problems and made ELIZA such that it had no built-in contextual framework or universe of discourse. However, this required ELIZA to have a script of instructions on how to respond to inputs from users.\nELIZA starts its process of responding to an input by a user by first examining the text input for a \"keyword\". A \"keyword\" is a word designated as important by the acting ELIZA script, which assigns to each keyword a precedence number, or a RANK, designed by the programmer. If such words are found, they are put into a \"keystack\", with the keyword of the highest RANK at the top. The input sentence is then manipulated and transformed as the rule associated with the keyword of the highest RANK directs. For example, when the DOCTOR script encounters words such as \"alike\" or \"same\", it would output a message pertaining to similarity, in this case \"In what way?\", as these words had high precedence number. This also demonstrates how certain words, as dictated by the script, can be manipulated regardless of contextual considerations, such as switching first-person pronouns and second-person pronouns and vice versa, as these too had high precedence numbers. Such words with high precedence numbers are deemed superior to conversational patterns and are treated independently of contextual patterns.\nFollowing the first examination, the next step of the process is to apply an appropriate transformation rule, which includes two parts: the \"decomposition rule\" and the \"reassembly rule\". First, the input is reviewed for syntactical patterns in order to establish the minimal context necessary to respond. Using the keywords and other nearby words from the input, different disassembly rules are tested until an appropriate pattern is found. Using the script's rules, the sentence is then \"dismantled\" and arranged into sections of the component parts as the \"decomposition rule for the highest-ranking keyword\" dictates. The example that Weizenbaum gives is the input \"You are very helpful\", which is transformed to \"I are very helpful\". This is then broken into (1) empty (2) \"I\" (3) \"are\" (4) \"very helpful\". The decomposition rule has broken the phrase into four small segments that contain both the keywords and the information in the sentence.\nThe decomposition rule then designates a particular reassembly rule, or set of reassembly rules, to follow when reconstructing the sentence. The reassembly rule takes the fragments of the input that the decomposition rule had created, rearranges them, and adds in programmed words to create a response. Using Weizenbaum's example previously stated, such a reassembly rule would take the fragments and apply them to the phrase \"What makes you think I am (4)\", which would result in \"What makes you think I am very helpful?\". This example is rather simple, since depending upon the disassembly rule, the output could be significantly more complex and use more of the input from the user. However, from this reassembly, ELIZA then sends the constructed sentence to the user in the form of text on the screen.\nThese steps represent the bulk of the procedures that ELIZA follows in order to create a response from a typical input, though there are several specialized situations that ELIZA/DOCTOR can respond to. One Weizenbaum specifically wrote about was when there is no keyword. One solution was to have ELIZA respond with a remark that lacked content, such as \"I see\" or \"Please go on\". The second method was to use a \"MEMORY\" structure, which recorded prior recent inputs, and would use these inputs to create a response referencing a part of the earlier conversation when encountered with no keywords. This was possible due to Slip's ability to tag words for other usage, which simultaneously allowed ELIZA to examine, store, and repurpose words for usage in outputs.\nWhile these functions were all framed in ELIZA's programming, the exact manner by which the program dismantled, examined, and reassembled inputs is determined by the operating script. The script is not static and can be edited, or a new one created, as is necessary for the operation in the context needed. This would allow the program to be applied in multiple situations, including the well-known DOCTOR script, which simulates a Rogerian psychotherapist.\nA Lisp version of ELIZA, based on Weizenbaum's CACM paper, was written shortly after that paper's publication by Bernie Cosell. A BASIC version appeared in \"Creative Computing\" in 1977 (although it was written in 1973 by Jeff Shrager). This version, which was ported to many of the earliest personal computers, appears to have been subsequently translated into many other versions in many other languages. Shrager claims not to have seen either Weizenbaum's or Cosell's versions.\nIn 2021, Jeff Shrager searched MIT's Weizenbaum archives, along with MIT archivist Myles Crowley, and found files labeled Computer Conversations. These included the complete source code listing of ELIZA in MAD-SLIP, with the DOCTOR script attached. The Weizenbaum estate gave permission to open-source this code under a Creative Commons CC0 public domain license. The code and other information can be found on the ELIZAGEN site. The 1965 source code has been dated as part of a software archaeology project which brings together researchers from USC, University of Sussex, Oxford, and Stanford U. who have worked together to unravel the complicated history of ELIZA. \nIn December 2024, Rupert Lane, with the assistance of several other engineers who had been studying the original MAD-SLIP ELIZA, brought up the original ELIZA and demonstrated the implementation of ELIZA based on the discovered code can reproduce almost exactly the published conversations with ELIZA from Weizenbaum's 1966 paper. This original ELIZA was reconstructed using almost a vast majority of a 1965 version of the source code discovered in the MIT archives (approx. 96% of the functions). This was run on a version of the original MIT CTSS running on a 7094 emulator, both of the latter due to David Pitts. \nAnother version of Eliza popular among software engineers is the version that comes with the default release of GNU Emacs, and which can be accessed by typing codice_1 from most modern Emacs implementations.\nPseudocode.\nFrom Figure 15.5, Chapter 15 of Speech and Language Processing (third edition).\n function ELIZA GENERATOR(user \"sentence\") returns \"response\"\n Let \"w\" be the word in \"sentence\" that has the highest keyword rank\n if \"w\" exists\n Let r be the highest ranked rule for w that matches sentence\n \"response\" \u2190 Apply the transform in \"r\" to \"sentence\"\n if w = 'my'\n \"future\" \u2190 Apply a transformation from the \u2018memory\u2019 rule list to \"sentence\"\n Push \"future\" onto the memory queue\n else (no keyword applies)\n Either\n \"response\" \u2190 Apply the transform for the NONE keyword to \"sentence\"\n Or\n \"response\" \u2190 Pop the oldest response from the memory queue\n Return \"response\"\nResponse and legacy.\nLay responses to ELIZA were disturbing to Weizenbaum and motivated him to write his book \"Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation\", in which he explains the limits of computers, as he wants to make clear his opinion that the anthropomorphic views of computers are just a reduction of human beings or any life form for that matter. In the independent documentary film \"Plug &amp; Pray\" (2010) Weizenbaum said that only people who misunderstood ELIZA called it a sensation.\nDavid Avidan, who was fascinated with future technologies and their relation to art, desired to explore the use of computers for writing literature. He conducted several conversations with an APL implementation of ELIZA and published them \u2013 in English, and in his own translation to Hebrew \u2013 under the title \"My Electronic Psychiatrist \u2013 Eight Authentic Talks with a Computer\". In the foreword, he presented it as a form of constrained writing.\nThere are many programs based on ELIZA in different programming languages. For MS-DOS computers, some Sound Blaster cards came bundled with Dr. Sbaitso, which functions like the DOCTOR script. Other versions adapted ELIZA around a religious theme, such as ones featuring Jesus (both serious and comedic), and another Apple II variant called \"I Am Buddha\". The 1980 game \"The Prisoner\" incorporated ELIZA-style interaction within its gameplay. In 1988, the British artist and friend of Weizenbaum Brian Reffin Smith created two art-oriented ELIZA-style programs written in BASIC, one called \"Critic\" and the other \"Artist\", running on two separate Amiga 1000 computers and showed them at the exhibition \"Salamandre\" in the Mus\u00e9e du Berry, Bourges, France. The visitor was supposed to help them converse by typing in to \"Artist\" what \"Critic\" said, and vice versa. The secret was that the two programs were identical. GNU Emacs formerly had a codice_2 command that simulates a session between ELIZA and Zippy the Pinhead. The Zippyisms were removed due to copyright issues, but the DOCTOR program remains.\nELIZA has been referenced in popular culture and continues to be a source of inspiration for programmers and developers focused on artificial intelligence. It was also featured in a 2012 exhibit at Harvard University titled \"Go Ask A.L.I.C.E.\", as part of a celebration of mathematician Alan Turing's 100th birthday. The exhibit explores Turing's lifelong fascination with the interaction between humans and computers, pointing to ELIZA as one of the earliest realizations of Turing's ideas.\nELIZA won a 2021 Legacy Peabody Award. A 2023 preprint reported that ELIZA beat OpenAI's GPT-3.5, the model used by ChatGPT at the time, in a Turing test study. However, it did not outperform GPT-4 or real humans.\nEliza Effect.\nThe Eliza effect borrowed its name from ELIZA the chatbot. This effect is first defined in \"Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies: Computer Models and the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought\" as humans\u2019 assumption of which computer programs understand the user inputs and make analogies. However, it has no permanent knowledge but \u201chandling a list of \u2018assertions\u2019.\u201d\nThis misunderstanding can potentially manipulate and misinform users. When interacting and communicating with chatbots, users can be overly confident in the reliability of the chatbots\u2019 answers. Other than misinforming, the chatbot's human-mimicking nature can also cause severe consequences, especially for younger users who lack a sufficient understanding of the chatbot's mechanism.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1969, George Lucas and Walter Murch incorporated an Eliza-like dialogue interface in their screenplay for the feature film \"THX-1138\". Inhabitants of the underground future world of THX, when stressed, would retreat to \"confession booths\" and initiate a one-sided Eliza-formula conversation with a Jesus-faced computer who claimed to be \"OMM\".\nFrederik Pohl's science-fiction novel Gateway has the narrator undergo therapy at a praxis run by an AI that performs the task of a Freudian therapist, which he calls \"Sigfrid von Shrink\". The novel contains a few pages of (nonsensical) machine code illustrating Sigfrid's internal processes.\nELIZA influenced a number of early computer games by demonstrating additional kinds of interface designs. Don Daglow claims he wrote an enhanced version of the program called \"Ecala\" on a DEC PDP-10 minicomputer at Pomona College in 1973.\nThe 2011 video game ' and the 2016 sequel ' features an artificial-intelligence Picus TV Network newsreader named Eliza Cassan.\nIn Adam Curtis's 2016 documentary, \"HyperNormalisation\", ELIZA was referenced in relationship to post-truth.\nThe twelfth episode of the American sitcom \"Young Sheldon\", aired in January 2018, included the protagonist \"conversing\" with ELIZA, hoping to resolve a domestic issue.\nOn August 12, 2019, independent game developer Zachtronics published a visual novel called \"Eliza\", about an AI-based counseling service inspired by ELIZA.\nIn \"A Murder at the End of the World\", the anthropomorphic LLM-powered character Ray cites ELIZA as an example of how some may seek refuge in a non-human therapist.\nIn Jan. 2025 The satirical BBC Interviewer Philomena Cunk (portrayed by Diane Morgan) briefly discussed ELIZA.\nConcerns.\nBias.\nWhen ELIZA was created in 1966, it was meant predominantly for white, male, individuals with high education. This exclusivity was especially prevalent during the creation and testing stages of the bot, which marginalized the experience of those intended users and those who did not fit into the characteristics mentioned. Although this chatbot was meant to mimic human conversation with the goal of making the user think it is human, and those users would typically converse with others like them, ELIZA was named after a female character and programmed to give more feminine responses. Joseph Weizenbaum, the creator of ELIZA, has reflected upon and critiqued how ELIZA and other chatbots of the sort reinforce gender stereotypes. In particular, Weizenbaum reflects on how the script ELIZA is programmed to follow mimics a therapist's nurturing and feminine qualities. He criticizes this decision by acknowledging that when technologies such as chatbots are created in such a way, they reinforce the idea that emotional and nurturing jobs are inherently feminine.\nAccuracy and responsiveness.\nELIZA's design, while a pioneering chatbot of its time, unveils the need to reevaluate the Turing Test's relevance in assessing AI capabilities.\nIn a study titled \u201cDoes GPT-4 Pass the Turing Test?\u201d by University of California, San Diego researchers Cameron R. Jones and Benjamin K. Bergen where they explored the performance of various AI models, including ELIZA, GPT-3.5, and GPT-4, alongside human participants in imitating human conversation, they ended up highlighting several factors that contributed to ELIZA's surprising performance. First factor was its conservative response style that minimized the risk of providing misleading or incorrect information that could have exposed that it's a machine since ELIZA was processed to build its response around a single keyword from users which meant that its accuracy was limited to syntactic response built upon predefined patterns. Further, researchers observed an absence of characteristic traits that were found in modern AI - such as helpfulness or excessive verbosity - that led them to view ELIZA as an uncooperative human. Ultimately, the researchers, Cameron R. Jones and Benjamin K. Bergen from UC San Diego, pointed out how the Turing Test that led to ELIZA's roar need to be critically reevaluated in the light of findings about both current and historical AI systems as ELIZA's role in the case of ongoing conversation seems to be relevant only because of the parameters put forward by the Turing Test in 1949 which was initially thought of as an experiment and not an actual test. In the same research, they - Cameron R. Jones and Benjamin K. Bergen from UC San Diego - also observed how ELIZA ignores grammatical structure and the context of the sentence. This causes an issue as ELIZA suffers from the inability to parse sentence structures that leads to less meaningful responses. This could also stem from its knowledge gap about the topic being discussed. Unlike modern models, due to this ELIZA could not put things into a broader context. ELIZA's responsiveness is scripted and seems rigid and the reason is rooted in its underlying design, thus, changing its programming would not change its response patterns and sentence handling, rather would add more to its complexity as seen in the information shared by University of Birmingham\u2019s excerpt \"What ELIZA lacks\" that say when a user states \u201c\"Computers worry me,\"\u201d ELIZA cannot relate this to any broader context, and often can generalize between the previous statement and \u201c\"I\u2019m not worried much by computers\"\u201d. This calls for an AI capable of meaningful guidance."}
{"id": "10236", "revid": "6484069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10236", "title": "ELIZA effect", "text": "In computer science, the ELIZA effect is a tendency to project human traits \u2014 such as experience, semantic comprehension or empathy \u2014 onto rudimentary computer programs having a textual interface. ELIZA was a symbolic AI chatbot developed in 1966 by Joseph Weizenbaum and imitating a psychotherapist. Many early users were convinced of ELIZA's intelligence and understanding, despite its basic text-processing approach and the explanations of its limitations.\nHistory.\nThe effect is named for ELIZA, the 1966 chatbot developed by MIT computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. When executing Weizenbaum's \"DOCTOR\" script, ELIZA simulated a Rogerian psychotherapist, largely by rephrasing the \"patients replies as questions:\nThough designed strictly as a mechanism to support \"natural language conversation\" with a computer, ELIZA's \"DOCTOR\" script was found to be surprisingly successful in eliciting emotional responses from users who, in the course of interacting with the program, began to ascribe understanding and motivation to the program's output. As Weizenbaum later wrote, \"I had not realized ... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\" Indeed, ELIZA's code had not been designed to evoke this reaction in the first place. Upon observation, researchers discovered users unconsciously assuming ELIZA's questions implied interest and emotional involvement in the topics discussed, even when they consciously knew that ELIZA did not simulate emotion.\nAlthough the effect was first named in the 1960s, the tendency to understand mechanical operations in psychological terms was noted by Charles Babbage. In proposing what would later be called a carry-lookahead adder, Babbage remarked that he found such terms convenient for descriptive purposes, even though nothing more than mechanical action was meant.\nCharacteristics.\nIn its specific form, the ELIZA effect refers only to \"the susceptibility of people to read far more understanding than is warranted into strings of symbols\u2014especially words\u2014strung together by computers\". A trivial example of the specific form of the Eliza effect, given by Douglas Hofstadter, involves an automated teller machine which displays the words \"THANK YOU\" at the end of a transaction. A naive observer might think that the machine is actually expressing gratitude; however, the machine is only printing a preprogrammed string of symbols.\nMore generally, the ELIZA effect describes any situation where, based solely on a system's output, users perceive computer systems as having \"intrinsic qualities and abilities which the software controlling the (output) cannot possibly achieve\" or \"assume that [outputs] reflect a greater causality than they actually do\". In both its specific and general forms, the ELIZA effect is notable for occurring even when users of the system are aware of the determinate nature of output produced by the system.\nFrom a psychological standpoint, the ELIZA effect is the result of a subtle cognitive dissonance between the user's awareness of programming limitations and their behavior towards the output of the program.\nSignificance.\nThe discovery of the ELIZA effect was an important development in artificial intelligence, demonstrating the principle of using social engineering rather than explicit programming to pass a Turing test.\nELIZA convinced some users into thinking that a machine was human. This shift in human-machine interaction marked progress in technologies emulating human behavior. Two groups of chatbots are distinguished by William Meisel as \"general personal assistants\" and \"specialized digital assistants\". General digital assistants have been integrated into personal devices, with skills like sending messages, taking notes, checking calendars, and setting appointments. Specialized digital assistants \"operate in very specific domains or help with very specific tasks\". Weizenbaum considered that not every part of the human thought could be reduced to logical formalisms and that \"there are some acts of thought that ought to be attempted only by humans\".\nWhen chatbots are anthropomorphized, they tend to portray gendered features as a way through which we establish relationships with the technology. \"Gender stereotypes are instrumentalised to manage our relationship with chatbots\" when human behavior is programmed into machines. Feminized labor, or women's work, automated by anthropomorphic digital assistants reinforces an \"assumption that women possess a natural affinity for service work and emotional labour\". In defining our proximity to digital assistants through their human attributes, chatbots become gendered entities.\nIncidents.\nAs artificial intelligence has advanced, a number of internationally notable incidents underscore the extent to which the ELIZA effect is realized.\nIn June 2022, Google engineer Blake Lemoine claimed that the large language model LaMDA had become sentient, hiring an attorney on its behalf after the chatbot requested he do so. Lemoine's claims were widely pushed back by experts and the scientific community. After a month of paid administrative leave, he was dismissed for violation of corporate policies on intellectual property. Lemoine contends he \"did the right thing by informing the public\" because \"AI engines are incredibly good at manipulating people\".\nIn February 2023, Luka made abrupt changes to its Replika chatbot following a demand from the Italian Data Protection Authority, which cited \"real risks to children\". However, users worldwide protested when the bots stopped responding to their sexual advances. Moderators in the Replika subreddit even posted support resources, including links to suicide hotlines. Ultimately, the company reinstituted erotic roleplay for some users.\nIn March 2023, a Belgian man killed himself after chatting for six weeks on the app Chai. The chatbot model was originally based on GPT-J and had been fine-tuned to be \"more emotional, fun and engaging\". The bot, ironically having the name Eliza as a default, encouraged the father of two to kill himself, according to his widow and his psychotherapist. In an open letter, Belgian scholars responded to the incident fearing \"the risk of emotional manipulation\" by human-imitating AI."}
{"id": "10237", "revid": "1262625075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10237", "title": "Exponentiation by squaring", "text": "In mathematics and computer programming, exponentiating by squaring is a general method for fast computation of large positive integer powers of a number, or more generally of an element of a semigroup, like a polynomial or a square matrix. Some variants are commonly referred to as square-and-multiply algorithms or binary exponentiation. These can be of quite general use, for example in modular arithmetic or powering of matrices. For semigroups for which additive notation is commonly used, like elliptic curves used in cryptography, this method is also referred to as double-and-add.\nBasic method.\nRecursive version.\nThe method is based on the observation that, for any integer formula_1, one has:\nformula_2\nIf the exponent is zero then the answer is 1. If the exponent is negative then we can reuse the previous formula by rewriting the value using a positive exponent. That is,\nformula_3\nTogether, these may be implemented directly as the following recursive algorithm:\n In: a real number x; an integer n\n Out: xn\n exp_by_squaring(x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then\n return exp_by_squaring(1 / x, -n);\n else if n = 0 then \n return 1;\n else if n is even then \n return exp_by_squaring(x * x, n / 2);\n else if n is odd then \n return x * exp_by_squaring(x * x, (n - 1) / 2);\n end function \nIn each recursive call, the least significant digits of the binary representation of is removed. It follows that the number of recursive calls is formula_4 the number of bits of the binary representation of . So this algorithm computes this number of squares and a lower number of multiplication, which is equal to the number of in the binary representation of . This logarithmic number of operations is to be compared with the trivial algorithm which requires multiplications.\nThis algorithm is not tail-recursive. This implies that it requires an amount of auxiliary memory that is roughly proportional to the number of recursive calls -- or perhaps higher if the amount of data per iteration is increasing.\nThe algorithms of the next section use a different approach, and the resulting algorithms needs the same number of operations, but use an auxiliary memory that is roughly the same as the memory required to store the result.\nWith constant auxiliary memory.\nThe variants described in this section are based on the formula\nIf one applies recursively this formula, by starting with , one gets eventually an exponent equal to , and the desired result is then the left factor.\nThis may be implemented as a tail-recursive function:\n Function exp_by_squaring(x, n)\n return exp_by_squaring2(1, x, n)\n Function exp_by_squaring2(y, x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then return exp_by_squaring2(y, 1 / x, -n);\n else if n = 0 then return y;\n else if n is even then return exp_by_squaring2(y, x * x, n / 2);\n else if n is odd then return exp_by_squaring2(x * y, x * x, (n - 1) / 2).\nThe iterative version of the algorithm also uses a bounded auxiliary space, and is given by\n Function exp_by_squaring_iterative(x, n)\n if n &lt; 0 then\n x := 1 / x;\n n := -n;\n if n = 0 then return 1\n y := 1;\n while n &gt; 1 do\n if n is odd then\n y := x * y;\n n := n - 1;\n x := x * x;\n n := n / 2;\n return x * y\nThe correctness of the algorithm results from the fact that formula_6 is invariant during the computation; it is formula_7 at the beginning; and it is formula_8 at the end.\nThese algorithms use exactly the same number of operations as the algorithm of the preceding section, but the multiplications are done in a different order.\nComputational complexity.\nA brief analysis shows that such an algorithm uses formula_9 squarings and at most formula_9 multiplications, where formula_11 denotes the floor function. More precisely, the number of multiplications is one less than the number of ones present in the binary expansion of \"n\". For \"n\" greater than about 4 this is computationally more efficient than naively multiplying the base with itself repeatedly.\nEach squaring results in approximately double the number of digits of the previous, and so, if multiplication of two \"d\"-digit numbers is implemented in O(\"d\"\"k\") operations for some fixed \"k\", then the complexity of computing \"x\"\"n\" is given by\n2\"k\"-ary method.\nThis algorithm calculates the value of \"xn\" after expanding the exponent in base 2\"k\". It was first proposed by Brauer in 1939. In the algorithm below we make use of the following function \"f\"(0) = (\"k\",\u202f0) and \"f\"(\"m\") = (\"s\",\u202f\"u\"), where \"m\" = \"u\"\u00b72\"s\" with \"u\" odd.\nAlgorithm:\n y := 1; i := l - 1\n while i \u2265 0 do\n (s, u) := f(ni)\n for j := 1 to k - s do\n y := y2\n y := y * xu\n for j := 1 to s do\n y := y2\n i := i - 1\n return y\nFor optimal efficiency, \"k\" should be the smallest integer satisfying\nSliding-window method.\nThis method is an efficient variant of the 2\"k\"-ary method. For example, to calculate the exponent 398, which has binary expansion (110 001 110)2, we take a window of length 3 using the 2\"k\"-ary method algorithm and calculate 1, x3, x6, x12, x24, x48, x49, x98, x99, x198, x199, x398.\nBut, we can also compute 1, x3, x6, x12, x24, x48, x96, x192, x199, x398, which saves one multiplication and amounts to evaluating (110 001 110)2\nHere is the general algorithm:\nAlgorithm:\nAlgorithm:\n y := 1; i := l - 1\n while i &gt; -1 do\n if ni = 0 then\n y := y2' i := i - 1\n else\n while ns = 0 do\n s := s + 1\n for h := 1 to i - s + 1 do\n y := y2\n u := (ni, ni-1, ..., ns)2\n y := y * xu\n i := s - 1\n return y\nMontgomery's ladder technique.\nMany algorithms for exponentiation do not provide defence against side-channel attacks. Namely, an attacker observing the sequence of squarings and multiplications can (partially) recover the exponent involved in the computation. This is a problem if the exponent should remain secret, as with many public-key cryptosystems. A technique called \"Montgomery's ladder\" addresses this concern.\nGiven the binary expansion of a positive, non-zero integer \"n\" = (\"n\"\"k\"\u22121...\"n\"0)2 with \"n\"k\u22121 = 1, we can compute \"xn\" as follows:\n x1 = x; x2 = x2\n for i = k - 2 to 0 do\n if ni = 0 then\n x2 = x1 * x2; x1 = x12\n else\n x1 = x1 * x2; x2 = x22\n return x1\nThe algorithm performs a fixed sequence of operations (up to log\u202f\"n\"): a multiplication and squaring takes place for each bit in the exponent, regardless of the bit's specific value. A similar algorithm for multiplication by doubling exists.\nThis specific implementation of Montgomery's ladder is not yet protected against cache timing attacks: memory access latencies might still be observable to an attacker, as different variables are accessed depending on the value of bits of the secret exponent. Modern cryptographic implementations use a \"scatter\" technique to make sure the processor always misses the faster cache.\nFixed-base exponent.\nThere are several methods which can be employed to calculate \"xn\" when the base is fixed and the exponent varies. As one can see, precomputations play a key role in these algorithms.\nYao's method.\nYao's method is orthogonal to the -ary method where the exponent is expanded in radix and the computation is as performed in the algorithm above. Let , , , and be integers.\nLet the exponent be written as\nwhere formula_17 for all formula_18.\nLet .\nThen the algorithm uses the equality\nGiven the element of , and the exponent written in the above form, along with the precomputed values , the element is calculated using the algorithm below:\n y = 1, u = 1, j = h - 1\n while j &gt; 0 do\n for i = 0 to w - 1 do\n if ni = j then\n u = u \u00d7 xbi\n y = y \u00d7 u\n j = j - 1\n return y\nIf we set and , then the values are simply the digits of in base . Yao's method collects in \"u\" first those that appear to the highest power ; in the next round those with power are collected in as well etc. The variable \"y\" is multiplied times with the initial , times with the next highest powers, and so on.\nThe algorithm uses multiplications, and elements must be stored to compute .\nEuclidean method.\nThe Euclidean method was first introduced in \"Efficient exponentiation using precomputation and vector addition chains\" by P.D Rooij.\nThis method for computing formula_20 in group , where is a natural integer, whose algorithm is given below, is using the following equality recursively:\nwhere formula_22.\nIn other words, a Euclidean division of the exponent by is used to return a quotient and a rest .\nGiven the base element in group , and the exponent formula_23 written as in Yao's method, the element formula_20 is calculated using formula_25 precomputed values formula_26 and then the algorithm below.\n Begin loop\n \n Break loop \n \n End loop;\nThe algorithm first finds the largest value among the and then the supremum within the set of .\nThen it raises to the power , multiplies this value with , and then assigns the result of this computation and the value modulo .\nFurther applications.\nThe approach also works with semigroups that are not of characteristic zero, for example allowing fast computation of large exponents modulo a number. Especially in cryptography, it is useful to compute powers in a ring of integers modulo. For example, the evaluation of\nwould take a very long time and much storage space if the na\u00efve method of computing and then taking the remainder when divided by 2345 were used. Even using a more effective method will take a long time: square 13789, take the remainder when divided by 2345, multiply the result by 13789, and so on.\nApplying above \"exp-by-squaring\" algorithm, with \"*\" interpreted as (that is, a multiplication followed by a division with remainder) leads to only 27 multiplications and divisions of integers, which may all be stored in a single machine word. Generally, any of these approaches will take fewer than modular multiplications.\nThe approach can also be used to compute integer powers in a group, using either of the rules\nThe approach also works in non-commutative semigroups and is often used to compute powers of matrices.\nMore generally, the approach works with positive integer exponents in every magma for which the binary operation is power associative.\nSigned-digit recoding.\nIn certain computations it may be more efficient to allow negative coefficients and hence use the inverse of the base, provided inversion in is \"fast\" or has been precomputed. For example, when computing , the binary method requires multiplications and squarings. However, one could perform squarings to get and then multiply by to obtain .\nTo this end we define the signed-digit representation of an integer in radix as\n\"Signed binary representation\" corresponds to the particular choice and formula_28. It is denoted by formula_29. There are several methods for computing this representation. The representation is not unique. For example, take : two distinct signed-binary representations are given by formula_30 and formula_31, where formula_32 is used to denote . Since the binary method computes a multiplication for every non-zero entry in the base-2 representation of , we are interested in finding the signed-binary representation with the smallest number of non-zero entries, that is, the one with \"minimal\" Hamming weight. One method of doing this is to compute the representation in non-adjacent form, or NAF for short, which is one that satisfies formula_33 and denoted by formula_34. For example, the NAF representation of 478 is formula_35. This representation always has minimal Hamming weight. A simple algorithm to compute the NAF representation of a given integer formula_36 with formula_37 is the following:\n for to do\n \nAnother algorithm by Koyama and Tsuruoka does not require the condition that formula_38; it still minimizes the Hamming weight.\nAlternatives and generalizations.\nExponentiation by squaring can be viewed as a suboptimal addition-chain exponentiation algorithm: it computes the exponent by an addition chain consisting of repeated exponent doublings (squarings) and/or incrementing exponents by \"one\" (multiplying by \"x\") only. More generally, if one allows \"any\" previously computed exponents to be summed (by multiplying those powers of \"x\"), one can sometimes perform the exponentiation using fewer multiplications (but typically using more memory). The smallest power where this occurs is for \"n\" = 15:\nIn general, finding the \"optimal\" addition chain for a given exponent is a hard problem, for which no efficient algorithms are known, so optimal chains are typically used for small exponents only (e.g. in compilers where the chains for small powers have been pre-tabulated). However, there are a number of heuristic algorithms that, while not being optimal, have fewer multiplications than exponentiation by squaring at the cost of additional bookkeeping work and memory usage. Regardless, the number of multiplications never grows more slowly than \u0398(log \"n\"), so these algorithms improve asymptotically upon exponentiation by squaring by only a constant factor at best."}
{"id": "10238", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10238", "title": "Exon", "text": "An exon is any part of a gene that will form a part of the final mature RNA produced by that gene after introns have been removed by RNA splicing. The term \"exon\" refers to both the DNA sequence within a gene and to the corresponding sequence in RNA transcripts. In RNA splicing, introns are removed and exons are covalently joined to one another as part of generating the mature RNA. Just as the entire set of genes for a species constitutes the genome, the entire set of exons constitutes the exome.\nHistory.\nThe term \"exon\" derives from the expressed region and was coined by American biochemist Walter Gilbert in 1978: \"The notion of the cistron... must be replaced by that of a transcription unit containing regions which will be lost from the mature messengerwhich I suggest we call introns (for intragenic regions)alternating with regions which will be expressedexons.\"\nThis definition was originally made for protein-coding transcripts that are spliced before being translated. The term later came to include sequences removed from rRNA and tRNA, and other ncRNA and it also was used later for RNA molecules originating from different parts of the genome that are then ligated by trans-splicing.\nContribution to genomes and size distribution.\nAlthough unicellular eukaryotes such as yeast have either no introns or very few, metazoans and especially vertebrate genomes have a large fraction of non-coding DNA. For instance, in the human genome only 1.1% of the genome is spanned by exons, whereas 24% is in introns, with 75% of the genome being intergenic DNA. This can provide a practical advantage in omics-aided health care (such as precision medicine) because it makes commercialized whole exome sequencing a smaller and less expensive challenge than commercialized whole genome sequencing. The large variation in genome size and C-value across life forms has posed an interesting challenge called the C-value enigma.\nAcross all eukaryotic genes in GenBank, there were (in 2002), on average, 5.48 exons per protein coding gene. The average exon encoded 30-36 amino acids. While the longest exon in the human genome is 11555 bp long, several exons have been found to be only 2 bp long. A single-nucleotide exon has been reported from the \"Arabidopsis\" genome. In humans, like protein coding mRNA, most non-coding RNA also contain multiple exons\nStructure and function.\nIn protein-coding genes, the exons include both the protein-coding sequence and the 5\u2032- and 3\u2032-untranslated regions (UTR). Often the first exon includes both the 5\u2032-UTR and the first part of the coding sequence, but exons containing only regions of 5\u2032-UTR or (more rarely) 3\u2032-UTR occur in some genes, i.e. the UTRs may contain introns. Some non-coding RNA transcripts also have exons and introns.\nMature mRNAs originating from the same gene need not include the same exons, since different introns in the pre-mRNA can be removed by the process of alternative splicing.\nExonization is the creation of a new exon, as a result of mutations in introns.\nExperimental approaches using exons.\nExon trapping or 'gene trapping' is a molecular biology technique that exploits the existence of the intron-exon splicing to find new genes. The first exon of a 'trapped' gene splices into the exon that is contained in the insertional DNA. This new exon contains the ORF for a reporter gene that can now be expressed using the enhancers that control the target gene. A scientist knows that a new gene has been trapped when the reporter gene is expressed.\nSplicing can be experimentally modified so that targeted exons are excluded from mature mRNA transcripts by blocking the access of splice-directing small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) to pre-mRNA using Morpholino antisense oligos. This has become a standard technique in developmental biology. Morpholino oligos can also be targeted to prevent molecules that regulate splicing (e.g. splice enhancers, splice suppressors) from binding to pre-mRNA, altering patterns of splicing.\nCommon misuse of the term.\nCommon incorrect uses of the term \"exon\" are that 'exons code for protein', or 'exons code for amino-acids' or 'exons are translated'. However, these sorts of definitions only cover protein-coding genes, and omit those exons that become part of a non-coding RNA or the untranslated region of an mRNA. Such incorrect definitions still occur in overall reputable secondary sources."}
{"id": "10239", "revid": "42391335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10239", "title": "Exxon", "text": ""}
{"id": "10243", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10243", "title": "Exxon Valdez oil spill", "text": "The \"Exxon Valdez\" oil spill was a major environmental disaster that occurred in Alaska's Prince William Sound on March 24, 1989. The spill occurred when \"Exxon Valdez\", an oil supertanker owned by Exxon Shipping Company, bound for Long Beach, California, struck Prince William Sound's Bligh Reef, west of Tatitlek, Alaska at 12:04\u00a0a.m. The tanker spilled more than (or 37,000 tonnes) of crude oil over the next few days.\nThe \"Exxon Valdez\" spill is the second largest in U.S. waters, after the 2010 \"Deepwater Horizon\" oil spill, in terms of volume of oil released. Prince William Sound's remote location, accessible only by helicopter, plane, or boat, made government and industry response efforts difficult and made existing response plans especially hard to implement. The region is a habitat for salmon, sea otters, seals, and seabirds. The oil, extracted from the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field, eventually affected of coastline, of which were heavily or moderately oiled.\nSpill.\n\"Exxon Valdez\" was carrying of oil, of which approximately were spilled into the Prince William Sound.\nThe ship docked at the Valdez Marine Terminal at 11:30\u00a0p.m. on March 22, 1989. Loading of crude oil was completed late in the day on the 23rd. The tanker left the terminal at 9:12\u00a0p.m., March 23, 1989 (the deck log shows that it was clear of the dock at 9:21p.m.), loaded with 53,094,510 gallons (1,264,155 barrels) of crude oil. Captain Joseph Hazelwood retired to his cabin at 9:25p.m. Harbor pilot William Murphy and Third Mate Gregory Cousins were accompanied by a single tug for the passage through the Valdez Narrows \u2013 a journey of about 7 miles. The pilot left the bridge shortly after the vessel left the narrows, at 11:24p.m. At this point, the captain was called to the bridge. Cousins helped the pilot disembark from the vessel, leaving the captain as the only officer on the bridge. At 11:25p.m. \"Exxon Valdez\" reported that the pilot had left. The third mate advised traffic control and decided to deviate from the predetermined traffic lane to avoid small icebergs; a common occurrence since the Columbia Glacier calved such icebergs nearby. The vessel was placed on a due south course and set on autopilot. At 11:47p.m. the vessel left the traffic lane's eastern boundary.\nThird Mate Cousins had been on duty for 6 hours and was scheduled to be relieved by Second Mate Lloyd LeCain Jr. However, due to the long hours that the second mate had worked, Cousins was reluctant to wake him, and remained on duty. Cousins was the only officer on the bridge for most of the night, in violation of company policy. At around midnight on March 24 Cousins began to maneuver the vessel into the traffic lanes. At the same time, the lookout reported that the Bligh Reef light appeared far off the starboard bow at 45 degrees \u2013 this was problematic given that the light should have been off the port side. Cousins ordered a course change as the ship was in danger. Captain Hazelwood was phoned by Cousins, but before their conversation could finish, the ship grounded. At 12:04a.m., accompanied by what the helmsman and Cousins described as \"a bumpy ride\" and \"six very sharp jolts\" respectively, the ship ran aground on Bligh Reef.\nCarried by its own momentum, the ship ended up perched on its middle on a pinnacle of rock. 8 out of 11 cargo holds were punctured. 5.8 million gallons of oil drained from the ship within 3 hours and 15 minutes. 30 minutes after numerous attempts to dislodge the ship under her own power, Captain Hazelwood radioed the Coast Guard informing them of the grounding. For more than 45 minutes after the grounding, the captain attempted to maneuver free of the reef despite being informed by First Mate James Kunkel that the vessel was not structurally sound without the reef supporting it.\nMultiple factors have been identified as contributing to the incident:\nCaptain Hazelwood, who was widely reported to have been drinking heavily that night, was not at the controls when the ship struck the reef. Exxon blamed Hazelwood for the grounding of the tanker, but he accused the corporation of making him a scapegoat. \nIn a 1990 trial he was charged with criminal mischief, reckless endangerment, and piloting a vessel while intoxicated, but was cleared of the three charges. He was convicted of misdemeanor negligent discharge of oil. 21 witnesses testified that he did not appear to be under the influence of alcohol around the time of the accident.\nJournalist Greg Palast stated in 2008:\nOther factors, according to an MIT course entitled \"Software System Safety\" by Professor Nancy G. Leveson, included:\nThis disaster resulted in International Maritime Organization introducing comprehensive marine pollution prevention rules (MARPOL) through various conventions. The rules were ratified by member countries and, under International Ship Management rules, the ships are being operated with a common objective of \"safer ships and cleaner oceans.\"\nIn 2009, Captain Hazelwood offered a \"heartfelt apology\" to the people of Alaska, suggesting he had been wrongly blamed for the disaster: \"The true story is out there for anybody who wants to look at the facts, but that's not the sexy story and that's not the easy story,\" he said. Hazelwood said he felt Alaskans always gave him a fair shake.\nClean-up and major effects.\nChemical dispersant, a surfactant and solvent mixture, was applied to the slick by a private company on March 24 with a helicopter, but the helicopter missed the target area. Scientific data on its toxicity were either thin or incomplete. In addition, public acceptance of new, widespread chemical treatment was lacking. Landowners, fishing groups, and conservation organizations questioned the use of chemicals on hundreds of miles of shoreline when other alternatives might have been available.\"\nAccording to a report by David Kirby for TakePart, the main component of the Corexit formulation used during cleanup, 2-butoxyethanol, was identified as \"one of the agents that caused liver, kidney, lung, nervous system, and blood disorders among cleanup crews in Alaska following the 1989 \"Exxon Valdez\" spill\". It is now known that while 2-butoxyethanol is indeed a respiratory irritant that can be acutely toxic, animal studies did not find it to be mutagenic, and no studies suggest it to be a human carcinogen.\nMechanical cleanup was started shortly afterward using booms and skimmers, but the skimmers were not readily available during the first 24 hours following the spill, and thick oil and kelp tended to clog the equipment. Despite civilian insistence for a complete cleanup, only 10% of total oil was actually completely cleaned. Exxon was widely criticized for its slow response to cleaning up the disaster and John Devens, the mayor of Valdez, said his community felt betrayed by Exxon's inadequate response to the crisis. More than 11,000 Alaska residents, along with some Exxon employees, worked throughout the region to try to restore the environment.\nThough the clean-up effort was diligent it failed to contain the majority of the oil that had spilled and that has been blamed heavily upon Exxon. On November 26, 1984, Ronald A. Kreizenbeck (Director, Alaska Operations Office) informed the Coast Guard that the EPA suspected, due to a recent site-visitation during an 'Annual Marine Drill' that the Port of Valdez was not prepared to \"efficiently respond to a major spill event\". In the letter, he stated that \"[it] appears that the Vikoma boom and/or deployment vessels used may not be adequate to handle the harsh environmental conditions of Port Valdez\".\nBecause Prince William Sound contained many rocky coves where the oil was collected, the decision was made to displace it with high-pressure hot water. However, this also displaced and destroyed the microbial populations on the shoreline; many of these organisms (e.g. plankton) are the basis of the coastal marine food chain, and others (e.g., certain bacteria and fungi) are capable of facilitating the biodegradation of oil. At the time, both scientific advice and public pressure was to clean everything, but since then, a much greater understanding of natural and facilitated remediation processes has developed, due somewhat in part to the opportunity presented for study by the \"Exxon Valdez\" spill.\nBoth long-term and short-term effects of the oil spill have been studied. Immediate effects include the deaths of between 100,000 and 250,000 seabirds, at least 2,800 sea otters, approximately 12 river otters, 300 harbor seals, 247 bald eagles, and 22 orcas, and an unknown number of salmon and herring.\nNine years after the disaster, evidence of negative oil spill effects on marine birds was found in the following species: cormorants, goldeneyes, mergansers, murres and pigeon guillemots.\nAlthough the volume of oil has declined considerably, with oil remaining only about 0.14\u20130.28% of the original spilled volume, studies suggest that the area of oiled beach has changed little since 1992. A study by the National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA in Juneau, determined that by 2001 approximately 90 tonnes of oil remained on beaches in Prince William Sound in the sandy soil of the contaminated shoreline, with annual loss rates declining from 68% per year prior to 1992, to 4% per year after 2001.\nThe remaining oil lasting far longer than anticipated has resulted in more long-term losses of species than had been expected. Laboratory experiments found that at levels as low as one part per billion, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are toxic for salmon and herring eggs. Species as diverse as sea otters, harlequin ducks, and orcas suffered immediate and long-term losses. Oiled mussel beds and other tidal shoreline habitats may take up to 30 years to recover.\nExxonMobil denied concerns over the remaining oil, stating that they anticipated the remaining fraction would not cause long-term ecological impacts. According to the conclusions of ExxonMobil's study: \"We've done 350 peer-reviewed studies of Prince William Sound, and those studies conclude that Prince William Sound has recovered, it's healthy and it's thriving.\"\nOn March 24, 2014, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the spill, NOAA scientists reported that some species seem to have recovered, with the sea otter the latest creature to return to pre-spill numbers. Scientists who have monitored the spill area for the last 25 years report that concern remains for one of two pods of local orca whales, with fears that one pod may eventually die out. Federal scientists estimate that between 16,000 and 21,000 US gallons (61 to 79 m3) of oil remains on beaches in Prince William Sound and up to 450 miles (725\u00a0km) away. Some of the oil does not appear to have biodegraded at all. A USGS scientist who analyses the remaining oil along the coastline states that it remains among rocks and between tide marks. \"The oil mixes with seawater and forms an emulsion...Left out, the surface crusts over but the inside still has the consistency of mayonnaise \u2013 or mousse.\" Alaska state senator Berta Gardner is urging Alaskan politicians to demand that the US government force ExxonMobil to pay the final $92\u00a0million (\u00a357\u00a0million) still owed from the court settlement. The major part of the money would be spent to finish cleaning up oiled beaches and attempting to restore the crippled herring population.\nAs of 2012, the indirect and long-term sublethal effects of oil on shorebirds had been measured in relatively few studies.\nLitigation and cleanup costs.\nIn October 1989, Exxon filed a suit against the State of Alaska, claiming that the state had interfered with Exxon's attempts to clean up the spill by refusing to approve the use of dispersant chemicals until the night of the 26th. The State of Alaska disputed this claim, stating that there was a long-standing agreement to allow the use of dispersants to clean up spills, thus Exxon did not require permission to use them, and that, in fact, Exxon had not had enough dispersant on hand to effectively handle a spill of the size created by \"Exxon Valdez\".\nExxon filed claims in October 1990 against the Coast Guard, asking to be reimbursed for cleanup costs and damages awarded to plaintiffs in any lawsuits filed by the State of Alaska or the federal government against Exxon. The company claimed that the Coast Guard was \"wholly or partially responsible\" for the spill, because they had granted mariners' licenses to the crew of the Valdez, and because they had given \"Exxon Valdez\" permission to leave regular shipping lanes to avoid ice. They also reiterated the claim that the Coast Guard had delayed cleanup by refusing to give permission to immediately use chemical dispersants on the spill.\nAlso, in 1991, Exxon made a quiet, separate financial settlement of damages with a group of seafood producers known as the Seattle Seven for the disaster's effect on the Alaskan seafood industry. The agreement granted $63.75\u00a0million to the Seattle Seven, but stipulated that the seafood companies would have to repay almost all of any punitive damages awarded in other civil proceedings. The $5\u00a0billion in punitive damages was awarded later, and the Seattle Seven's share could have been as high as $750\u00a0million if the damages award had held. Other plaintiffs have objected to this secret arrangement, and when it came to light, Judge Holland ruled that Exxon should have told the jury at the start that an agreement had already been made, so the jury would know exactly how much Exxon would have to pay.\nIn the case of \"Exxon v. Baker\", an Anchorage jury awarded $287\u00a0million for actual damages and $5\u00a0billion for punitive damages. To protect itself in case the judgment was affirmed, Exxon obtained a $4.8\u00a0billion credit line from J.P. Morgan &amp; Co., who created the first modern credit default swap so that they would not have to hold as much money in reserve against the risk of Exxon's default.\nMeanwhile, Exxon appealed the ruling, and the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ordered the trial judge, Russel Holland, to reduce the punitive damages. On December 6, 2002, Holland announced that he had reduced the damages to $4\u00a0billion, which he concluded was justified by the facts of the case and was not grossly excessive. Exxon appealed again and the case returned to Holland to be reconsidered in light of a recent Supreme Court ruling in a similar case. Holland increased the punitive damages to $4.5\u00a0billion, plus interest.\nAfter more appeals, in December 2006 the damages award was cut to $2.5\u00a0billion. The court of appeals cited recent Supreme Court rulings relative to limits on punitive damages.\nExxon appealed again. On May 23, 2007, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals denied ExxonMobil's request for a third hearing and let stand its ruling that Exxon owed $2.5\u00a0billion in punitive damages. Exxon then appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case. On February 27, 2008, the Supreme Court heard oral arguments. Justice Samuel Alito, who at the time owned between $100,000 and $250,000 in Exxon stock, recused himself from the case. In a decision issued June 25, 2008, written by Justice David Souter, the court vacated the $2.5\u00a0billion award and remanded the case back to the lower court, finding that the damages were excessive with respect to maritime common law. Exxon's actions were deemed \"worse than negligent but less than malicious.\" The punitive damages were further reduced to an amount of $507.5\u00a0million. The Court's ruling was that maritime punitive damages should not exceed the compensatory damages, supported by a precedent dating from 1818. Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy has decried the ruling as \"another in a line of cases where this Supreme Court has misconstrued congressional intent to benefit large corporations.\"\nExxon's official position was that punitive damages greater than $25\u00a0million were not justified because the spill resulted from an accident, and because Exxon spent an estimated $2\u00a0billion cleaning up the spill and a further $1\u00a0billion to settle related civil and criminal charges. Attorneys for the plaintiffs contended that Exxon bore responsibility for the accident because the company \"put a drunk in charge of a tanker in Prince William Sound.\" Exxon recovered a significant portion of clean-up and legal expenses through insurance claims associated with the grounding of \"Exxon Valdez\".\nAs of December 15, 2009, Exxon had paid the entire $507.5\u00a0million in punitive damages, including lawsuit costs, plus interest, which were further distributed to thousands of plaintiffs. This amount was one-tenth of the original punitive damages, Exxon remained hugely profitable, the process of payment was drawn out over decades, and long term damage continues and is not funded by Exxon. Hence, the Exxon spill is often cited as shorthand for corporate responsibility for societal damage not being enforced adequately.\nPolitical consequences and reforms.\nCoast Guard report.\nA 1989 report by the Coast Guard's U.S. National Response Center summarized the event and made many recommendations, including that neither Exxon, Alyeska Pipeline Service Company, the State of Alaska, nor the federal government were prepared for a spill of this magnitude.\nOil Pollution Act of 1990.\nIn response to the spill, the United States Congress passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA). The legislation included a clause that prohibits any vessel that, after March 22, 1989, has caused an oil spill of more than in any marine area, from operating in Prince William Sound.\nIn April 1998, the company argued in a legal action against the federal government that the ship should be allowed back into Alaskan waters. Exxon claimed OPA was effectively a bill of attainder, a regulation that was unfairly directed at Exxon alone. In 2002, the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against Exxon. As of 2002, OPA had prevented 18 ships from entering Prince William Sound.\nOPA also set a schedule for the gradual phase-in of a double hull design, providing an additional layer between the oil tanks and the ocean. While a double hull would likely not have prevented the \"Exxon Valdez\" disaster, a Coast Guard study estimated that it would have cut the amount of oil spilled by 60 percent.\n\"Exxon Valdez\" was towed to San Diego, arriving on July 10. Repairs began on July 30. Approximately of steel were removed and replaced. In June 1990, the tanker, renamed \"Exxon Mediterranean\", left the harbor after $30\u00a0million of repairs. In 1993, owned by SeaRiver Maritime, it was named \"S/R Mediterranean\", then in 2005 \"Mediterranean\". In 2008 the vessel was acquired by a Hong Kong company that operated her as \"Dong Fang Ocean\", then in 2011 renamed her \"Oriental Nicety\". In August 2012, she was beached at Alang, and dismantled.\nAlaska regulations.\nIn the aftermath of the spill, Alaska governor Steve Cowper issued an executive order requiring two tugboats to escort every loaded tanker from Valdez out through Prince William Sound to Hinchinbrook Entrance. As the plan evolved in the 1990s, one of the two routine tugboats was replaced with a Escort Response Vehicle (ERV). Tankers at Valdez are no longer single-hulled. Congress enacted legislation requiring all tankers to be double-hulled as of 2015.\nEconomic and Native impact.\nIn 1991, following the collapse of populations of local marine species (particularly clams, herring, and seals), the Chugach Alaska Corporation, an Alaska Native Corporation, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. It has since recovered.\nAccording to several studies funded by the state of Alaska, the spill had both short-term and long-term economic effects. These included the loss of recreational sports, fisheries, reduced tourism, and an estimate of what economists call \"existence value\", which is the value to the public of a pristine Prince William Sound.\nThe economy of the city of Cordova, Alaska was adversely affected after the spill damaged stocks of salmon and herring in the area. The village of Chenega was transformed into an emergency base and media outlet. The local villagers had to cope with a tripling of their population from 80 to 250. When asked how they felt about the situation, a village councilor noted that they were too shocked and busy to be depressed; others emphasized the human costs of leaving children unattended while their parents worked to clean up. Many Alaska Natives were worried that too much time was spent on the fishery and not enough on the land that supports subsistence hunting.\nIn 2010, CNN reported on studies concluding that many oil spill cleanup workers involved in the \"Exxon Valdez\" response had subsequently become sick, and warned those exposed to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill to take heed. Anchorage lawyer Dennis Mestas found that this was true for 6,722 of 11,000 worker files he was able to inspect, despite access to the records being controlled by Exxon. Exxon denied this in a statement to CNN:\nEnvironmental activists and State officials became concerned that BP would use similar techniques to minimize liability and de-emphasize health impacts: \nReactions.\nIn 1992, Exxon released a video titled \"Scientists and the Alaska Oil Spill\" for distribution to schools. Critics said the video misrepresented the clean-up process.\nIn December 1994, the Unabomber assassinated Burson-Marsteller executive Thomas J. Mosser, accusing him of having \"helped Exxon clean up its public image after the \"Exxon Valdez\" incident\".\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral weeks after the spill, \"Saturday Night Live\" aired a pointed sketch featuring Kevin Nealon, Phil Hartman, and Victoria Jackson as cleanup workers struggling to scrub the oil off of animals and rocks on a beach in Prince William Sound.\nIn the \"Rocko's Modern Life\" episode, \"Rocko's Happy Sack\", Rocko and his dog, Spunky are grocery shopping when the announcer informs everyone of a \"spill in the seafood section\", represented by a giant oil tanker labeled \"Noxxon Valdez\".\nIn the 1995 film \"Waterworld\", \"Exxon Valdez\" is the flagship of the movie's villain, \"The Deacon,\" the leader of a band of scavenging raiders. In the ship is a portrait of their patron saint, Joseph Hazelwood.\n\"On Deadly Ground\", directed and starring Steven Seagal, involved environments threatened by oil factories in Alaska; in obvious reference to the Exxon Valdez oil spill.\n\"\", sequel to \"Free Willy\", contained an oil spill plotline that echoes the \"Exxon Valdez\" oil spill.\nThe book \"Prince William\" by Gloria Rand is set on the Exxon Valdis incident, involving a young girl named Denny who assists in the environmental cleanup effort; starting with an oil-covered baby seal whom she saves and befriends.\nIn the seventeenth episode of \"\", \"Speed Demons\", both Superman and the Flash fight against Weather Wizard when he interrupts their charity race to test his weather machine; demonstrating his power by creating a storm off the coast of Australia which causes an oil tanker to crash and rupturing its hull, releasing an oil spill which begins to contaminate the ocean in a manner similar to the Exxon Valdis incident. Thankfully, it is stopped when Superman and the Flash intervene; the former sealing the rupture shut with his heat-ray vision and the latter using his speed to extract the oil from the ocean by its atoms to return it to the ship.\nIn the second Forrest Gump novel, \"Gump and Co.\" by Winston Groom, Gump commandeers \"Exxon Valdez\" and accidentally crashes it.\nComposer Jonathan Larson wrote a song called \"Iron Mike\" about the oil spill. The song is written in the style of a sea shanty. It was first professionally recorded by George Salazar for the album \"The Jonathan Larson Project\".\nThe 1992 made-for-television film \"\", produced by HBO, dramatized the oil spill disaster.\nIn season 2, episode 8, of \"Breaking Bad\", entitled \"Better Call Saul\", Walter White tells Jesse Pinkman that Jesse's friend Badger, who had been caught in a drug deal with their methamphetamine and placed under arrest, is going to spill [information] like the \"Exxon Valdez\"."}
{"id": "10244", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10244", "title": "\u00c9douard de Pomiane", "text": "\u00c9douard Alexandre de Pomiane, sometimes \u00c9douard Pozerski (20 April 1875 \u2013 26 January 1964), was a French scientist, radio broadcaster and food writer.\nHis parents emigrated from Congress Poland in 1863 after the January Uprising, changed their name from \"Pozerski\" to \"de Pomiane\", and became French citizens.\nDe Pomiane worked as a physician at the Institut Pasteur in Paris, where he gave F\u00e9lix d'Herelle a place to work on bacteriophages.\nHis best known works that have been translated into English are \"Cooking in Ten Minutes\" and \"Cooking with Pomiane\". His writing was remarkable in its time for its directness (he frequently uses a strange second-person voice, telling you\u2014the reader\u2014what you are seeing and smelling as you follow a recipe) and for his general disdain for upper-class elaborate French cuisine. He travelled widely and quite a few of his recipes are from abroad. His recipes often take pains to demystify cooking by explaining the chemical processes at work.\nHe was a founding member of the Acad\u00e9mie des Gastronomes in 1928, with the high rank of chair no. 5 Louis Pasteur. 1940 was the age of retirement from the Pasteur Institute, but he continued his work in a small laboratory made for him in the attic. His teaching at the Scientific Institute of Food Hygiene ended in 1943.\nBooks.\n\"Vingt Plats Qui Donnent Goutte\"IMG_7221.jpeg 1935 edition."}
{"id": "10245", "revid": "28078513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10245", "title": "Edward VI", "text": "Edward VI (12 October 1537 \u2013 6 July 1553) was King of England and Ireland from 28 January 1547 until his death in 1553. He was crowned on 20 February 1547 at the age of nine. The only surviving son of Henry VIII by his third wife, Jane Seymour, Edward was the first English monarch to be raised as a Protestant. During his reign, the realm was governed by a regency council because Edward never reached maturity. The council was first led by his uncle Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset (1547\u20131549), and then by John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland (1550\u20131553).\nEdward's reign was marked by many economic problems and social unrest that in 1549 erupted into riot and rebellion. An expensive war with Scotland, at first successful, ended with military withdrawal from Scotland and Boulogne-sur-Mer in exchange for peace. The transformation of the Church of England into a recognisably Protestant body also occurred under Edward, who took great interest in religious matters. His father, Henry VIII, had severed the link between the English Church and Rome but continued to uphold most Catholic doctrine and ceremony. It was during Edward's reign that Protestantism was established for the first time in England with reforms that included the abolition of clerical celibacy and the Mass, and the imposition of compulsory English in church services.\nIn 1553, at age 15, Edward fell ill. When his sickness was discovered to be terminal, he and his council drew up a \"Devise for the Succession\" to prevent the country's return to Catholicism. Edward named his Protestant first cousin once removed, Lady Jane Grey, as his heir, excluding his half-sisters, Mary and Elizabeth. This decision was disputed following Edward's death, and Jane was deposed by Mary \u2013 the elder of the two half-sisters \u2013 nine days after becoming queen. Mary, a Catholic, reversed Edward's Protestant reforms during her reign, but Elizabeth restored them in 1559.\nEarly life.\nBirth.\nEdward was born on 12 October 1537 in his mother's room inside Hampton Court Palace, in Middlesex. He was the son of King Henry VIII by his third wife, Jane Seymour, and was the only son of Henry VIII to outlive him. Throughout the realm, the people greeted the birth of a male heir, \"whom we hungered for so long\", with joy and relief. \"Te Deums\" were sung in churches, bonfires lit, and \"their was shott at the Tower that night above two thousand gonnes\". Queen Jane, appearing to recover quickly from the birth, sent out personally signed letters announcing the birth of \"a Prince, conceived in most lawful matrimony between my Lord the King's Majesty and us\". Edward was christened on 15 October, with his 21-year-old half-sister Lady Mary as godmother and his 4-year-old half-sister Lady Elizabeth carrying the chrisom; the Garter King of Arms proclaimed him as Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester. The queen, however, fell ill and died from postnatal complications on 24 October, days after Edward's birth. Henry VIII wrote to Francis I of France that \"Divine Providence ... hath mingled my joy with bitterness of the death of her who brought me this happiness\".\nUpbringing and education.\nEdward was a healthy baby who suckled strongly from the outset. His father was delighted with him; in May 1538, Henry was observed \"dallying with him in his arms ... and so holding him in a window to the sight and great comfort of the people\". That September, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Audley, reported Edward's rapid growth and vigour, and other accounts describe him as a tall and merry child. The tradition that Edward VI was a sickly boy has been challenged by more recent historians. At the age of four, he fell ill with a life-threatening \"quartan fever\", but, despite occasional illnesses and poor eyesight, he enjoyed generally good health until the last six months of his life.\nEdward was initially placed in the care of Margaret Bryan, \"lady mistress\" of the prince's household. She was succeeded by Blanche Herbert, Lady Troy. Until the age of six, Edward was brought up, as he put it later in his \"Chronicle\", \"among the women\". The formal royal household established around Edward was, at first, under William Sidney, and later Richard Page, stepfather of Edward's aunt Anne (the wife of Edward Seymour). Henry demanded exacting standards of security and cleanliness in his son's household, stressing that Edward was \"this whole realm's most precious jewel\". Visitors described the prince, who was lavishly provided with toys and comforts, including his own troupe of minstrels, as a contented child.\nFrom the age of six, Edward began his formal education under Richard Cox and John Cheke, concentrating, as he recalled himself, on \"learning of tongues, of the scripture, of philosophy, and all liberal sciences\". He received tuition from his sister Elizabeth's tutor, Roger Ascham, and from Jean Belmain, learning French, Spanish and Italian. In addition, he is known to have studied geometry and learned to play musical instruments, including the lute and the virginals. He collected globes and maps and, according to coinage historian C. E. Challis developed a grasp of monetary affairs that indicated a high intelligence. Edward's religious education is assumed to have favoured the reforming agenda. His religious establishment was probably chosen by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, a leading reformer. Both Cox and Cheke were \"reformed\" Catholics or Erasmians and later became Marian exiles. By 1549, Edward had written a treatise on the pope as Antichrist and was making informed notes on theological controversies. Many aspects of Edward's religion were essentially Catholic in his early years, including the celebration of the mass and reverence for images and relics of the saints.\nBoth Edward's sisters were attentive to their brother and often visited him\u2014on one occasion, Elizabeth gave him a shirt \"of her own working\". Edward \"took special content\" in Mary's company, though he disapproved of her taste for foreign dances; \"I love you most\", he wrote to her in 1546. In 1543, Henry invited his children to spend Christmas with him, signalling his reconciliation with his daughters, whom he had previously illegitimised and disinherited. The following spring, he restored them to their place in the succession with a Third Succession Act, which also provided for a regency council during Edward's minority. This unaccustomed family harmony may have owed much to the influence of Henry's sixth wife, Catherine Parr, of whom Edward soon became fond. He called her his \"most dear mother\" and in September 1546 wrote to her: \"I received so many benefits from you that my mind can hardly grasp them.\"\nOther children were brought to play with Edward, including the granddaughter of his chamberlain, William Sidney, who in adulthood recalled the prince as \"a marvellous sweet child, of very mild and generous condition\". Edward was educated with sons of nobles, \"appointed to attend upon him\" in what was a form of miniature court. Among these, Barnaby Fitzpatrick, son of an Irish peer, became a close and lasting friend. Edward was more devoted to his schoolwork than his classmates and seems to have outshone them, motivated to do his \"duty\" and compete with his sister Elizabeth's academic prowess. Edward's surroundings and possessions were regally splendid: his rooms were hung with costly Flemish tapestries, and his clothes, books and cutlery were encrusted with precious jewels and gold. Like his father, Edward was fascinated by military arts, and many of his portraits show him wearing a gold dagger with a jewelled hilt, in imitation of Henry. Edward's \"Chronicle\" enthusiastically details English military campaigns against Scotland and France, and adventures such as John Dudley's near capture at Musselburgh in 1547.\n\"The Rough Wooing\".\nOn 1 July 1543, Henry signed the Treaty of Greenwich with the Scots, sealing the peace with Edward's betrothal to the seven-month-old Mary, Queen of Scots, granddaughter of Edward's aunt and Henry's sister Margaret Tudor. The Scots were in a weak bargaining position after their defeat at the Battle of Solway Moss in November 1542, and Henry, seeking to unite the two realms, stipulated that Mary be handed over to him to be brought up in England. When the Scots repudiated the treaty in December 1543 and renewed their alliance with France, Henry was enraged. In April 1544, he ordered Edward's uncle, Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford, to invade Scotland and \"put all to fire and sword, burn Edinburgh town, so razed and defaced when you have sacked and gotten what ye can of it, as there may remain forever a perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon [them] for their falsehood and disloyalty\". Seymour responded with the most savage campaign ever launched by the English against the Scots. The war, which continued into Edward's reign, has become known as \"the Rough Wooing\".\nAccession.\nThe nine-year-old Edward wrote to his father and stepmother on 10 January 1547 from Hertford thanking them for his New Year's gift of their portraits from life. By 28 January, Henry VIII was dead. Those close to the throne, led by Edward Seymour and William Paget, agreed to delay the announcement of the king's death until arrangements had been made for a smooth succession. Seymour and Sir Anthony Browne, the Master of the Horse, rode to collect Edward from Hertford and brought him to Enfield, where Lady Elizabeth was living. He and Elizabeth were then told of their father's death and heard a reading of his will.\nLord Chancellor Thomas Wriothesley announced Henry's death to Parliament on 31 January 1547, and general proclamations of Edward's succession were ordered. The new king was taken to the Tower of London, where he was welcomed with \"great shot of ordnance in all places there about, as well out of the Tower as out of the ships\". The following day, the nobles of the realm made their obeisance to Edward at the Tower, and Seymour was announced as Protector. Henry VIII was buried at Windsor on 16 February, in the same tomb as Jane Seymour, as he had wished.\nEdward VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey on Sunday 20 February. The ceremonies were shortened, because of the \"tedious length of the same which should weary and be hurtsome peradventure to the King's majesty, being yet of tender age\", and also because the Reformation had rendered some of them inappropriate.\nOn the eve of the coronation, Edward progressed on horseback from the Tower to the Palace of Westminster through thronging crowds and pageants, many based on the pageants for a previous boy king, Henry VI. He laughed at a Spanish tightrope walker who \"tumbled and played many pretty toys\" outside St Paul's Cathedral.\nAt the coronation service, Cranmer affirmed the royal supremacy and called Edward a second Josiah, urging him to continue the reformation of the Church of England, \"the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome banished from your subjects, and images removed\". After the service, Edward presided at a banquet in Westminster Hall, where, he recalled in his \"Chronicle\", he dined with his crown on his head.\nSomerset protectorate.\nCouncil of regency.\nHenry VIII's will named sixteen executors, who were to act as Edward's council until he reached the age of eighteen. These executors were supplemented by twelve men \"of counsail\" who would assist the executors when called on. The final state of Henry VIII's will has been the subject of controversy. Some historians suggest that those close to the king manipulated either him or the will itself to ensure a share-out of power to their benefit, both material and religious. In this reading, the composition of the Privy Chamber shifted towards the end of 1546 in favour of the reforming faction. In addition, two leading conservative Privy Councillors were removed from the centre of power.\nStephen Gardiner was refused access to Henry during his last months. Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, found himself accused of treason; the day before the king's death his vast estates were seized, making them available for redistribution, and he spent the whole of Edward's reign in the Tower of London. Other historians have argued that Gardiner's exclusion was based on non-religious matters, that Norfolk was not noticeably conservative in religion, that conservatives remained on the council, and that the radicalism of such men as Sir Anthony Denny, who controlled the dry stamp that replicated the king's signature, is debatable.\nWhatever the case, Henry's death was followed by a lavish hand-out of lands and honours to the new power group. The will contained an \"unfulfilled gifts\" clause, added at the last minute, which allowed the executors to freely distribute lands and honours to themselves and the court, particularly to Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford, the new king's uncle who became Lord Protector of the Realm, Governor of the King's Person and Duke of Somerset.\nHenry VIII's will did not provide for the appointment of a Protector. It entrusted the government of the realm during his son's minority to a regency council that would rule collectively, by majority decision, with \"like and equal charge\". Nevertheless, a few days after Henry's death, on 4 February, the executors chose to invest almost regal power in the Duke of Somerset. Thirteen out of the sixteen (the others being absent) agreed to his appointment as Protector, which they justified as their joint decision \"by virtue of the authority\" of Henry's will. Somerset may have done a deal with some of the executors, who almost all received hand-outs. He is known to have done so with William Paget, private secretary to Henry VIII, and to have secured the support of Sir Anthony Browne of the Privy Chamber.\nSomerset's appointment was in keeping with historical precedent, and his eligibility for the role was reinforced by his military successes in Scotland and France. In March 1547, he secured letters patent from King Edward granting him the almost monarchical right to appoint members to the Privy Council himself and to consult them only when he wished. In the words of historian Geoffrey Elton, \"from that moment his autocratic system was complete\". He proceeded to rule largely by proclamation, calling on the Privy Council to do little more than rubber-stamp his decisions.\nSomerset's takeover of power was smooth and efficient. The imperial ambassador, Fran\u00e7ois van der Delft, reported that he \"governs everything absolutely\", with Paget operating as his secretary, though he predicted trouble from John Dudley, Viscount Lisle, who had recently been raised to Earl of Warwick in the share-out of honours. In fact, in the early weeks of his Protectorate, Somerset was challenged only by the Chancellor, Thomas Wriothesley, whom the Earldom of Southampton had evidently failed to buy off, and by his own brother. Wriothesley, a religious conservative, objected to Somerset's assumption of monarchical power over the council. He then found himself abruptly dismissed from the chancellorship on charges of selling off some of his offices to delegates.\nThomas Seymour.\nSomerset faced less manageable opposition from his younger brother Thomas, who has been described as a \"worm in the bud\". As King Edward's uncle, Thomas Seymour demanded the governorship of the king's person and a greater share of power. Somerset tried to buy his brother off with a barony, an appointment to the Lord Admiralship, and a seat on the Privy Council \u2014 but Thomas was bent on scheming for power. He began smuggling pocket money to King Edward, telling him that Somerset held the purse strings too tight, making him a \"beggarly king\". He also urged the king to throw off the Protector within two years and \"bear rule as other kings do\"; but Edward, schooled to defer to the council, failed to co-operate. In the spring of 1547, using Edward's support to circumvent Somerset's opposition, Thomas Seymour secretly married Henry VIII's widow Catherine Parr, whose Protestant household included the 11-year-old Lady Jane Grey and the 13-year-old Lady Elizabeth.\nIn summer 1548, a pregnant Catherine Parr discovered Thomas Seymour embracing Lady Elizabeth. As a result, Elizabeth was removed from Parr's household and transferred to Sir Anthony Denny's. That September, Parr died shortly after childbirth, and Seymour promptly resumed his attentions to Elizabeth by letter, planning to marry her. Elizabeth was receptive, but, like Edward, unready to agree to anything unless permitted by the council. In January 1549, the council had Thomas Seymour arrested on various charges, including embezzlement at the Bristol mint. King Edward, whom Seymour was accused of planning to marry to Lady Jane Grey, himself testified about the pocket money. Lack of clear evidence for treason ruled out a trial, so Seymour was condemned instead by an act of attainder and beheaded on 20 March 1549.\nWar.\nSomerset's only undoubted skill was as a soldier, which he had proven on expeditions to Scotland and in the defence of Boulogne-sur-Mer in 1546. From the first, his main interest as Protector was the war against Scotland. After a crushing victory at the Battle of Pinkie in September 1547, he set up a network of garrisons in Scotland, stretching as far north as Dundee. His initial successes, however, were followed by a loss of direction, as his aim of uniting the realms through conquest became increasingly unrealistic. The Scots allied with France, who sent reinforcements for the defence of Edinburgh in 1548. The Queen of Scots was moved to France, where she was betrothed to the Dauphin. The cost of maintaining the Protector's massive armies and his permanent garrisons in Scotland also placed an unsustainable burden on the royal finances. A French attack on Boulogne in August 1549 at last forced Somerset to begin a withdrawal from Scotland.\nRebellion.\nDuring 1548, England was subject to social unrest. After April 1549, a series of armed revolts broke out, fuelled by various religious and agrarian grievances. The two most serious rebellions, which required major military intervention to put down, were in Devon and Cornwall and in Norfolk. The first sometimes called the Prayer Book Rebellion, arose from the imposition of Protestantism, and the second, led by a tradesman called Robert Kett, mainly from the encroachment of landlords on common grazing ground. A complex aspect of the social unrest was that the protesters believed they were acting legitimately against enclosing landlords with the Protector's support, convinced that the landlords were the lawbreakers.\nThe same justification for outbreaks of unrest was voiced throughout the country, not only in Norfolk and the west. The origin of the popular view of Somerset as sympathetic to the rebel cause lies partly in his series of sometimes liberal, often contradictory, proclamations, and partly in the uncoordinated activities of the commissions he sent out in 1548 and 1549 to investigate grievances about loss of tillage, encroachment of large sheep flocks on common land, and similar issues. Somerset's commissions were led by an evangelical MP called John Hales, whose socially liberal rhetoric linked the issue of enclosure with Reformation theology and the notion of a godly commonwealth. Local groups often assumed that the findings of these commissions entitled them to act against offending landlords themselves. King Edward wrote in his \"Chronicle\" that the 1549 risings began \"because certain commissions were sent down to pluck down enclosures\".\nWhatever the popular view of Somerset, the disastrous events of 1549 were taken as evidence of a colossal failure of government, and the council laid the responsibility at the Protector's door. In July 1549, Paget wrote to Somerset: \"Every man of the council have misliked your proceedings ... would to God, that, at the first stir you had followed the matter hotly, and caused justice to be ministered in solemn fashion to the terror of others ...\".\nFall of Somerset.\nThe sequence of events that led to Somerset's removal from power has often been called a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". By 1 October 1549, Somerset had been alerted that his rule faced a serious threat. He issued a proclamation calling for assistance, took possession of the king's person, and withdrew for safety to the fortified Windsor Castle, where Edward wrote, \"Me thinks I am in prison\". Meanwhile, a united council published details of Somerset's government mismanagement. They made clear that the Protector's power came from them, not from Henry VIII's will. On 11 October, the council had Somerset arrested and brought the king to Richmond Palace. Edward summarised the charges against Somerset in his \"Chronicle\": \"ambition, vainglory, entering into rash wars in mine youth, negligent looking on Newhaven, enriching himself of my treasure, following his own opinion, and doing all by his own authority, etc.\" In February 1550, John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, emerged as the leader of the council and, in effect, as Somerset's successor. Although Somerset was released from the Tower and restored to the council, he was executed for felony in January 1552 after scheming to overthrow Dudley's regime. Edward noted his uncle's death in his \"Chronicle\": \"the duke of Somerset had his head cut off upon Tower Hill between eight and nine o'clock in the morning\".\nHistorians contrast the efficiency of Somerset's takeover of power, in which they detect the organising skills of allies such as Paget, the \"master of practices\", with the subsequent ineptitude of his rule. By autumn 1549, his costly wars had lost momentum, the crown faced financial ruin, and riots and rebellions had broken out around the country. Until recent decades, Somerset's reputation with historians was high, in view of his many proclamations that appeared to back the common people against a rapacious landowning class. More recently, however, he has often been portrayed as an arrogant and aloof ruler, lacking in political and administrative skills.\nNorthumberland's leadership.\nIn contrast, Somerset's successor the Earl of Warwick, made Duke of Northumberland in 1551, was once regarded by historians merely as a grasping schemer who cynically elevated and enriched himself at the expense of the crown. Since the 1970s, the administrative and economic achievements of his regime have been recognised, and he has been credited with restoring the authority of the royal council and returning the government to an even keel after the disasters of Somerset's protectorate.\nThe Earl of Warwick's rival for leadership of the new regime was Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, whose conservative supporters had allied with Warwick's followers to create a unanimous council which they and observers, such as the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V's ambassador, expected to reverse Somerset's policy of religious reform. Warwick, on the other hand, pinned his hopes on the king's strong Protestantism and, claiming that Edward was old enough to rule in person, moved himself and his people closer to the king, taking control of the Privy Chamber. Paget, accepting a barony, joined Warwick when he realised that a conservative policy would not bring the emperor onto the English side over Boulogne. Southampton prepared a case for executing Somerset, aiming to discredit Warwick through Somerset's statements that he had done all with Warwick's co-operation. As a counter-move, Warwick convinced Parliament to free Somerset, which it did on 14 January 1550. Warwick then had Southampton and his followers purged from the council after winning the support of council members in return for titles, and was made Lord President of the Council and great master of the king's household. Although not called a Protector, he was now clearly the head of the government.\nAs Edward was growing up, he was able to understand more and more government business. However, his actual involvement in decisions has long been a matter of debate, and during the 20th century, historians have presented the whole gamut of possibilities, \"balanc[ing] an articulate puppet against a mature, precocious, and essentially adult king\", in the words of Stephen Alford. A special \"Counsel for the Estate\" was created when Edward was fourteen. He chose the members himself. In the weekly meetings with this council, Edward was \"to hear the debating of things of most importance\". A major point of contact with the king was the Privy Chamber, and there Edward worked closely with William Cecil and William Petre, the principal secretaries. The king's greatest influence was in matters of religion, where the council followed the strongly Protestant policy that Edward favoured.\nThe Duke of Northumberland's mode of operation was very different from Somerset's. Careful to make sure he always commanded a majority of councillors, he encouraged a working council and used it to legitimise his authority. Lacking Somerset's blood-relationship with the king, he added members to the council from his own faction in order to control it. He also added members of his family to the royal household. He saw that to achieve personal dominance, he needed total procedural control of the council. In the words of historian John Guy, \"Like Somerset, he became quasi-king; the difference was that he managed the bureaucracy on the pretence that Edward had assumed full sovereignty, whereas Somerset had asserted the right to near-sovereignty as Protector\".\nWarwick's war policies were more pragmatic than Somerset's, and they have earned him criticism for weakness. In 1550, he signed a peace treaty with France that agreed to withdrawal from Boulogne and recalled all English garrisons from Scotland. In 1551, Edward was betrothed to Elisabeth of Valois, King Henry II's daughter, and was made a Knight of Saint Michael. Warwick realised that England could no longer support the cost of wars. At home, he took measures to police local unrest. To forestall future rebellions, he kept permanent representatives of the crown in the localities, including lords lieutenant, who commanded military forces and reported back to central government.\nWorking with William Paulet and Walter Mildmay, Warwick tackled the disastrous state of the kingdom's finances. However, his regime first succumbed to the temptations of a quick profit by further debasing the coinage. The economic disaster that resulted caused Warwick to hand the initiative to the expert Thomas Gresham. By 1552, confidence in the coinage was restored, prices fell and trade at last improved. Though a full economic recovery was not achieved until Elizabeth's reign, its origins lay in the Duke of Northumberland's policies. The regime also cracked down on widespread embezzlement of government finances, and carried out a thorough review of revenue collection practices, which has been called \"one of the more remarkable achievements of Tudor administration\".\nReformation.\nIn the matter of religion, the regime of Northumberland followed the same policy as that of Somerset, supporting an increasingly vigorous programme of reform. Although Edward VI's practical influence on government was limited, his intense Protestantism made a reforming administration obligatory; his succession was managed by the reforming faction, who continued in power throughout his reign. The man Edward trusted most, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, introduced a series of religious reforms that revolutionised the English church from one that\u2014while rejecting papal supremacy\u2014remained essentially Catholic to one that was institutionally Protestant. The confiscation of church property that had begun under Henry VIII resumed under Edward\u2014notably with the dissolution of the chantries\u2014to the great monetary advantage of the crown and the new owners of the seized property. Church reform was therefore as much a political as a religious policy under Edward VI. By the end of his reign, the church had been financially ruined, with much of the property of the bishops transferred into lay hands.\nThe religious convictions of both Somerset and Northumberland have proved elusive for historians, who are divided on the sincerity of their Protestantism. There is less doubt, however, about the religious fervour of King Edward, who was said to have read twelve chapters of scripture daily and enjoyed sermons, and was commemorated by John Foxe as a \"godly imp\". Edward was depicted during his life and afterwards as a new Josiah, the biblical king who destroyed the idols of Baal. He could be priggish in his anti-Catholicism and once asked Catherine Parr to persuade Lady Mary \"to attend no longer to foreign dances and merriments which do not become a most Christian princess\". Edward's biographer Jennifer Loach cautions, however, against accepting too readily the pious image of Edward handed down by the reformers, as in John Foxe's influential \"Acts and Monuments\", where a woodcut depicts the young king listening to a sermon by Hugh Latimer. In the early part of his life, Edward conformed to the prevailing Catholic practices, including attendance at mass, but he became convinced, under the influence of Cranmer and the reformers among his tutors and courtiers, that \"true\" religion should be imposed in England.\nThe English Reformation advanced under pressure from two directions: from the traditionalists on the one hand and the zealots on the other, who led incidents of iconoclasm (image-smashing) and complained that reform did not go far enough. Cranmer set himself the task of writing a uniform liturgy in English, detailing all weekly and daily services and religious festivals, to be made compulsory in the first Act of Uniformity of 1549. The \"Book of Common Prayer\" of 1549, intended as a compromise, was attacked by traditionalists for dispensing with many cherished rituals of the liturgy, such as the elevation of the bread and wine, while some reformers complained about the retention of too many \"popish\" elements, including vestiges of sacrificial rites at communion. Many senior Catholic clerics, including Bishops Stephen Gardiner of Winchester and Edmund Bonner of London, also opposed the prayer book. Both were imprisoned in the Tower and, along with others, deprived of their sees. In 1549, over 5,500 people died in the Prayer Book Rebellion in Devon and Cornwall.\nReformed doctrines were made official, such as justification by faith alone and communion for laity as well as clergy in both kinds, of bread and wine. The Ordinal of 1550 replaced the divine ordination of priests with a government-run appointment system, authorising ministers to preach the gospel and administer the sacraments rather than, as before, \"to offer sacrifice and celebrate mass both for the living and the dead\".\nAfter 1551, the Reformation advanced further, with the approval and encouragement of Edward, who began to exert more personal influence in his role as Supreme Head of the church. The new changes were also a response to criticism from such reformers as John Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, and the Scot John Knox, who was employed as a minister in Newcastle upon Tyne under the Duke of Northumberland and whose preaching at court prompted the king to oppose kneeling at communion. Cranmer was also influenced by the views of the continental reformer Martin Bucer, who died in England in 1551; by Peter Martyr, who was teaching at Oxford; and by other foreign theologians. The progress of the Reformation was further speeded by the consecration of more reformers as bishops. In the winter of 1551\u201352, Cranmer rewrote the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in less ambiguous reformist terms, revised canon law and prepared a doctrinal statement, the Forty-two Articles, to clarify the practice of the reformed religion, particularly in the divisive matter of the communion service. Cranmer's formulation of the reformed religion, finally divesting the communion service of any notion of the real presence of God in the bread and the wine, effectively abolished the mass. According to Elton, the publication of Cranmer's revised prayer book in 1552, supported by a second Act of Uniformity, \"marked the arrival of the English Church at Protestantism\". The prayer book of 1552 remains the foundation of the Church of England's services. However, Cranmer was unable to implement all these reforms once it became clear in spring 1553 that King Edward, upon whom the whole Reformation in England depended, was dying.\nBetrothal.\nAfter the Rough Wooing and Thomas Seymour's plan to marry him off to Lady Jane Grey, the 13-year-old King was betrothed to the five-year-old Elisabeth of Valois, daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de' Medici, in 1550. The marriage alliance was negotiated in secrecy, although Pope Julius III became aware of the plan and threatened to excommunicate both Henry and Elisabeth if the marriage went forward. A dowry of 200,000 \u00e9cus was agreed to, but was never paid due to Edward's death before marriage. Elisabeth later married his sister Mary's widower, Philip II of Spain.\nDeath and succession crisis.\nDevise for the succession.\nIn February 1553, Edward VI became ill, and by June, after several improvements and relapses, he was in a hopeless condition. The king's death and the succession of his Catholic half-sister Mary would jeopardise the English Reformation, and Edward's council and officers had many reasons to fear it. Edward himself opposed Mary's succession, not only on religious grounds but also on those of legitimacy and male inheritance, which also applied to Elizabeth. He composed a draft document, headed \"My devise for the succession\", in which he undertook to change the succession, most probably inspired by his father Henry VIII's precedent. He passed over the claims of his half-sisters and, at last, settled the Crown on his first cousin once removed, the 16-year-old Lady Jane Grey, who on 25 May 1553 had married Lord Guilford Dudley, a younger son of the Duke of Northumberland. In the document he writes:\nIn his document Edward provided, in case of \"lack of issue of my body\", for the succession of male heirs only \u2013 those of Lady Jane Grey's mother, Frances Grey, Duchess of Suffolk; of Jane herself; or of her sisters Katherine, Lady Herbert, and Lady Mary. As his death approached and possibly persuaded by Northumberland, he altered the wording so that Jane and her sisters themselves should be able to succeed. Yet Edward conceded their right only as an exception to male rule, demanded by reality, an example not to be followed if Jane and her sisters had only daughters. In the final document both Mary and Elizabeth were excluded because of bastardy; since both had been declared bastards under Henry VIII and never made legitimate again, this reason could be advanced for both sisters. The provisions to alter the succession directly contravened Henry VIII's Third Succession Act of 1544 and have been described as bizarre and illogical.\nIn early June, Edward personally supervised the drafting of a clean version of his devise by lawyers, to which he lent his signature \"in six several places.\" Then, on 15 June he summoned high-ranking judges to his sickbed, commanding them on their allegiance \"with sharp words and angry countenance\" to prepare his devise as letters patent and announced that he would have these passed in Parliament. His next measure was to have leading councillors and lawyers sign a bond in his presence, in which they agreed faithfully to perform Edward's will after his death. A few months later, Chief Justice Edward Montagu recalled that when he and his colleagues had raised legal objections to the devise, Northumberland had threatened them \"trembling for anger, and ... further said that he would fight in his shirt with any man in that quarrel\". Montagu also overheard a group of lords standing behind him conclude \"if they refused to do that, they were traitors\". At last, on 21 June, the devise was signed by over a hundred notables, including councillors, peers, archbishops, bishops and sheriffs; many of them later claimed that they had been bullied into doing so by Northumberland, although in the words of Edward's biographer Jennifer Loach, \"few of them gave any clear indication of reluctance at the time\".\nIt was now common knowledge that Edward was dying, and foreign diplomats suspected that some scheme to debar Mary was under way. France found the prospect of the emperor's cousin on the English throne disagreeable and engaged in secret talks with Northumberland, indicating support. The diplomats were certain that the overwhelming majority of the English people backed Mary, but nevertheless believed that Queen Jane would be successfully established.\nFor centuries, the attempt to alter the succession was mostly seen as a one-man plot by the Duke of Northumberland. Since the 1970s, however, many historians have attributed the inception of the \"devise\" and the insistence on its implementation to the king's initiative. Diarmaid MacCulloch has made out Edward's \"teenage dreams of founding an evangelical realm of Christ\", while David Starkey has stated that \"Edward had a couple of co-operators, but the driving will was his\". Among other members of the Privy Chamber, Northumberland's intimate Sir John Gates has been suspected of suggesting to Edward to change his devise so that Lady Jane Grey herself\u2014not just any sons of hers\u2014could inherit the Crown. Whatever the degree of his contribution, Edward was convinced that his word was law and fully endorsed disinheriting his half-sisters: \"barring Mary from the succession was a cause in which the young King believed\".\nIllness and death.\nEdward had become ill during January 1553 with a fever and cough that gradually worsened. The imperial ambassador, Jean Scheyfve, reported that \"he suffers a good deal when the fever is upon him, especially from a difficulty in drawing his breath, which is due to the compression of the organs on the right side\".\nEdward felt well enough in early April to take the air in the park at Westminster and to move to Greenwich, but by the end of the month he had weakened again. By 7 May he was \"much amended\", and the royal doctors had no doubt of his recovery. A few days later the king was watching the ships on the Thames, sitting at his window. However, he relapsed, and on 11 June Scheyfve, who had an informant in the king's household, reported that \"the matter he ejects from his mouth is sometimes coloured a greenish yellow and black, sometimes pink, like the colour of blood\". Now his doctors believed he was suffering from \"a suppurating tumour\" of the lung and admitted that Edward's life was beyond recovery. Soon, his legs became so swollen that he had to lie on his back, and he lost the strength to resist the disease. To his tutor John Cheke he whispered, \"I am glad to die\".\nEdward made his final appearance in public on 1 July, when he showed himself at his window in Greenwich Palace, horrifying those who saw him by his \"thin and wasted\" condition. During the next two days, large crowds arrived hoping to see the king again, but on 3 July, they were told that the weather was too chilly for him to appear. Edward died at the age of 15 at Greenwich Palace at 8\u00a0pm on 6 July 1553. According to John Foxe's account of his death, his last words were: \"I am faint; Lord have mercy upon me, and take my spirit\".\nEdward was buried on 8 August 1553 immediately to the west of his grandfather Henry VII's tomb in the Lady Chapel at Westminster Abbey, right under the Chapel's original altar, with reformed rites performed by Thomas Cranmer. The procession was led by \"a grett company of chylderyn in ther surples\" and watched by Londoners \"wepyng and lamenting\"; the funeral chariot, draped in cloth of gold, was topped by an effigy of Edward, with crown, sceptre, and garter. A monument was designed but not realised, leaving Edward's burial place unmarked right up until 1966, when an inscribed stone was laid in the chapel floor by Christ's Hospital school to commemorate its founder. The inscription reads as follows: \"In Memory Of King Edward VI Buried In This Chapel This Stone Was Placed Here By Christ's Hospital In Thanksgiving For Their Founder 7 October 1966\".\nThe cause of Edward VI's death is not certain. As with many royal deaths in the 16th century, rumours of poisoning abounded, but no evidence has been found to support these. The Duke of Northumberland, whose unpopularity was underlined by the events that followed Edward's death, was widely believed to have ordered the imagined poisoning. Another theory held that Edward had been poisoned by Catholics seeking to bring Mary to the throne. The surgeon who opened Edward's chest after his death found that \"the disease whereof his majesty died was the disease of the lungs\". The Venetian ambassador reported that Edward had died of consumption\u2014in other words, tuberculosis\u2014a diagnosis accepted by many historians. Skidmore believes that Edward contracted tuberculosis after a bout of measles and smallpox in 1552 that suppressed his natural immunity to the disease. Loach suggests instead that his symptoms were typical of acute bronchopneumonia, leading to a \"suppurating pulmonary infection\" or lung abscess, septicaemia and kidney failure.\nLady Jane and Queen Mary.\nLady Mary was last seen by Edward in February, and was kept informed about the state of her half-brother's health by Northumberland and through her contacts with the imperial ambassadors. Aware of Edward's imminent death, she left Hunsdon House, near London, and sped to her estates around Kenninghall in Norfolk, where she could count on the support of her tenants. Northumberland sent ships to the Norfolk coast to prevent her escape or the arrival of reinforcements from the continent. He delayed the announcement of the king's death while he gathered his forces, and Jane Grey was taken to the Tower on 10 July. On the same day, she was proclaimed queen in the streets of London, to murmurings of discontent. The Privy Council received a message from Mary asserting her \"right and title\" to the throne and commanding that the council proclaim her queen, as she had already proclaimed herself. The council replied that Jane was queen by Edward's authority and that Mary, by contrast, was illegitimate and supported only by \"a few lewd, base people\".\nNorthumberland soon realised that he had miscalculated drastically, not least in failing to secure Mary's person before Edward's death. Although many of those who rallied to Mary were Catholics hoping to establish that religion and hoping for the defeat of Protestantism, her supporters also included many for whom her lawful claim to the throne overrode religious considerations. Northumberland was obliged to relinquish control of a nervous council in London and launch an unplanned pursuit of Mary into East Anglia, from where news was arriving of her growing support, which included a number of nobles and gentlemen and \"innumerable companies of the common people\". On 14 July Northumberland marched out of London with three thousand men, reaching Cambridge the next day; meanwhile, Mary rallied her forces at Framlingham Castle in Suffolk, gathering an army of nearly twenty thousand by 19 July.\nIt now dawned on the Privy Council that it had made a terrible mistake. Led by the Earls of Arundel and Pembroke, on 19 July the council publicly proclaimed Mary as queen; Jane's nine-day reign came to an end. The proclamation triggered wild rejoicing throughout London. Stranded in Cambridge, Northumberland himself proclaimed Mary queen\u2014as he had been commanded to do by a letter from the council. William Paget and the Earl of Arundel rode to Framlingham to beg Mary's pardon, and Arundel arrested Northumberland on 24 July. Northumberland was beheaded on 22 August, shortly after renouncing Protestantism. His recantation dismayed his daughter-in-law, Jane, who followed him to the scaffold on 12 February 1554, after her father's involvement in Wyatt's rebellion.\nProtestant legacy.\nAlthough Edward reigned for only six years and died at the age of 15, his reign made a lasting contribution to the English Reformation and the structure of the Church of England. The last decade of Henry VIII's reign had seen a partial stalling of the Reformation, a drifting back to Catholic values. By contrast, Edward's reign saw radical progress in the Reformation, with the Church transferring from an essentially Catholic liturgy and structure to one that is usually identified as Protestant. In particular, the introduction of the Book of Common Prayer, the Ordinal of 1550 and Cranmer's Forty-two Articles formed the basis for English Church practices that continue to this day. Edward himself fully approved these changes, and though they were the work of reformers such as Thomas Cranmer, Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley, backed by Edward's determinedly evangelical council, the fact of the king's religion was a catalyst in the acceleration of the Reformation during his reign.\nQueen Mary's attempts to undo the reforming work of her brother's reign faced major obstacles. Despite her belief in the papal supremacy, she ruled constitutionally as the Supreme Head of the English Church, a contradiction under which she bridled. She found herself entirely unable to restore the vast number of ecclesiastical properties handed over or sold to private landowners. Although she burned a number of leading Protestant churchmen, many reformers either went into exile or remained subversively active in England during her reign, producing a torrent of reforming propaganda that she was unable to stem. Nevertheless, Protestantism was not yet \"printed in the stomachs\" of the English people, and had Mary lived longer, her Catholic reconstruction might have succeeded, leaving Edward's reign, rather than hers, as a historical aberration.\nOn Mary's death in 1558, the English Reformation resumed its course, and most of the reforms instituted during Edward's reign were reinstated in the Elizabethan Religious Settlement. Queen Elizabeth replaced Mary's councillors and bishops with ex-Edwardians, such as William Cecil, Northumberland's former secretary, and Richard Cox, Edward's old tutor, who preached an anti-Catholic sermon at the opening of Parliament in 1559. Parliament passed an Act of Uniformity the following spring that restored, with modifications, Cranmer's prayer book of 1552; and the Thirty-nine Articles of 1563 were largely based on Cranmer's Forty-two Articles. The theological developments of Edward's reign provided a vital source of reference for Elizabeth's religious policies, though the internationalism of the Edwardian Reformation was never revived."}
{"id": "10248", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10248", "title": "Extrapyramidal", "text": "Extrapyramidal can refer to:"}
{"id": "10249", "revid": "104523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10249", "title": "Extrapyramidal side-effect", "text": ""}
{"id": "10251", "revid": "3397128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10251", "title": "EDSAC", "text": "The Electronic Delay Storage Automatic Calculator (EDSAC) was an early British computer. Inspired by John von Neumann's seminal \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\", the machine was constructed by Maurice Wilkes and his team at the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory in England. EDSAC was the second electronic digital stored-program computer, after the Manchester Mark 1, to go into regular service.\nLater the project was supported by J. Lyons &amp; Co. Ltd., intending to develop a commercially applied computer and resulting in Lyons' development of the LEO\u00a0I, based on the EDSAC design. Work on EDSAC started during 1947, and it ran its first programs on 6\u00a0May 1949, when it calculated a table of square numbers and a list of prime numbers. EDSAC was finally shut down on 11\u00a0July 1958, having been superseded by EDSAC\u00a02, which remained in use until 1965.\nTechnical overview.\nPhysical components.\nAs soon as EDSAC was operational, it began serving the university's research needs. It used mercury delay lines for memory and derated vacuum tubes for logic. Power consumption was 11\u00a0kW of electricity. Cycle time was 1.5\u00a0ms for all ordinary instructions, 6\u00a0ms for multiplication. Input was via five-hole punched tape, and output was via a teleprinter.\nInitially, registers were limited to an accumulator and a multiplier register. In 1953, David Wheeler, returning from a stay at the University of Illinois, designed an index register as an extension to the original EDSAC hardware.\nA magnetic-tape drive was added in 1952 but never worked sufficiently well to be of real use.\nUntil 1952, the available main memory (instructions and data) was only 512 18-bit words, and there was no backing store. The delay lines (or \"tanks\") were arranged in two batteries providing 512 words each. The second battery came into operation in 1952.\nThe full 1024-word delay-line store was not available until 1955 or early 1956, limiting programs to about 800 words until then.\nJohn Lindley (diploma student 1958\u20131959) mentioned \"the incredible difficulty we had ever to produce a single correct piece of paper tape with the crude and unreliable home-made punching, printing and verifying gear available in the late 50s\".\nMemory and instructions.\nThe EDSAC's main memory consisted of 1024 locations, though only 512 locations were initially installed. Each contained 18\u00a0bits, but the topmost bit was always unavailable due to timing problems, so only 17\u00a0bits were used. An instruction consisted of a five-bit instruction code, one spare bit, a 10-bit operand (usually a memory address), and one length bit to control whether the instruction used a 17-bit or a 35-bit operand (two consecutive words, little-endian). All instruction codes were by design represented by one mnemonic letter, so that the \"Add\" instruction, for example, used the EDSAC character code for the letter\u00a0A.\nInternally, the EDSAC used two's complement binary numbers. Numbers were either 17\u00a0bits (one word) or 35\u00a0bits (two words) long. Unusually, the multiplier was designed to treat numbers as fixed-point fractions in the range \u22121 \u2264 \"x\" &lt; 1, i.e. the binary point was immediately to the right of the sign. The accumulator could hold 71\u00a0bits, including the sign, allowing two long (35-bit) numbers to be multiplied without losing any precision.\nThe instructions available were:\nThere was no division instruction (but various division subroutines were supplied) and no way to directly load a number into the accumulator (a \"Store and zero accumulator\" instruction followed by an \"Add\" instruction were necessary for this). There was no unconditional jump instruction, nor was there a procedure call instruction\u00a0\u2013 it had not yet been invented.\nMaurice Wilkes discussed relative addressing modes for the EDSAC in a paper published in 1953. He was making the proposals to facilitate the use of subroutines.\nSystem software.\nThe \"initial orders\" were hard-wired on a set of uniselector switches and loaded into the low words of memory at startup. By May 1949, the initial orders provided a primitive relocating assembler taking advantage of the mnemonic design described above, all in 31 words. This was the world's first assembler, and arguably the start of the global software industry. There is a simulation of EDSAC available, and a full description of the initial orders and first programs.\nThe first calculation done by EDSAC was a program run on 6\u00a0May 1949 to compute square numbers. The program was written by Beatrice Worsley, who had travelled from Canada to study the machine.\nThe machine was used by other members of the university to solve real problems, and many early techniques were developed that are now included in operating systems.\nUsers prepared their programs by punching them (in assembler) onto a paper tape. They soon became good at being able to hold the paper tape up to the light and read back the codes. When a program was ready, it was hung on a length of line strung up near the paper-tape reader. The machine operators, who were present during the day, selected the next tape from the line and loaded it into EDSAC. This is of course well known today as job queues. If it printed something, then the tape and the printout were returned to the user, otherwise they were informed at which memory location it had stopped. Debuggers were some time away, but a cathode-ray tube screen could be set to display the contents of a particular piece of memory. This was used to see whether a number was converging, for example. A loudspeaker was connected to the accumulator's sign bit; experienced users knew healthy and unhealthy sounds of programs, particularly programs \"hung\" in a loop.\nAfter office hours certain \"authorised users\" were allowed to run the machine for themselves, which went on late into the night until a valve blew \u2013 which usually happened according to one such user. This is alluded to by Fred Hoyle in his novel \"The Black Cloud\"\nProgramming technique.\nThe early programmers had to make use of techniques frowned upon today\u2014in particular, the use of self-modifying code. As there was no index register until much later, the only way of accessing an array was to alter which memory location a particular instruction was referencing.\nDavid Wheeler, who earned the world's first Computer Science PhD working on the project, is credited with inventing the concept of a subroutine. Users wrote programs that called a routine by jumping to the start of the subroutine with the return address (i.e. the location-plus-one of the jump itself) in the accumulator (a Wheeler Jump). By convention the subroutine expected this, and the first thing it did was to modify its concluding jump instruction to that return address. Multiple and nested subroutines could be called so long as the user knew the length of each one in order to calculate the location to jump to; recursive calls were forbidden. The user then copied the code for the subroutine from a master tape onto their own tape following the end of their own program. (However, Alan Turing discussed subroutines in a paper of 1945 on design proposals for the NPL ACE, going so far as to invent the concept of a return-address stack, which would have allowed recursion.)\nThe lack of an index register also posed a problem to the writer of a subroutine in that they could not know in advance where in memory the subroutine would be loaded, and therefore they could not know how to address any regions of the code that were used for storage of data (so-called \"pseudo-orders\"). This was solved by use of an initial input routine, which was responsible for loading subroutines from punched tape into memory. On loading a subroutine, it would note the start location and increment internal memory references as required. Thus, as Wilkes wrote, \"the code used to represent orders outside the machine differs from that used inside, the differences being dictated by the different requirements of the programmer on the one hand, and of the control circuits of the machine on the other\".\nEDSAC's programmers used special techniques to make best use of the limited available memory. For example, at the point of loading a subroutine from punched tape into memory, it might happen that a particular constant would have to be calculated, a constant that would not subsequently need recalculation. In this situation, the constant would be calculated in an \"interlude\". The code required to calculate the constant would be supplied along with the full subroutine. After the initial input routine had loaded the calculation-code, it would transfer control to this code. Once the constant had been calculated and written into memory, control would return to the initial input routine, which would continue to write the remainder of the subroutine into memory, but first adjusting its starting point so as to overwrite the code that had calculated the constant. This allowed quite complicated adjustments to be made to a general-purpose subroutine without making its final footprint in memory any larger than had it been tailored to a specific circumstance.\nApplication software.\nThe subroutine concept led to the availability of a substantial subroutine library. By 1951, 87 subroutines in the following categories were available for general use: floating-point arithmetic; arithmetic operations on complex numbers; checking; division; exponentiation; routines relating to functions; differential equations; special functions; power series; logarithms; miscellaneous; print and layout; quadrature; read (input); \"n\"th root; trigonometric functions; counting operations (simulating repeat until loops, while loops and for loops); vectors; and matrices.\nThe first assembly language appeared for the EDSAC, and inspired several other assembly languages:\nApplications of EDSAC.\nEDSAC was designed specifically to form part of the Mathematical Laboratory's support service for calculation. Ronald Fisher, in collaboration with Wilkes and Wheeler, used EDSAC to solve a differential equation relating to gene frequencies; this represented the first application of a computer to research in biology. In 1951, Miller and Wheeler used the machine to discover a 79-digit prime\u00a0\u2013 the largest known at the time.\nThe winners of three Nobel Prizes John Kendrew and Max Perutz (Chemistry, 1962), Andrew Huxley (Medicine, 1963) and Martin Ryle (Physics, 1974) benefitted from EDSAC's revolutionary computing power. In their acceptance prize speeches, each acknowledged the role that EDSAC had played in their research.\nIn the early 1960s Peter Swinnerton-Dyer used the EDSAC computer to calculate the number of points modulo \"p\" (denoted by \"Np\") for a large number of primes \"p\" on elliptic curves whose rank was known. Based on these numerical results, conjectured that \"Np\" for a curve \"E\" with rank \"r\" obeys an asymptotic law, the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, considered one of the top unsolved problems in mathematics as of 2024.\nGames.\nIn 1952, Sandy Douglas developed \"OXO\", a version of noughts and crosses (tic-tac-toe) for the EDSAC, with graphical output to a VCR97 6\" cathode-ray tube. This may well have been the world's first video game.\nAnother video game was created by Stanley Gill and involved a dot (termed a sheep) approaching a line in which one of two gates could be opened. The Stanley Gill game was controlled via the lightbeam of the EDSAC's paper-tape reader. Interrupting it (such as by the player placing their hand in it) would open the upper gate. Leaving the beam unbroken would result in the lower gate opening.\nFurther developments.\nEDSAC's successor, EDSAC 2, was commissioned in 1958.\nIn 1961, an EDSAC 2 version of Autocode, an ALGOL-like high-level programming language for scientists and engineers, was developed by David Hartley.\nIn the mid-1960s, a successor to the EDSAC 2 was planned, but the move was instead made to the Titan, a prototype Atlas\u00a02 developed from the Atlas Computer of the University of Manchester, Ferranti, and Plessey.\nEDSAC Replica Project.\nOn 13 January 2011, the Computer Conservation Society announced that it planned to build a working replica of EDSAC, at the National Museum of Computing (TNMoC) in Bletchley Park supervised by Andrew Herbert, who studied under Maurice Wilkes. The first parts of the replica were switched on in November 2014. The EDSAC logical circuits were meticulously reconstructed through the development of a simulator and the reexamination of some rediscovered original schematics. This documentation has been released under a Creative Commons license. The ongoing project is open to visitors of the museum. In 2016, two original EDSAC operators, Margaret Marrs and Joyce Wheeler, visited the museum to assist the project. As of November 2016, commissioning of the fully completed and operational state of the replica was estimated to be the autumn of 2017. However, unforeseen project delays have resulted in an unknown date for a completed and fully operational machine."}
{"id": "10252", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10252", "title": "E. H. Shepard", "text": "Ernest Howard Shepard (10 December 1879 \u2013 24 March 1976) was an English artist and book illustrator. He is known especially for illustrations of the anthropomorphic animal and soft toy characters in \"The Wind in the Willows\" and \"Winnie-the-Pooh\".\nShepard's original 1926 illustrated map of the Hundred Acre Wood, which features in the opening pages of \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" (and also appears in the opening animation in the first Disney adaptation in 1966), sold for \u00a3430,000 ($600,000) at Sotheby's in London, setting a world record for book illustrations.\nEarly life and career.\nShepard was born in St John's Wood, London, son of Henry Donkin Shepard, an architect, and Jessie Harriet, daughter of watercolour painter William Lee. Having shown some promise in drawing at St Paul's School, in 1897 he enrolled in the Heatherley School of Fine Art in Chelsea. After a productive year there, he attended the Royal Academy Schools, winning a Landseer scholarship in 1899 and a British Institute prize in 1900. There he met Florence Eleanor Chaplin, whom he married in 1904. By 1906 Shepard had become a successful illustrator, having produced work for illustrated editions of Aesop's Fables, \"David Copperfield\", and \"Tom Brown's Schooldays\", while at the same time working as an illustrator on the staff of \"Punch\". The couple bought a house in London, but in 1905 moved to Shamley Green, near Guildford.\nShepard was a prolific painter, showing in a number of exhibitions. He exhibited at the Royal Society of Artists, Birmingham\u2014a traditional venue for generic painters\u2014as well as in the more radical atmosphere of Glasgow's Institute of Fine Arts, where some of the most innovative artists were on show. He was twice an exhibitor at the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool, one of the largest provincial galleries in the country, and another at the Manchester Art Gallery, a Victorian institution later part of the public libraries. But at heart, Shepard was a Londoner, showing sixteen times at the Royal Academy on Piccadilly. His wife, who was also a painter, found a home in London's West End venue for her own modest output during a 25-year career.\nIn his mid-thirties when World War I broke out in 1914, Shepard received a commission as a second lieutenant in the Royal Garrison Artillery, an arm of the Royal Artillery. He was assigned to the 105th Siege Battery, which crossed to France in May 1916 and went into action at the Battle of the Somme.\nBy the autumn of 1916, Shepard started working for the Intelligence Department sketching the combat area within the view of his battery position. On 16 February 1917, he was made an acting captain whilst second-in-command of his battery, and briefly served as an acting major in late April and early May of that year during the Battle of Arras before reverting to acting captain. He was promoted to substantive lieutenant on 1 July 1917. Whilst acting as captain, he was awarded the Military Cross. His citation read:\nLater in 1917, the 105th Siege Battery participated in the final stages of the Battle of Passchendaele where it came under heavy fire and suffered a number of casualties. At the end of the year, it was sent to help retrieve a disastrous situation on the Italian Front, travelling by rail via Verona before coming into action on the Montello Hill.\nShepard missed the Second Battle of the Piave River in April 1918, being on leave in England (where he was invested with his MC by King George V at Buckingham Palace) and where he was attending a gunnery course. He was back in Italy with his battery for the victory at Vittorio Veneto. After the Armistice of Villa Giusti in November 1918, Shepard was promoted to acting major in command of the battery, and given the duty of administering captured enemy guns. Demobilisation began at Christmas 1918 and the 105th Siege Battery was disbanded in March 1919.\nThroughout the war, he had been contributing to \"Punch\". He was hired as a regular staff cartoonist in 1921 and became lead cartoonist in 1945. He was removed from this post in 1953 by \"Punch\"'s new editor, Malcolm Muggeridge. His work was also part of the painting event in the art competition at the 1928 Summer Olympics.\nShepard was recommended to A. A. Milne in 1923 by another \"Punch\" staffer, E. V. Lucas. Milne initially thought Shepard's style was not what he wanted, but used him to illustrate the book of poems \"When We Were Very Young\". Happy with the results, Milne then insisted Shepard illustrate \"Winnie-the-Pooh\". Realising his illustrator's contribution to the book's success, the writer arranged for Shepard to receive a share of his royalties. Milne also inscribed a copy of \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" with the following personal verse:\nEventually Shepard came to resent \"that silly old bear\" as he felt that the Pooh illustrations overshadowed his other work.\nShepard modelled Pooh not on the toy owned by Milne's son Christopher Robin but on \"Growler\", a stuffed bear owned by his own son. (Growler no longer exists, having been given to his granddaughter Minnie Hunt and subsequently destroyed by a neighbour's dog.) His Pooh work is so famous that 300 of his preliminary sketches were exhibited at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1969, when he was 90 years old.\nA Shepard painting of Winnie the Pooh, believed to have been painted in the 1930s for a Bristol teashop, is his only known oil painting of the famous teddy bear. It was purchased at an auction for $243,000 in London late in 2000. The painting is displayed in the Pavilion Gallery at Assiniboine Park in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, the city after which Winnie is named.\nShepard wrote two autobiographies: \"Drawn from Memory\" (1957) and \"Drawn From Life\" (1961).\nIn 1972, Shepard gave his personal collection of papers and illustrations to the University of Surrey. These now form the E.H. Shepard Archive.\nShepard was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1972 Birthday Honours.\nPersonal life.\nShepard lived at Melina Place in St John's Wood and from 1955 in Lodsworth, West Sussex. He and Florence had two children, Graham (born 1907) and Mary (born 1909), who both became illustrators. Lt. Graham Shepard died when his ship HMS \"Polyanthus\" was sunk by German submarine U-952 in September 1943. Mary married E.V. Knox, the editor of \"Punch\", and became known as the illustrator of the \"Mary Poppins\" series of children's books. Florence Shepard died in 1927. In November 1943 Shepard married Norah Carroll, a nurse at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington. They remained married until his death on 24 March 1976. In 1966, he called the Disney Animation short film \"Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree\" a travesty.\nReferences.\nSecondary sources.\nArticles"}
{"id": "10253", "revid": "13549925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10253", "title": "Enterobacteriaceae", "text": "Enterobacteriaceae is a large family of Gram-negative bacteria. It includes over 30 genera and more than 100 species. Its classification above the level of family is still a subject of debate, but one classification places it in the order Enterobacterales of the class Gammaproteobacteria in the phylum Pseudomonadota. In 2016, the description and members of this family were emended based on comparative genomic analyses by Adeolu et al.\nEnterobacteriaceae includes, along with many harmless symbionts, many of the more familiar pathogens, such as \"Salmonella\", \"Escherichia coli\", \"Klebsiella\", and \"Shigella\". Other disease-causing bacteria in this family include \"Enterobacter\" and \"Citrobacter\". Members of the Enterobacteriaceae can be trivially referred to as enterobacteria or \"enteric bacteria\", as several members live in the intestines of animals. In fact, the etymology of the family is enterobacterium with the suffix to designate a family (aceae)\u2014not after the genus \"Enterobacter\" (which would be \"Enterobacteraceae\")\u2014and the type genus is \"Escherichia\".\nMorphology.\nMembers of the Enterobacteriaceae are bacilli (rod-shaped), and are typically 1\u20135\u00a0\u03bcm in length. They typically appear as medium to large-sized grey colonies on blood agar, although some can express pigments.\nMost have many flagella used to move about, but a few genera are nonmotile. Most members of Enterobacteriaceae have peritrichous, type I fimbriae involved in the adhesion of the bacterial cells to their hosts.\nThey are not spore-forming.\nMetabolism.\nLike other Pseudomonadota, Enterobacteriaceae have Gram-negative stains, and they are facultative anaerobes, fermenting sugars to produce lactic acid and various other end products. Most also reduce nitrate to nitrite, although exceptions exist. Unlike most similar bacteria, Enterobacteriaceae generally lack cytochrome c oxidase, there are exceptions.\nCatalase reactions vary among Enterobacteriaceae.\nEcology.\nMany members of this family are normal members of the gut microbiota in humans and other animals, while others are found in water or soil, or are parasites on a variety of different animals and plants.\nModel organisms and medical relevance.\n\"Escherichia coli\" is one of the most important model organisms, and its genetics and biochemistry have been closely studied.\nSome enterobacteria are important pathogens, e.g. \"Salmonella\", or \"Shigella\" e.g. because they produce endotoxins. Endotoxins reside in the cell wall and are released when the cell dies and the cell wall disintegrates. Some members of the Enterobacteriaceae produce endotoxins that, when released into the bloodstream following cell lysis, cause a systemic inflammatory and vasodilatory response. The most severe form of this is known as endotoxic shock, which can be rapidly fatal.\nHistorical systematics and taxonomy.\nEnterobacteriaceae was originally the sole family under the order Enterobacteriales. The family contained a large array of biochemically distinct species with different ecological niches, which made biochemical descriptions difficult. The original classification of species to this family and order was largely based on 16S rRNA genome sequence analyses, which is known to have low discriminatory power and the results of which changes depends on the algorithm and organism information used. Despite this, the analyses still exhibited polyphyletic branching, indicating the presence of distinct subgroups within the family.\nIn 2016, the order Enterobacteriales was renamed to Enterobacterales, and divided into 7 new families, including the emended Enterobacteriaceae family. This emendation restricted the family to include only those genera directly related to the type genus, which included most of the enteric species under the order. This classification was proposed based on the construction of several robust phylogenetic trees using conserved genome sequences, 16S rRNA sequences and multilocus sequence analyses. Molecular markers, specifically conserved signature indels, specific to this family were identified as evidence supporting the division independent of phylogenetic trees.\nIn 2017, a subsequent study using comparative phylogenomic analyses identified the presence of 6 subfamily level clades within the family Enterobacteriaceae, namely the \"Escherichia clade\", \"Klebsiella clade\", \"Enterobacter clade\", \"Kosakonia clade\", \"Cronobacter clade\", \"Cedecea clade\" and an \"Enterobacteriaceae incertae sedis clade\" containing species whose taxonomic placement within the family is unclear. However, this division was not officially proposed as the subfamily rank is generally not used.\nMolecular signatures.\nAnalyses of genome sequences from Enterobacteriaceae species identified 21 conserved signature indels (CSIs) that are uniquely present in this family in the proteins (subunit M), twitching motility protein PilT, 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate-AMP ligase, ATP/GTP-binding protein, multifunctional fatty acid oxidation complex (subunit alpha), S-formylglutathione hydrolase, aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase, epimerase, membrane protein, formate dehydrogenylase (subunit 7), glutathione S-transferase, major facilitator superfamily transporter, phosphoglucosamine mutase, glycosyl hydrolase 1 family protein, 23S rrna [uracil(1939)-C(5)]-methyltransferase, co-chaperone HscB, N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase, sulfate ABC transporter ATP-binding protein CysA, and LPS assembly protein LptD. These CSIs provide a molecular means of distinguishing Enterobacteriaceae from other families within the order Enterobacterales and other bacteria.\nGenera.\nValidly published genera.\nThe following genera have been validly published, thus they have \"Standing in Nomenclature\". The year the genus was proposed is listed in parentheses after the genus name.\nProposed genera.\nThe following genera have been effectively, but not validly, published, thus they do not have \"Standing in Nomenclature\". The year the genus was proposed is listed in parentheses after the genus name.\nIdentification.\nTo identify different genera of Enterobacteriaceae, a microbiologist may run a series of tests in the lab. These include:\nIn a clinical setting, three species make up 80 to 95% of all isolates identified. These are \"Escherichia coli\", \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", and \"Proteus mirabilis\". However, \"Proteus mirabilis\" is now considered a part of the Morganellaceae, a sister clade within the Enterobacterales.\nAntibiotic resistance.\nSeveral Enterobacteriaceae strains have been isolated which are resistant to antibiotics including carbapenems, which are often claimed as \"the last line of antibiotic defense\" against resistant organisms. For instance, some \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\" strains are carbapenem resistant. Various carbapenemases genes (blaOXA-48, blaKPC and blaNDM-1, blaVIM and blaIMP) have been identified in carbapenem resistant Enterobacteriaceae including \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Klebsiella pneumoniae\"."}
{"id": "10256", "revid": "21228317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10256", "title": "Eccentricity", "text": "Eccentricity or eccentric may refer to:"}
{"id": "10257", "revid": "814993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10257", "title": "Essendon Football Club", "text": "The Essendon Football Club, nicknamed the Bombers or colloquially the Dons, is a professional Australian rules football club that plays in the Australian Football League (AFL), the game's premier competition. The club was formed by the McCracken family in their Ascot Vale home \"Alisa\" adopting the name of the local borough. While the exact date is unknown, it is generally accepted to have been in 1872. The club's first recorded game took place on 7 June 1873 against a seconds team. From 1878 until 1896, the club played in the Victorian Football Association (VFA), then joined seven other clubs in October 1896 to form the breakaway Victorian Football League (known as the Australian Football League since 1990). Headquartered at the Essendon Recreation Ground, known as Windy Hill, from 1922 to 2013, the club moved to The Hangar in Tullamarine in late 2013 on land owned by the Melbourne Airport corporation. The club shares its home games between Docklands Stadium and the Melbourne Cricket Ground. Zach Merrett is the current club captain.\nEssendon is one of Australia's best-known and most successful football clubs. It has won 16 VFL/AFL premierships, which, along with Carlton and Collingwood, is the most of any club in the competition. The club won four consecutive VFA premierships between 1891 and 1894, a feat unmatched in that competition's history. Essendon also hold the distinction of being the only club to win a premiership in their inaugural season (1897). It has struggled to achieve significant on-field success in the 21st century, however, having won its most recent premiership in 2000 and most recent final in 2004.\nThree Essendon players\u2014John Coleman, Bill Hutchison, and Dick Reynolds\u2014and one coach, Kevin Sheedy, are classified as \"Legends\" in the Australian Football Hall of Fame.\nEssendon also fields reserve men's and women's teams in the Victoria Football League and VFL Women's, respectively. Since 2022 (S7), it has fielded a senior women's team in the national AFL Women's competition.\nHistory.\nFormation and VFA years (1871\u20131896).\nThe club was founded by members of the Royal Agricultural Society, the Melbourne Hunt Club and the Victorian Woolbrokers. The Essendon Football Club is thought to have been formed in 1872 at a meeting it the home of a well-known brewery family, the McCrackens, whose Ascot Vale property hosted a team of local junior players.\nRobert McCracken (1813\u20131885), the owner of several city hotels, was the founder and first president of the Essendon Football Club, and his son, Alex McCracken, its first secretary. Alex later became president of the newly formed VFL. Alex's cousin Collier McCracken, who had already played with Melbourne, was the team's first captain.\nThe club played its first recorded match against the Carlton Second Twenty (the reserves) on 7 June 1873, with Essendon winning by one goal. Essendon played 13 matches in its first season, winning seven, with four draws and losing two. The club was one of the inaugural junior members of the Victorian Football Association (VFA) in 1877, and it began competing as a senior club from the 1878 season. During its early years in the Association, Essendon played its home matches at Flemington Hill, but it moved to the East Melbourne Cricket Ground in 1881.\nIn 1878, at Flemington Hill, Essendon played its first match on what would be considered by modern standards to be a full-sized field. In 1879, Essendon played Melbourne in one of the earliest night matches recorded when the ball was painted white. In 1883, the team played four matches in eight days in Adelaide: losing to Norwood (on 23 June) and defeating Port Adelaide (on 16 June), a combined South Australian team (on 18 June), and South Adelaide (on 20 June).\nThe club played against the touring British footballers in 1888.\nIn 1891, Essendon won their first VFA premiership, which they repeated in 1892, 1893 and 1894. One of the club's greatest players, Albert Thurgood, played for the club during this period, making his debut in 1892. Essendon (18 wins, 2 draws) was undefeated in the 1893 season.\nFounding of the VFL to World War I (1897\u20131915).\nAt the end of the 1896 season, Essendon, along with seven other clubs, formed the Victorian Football League. Essendon's first VFL game was in 1897 against Geelong at Corio Oval in Geelong. Essendon won its first VFL premiership by winning the 1897 VFL finals series in a round-robin event. Essendon again won the premiership in 1901, defeating Collingwood in the Grand Final. The club won successive premierships in 1911 and 1912 over Collingwood and South Melbourne, respectively.\n\"Same Olds\".\nThe club is recorded as having played at McCracken's Paddock, Glass's Paddock, and Flemington Hill. It is likely that these are three different names for the one ground, given that McCracken's Paddock was a parcel of land that sat within the larger Glass's Paddock, which in turn was situated in an area widely known at the time as Flemington Hill. In 1882, the club moved home games to the East Melbourne Cricket Ground (since demolished) after an application to play on the Essendon Cricket Ground (later known as Windy Hill) was voted down by Lord Mayor of the City of Essendon, James Taylor, on the basis that the considered the Essendon Cricket Ground \"to be suitable only for the gentleman's game of cricket\".\nThe club became known by the nickname \"the Same Old Essendon\" from the title and hook of the principal song performed by a band of supporters which regularly occupied a section of the grandstand at the club's games. The nickname first appeared in print in the local \"North Melbourne Advertiser\" in 1889, and ended up gaining wide use, often as the diminutive \"Same Olds\".\nThis move away from Essendon, at a time when fans would walk to their local ground, didn't go down too well with many Essendon people; and, as a consequence, a new team and club was formed in 1900, unconnected with the first (although it played in the same colours), that was based at the Essendon Cricket Ground, and playing in the Victorian Football Association. It was known firstly as Essendon Town and, after 1905, as Essendon (although it was often called Essendon A, with the A standing for association).\nReturn to suburban Essendon (1921\u20131932).\nAfter the 1921 season, the East Melbourne Cricket Ground was closed and demolished to expand the Flinders Street Railyard. Having played at the East Melbourne Cricket Ground from 1882 to 1921, and having won four VFA premierships (1891\u20131894) and four VFL premierships (1897, 1901, 1911 and 1912) whilst there, Essendon was looking for a new home. It was offered grounds at the current Royal Melbourne Showgrounds, Ascot Vale; at Victoria Park, Melbourne; at Arden St, North Melbourne; and the Essendon Cricket Ground. The Essendon City Council offered the (VFL) team the Essendon Cricket Ground, announcing that it would be prepared to spend over \u00a312,000 ($1,009,066 in 2021 terms, according to the Retail Price Index) on improvements, including a new grandstand, scoreboard and re-fencing of the oval.\nThe club's first preference was to move to North Melbourne\u2014a move which the North Melbourne Football Club (then in the VFA) saw as an opportunity to get into the VFL. Most of Essendon's members and players were from the North Melbourne area, and sportswriters believed that Essendon would have been taken over by or rebranded as North Melbourne within only a few years of the move. However, the VFA, desperate for its own strategic reasons not to lose its use of the North Melbourne Cricket Ground, successfully appealed to the State Government to block Essendon's move to North Melbourne. With its preferred option off the table, the club returned to Essendon, and the Essendon VFA club disbanded, with most of its players moving to North Melbourne.\nThe old \"Same Olds\" nickname fell into disuse, and by 1922 the other nicknames \"Sash Wearers\" and \"Essendonians\" that had been variously used from time to time were also abandoned. The team became universally known as \"the Dons\" (from EssenDON); it was not until much later, during the War years of the early 1940s, that they became known as \"The Bombers\" due to Windy Hill's proximity to the Essendon Aerodrome.\nIn the 1922 season, playing in Essendon for the first time in decades, Essendon reached the final four for the first time since 1912, finishing in third place. In the 1923 season, the club topped the ladder with 13 wins from 16 games. After a 17-point Second Semi-Final loss to South Melbourne, Essendon defeated Fitzroy (who had beaten South Melbourne) in the 1923 Grand Final (then known as a \"Challenge Final\" due to its different finals format): Essendon 8.15 (63) to Fitzroy 6.10 (46). Amongst Essendon's best players were half-forward flanker George \"Tich\" Shorten, centre half-forward Justin McCarthy, centre half-back Tom Fitzmaurice, rover Frank Maher, and wingman Jack Garden. This was one of Essendon's most famous sides, dubbed the \"Mosquito Fleet\" due to the number of small, very fast players in the side. Six players were 5'6\" (167\u00a0cm) or smaller.\nIn the 1924 season, for the first time since their inaugural premiership in 1897, there was no ultimate match to decide the league's champion team \u2013 either \"Challenge Final\" or \"Grand Final\" \u2013 to determine the premiers; instead, the top four clubs after the home-and-away season played a round-robin to determine the premiers. Essendon, having previously defeated both Fitzroy (by 40 points) and South Melbourne (by 33 points), clinched the premiership by means of a 20-point loss to Richmond. With the Tigers having already lost a match to Fitzroy by a substantial margin, the Dons were declared premiers by virtue of their superior percentage, meaning that Essendon again managed to win successive premierships. But the low gates for the finals meant this was never attempted again, resulting in Essendon having the unique record of winning the only two premierships without a grand final.\nProminent contributors to Essendon's 1924 Premiership success included back pocket Clyde Donaldson, follower Norm Beckton, half-back flanker Roy Laing, follower Charlie May, and rover Charlie Hardy. The 1924 season was not without controversy, however, with rumours of numerous players accepting bribes. Regardless of the accuracy of these allegations, the club's image was tarnished, and the side experienced its lowest period during the decade that followed, with poor results on the field and decreased support off it.\nThere was worse to follow, with various Essendon players publicly blaming each other for a poor performance against Richmond, and then, with dissension still rife in the ranks, the side plummeted to an unexpected and humiliating 28-point loss to VFA premiers Footscray in a special charity match played a week later in front of 46,100 people, in aid of Dame Nellie Melba's Limbless Soldiers' Appeal Fund, purportedly (but not officially) for the championship of Victoria.\nThe club's fortunes dipped alarmingly\u2014and persistently. Indeed, after finishing third in the 1926 season, it was to be 14 years later\u2014in 1940\u2014before Essendon would even contest a finals series.\nDick Reynolds years (1933\u20131960).\nAfter the malaise of the late 1920s and early 1930, the 1933 season proved a turning point in morale despite no finals entries for the entire 1930s. Essendon saw the debut of the player regarded as one of the game's greatest-ever players, Dick Reynolds. His impact was immediate. He won his first Brownlow Medal aged 19. His record of three Brownlow victories (1934, 1937, 1938), equalled Fitzroy's Haydn Bunton, Sr (1931, 1932, 1935), and later equalled by Bob Skilton (1959, 1963, 1968), and Ian Stewart (1965, 1966, 1971).\nReynolds went on to arguably even greater achievements as a coach, a position to which he was first appointed, jointly with Harry Hunter, in 1939 (this was while Reynolds was still a player). A year later he took the reins on a solo basis and was rewarded with immediate success (at least in terms of expectations at the time which, after so long in the wilderness, were somewhat modest). He was regarded as having a sound tactical knowledge of the game and being an inspirational leader, as he led the side into the finals in 1940 for the first time since 1926, when the side finished 3rd. Melbourne, which defeated Essendon by just 5 points in the preliminary final, later went on to trounce Richmond by 39 points in the grand final.\nThe Essendon Football Club adopted the nickname The Bombers in April 1940.\n1941 brought Essendon's first grand final appearance since 1923, but the side again lowered its colours to Melbourne. While Australia had entered World War IIlocated primarily in Europe and Africain 1939, the Pacific Theatre opened in December 1941. Australian sports competition was considerably weakened, with Geelong being forced to pull out of the competition due petrol rationing. Attendances at games also declined dramatically, whilst some clubs had to move from their normal grounds due to them being used for military purposes. Many players were lost to football due to their military service. Nevertheless, Essendon went on to win the 1942 Premiership with Western Australian Wally Buttsworth in irrepressible form at centre half-back. Finally, the long-awaited premiership was Essendon's after comprehensively outclassing Richmond in the grand final, 19.18 (132) to 11.13 (79). The match was played at Carlton in front of 49,000 spectators.\nIn any case, there could be no such reservations about Essendon's next premiership, which came just four years later. Prior to that Essendon lost a hard-fought grand final to Richmond in 1943 by 5 points, finished 3rd in 1944, and dropped to 8th in 1945.\nAfter World War II, Essendon enjoyed great success. In the five years immediately after the war, Essendon won 3 premierships (1946, 1949, 1950) and were runners up twice (1947, 1948). In 1946, Essendon were clearly the VFL's supreme force, topping the ladder after the home-and-away games and surviving a drawn second semi-final against Collingwood to make it through to the grand final a week later with a score of 10.16 (76) to 8.9 (57). Then, in the grand final against Melbourne, Essendon set a grand final record score of 22.18 (150) to Melbourne 13.9 (87), featuring a 7-goal performance by centre half-forward Gordon Lane. Rover Bill Hutchinson, and defenders Wally Buttsworth, Cec Ruddell and Harold Lambert were among the best players.\nThe 1947 Grand Final has to go down in the ledger as 'one of the ones that got away', with Essendon losing to Carlton by a single point despite managing 30 scoring shots to 21. As if to prove that lightning does occasionally strike twice, the second of the 'ones that got away' came just a year later, the Dons finishing with a lamentable 7.27, to tie with Melbourne (who managed 10.9) in the 1948 grand final. A week later Essendon waved the premiership good-bye, as Melbourne raced to a 13.11 (89) to 7.8 (50) triumph. The club's Annual Report made an assessment that was at once restrained and, as was soon to emerge, tacitly and uncannily prophetic: \"It is very apparent that no team is complete without a spearhead and your committee has high hopes of rectifying that fault this coming season.\"\nThe 1949 season heralded the arrival on the VFL scene of John Coleman, arguably the greatest player in Essendon's history, and, in the view of some, the finest player the game has known. In his first ever appearance for the Dons, against Hawthorn in Round 1, 1949, he booted 12 of his side's 18 goals to create a round one record which was to endure for forty-five years. More importantly, however, he went on to maintain the same high level of performance throughout the season, kicking precisely 100 goals for the year to become the first player to kick 100 goals in a season since Richmond's Jack Titus in 1940.\nThe Coleman factor was just what Essendon needed to enable them to take that vital final step to premiership glory, but even so it was not until the business end of the season that this became clear. Essendon struggled to make the finals in 4th place, but once there they suddenly ignited to put in one of the most consistently devastating September performances in VFL history.\nCollingwood succumbed first as the Dons powered their way to an 82-point first semi-final victory, and a fortnight later it was the turn of the North Melbourne Football Club as Essendon won the preliminary final a good deal more comfortably than the ultimate margin of 17 points suggested. In the grand final, Essendon were pitted against Carlton and in a match that was a total travesty as a contest they overwhelmed the Blues to the tune of 73 points, 18.17 (125) to 6.16 (52). Best for the Dons included pacy aboriginal half-back flanker Norm McDonald, ruckman Bob McLure, and rovers Bill Hutchinson and Ron McEwin. John Coleman also did well, registering six goals.\nA year later, in 1950, Essendon were\u2014if anything\u2014even more dominant, defeating the North Melbourne Football Club in both the Second Semi-Final and the Grand Final to secure consecutive VFL premierships for the third time. Best afield in the 1950 Grand Final, in what was officially his swan song as a player, was captain-coach Dick Reynolds, who received sterling support from the likes of Norm McDonald, ruckman/back pocket Wally May, back pocket Les Gardiner, and ruckman McLure.\nWith Reynolds, aka 'King Richard', still holding court as coach in 1951, albeit now in a non-playing capacity, Essendon seemed on course for a third consecutive flag, but a controversial four-week suspension dished out to John Coleman on the eve of the finals effectively destroyed their chances. Coleman was reported for retaliation after twice being struck by his direct Carlton opponent, Harry Caspar, and without him the Dons were rated a four-goals-poorer team. Nevertheless, they still managed to battle their way to a 6th successive grand final with wins over Footscray by 8 points in the first semi-final and Collingwood by 2 points in the preliminary final.\nThe Dons sustained numerous injuries in the preliminary final, and the selectors sprang a surprise on Grand Final day by naming the officially retired Dick Reynolds as 20th man. Reynolds was powerless to prevent the inevitable; although leading at half-time, Geelong kicked five goals to Essendon's two points in the third quarter to set up victory by 11 points.\nEssendon slumped to 8th in 1952, but Coleman was in blistering form, managing 103 goals for the year. Hugh Buggy noted in \"The Argus\": \"It was the wettest season for twenty-two years and Coleman showed that since the war he was without peer in the art of goal kicking.\"\nTwo seasons later, Coleman's career was ended after he dislocated a knee during the Round 8 clash with the North Melbourne Football Club at Essendon. Aged just 25, he had kicked 537 goals in only 98 VFL games in what was generally a fairly low-scoring period for the game. His meteoric rise and fall were clearly the stuff of legend, and few (if any) players, either before or since, have had such an immense impact over so brief a period.\nAccording to Alf Brown, football writer for \"The Herald\":\nSomewhat more colourfully, R.S. Whittington suggested:\nWithout Coleman, Essendon's fortunes plummeted, and there were to be no further premierships in the 1950s. The nearest miss came in 1957 when the Bombers (as they were popularly known by this time) earned premiership favouritism after a superb 16-point Second Semi-Final defeat of Melbourne\u2014only to lose by over 10 goals against the same side a fortnight later.\n1959 saw another grand final loss to Melbourne, this time by 37 points, but the fact that the average age of the Essendon side was only 22 was seen as providing considerable cause for optimism. However, it was to take another three years, and a change of coach, before the team's obvious potential was translated into tangible success.\nPost-Reynolds era and the \"Slugging Seventies\" (1961\u20131980).\nJohn Coleman started his coaching career at Essendon in 1961, thus ending the Dick Reynolds era at the club. In the same year, Essendon finished the season mid-table, and supporters were not expecting too much for the following season. However, the club blitzed the opposition in 1962, losing only two matches and finishing top of the table. Both losses were to the previous year's grand finalists. The finals posed no problems for the resurgent Dons, easily accounting for Carlton in the season's climax, winning the 1962 Premiership by 32 points. This was a remarkable result for Coleman, who, in just his second season of coaching, claimed the ultimate prize in Australian football. As so often is the case after a flag, the following two years were below standard. A further premiership in 1965 (won from 4th position on the ladder) was also unexpected due to periods of poor form during the 1965 season. The Bombers were a different club when the finals came around, but some of the credit for the improvement was given to the influence of Brian Sampson and Ted Fordham during the finals. Coleman's time as coach turned out to be much like his playing career: highly successful but cut short when he had to stand down due to health problems in 1967. Only six years later, on the eve of the 1973 season, he died of a heart attack at just 44 years of age.\nFollowing Coleman's retirement, the club experienced tough times on and off the field. Finals appearances were rare for the side, which was often in contention for the wooden spoon. Essendon did manage to make the 1968 VFL Grand Final, but it lost to Carlton by just three points and did not make it back to the big stage for a 15 years.\nDuring the period from 1968 until 1980, five different coaches were tried, with none lasting longer than four years. Off the field, the club went through troubled times as well. In 1970, five players went on strike before the season even began, demanding higher payments. Essendon did make the finals in 1972 and 1973 under the autocratic direction of Des Tuddenham (Collingwood), but they were beaten badly in successive elimination finals by St. Kilda and did not taste finals action again until the very end of the decade. The 1970s' Essendon sides were involved in many rough and tough encounters under Tuddenham, who himself came to loggerheads with Ron Barassi at a quarter-time huddle where both coaches exchanged heated words. Essendon had tough but talented players with the likes of \"Rotten Ronnie\" Ron Andrews and experienced players such as Barry Davis, Ken Fletcher, Geoff Blethyn, Neville Fields and West Australian import Graham Moss. In May 1974, a controversial half-time all-in-brawl with Richmond at Windy Hill and a 1975 encounter with Carlton were testimony of the era. Following the Carlton match, the \"Herald\" described Windy Hill as \"Boot Hill\" because of the extent of the fights and the high number of reported players (eight in all\u2014four from Carlton and four from Essendon). The peak of these incidents occurred in 1980 with new recruit Phil Carman making headlines for head-butting an umpire. The tribunal suspended him for sixteen weeks, and although most people thought this was a fair (or even lenient) sentence, he took his case to the supreme court, gathering even more unwanted publicity for the club. Despite this, the club had recruited many talented young players in the late 1970s who emerged as club greats. Three of those young players were Simon Madden, Tim Watson and Paul Van Der Haar. Terry Daniher and his brother Neale came via a trade with South Melbourne, and Roger Merrett joined soon afterwards to form the nucleus of what would become the formidable Essendon sides of the 1980s. This raw but talented group of youngsters took Essendon to an elimination final in 1979 under Barry Davis but were again thrashed in an Elimination Final, this time at the hands of Fitzroy. Davis resigned at the end of the 1980 season after missing out on a finals appearance.\nOne of the few highlights for Essendon supporters during this time was when Graham Moss won the 1976 Brownlow Medal; he was the only Bomber to do so in a 40-year span from 1953 to 1993. Even that was bittersweet, as he quit VFL football to move back to his native Western Australia, where Moss finished out his career as a player and coach at Claremont Football Club. In many ways, Moss's career reflects Essendon's mixed fortunes during the decade.\nKevin Sheedy era (1981\u20132007).\nFormer Richmond player Kevin Sheedy started as head coach in 1981.\nEssendon reached the Grand Final in 1983, the first time since 1968. Hawthorn won by a then record 83 points.\nIn 1984, Essendon won the pre-season competition and completed the regular season on top of the ladder. The club played, and beat, Hawthorn in the 1984 VFL Grand Final to win their 13th premiership\u2014their first since 1965. The teams met again in the 1985 Grand Final, which Essendon also won. At the start of 1986, Essendon were considered unbackable for three successive flags, but a succession of injuries to key players Paul Van der Haar (only fifteen games from 1986 to 1988), Tim Watson, Darren Williams, Roger Merrett and Simon Madden led the club to win only eight of its last eighteen games in 1986 and only nine games (plus a draw with Geelong) in 1987. In July 1987, the Bombers suffered a humiliation at the hands of Sydney, who fell two points short of scoring the then highest score in VFL history.\nIn 1988, Essendon made a rebound to sixth place with twelve wins, including a 140-point thrashing of Brisbane where they had a record sixteen individual goalkickers. In 1989, they rebounded further to second on the ladder with only five losses and thrashed Geelong in the Qualifying Final. However, after a fiery encounter with Hawthorn ended in a convincing defeat, the Bombers were no match for Geelong next week.\nIn 1990, Essendon were pace-setters almost from the start, but a disruption from the Qualifying Final draw between Collingwood and West Coast was a blow from which they never recovered. The Magpies comprehensively thrashed them in both the second semi-final and the grand final.\nFollowing the 1991 season, Essendon moved its home games from its traditional home ground at Windy Hill to the larger and newly renovated MCG. This move generated large increases in game attendance, membership and revenue for the club. The club's training and administrative base remained at Windy Hill until 2013.\nFollowing the retirement of Tim Watson and Simon Madden in the early 1990s, the team was built on new players such as Gavin Wanganeen, Joe Misiti, Mark Mercuri, Michael Long, Dustin Fletcher (son of Ken) and James Hird, who was taken at No. 79 in the 1990 draft. This side became known as the \"Baby Bombers\", as the core of the side was made up of young players early in their careers.\nThe team won the 1993 Grand Final against Carlton and that same year, Gavin Wanganeen won the Brownlow Medal, the first awarded to an Essendon player since 1976. Three years later, James Hird was jointly awarded the medal with Michael Voss of Brisbane.\nIn 2000, the club shifted the majority of its home games to the newly opened Docklands Stadium, signing a 25-year deal to play seven home matches per year at the venue, with the other four remaining at the MCG. The season was one of the most successful by any team in VFL/AFL history, and the club opened with 20 consecutive wins before they lost to the Western Bulldogs in round 21. The team went on to win their 16th premiership, defeating , thereby completing the most dominant single season in AFL/VFL history. The defeat to the Bulldogs was the only defeat for Essendon throughout the entire calendar year (Essendon also won the 2000 pre-season competition).\nEssendon was less successful after 2001. Lucrative contracts to a number of premiership players had caused serious pressure on the club's salary cap, forcing the club to trade several key players. Blake Caracella, Chris Heffernan, Justin Blumfield, Gary Moorcroft and Damien Hardwick had all departed by the end of 2002; in 2004, Mark Mercuri, Sean Wellman and Joe Misiti retired. The club remained competitive; however, they could progress no further than the second week of the finals each year for the years of 2002, 2003, and 2004. Sheedy signed a new three-year contract at the end of 2004.\nIn 2005, Essendon missed the finals for the first time since 1997, and in 2006, despite a first-round 27-point thrashing of defending premiers in which newly appointed captain Matthew Lloyd kicked eight goals playing on Leo Barry, the Bombers were uncompetitive for the majority of the season, partially due to Lloyd suffering a season-ending hamstring injuring in Round 3, recording only three wins and one draw from twenty-two games to suffer its worst season since 1933, as well as recording the least-ever number of votes collectively as a team at the 2006 Brownlow Medal count. In Lloyd's absence, David Hille was appointed captain for the remainder of the season. The club improved its on-field position in 2007 but again missed the finals.\nOn-field woes and subsequent relocation to Melbourne Airport (2008\u20132013).\nSheedy's contract was not renewed after 2007, ending his 27-year tenure as Essendon coach. Matthew Knights replaced Sheedy as coach, and coached the club for three seasons, reaching the finals once\u2014an eighth-place finish in 2009 at the expense of reigning premiers . On 29 August 2010, shortly after the end of the 2010 home-and-away season, Knights was dismissed as coach.\nOn 28 September 2010, former captain James Hird was named as Essendon's new coach from 2011 on a four-year deal. Dual-premiership-winning coach with and triple-premiership-winning player with Essendon Mark Thompson later joined Hird on the coaching panel. In his first season, Essendon finished eighth. The club started strongly in 2012, sitting fourth with a 10\u20133 record at the halfway mark of the season, but won only one more match for the season, finishing eleventh to miss the finals.\nIn 2013, the club moved its training and administrative base to The Hangar, a new facility in the suburb of Melbourne Airport which it had developed in conjunction with the Australian Paralympic Committee. Essendon holds a 37-year lease at the facility and maintains a lease at Windy Hill to use the venue for home matches for its reserves team in the Victorian Football League as well as for a social club and merchandise store on the site.\nASADA/WADA investigation (2013\u20132016).\nDuring 2013, the club was investigated by the AFL and the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority (ASADA) over its 2012 player supplements and sports science program, most specifically over allegations into illegal use of peptide supplements. An internal review found it to have \"established a supplements program that was experimental, inappropriate and inadequately vetted and controlled\", and on 27 August 2013, the club was found guilty of bringing the game into disrepute for this reason. Among its penalties, the club was fined A$2 million, stripped of early draft picks in the following two drafts, and forfeited its place in the 2013 finals series (having originally finished seventh on the ladder); Hird was suspended from coaching for twelve months. Several office-bearers also resigned their posts during the controversy, including chairman David Evans and CEO Ian Robson.\nIn the midst of the supplements saga, assistant coach Mark Thompson took over as coach for the 2014 season during Hird's suspension. He led the club back to the finals for a seventh-place finish but in a tense second elimination final against archrivals North Melbourne, the Bombers led by as much as 27 points at half time before a resurgent Kangaroos side came back and won the game by 12 points. After the 2014 season, Mark Thompson left the club to make way for Hird's return to the senior coaching role.\nIn June 2014, thirty-four players were issued show-cause notices alleging the use of banned peptide Thymosin beta-4 during the program. The players faced the AFL Anti-Doping Tribunal over the 2014/15 offseason, and on 31 March 2015 the tribunal returned a not guilty verdict, determining that it was \"not comfortably satisfied\" that the players had been administered the peptide.\nHird returned as senior coach for the 2015 season, and after a strong start, the club's form severely declined after the announcement that WADA would appeal the decision of the AFL Anti-Doping Tribunal. The effect of the appeal on the team's morale was devastating and they went on to win only six games for the year. Under extreme pressure, Hird resigned on 18 August 2015 following a disastrous 112-point loss to Adelaide. Former West Coast Eagles premiership coach John Worsfold was appointed as the new senior coach on a three-year contract.\nOn 12 January 2016 the Court of Arbitration for Sport overruled the AFL anti-doping tribunal's decision, deeming that 34 past and present players of the Essendon Football Club, took the banned substance Thymosin Beta-4. As a result, all 34 players, 12 of which were still at the club, were given two-year suspensions. However, all suspensions were effectively less due to players having previously taken part in provisional suspensions undertaken during the 2014/2015 off-season.\nAs a result, Essendon contested the 2016 season with twelve of its regular senior players under suspension. In order for the club to remain competitive, the AFL granted Essendon the ability to upgrade all five of their rookie listed players and to sign an additional ten players to cover the loss of the suspended players for the season.\nDue to this unprecedented situation, many in the football community predicted the club would go through the 2016 AFL season without a win; however, they were able to win three matches: against , and in rounds 2, 21 and 23 respectively. The absence of its most experienced players also allowed the development of its young players, with Zach Merrett and Orazio Fantasia having breakout years, with Darcy Parish and Anthony McDonald-Tipungwuti impressing in their debut seasons. Merrett acted as captain in the side's round 21 win over the Suns. The club eventually finished on the bottom of the ladder and thus claimed its first wooden spoon since 1933.\nPost-investigation (2017\u20132022).\nEssendon made their final financial settlement related to the supplements saga in September 2017, just before finals started. They also improved vastly on their 2016 performance, finishing 7th in the home-and-away season and becoming the first team since in 2011 to go from wooden spooner to a finals appearance, but they ultimately lost their only final to .\nThe 2017 season was also capped off by the retirement of much-loved club legend and ex-captain Jobe Watson, midfielder Brent Stanton, and ex-Geelong star James Kelly, who later took up a development coach role at the club. Midfielder Heath Hocking, who played 126 games for the club, was delisted.\nExpectations were high for the 2018 season, with the club having an outstanding offseason. The recruitment of Jake Stringer, Adam Saad and Devon Smith from the Western Bulldogs, Gold Coast Suns and Greater Western Sydney Giants respectively was expected to throw Essendon firmly into premiership contention.\nAfter beating the previous year's runner up (which went on to beat reigning premiers the following round) in round one, Essendon's form slumped severely, only winning one game out of the next seven rounds and losing to the then-winless Carlton in round eight. Senior assistant coach Mark Neeld was sacked by the club the following Monday.\nThe team's form improved sharply after this, recording wins against top-eight sides Geelong, GWS, eventual premiers West Coast, and Sydney, winning ten out of the last 13 games of the season. However, the mid-season revival was short-lived, with a loss to reigning premiers by eight points in round 22 ending any hopes they had of reaching the finals.\nThe 2018 season was capped off by the club not offering veteran Brendon Goddard a new contract for 2019.\nEssendon acquired Dylan Shiel from in one of the most high-profile trades of the 2018 AFL Trade Period. The Bombers had inconsistent form throughout the 2019 season but qualified for the finals for the second time in three seasons, finishing eighth on the ladder with 12 wins and 10 losses. The Bombers, however, were no match for the West Coast Eagles in the first elimination final and lost by 55 points to end their season. The defeat extended their 15-year finals-winning drought, having not won a final since 2004.\nFollowing the end of the 2019 season, assistant coach Ben Rutten was announced as John Worsfold's successor as senior coach, effective at the end of the 2020 AFL season. Rutten effectively shared co-coaching duties with Worsfold during the 2020 season.\n2020 was a particularly disappointing year for the club. The Bombers failed to make the finals, finishing thirteenth on the AFL ladder with just six wins and a draw from 17 games. Conor McKenna became the first AFL player to test positive to COVID-19 during the pandemic. A number of players also left the club at the end of the 2020 season, including Joe Daniher, Conor McKenna, Adam Saad and Orazio Fantasia. This also marked 20 years since their last premiership win, a new record for the club's longest premiership drought, with the previous record of 19 years from 1965\u20131984 being dethroned.\nWith Rutten solely at the helm in 2021, Essendon improved significantly from the previous year and returned to the finals, finishing eighth on the ladder with 11 wins and 11 losses; and, despite having beaten the Western Bulldogs towards the end of the regular season, the Bombers would lose to the same team by 49 points in the first elimination final.\nSeason 2022 was the club's 150th anniversary. Hopes were high, with some even predicting Essendon to break their 21-year premiership drought. However, these predictions proved drastically wrong, as the Bombers went on to finish 15th, winning only 7 games with a percentage of 83.2%. This poor performance placed Rutten's position under scrutiny, and after a late attempt to lure former Hawthorn coach Alastair Clarkson failed, Rutten was unceremoniously sacked. He was replaced by former AFL General Manager of Football and North Melbourne coach Brad Scott. As a result of the 2022 season's turmoil, board members such as former CEO Xavier Campbell, former president Paul Brasher, former player Simon Madden, and Peter Allen left their roles. Campbell was replaced by Andrew Thorburn, who was pressured into resignation after only one day in the role due to his simultaneous position as a board member of the conservative City on the Hill Church Movement\u2014whose controversial teachings conflicted with Essendon's progressive values\u2014was made public. Craig Vozzo replaced Thorburn in November 2022.\nAnthony McDonald-Tipungwuti, Devon Smith and Michael Hurley announced their retirements at the end of the 2022 season; however, Tipungwuti revoked the announcement on 10 November 2022. Tipungwuti again announced his retirement at the end of the 2023 after playing only two further games at senior level.\nBrad Scott era (2023\u2013present).\nIn 2023, reports emerged claiming that the club was reconsidering its logo. These included rumours that the current bomber logo was insensitive due to the operation of bomber jets in conflict. These reports were denied by then-captain Zach Merrett.\nAt the end of the 2023 season, it was announced that former West Coast and Gold Coast player Matt Rosa would join Essendon as Talent &amp; Operations Manager and that Adrian Dodoro would step back from his position of recruiting manager after the upcoming trade and draft periods.\nIn Brad Scott's first season as coach, Essendon sat in fifth position after round 17, but their form fell off later in the season to finish 11th with 11 wins and 12 losses.\nIn Brad Scott's second season as coach, Essendon finished with a win\u2013draw\u2013loss record of 11\u20131\u201311. \nOn 13 August 2024 club champion Dyson Heppell announced he would retire at the end of the season after playing 253 games for the club. Heppell was the final player of the Essendon 34 still playing at the club. \nClub symbols.\nGuernsey.\nEssendon's first recorded jumpers were navy blue (\"The Footballers\", edited by Thomas Power, 1875) although the club wore 'red and black caps and hose'. In 1877, \"The Footballers\" records the addition of 'a red sash over left shoulder'. This is the first time a red sash as part of the club jumper, and by 1878 there are newspaper reports referring to Essendon players as 'the men in the sash'.\nGiven that blue and navy blue were the most popular colours at the time, it is thought that Essendon adopted a red sash in 1877 to distinguish its players from others in similar-coloured jumpers.\nClash jumpers.\nIn 2007, the AFL Commission laid down the requirement that all clubs must produce an alternative jumper for use in matches where jumpers are considered to clash. From 2007 to 2011, the Essendon clash guernsey was the same design as its home guernsey, but with a substantially wider sash such that the guernsey was predominantly red rather than predominantly black. This was changed after 2011 when the AFL deemed that the wider sash did not provide sufficient contrast.\nFrom 2012 to 2016, Essendon's clash guernsey was predominantly grey, with a red sash fimbriated in black; the grey field contained, in small print, the names of all Essendon premiership players.\nBefore the 2016 season, Essendon's changed their clash guernsey to a predominantly red one, featuring a red sash outlined in black. Similar to the grey jumper, the names of Essendon premiership players were also printed outside the sash.\nThe 2025 season will see Essendon unveil a new away/clash guernsey, which will be red with a black sash, a reverse of the home guernsey.\nYellow armbands.\nFollowing Adam Ramanauskas's personal battle with cancer, a \"Clash for Cancer\" match against was launched in 2006. This was a joint venture between Essendon and the Cancer Council of Victoria to raise funds for the organisation. Despite a formal request to the AFL being denied, players wore yellow armbands for the match, which resulted in the club being fined $20,000. In 2007, the AFL agreed to allow yellow armbands to be incorporated into the left sleeve of the jumper. The 'Clash for Cancer' match against Melbourne has become an annual event, repeated in subsequent seasons, though in 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2016, (twice), the Sydney Swans and Brisbane Lions were the opponents in those respective seasons instead of Melbourne. In 2009, the jumpers were auctioned along with yellow boots worn by some players during the match.\nClub song.\nThe club's theme song, \"See the Bombers Fly Up\", is thought to have been written c. 1959 by Kevin Andrews in the home of player Jeff Gamble at which time Kevin Andrews was living. The song is based on the tune of Johnnie Hamp's 1929 song \"(Keep Your) Sunny Side Up\" at an increased tempo. Jeff Gamble came up with the line 'See the bombers fly up, up' while Kevin Andrews contributed all or most of the rest. At the time, \"(Keep Your) Sunny Side Up\" was the theme song for the popular Melbourne-based TV show on Channel 7 \"Sunnyside Up\". The official version of the song was recorded in 1972 by the Fable Singers and is still used today.\nThe song, as with all other AFL clubs, is played prior to every match and at the conclusion of matches when the team is victorious.\nSongwriter Mike Brady, of \"Up There Cazaly\" fame, penned an updated version of the song in 1999 complete with a new verse arrangement, but it was not well received. However, this version is occasionally played at club functions. In 2018, Andrews revealed that there was an error in the lyrics, in which in the line \"The other teams they don't fear\", the word \"they\" was supposed to be \"we\".\nLogo and mascot.\nThe club's current logo was introduced in 1998, making it the oldest AFL logo currently in use.\nTheir mascot is known as \"Skeeta Reynolds\", and was named after Dick Reynolds. He is a mosquito and was created in honour of the team's back-to-back premiership sides in the 1920s known as the \"Mosquito Fleet\". He was first named through a competition run in the Bomber magazine with \"Skeeta\" being the winning entry. This was later changed to \"Skeeta Reynolds\". He appears as a red mosquito in an Essendon jumper and wears a red and black scarf.\nHeadquarters, training and administration base.\nThe Essendon Football Club primary training and administration base has been at The Hangar since 2013. Prior to this, the primary training and administration base of Essendon Football Club was based at Windy Hill Oval from 1922 until 2013. Prior to Windy Hill, the home ground of Essendon Football Club was at the East Melbourne Cricket Ground from 1882 until 1921.\nRivalries.\nEssendon's biggest rivals are , , and , as these teams and Essendon are the four biggest and most supported clubs in Victoria. Matches between the clubs are often close regardless of form and ladder positions. If out of the race themselves, all four have the desire to deny the others a finals spot or a premiership. Essendon also has a fierce rivalry with Hawthorn, stemming from excessive on-field violence in the 1980s, perhaps reaching its zenith with the infamous Line in the Sand Match in 2004. Additionally, Essendon has a three-decade rivalry with the West Coast Eagles.\nOrganisation and finance.\nBoard.\nDavid Barham has served as chairman of the board since August 2022.\nEssendon's board members are David Barham, Andrew Welsh, Melissa Verner Green, Dorothy Hisgrove, Andrew Muir, Kate O'Sullivan, and Kevin Sheedy AO.\nSponsorship.\nThe club's apparel is currently produced by Under Armour. The club's apparel has also been produced by Reebok, Fila, Puma, Adidas and ISC.\nHonours.\n\"See Essendon Football Club honours.\"\nTeam of the Century.\nTo celebrate the 125th anniversary of the club, as well as 100 years of the VFL/AFL, Essendon announced its \"Team of the Century\" in 1997.\nChampions of Essendon.\nIn 2002, a club panel chose and ranked the 25 greatest players to have played for Essendon.\nHall of Fame.\nEssendon Hall of Fame Legends (year inducted): Bill Brew (2013), Bill Busbridge (1996), Jack Clarke (1996), John Coleman (1996), Bill Cookson (1996), Wally Crichton (2010), Terry Daniher (1996), Barry Davis (2006), Ron Evans (2012), Tom Fitzmaurice (1996), Ken Fraser (1996), Allan Hird Sr (1996), James Hird (2011), Harry Hunter (2015), Bill Hutchison (1996), Matthew Lloyd (2013), Simon Madden (1996), Alex McCracken (1996), Michael Long (2010), Howard Okey (2012), Frank Reid (1996), Dick Reynolds (1996), Greg Sewell (2009), Kevin Sheedy (2008), Albert Thurgood (1996), Tim Watson (1998), Neale Daniher* (2018), Dustin Fletcher*, Dr Bruce Reid* (2014), Gavin Wanganeen*\n\"*denotes recent elevation to Legend status\"\nEssendon Hall of Fame members (year inducted): Noel Allanson (2015), Fred Baring (2013), John Birt (2010), Reg Burgess (2015), Wally Buttsworth (2010), Barry Capuano (2014), Kevin Egan (2015), Alec Epis (2014), Ken Fletcher (2011), Keith Forbes (2010), Garry Foulds (2010), Darryl Gerlach (2013), Mark Harvey (2014), Bruce Heymanson (2013), Jack Jones (2012), Ron Kirwan (2016), Harold Lambert (2018), Scott Lucas (2013), Roy McConnell (2013), Don McKenzie (2010), Roger Merrett (2018), Joe Misiti (2012), Hugh Mitchell (2012), Graham Moss (2012), Gary O'Donnell (2014), Dr Ian Reynolds (2018), Paul Salmon (2012), David Shaw (2011), Arthur Showers (2010), George Stuckey (2010), Hugh Torney (2011), Paul Vander Haar (2015)\nReserves team.\nThe Essendon reserves are the reserves team of the club, playing in the Victorian Football League.\nHistory.\nThe team first competed in the Victorian Junior Football League (later the AFL reserves) when the competition was established in 1919, and was known as Essendon Juniors until the end of 1922.\nThe team enjoyed success in the form of eight premierships, including in the last year of the reserves competition in 1999. From 2000 until 2002, the club's reserves team competed in the Victorian Football League.\nAt the end of 2002, the club dissolved its reserves team and established a reserves affiliation with the Bendigo Football Club in the VFL. The affiliation ran for ten years from 2003 until 2012, allowing reserves players from the Essendon list to play with Bendigo. For all but the final year of the affiliation, Bendigo was known as the Bendigo Bombers.\nThe club re-established its reserves team in 2013, seeking greater developmental autonomy. The team plays its home games at Windy Hill. The team is made up of senior-listed AFL players and VFL-contracted players.\nThe side has been coached by former Essendon AFL player Brent Stanton since the start of the 2022 season.\nRunners-up (10).\n Essendon refused to play the Grand Final in Geelong, so the premiership was awarded to Geelong.\nWomen's teams.\nAFL Women's team.\nEssendon fielded a team in the AFL Women's (AFLW) competition from its seventh season. In March 2022, former AFLW player and Essendon VFLW captain Georgia Nanscawen was announced as the club's first AFLW player signing, and AFLW assistant coach Natalie Wood was announced as the club's first AFLW coach a week later. The club's AFLW coaching panel was finalised in late June.\nVFL Women's team.\nEssendon has fielded a team in the VFL Women's (VFLW) competition since the 2018 season. The league is the highest-grade competition for female footballers in Victoria and one of three second-tier female competitions underneath the national AFL Women's.\nVFL Women's season summaries.\n\"\"\nOther ventures.\nIn December 2017, Essendon entered e-sports by acquiring Australian \"League of Legends\" team Abyss ESports. This made them the second AFL team to acquire an e-sports division after Adelaide acquired Legacy ESports in May.\nOn 2 December 2019, it was announced that the Bombers' OPL slot had been sold to Perth-based internet provider Pentanet, marking Essendon's exit from the e-sports arena.\nIn 2018, the Essendon Football Club, along with four other AFL clubs, entered the Victorian Wheelchair Football League.\nActivism.\nAboriginal support.\nStarting with Norm McDonald in 1947, Essendon has a proud history of fostering Aboriginal talent at the top level. This came to the fore during the 1990s with players such as Michael Long, Derek Kickett, Gavin Wanganeen, and Dean Rioli rising through the ranks and being fostered by Kevin Sheedy. Dreamtime at the 'G and the Long Walk are two prominent annual events staged to help promote and support Aboriginal culture. The Long Walk, specifically, is designed to raise money for Indigenous education programs across the country.\nAdditionally, Essendon is a supporter of the Voice to Parliament.\nSame-Sex Marriage.\nDuring the Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey, Essendon supported the Yes vote."}
{"id": "10258", "revid": "39317500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10258", "title": "Enid Blyton", "text": "Enid Mary Blyton (11 August 1897 \u2013 28 November 1968) was an English children's writer, whose books have been worldwide bestsellers since the 1930s, selling more than 600 million copies. Her books are still enormously popular and have been translated into ninety languages. As at June 2019, Blyton held the 4th place for the most translated author. She wrote on a wide range of topics, including education, natural history, fantasy, mystery, and biblical narratives. She is best remembered for her \"Noddy\", \"Famous Five\", \"Secret Seven\", the \"Five Find-Outers\", and \"Malory Towers\" books, although she also wrote many others, including; \"St. Clare's\", \"The Naughtiest Girl\", and \"The Faraway Tree\" series.\nHer first book, \"Child Whispers\", a 24-page collection of poems, was published in 1922. Following the commercial success of her early novels, such as \"Adventures of the Wishing-Chair\" (1937) and \"The Enchanted Wood\" (1939), Blyton went on to build a literary empire, sometimes producing fifty books a year in addition to her prolific magazine and newspaper contributions. Her writing was unplanned and sprang largely from her unconscious mind; she typed her stories as events unfolded before her. The sheer volume of her work and the speed with which she produced it led to rumours that Blyton employed an army of ghost writers, a charge she vehemently denied.\nBlyton's work became increasingly controversial among literary critics, teachers, and parents beginning in the 1950s due to the alleged unchallenging nature of her writing and her themes, particularly in the Noddy series. Some libraries and schools banned her works, and from the 1930s until the 1950s, the BBC refused to broadcast her stories because of their perceived lack of literary merit. Her books have been criticised as elitist, sexist, racist, xenophobic, and at odds with the more progressive environment that was emerging in post-World War II Britain, but updated versions of her books have continued to be popular since her death in 1968.\nShe felt she had a responsibility to provide her readers with a strong moral framework, so she encouraged them to support worthy causes. In particular, through the clubs she set up or supported, she encouraged and organised them to raise funds for animal and paediatric charities. The story of Blyton's life was dramatised in \"Enid\", a BBC television film featuring Helena Bonham Carter in the title role. It was first broadcast in the UK on BBC Four in 2009.\nEarly life and education.\nEnid Blyton was born on 11 August 1897 in East Dulwich, south London, United Kingdom, the eldest of three children, to Thomas Carey Blyton (1870\u20131920), a cutlery salesman (recorded in the 1911 census with the occupation of \"Mantle Manufacturer dealer [in] women's suits, skirts, etc.\") and his wife Theresa Mary (\"n\u00e9e\" Harrison; 1874\u20131950). Enid's younger brothers, Hanly (1899\u20131983) and Carey (1902\u20131976), were born after the family had moved to a semi-detached house in Beckenham, then a village in Kent. A few months after her birth, Enid almost died from whooping cough but was nursed back to health by her father, whom she adored. Thomas Blyton ignited Enid's interest in nature; in her autobiography she wrote that he \"loved flowers and birds and wild animals, and knew more about them than anyone I had ever met\". He also passed on his interest in gardening, art, music, literature, and theatre, and the pair often went on nature walks, much to the disapproval of Enid's mother, who showed little interest in her daughter's pursuits. Enid was devastated when her father left the family shortly after her 13th birthday to live with another woman. Enid and her mother did not have a good relationship, and after she left home, Enid gave people the impression that her mother was dead. Enid did not attend either of her parents' funerals.\nFrom 1907 to 1915, Blyton attended St Christopher's School in Beckenham, where she enjoyed physical activities and became school tennis champion and lacrosse captain. She was not keen on all the academic subjects but excelled in writing and, in 1911, entered Arthur Mee's children's poetry competition. Mee offered to print her verses, encouraging her to produce more. Blyton's mother considered her efforts at writing to be a \"waste of time and money\", but she was encouraged to persevere by Mabel Attenborough, the aunt of school friend Mary Potter.\nBlyton's father taught her to play the piano, which she mastered well enough for him to believe she might follow in his sister's footsteps and become a professional musician. Blyton considered enrolling at the Guildhall School of Music, but decided she was better suited to becoming a writer. After finishing school, in 1915, as head girl, she moved out of the family home to live with her friend Mary Attenborough, before going to stay with George and Emily Hunt at Seckford Hall, near Woodbridge, in Suffolk. Seckford Hall, with its allegedly haunted room and secret passageway, provided inspiration for her later writing. At Woodbridge Congregational Church, Blyton met Ida Hunt, who taught at Ipswich High School and suggested she train there as a teacher. Blyton was introduced to the children at the nursery school and, recognising her natural affinity with them, enrolled in a National Froebel Union teacher training course at the school in September 1916. By this time, she had nearly terminated all contact with her family.\nBlyton's manuscripts were rejected by publishers on many occasions, which only made her more determined to succeed, saying, \"It is partly the struggle that helps you so much, that gives you determination, character, self-reliance\u00a0\u2013all things that help in any profession or trade, and most certainly in writing.\" In March 1916, her first poems were published in \"Nash's Magazine\". She completed her teacher training course in December 1918 and, the following month, obtained a teaching appointment at Bickley Park School, a small, independent establishment for boys in Bickley, Kent. Two months later, Blyton received a teaching certificate with distinctions in zoology and principles of education; first class in botany, geography, practice and history of education, child hygiene, and classroom teaching; and second class in literature and elementary mathematics. In 1920, she moved to Southernhay, in Hook Road Surbiton, as nursery governess to the four sons of architect Horace Thompson and his wife Gertrude, with whom Blyton spent four happy years. With the shortage of area schools, neighbouring children soon joined her charges, and a small school developed at the house.\nEarly writing career.\nIn 1920, Blyton moved to Chessington and began writing in her spare time. The following year, she won the \"Saturday Westminster Review\" writing competition with her essay \"On the Popular Fallacy that to the Pure All Things are Pure\". Publications such as \"The Londoner\", \"Home Weekly\" and \"The Bystander\" began to show an interest in her short stories and poems.\nBlyton's first book, \"Child Whispers\", a 24-page collection of poems, was published in 1922. Its illustrator, Enid's schoolfriend Phyllis Chase collaborated on several of her early works. Also in that year, Blyton began writing in annuals for Cassell and George Newnes, and her first piece of writing, \"Peronel and his Pot of Glue\", was accepted for publication in \"Teachers' World\". Further boosting her success, in 1923, her poems appeared alongside those of Rudyard Kipling, Walter de la Mare, and G. K. Chesterton in a special issue of \"Teachers' World.\" Blyton's educational texts were influential in the 1920s and 1930s, with her most sizable being the three-volume \"The Teacher's Treasury\" (1926), the six-volume \"Modern Teaching\" (1928), the eight-volume \"Pictorial Knowledge\" (1930), and the four-volume \"Modern Teaching in the Infant School\" (1932).\nIn July 1923, Blyton published \"Real Fairies\", a collection of thirty-three poems written especially for the book with the exception of \"Pretending\", which had appeared earlier in \"Punch\" magazine. The following year, she published \"The Enid Blyton Book of Fairies\", illustrated by Horace J. Knowles, and in 1926 the \"Book of Brownies\". Several books of plays appeared in 1927, including \"A Book of Little Plays\" and \"The Play's the Thing\" with the illustrator Alfred Bestall.\nIn the 1930s, Blyton developed an interest in writing stories related to various myths, including those of ancient Greece and Rome; \"The Knights of the Round Table\", \"Tales of Ancient Greece\" and \"Tales of Robin Hood\" were published in 1930. In \"Tales of Ancient Greece\" Blyton retold 16 well-known ancient Greek myths, but used Latin rather than Greek names and invented conversations between characters. \"The Adventures of Odysseus\", \"Tales of the Ancient Greeks and Persians\" and \"Tales of the Romans\" followed in 1934.\nCommercial success.\nNew series: 1934\u20131948.\nThe first of twenty-eight books in Blyton's Old Thatch series, \"The Talking Teapot and Other Tales\", was published in 1934, the same year as \"Brer Rabbit Retold\"; (Brer Rabbit originally featured in Uncle Remus stories by Joel Chandler Harris), her first serial story and first full-length book, \"Adventures of the Wishing-Chair\", followed in 1937. \"The Enchanted Wood\", the first book in the Faraway Tree series, published in 1939, is about a magic tree inspired by the Norse mythology that had fascinated Blyton as a child. According to Blyton's daughter Gillian, the inspiration for the magic tree came from \"thinking up a story one day, and suddenly she was walking in the enchanted wood and found the tree. In her imagination, she climbed up through the branches and met Moon-Face, Silky, the Saucepan Man and the rest of the characters. She had all she needed.\" As in the Wishing-Chair series, these fantasy books typically involve children being transported into a magical world in which they meet fairies, goblins, elves, pixies and other mythological creatures.\nBlyton's first full-length adventure novel, \"The Secret Island\", was published in 1938, featuring the characters of Jack, Mike, Peggy and Nora. Described by \"The Glasgow Herald\" as a \"Robinson Crusoe-style adventure on an island in an English lake\", \"The Secret Island\" was a lifelong favourite of Gillian's and spawned the Secret series. The following year Blyton released her first book in the Circus series and her initial book in the Amelia Jane series, \"Naughty Amelia Jane!\" According to Gillian, the main character was based on a large handmade doll given to her by her mother on her third birthday.\nDuring the 1940s, Blyton became a prolific author, her success enhanced by her \"marketing, publicity and branding that was far ahead of its time\". In 1940, Blyton published two books\u00a0\u2013 \"Three Boys and a Circus\" and \"Children of Kidillin\"\u00a0\u2013 under the pseudonym of Mary Pollock (middle name plus first married name), in addition to the eleven published under her name that year. So popular were Pollock's books that one reviewer was prompted to observe that \"Enid Blyton had better look to her laurels\". But Blyton's readers were not so easily deceived and many complained about the subterfuge to her and her publisher, with the result that all six books published under the name of Mary Pollock\u00a0\u2013 two in 1940 and four in 1943\u00a0\u2013 were reissued under Blyton's name. Later in 1940, Blyton published the first of her boarding school story books and the first novel in the Naughtiest Girl series, \"The Naughtiest Girl in the School\", which followed the exploits of the mischievous schoolgirl Elizabeth Allen at the fictional Whyteleafe School. The first of her six novels in the St. Clare's series, \"The Twins at St. Clare's\", appeared the following year, featuring the twin sisters Patricia and Isabel O'Sullivan.\nIn 1942, Blyton released the first book in the Mary Mouse series, \"Mary Mouse and the Dolls' House\", about a mouse exiled from her mousehole who becomes a maid at a dolls' house. Twenty-three books in the series were produced between 1942 and 1964; 10,000 copies were sold in 1942 alone. The same year, Blyton published the first novel in the Famous Five series, \"Five on a Treasure Island\", with illustrations by Eileen Soper. Its popularity resulted in twenty-one books between then and 1963, and the characters of Julian, Dick, Anne, George (Georgina) and Timmy the dog became household names in Britain. Matthew Grenby, author of \"Children's Literature\", states that the five were involved with \"unmasking hardened villains and solving serious crimes\", although the novels were \"hardly 'hard-boiled' thrillers\". Blyton based the character of Georgina, a tomboy she described as \"short-haired, freckled, sturdy, and snub-nosed\" and \"bold and daring, hot-tempered and loyal\", on herself.\nBlyton had an interest in biblical narratives and retold Old and New Testament stories. \"The Land of Far-Beyond\" (1942) is a Christian parable along the lines of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\" (1698), with contemporary children as the main characters. In 1943, she published \"The Children's Life of Christ\", a collection of fifty-nine short stories related to the life of Jesus, with her slant on popular biblical stories, from the Nativity and the Three Wise Men through to the trial, the crucifixion and the resurrection. \"Tales from the Bible\" was published the following year, followed by \"The Boy with the Loaves and Fishes\" in 1948.\nThe first book in Blyton's Five Find-Outers series, \"The Mystery of the Burnt Cottage\", was published in 1943, as was the second book in the Faraway series, \"The Magic Faraway Tree\", which in 2003 was voted 66th in the BBC's Big Read poll to find the UK's favourite book. Several of Blyton's works during this period have seaside themes; \"John Jolly by the Sea\" (1943), a picture book intended for younger readers, was published in a booklet format by Evans Brothers. Other books with a maritime theme include \"The Secret of Cliff Castle\" and \"Smuggler Ben\", both attributed to Mary Pollock in 1943; \"The Island of Adventure\", the first in the Adventure series of eight novels from 1944 onwards; and various novels of the Famous Five series such as \"Five on a Treasure Island\" (1942), \"Five on Kirrin Island Again\" (1947) and \"Five Go Down to the Sea\" (1953).\nCapitalising on her success, with a loyal and ever-growing readership, Blyton produced a new edition of many of her series such as the Famous Five, the Five Find-Outers and St. Clare's every year in addition to many other novels, short stories and books. In 1946, Blyton launched the first in the Malory Towers series of six books based around the schoolgirl Darrell Rivers, \"First Term at Malory Towers\", which became extremely popular, particularly with girls.\nPeak output: 1949\u20131959.\nThe first book in Blyton's Barney Mysteries series, \"The Rockingdown Mystery\", was published in 1949, as was the first of her fifteen Secret Seven novels. The Secret Seven Society consists of Peter, his sister Janet, and their friends Colin, George, Jack, Pam and Barbara, who meet regularly in a shed in the garden to discuss peculiar events in their local community. Blyton rewrote the stories so they could be adapted into cartoons, which appeared in \"Mickey Mouse Weekly\" in 1951 with illustrations by George Brook. The French author Evelyne Lallemand continued the series in the 1970s, producing an additional twelve books, nine of which were translated into English by Anthea Bell between 1983 and 1987.\nBlyton's Noddy, about a little wooden boy from Toyland, first appeared in the \"Sunday Graphic\" on 5 June 1949, and in November that year \"Noddy Goes to Toyland\", the first of at least two dozen books in the series, was published. The idea was conceived by one of Blyton's publishers, Sampson, Low, Marston and Company, who in 1949 arranged a meeting between Blyton and the Dutch illustrator Harmsen van der Beek. Despite having to communicate via an interpreter, he provided some initial sketches of how Toyland and its characters would be represented. Four days after the meeting, Blyton sent the text of the first two Noddy books to her publisher, to be forwarded to van der Beek. The Noddy books became one of her most successful and best-known series, and were hugely popular in the 1950s. An extensive range of sub-series, spin-offs and strip books was produced throughout the decade, including \"Noddy's Library\", \"Noddy's Garage of Books\", \"Noddy's Castle of Books\", \"Noddy's Toy Station of Books\" and \"Noddy's Shop of Books\".\nIn 1950, Blyton established the company Darrell Waters Ltd to manage her affairs. By the early 1950s, she had reached the peak of her output, often publishing more than fifty books a year, and she remained extremely prolific throughout much of the decade. By 1955, Blyton had written her fourteenth Famous Five novel, \"Five Have Plenty of Fun\", her fifteenth Mary Mouse book, \"Mary Mouse in Nursery Rhyme Land\", her eighth book in the Adventure series, \"The River of Adventure\", and her seventh Secret Seven novel, \"Secret Seven Win Through\". She completed the sixth and final book of the Malory Towers series, \"Last Term at Malory Towers\", in 1951.\nBlyton published several further books featuring the character of Scamp the terrier, following on from \"The Adventures of Scamp\", a novel she had released in 1943 under the nom de plume of Mary Pollock. \"Scamp Goes on Holiday\" (1952) and \"Scamp and Bimbo\", \"Scamp at School\", \"Scamp and Caroline\" and \"Scamp Goes to the Zoo\" (1954) were illustrated by Pierre Probst. She introduced the character of Bom, a stylish toy drummer dressed in a bright red coat and helmet, alongside Noddy in \"TV Comic\" in July 1956. A book series began the same year with \"Bom the Little Toy Drummer\", featuring illustrations by R. Paul-Hoye, and followed with \"Bom and His Magic Drumstick\" (1957), \"Bom Goes Adventuring\" and \"Bom Goes to Ho Ho Village\" (1958), \"Bom and the Clown\" and \"Bom and the Rainbow\" (1959) and \"Bom Goes to Magic Town\" (1960). In 1958, she produced two annuals featuring the character, the first of which included twenty short stories, poems and picture strips.\nFinal works.\nMany of Blyton's series, including Noddy and The Famous Five, continued to be successful in the 1960s; by 1962, 26 million copies of Noddy had been sold. Blyton concluded several of her long-running series in 1963, publishing the last books of The Famous Five (\"Five Are Together Again\") and The Secret Seven (\"Fun for the Secret Seven\"); she also produced three more Brer Rabbit books with the illustrator Grace Lodge: \"Brer Rabbit Again\", \"Brer Rabbit Book\", and \"Brer Rabbit's a Rascal\". In 1962, many of her books were among the first to be published by Armada Books in paperback, making them more affordable to children.\nAfter 1963, Blyton's output was generally confined to short stories and books intended for very young readers, such as \"Learn to Count with Noddy\" and \"Learn to Tell Time with Noddy\" in 1965, and \"Stories for Bedtime\" and the Sunshine Picture Story Book collection in 1966. Her declining health and a falling off in readership among older children have been put forward as the principal reasons for this change in trend. Blyton published her last book in the Noddy series, \"Noddy and the Aeroplane\", in February 1964. In May of the following year, she published \"Mixed Bag\", a songbook with music written by her nephew Carey, and in August she released her last full-length books, \"The Man Who Stopped to Help\" and \"The Boy Who Came Back\".\nMagazine and newspaper contributions.\nBlyton cemented her reputation as a children's writer when in 1926 she took over the editing of \"Sunny Stories\", a magazine that typically included the re-telling of legends, myths, stories and other articles for children. That same year, she was given her own column in \"Teachers' World\", entitled \"From my Window\". Three years later, she began contributing a weekly page in the magazine, in which she published letters from her fox terrier dog Bobs. They proved to be so popular that in 1933 they were published in book form as \"Letters from Bobs\", and sold ten thousand copies in the first week. Her most popular feature was \"Round the Year with Enid Blyton\", which consisted of forty-eight articles covering aspects of natural history such as weather, pond life, how to plant a school garden and how to make a bird table. Among Blyton's other nature projects was her monthly \"Country Letter\" feature that appeared in \"The Nature Lover\" magazine in 1935.\n\"Sunny Stories\" was renamed \"Enid Blyton's Sunny Stories\" in January 1937, and served as a vehicle for the serialisation of Blyton's books. Her first Naughty Amelia Jane story, about an anti-heroine based on a doll owned by her daughter Gillian, was published in the magazine. Blyton stopped contributing in 1952, and it closed down the following year, shortly before the appearance of the new fortnightly \"Enid Blyton Magazine\" written entirely by Blyton. The first edition appeared on 18 March 1953, and the magazine ran until September 1959.\nNoddy made his first appearance in the \"Sunday Graphic\" in 1949, the same year as Blyton's first daily Noddy strip for the London \"Evening Standard\". It was illustrated by van der Beek until his death in 1953.\nWriting style and technique.\nBlyton worked in a wide range of fictional genres, from fairy tales to animal, nature, detective, mystery, and circus stories, but she often \"blurred the boundaries\" in her books, and encompassed a range of genres even in her short stories. In a 1958 article published in \"The Author\", she wrote that there were a \"dozen or more different types of stories for children\", and she had tried them all, but her favourites were those with a family at their centre.\nIn a letter to the psychologist Peter McKellar, Blyton describes her writing technique:\nIn another letter to McKellar, she describes how in just five days she wrote the 60,000-word book \"The River of Adventure\", the eighth in her Adventure Series, by listening to what she referred to as her \"under-mind\", which she contrasted with her \"upper conscious mind\". Blyton was unwilling to conduct any research or planning before beginning work on a new book, which coupled with the lack of variety in her life according to Druce, almost inevitably presented the danger that she might unconsciously, and did, plagiarise the books she had read, including her own. Gillian has recalled that her mother \"never knew where her stories came from\", but that she used to talk about them \"coming from her 'mind's eye\", as did William Wordsworth and Charles Dickens. Blyton had \"thought it was made up of every experience she'd ever had, everything she's seen or heard or read, much of which had long disappeared from her conscious memory\" but never knew the direction her stories would take. Blyton further explained in her biography that \"If I tried to think out or invent the whole book, I could not do it. For one thing, it would bore me and for another, it would lack the 'verve' and the extraordinary touches and surprising ideas that flood out from my imagination.\"\nBlyton's daily routine varied little over the years. She usually began writing soon after breakfast, with her portable typewriter on her knee and her favourite red Moroccan shawl nearby; she believed that the colour red acted as a \"mental stimulus\" for her. Stopping only for a short lunch break, she continued writing until five o'clock, by which time she would usually have produced 6,000\u201310,000 words.\nAn article in \"The Malay Mail\" published in 2000 considers Blyton's children to have \"lived in a world shaped by the realities of post-war austerity\", enjoying freedom without political correctness, which serves modern readers of Blyton's novels with a form of escapism. Brandon Robshaw of \"The Independent\" refers to the Blyton universe as \"crammed with colour and character\", \"self-contained and internally consistent\", noting that Blyton exemplifies a strong mistrust of adults and figures of authority in her works, creating a world in which children govern. Gillian noted that in her mother's adventure, detective and school stories for older children, \"the hook is the strong storyline with plenty of cliffhangers, a trick she acquired from her years of writing serialised stories for children's magazines. There is always a strong moral framework in which bravery and loyalty are (eventually) rewarded\". Blyton herself wrote that \"my love of children is the whole foundation of all my work\".\nVictor Watson, assistant director of Research at Homerton College, Cambridge, believes that Blyton's works reveal an \"essential longing and potential associated with childhood\", and notes how the opening pages of \"The Mountain of Adventure\" present a \"deeply appealing ideal of childhood\". He argues that Blyton's work differs from that of many other authors in its approach, describing the narrative of The Famous Five series for instance as \"like a powerful spotlight, it seeks to illuminate, to explain, to demystify. It takes its readers on a roller-coaster story in which the darkness is always banished; everything puzzling, arbitrary, evocative is either dismissed or explained\". Watson further notes how Blyton often used minimalist visual descriptions and introduced a few careless phrases such as \"gleamed enchantingly\" to appeal to her young readers.\nFrom the mid-1950s, rumours began to circulate that Blyton had not written all the books attributed to her, a charge she found particularly distressing. She published an appeal in her magazine asking children to let her know if they heard such stories and after one mother informed her that she had attended a parents' meeting at her daughter's school, during which a young librarian had repeated the allegation, Blyton decided in 1955 to begin legal proceedings. The librarian was eventually forced to make a public apology in open court early the following year, but the rumours that Blyton operated \"a 'company' of ghostwriters\" persisted, as some found it difficult to believe that one woman working alone could produce such a volume of work.\nCharitable work.\nBlyton felt a responsibility to provide her readers with a positive moral framework, and she encouraged them to support worthy causes. Her view, expressed in a 1957 article, was that children should help animals and other children rather than adults:\nBlyton and the members of the children's clubs she promoted via her magazines raised a great deal of money for various charities; according to Blyton, membership of her clubs meant \"working for others, for no reward\". The largest of the clubs she was involved with was the Busy Bees, the junior section of the People's Dispensary for Sick Animals, which Blyton had actively supported since 1933. The club had been set up by Maria Dickin in 1934, and after Blyton publicised its existence in the \"Enid Blyton Magazine\", it attracted 100,000 members in three years. Such was Blyton's popularity among children that after she became Queen Bee in 1952, more than 20,000 additional members were recruited in her first year in office. The Enid Blyton Magazine Club was formed in 1953. Its primary objective was to raise funds to help those children with cerebral palsy who attended a centre in Cheyne Walk, in Chelsea, London, by furnishing an on-site hostel among other things.\nThe Famous Five series gathered such a following that readers asked Blyton if they might form a fan club. She agreed, on condition that it serves a useful purpose, and suggested that it could raise funds for the Shaftesbury Society Babies' Home in Beaconsfield, on whose committee she had served since 1948. The club was established in 1952, and provided funds for equipping a Famous Five Ward at the home, a paddling pool, sun room, summer house, playground, birthday and Christmas celebrations, and visits to the pantomime. By the late 1950s, Blyton's clubs had a membership of 500,000, and raised \u00a335,000 in the six years of the \"Enid Blyton Magazine\"'s run.\nBy 1974, the Famous Five Club had a membership of 220,000 and was growing at the rate of 6,000 new members a year. The Beaconsfield home that was set up to support was closed in 1967, but the club continued to raise funds for other paediatric charities, including an Enid Blyton bed at Great Ormond Street Hospital and a mini-bus for disabled children at Stoke Mandeville Hospital.\nJigsaw puzzle and games.\nBlyton capitalised upon her commercial success as an author by negotiating agreements with jigsaw puzzle and games manufacturers from the late 1940s onwards; by the early 1960s, some 146 different companies were involved in merchandising Noddy alone. In 1948, Bestime released four jigsaw puzzles featuring her characters, and the first Enid Blyton board game appeared, \"Journey Through Fairyland\", created by BGL. The first card game, Faraway Tree, appeared from Pepys in 1950. In 1954, Bestime released the first four jigsaw puzzles of the Secret Seven, and the following year a Secret Seven card game appeared.\nBestime released the Little Noddy Car Game in 1953 and the Little Noddy Leap Frog Game in 1955, and in 1956 American manufacturer Parker Brothers released Little Noddy's Taxi Game, a board game which features Noddy driving about town, picking up various characters. Bestime released its Plywood Noddy Jigsaws series in 1957 and a Noddy jigsaw series featuring cards appeared from 1963, with illustrations by Robert Lee. Arrow Games became the chief producer of Noddy jigsaws in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Whitman manufactured four new Secret Seven jigsaw puzzles in 1975 and produced four new Malory Towers ones two years later. In 1979, the company released a Famous Five adventure board game, the Famous Five Kirrin Island Treasure. Stephen Thraves wrote eight Famous Five adventure game books, published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton in the 1980s. The first adventure game book of the series, \"The Wreckers' Tower Game\", was published in October 1984.\nPersonal life.\nOn 28 August 1924, Blyton married Major Hugh Alexander Pollock, DSO (1888\u20131971) at Bromley Register Office, without inviting her family. They married shortly after his divorce from his first wife, with whom he had two sons, one of them already deceased. Pollock was an editor of the book department in the publishing firm George Newnes, which became Blyton's regular publisher. It was he who requested her to write a book about animals, resulting in \"The Zoo Book\", completed in the month before their marriage. They initially lived in a flat in Chelsea before moving to Elfin Cottage in Beckenham in 1926, and then to Old Thatch in Bourne End (called Peterswood in her books) in 1929. Blyton's first daughter, Gillian, was born on 15 July 1931, and after a miscarriage in 1934, she gave birth to a second daughter, Imogen, on 27 October 1935.\nIn 1938, she and her family moved to a house in Beaconsfield, named Green Hedges by Blyton's readers, following a competition in her magazine. By the mid-1930s, Pollock had become a secret alcoholic, withdrawing increasingly from public life\u2014possibly triggered through his meetings, as a publisher, with Winston Churchill, which may have reawakened the trauma Pollock suffered during World War I. With the outbreak of World War II, he became involved in the Home Guard and also re-encountered Ida Crowe, an aspiring writer 19 years his junior, whom he had first met years earlier. He made her an offer to join him as a secretary in his posting to a Home Guard training center at Denbies, a Gothic mansion in Surrey belonging to Lord Ashcombe, and they began a romantic relationship.\nBlyton's marriage to Pollock was troubled for years, and according to Crowe's memoir, she had a series of affairs, including lesbian relationships with one of the children's nannies and with Lola Onslow, an artist who illustrated Blyton's 1924, titled \"The Enid Blyton Book of Fairies\". In 1941, Blyton met Kenneth Fraser Darrell Waters, a London surgeon with whom she began a serious affair. Pollock discovered the liaison and threatened to initiate divorce proceedings. Due to fears that exposure of her adultery would ruin her public image, it was ultimately agreed that Blyton would instead file for divorce against Pollock. According to Crowe's memoir, Blyton promised that if he admitted to infidelity, she would allow him parental access to their daughters; but after the divorce, he was denied contact with them, and Blyton made sure he was subsequently unable to find work in publishing. Pollock, having married Crowe on 26 October 1943, eventually resumed his heavy drinking and was forced to petition for bankruptcy in 1950.\nBlyton and Darrell Waters married at the City of Westminster Register Office on 20 October 1943. She changed the surname of her daughters to Darrell Waters and publicly embraced her new role as a happily married and devoted doctor's wife. After discovering she was pregnant in the spring of 1945, Blyton miscarried five months later, following a fall from a ladder. The baby would have been Darrell Waters's first child and the son for which they both longed.\nHer love of tennis included playing naked, with nude tennis \"a common practice in those days among the more louche members of the middle classes\".\nBlyton's health began to deteriorate in 1957, when, during a round of golf, she started to feel faint and breathless, and, by 1960, she was displaying signs of dementia. Her agent, George Greenfield, recalled that it was \"unthinkable\" for the \"most famous and successful of children's authors with her enormous energy and computerlike memory\" to be losing her mind and suffering from what is now known as Alzheimer's disease in her mid-60s. Worsening Blyton's situation was her husband's declining health throughout the 1960s; he suffered from severe arthritis in his neck and hips, deafness, and became increasingly ill-tempered and erratic until his death on 15 September 1967.\nThe story of Blyton's life was dramatised in a BBC film entitled \"Enid\", which aired in the United Kingdom on BBC Four on 16 November 2009. Helena Bonham Carter, who played the title role, described Blyton as \"a complete workaholic, an achievement junkie and an extremely canny businesswoman\" who \"knew how to brand herself, right down to the famous signature\".\nDeath and legacy.\nDuring the months following her husband's death, Blyton became increasingly ill and moved into a nursing home three months before her death. She died in her sleep of Alzheimer's disease at the Greenways Nursing Home, Hampstead, north London, on 28 November 1968, aged 71. A memorial service was held at St James's Church, Piccadilly and she was cremated at Golders Green Crematorium, where her ashes remain. Blyton's home, Green Hedges, was auctioned on 26 May 1971 and demolished in 1973; the site is now occupied by houses and a street named Blyton Close. An English Heritage blue plaque commemorates Blyton at Hook Road in Chessington, where she lived from 1920 to 1924. In 2014, a plaque recording her time as a Beaconsfield resident from 1938 until her death in 1968 was unveiled in the town hall gardens, next to small iron figures of Noddy and Big Ears.\nSince her death and the publication of her daughter Imogen's 1989 autobiography, \"A Childhood at Green Hedges\", Blyton has emerged as an emotionally immature, unstable and often malicious figure. Imogen considered her mother to be \"arrogant, insecure, pretentious, very skilled at putting difficult or unpleasant things out of her mind, and without a trace of maternal instinct. As a child, I viewed her as a rather strict authority. As an adult I pitied her.\" Blyton's eldest daughter Gillian remembered her rather differently however, as \"a fair and loving mother, and a fascinating companion\".\nThe Enid Blyton Trust for Children was established in 1982, with Imogen as its first chairman, and in 1985 it established the National Library for the Handicapped Child. \"Enid Blyton's Adventure Magazine\" began publication in September 1985, and on 14 October 1992, the BBC began publishing \"Noddy Magazine\" and released the Noddy CD-Rom in October 1996.\nThe first Enid Blyton Day was held at Rickmansworth on 6 March 1993, and in October 1996, the Enid Blyton award, The Enid, was given to those who have made outstanding contributions towards children. The Enid Blyton Society was formed in early 1995, to provide \"a focal point for collectors and enthusiasts of Enid Blyton\" through its thrice-annual \"Enid Blyton Society Journal\", its annual Enid Blyton Day and its website. On 16 December 1996, Channel 4 broadcast a documentary about Blyton, \"Secret Lives\". To celebrate her centenary in 1997, exhibitions were put on at the London Toy &amp; Model Museum (now closed), Hereford and Worcester County Museum and Bromley Library, and on 9 September the Royal Mail issued centenary stamps.\nThe London-based entertainment and retail company, Trocadero PLC, purchased Blyton's Darrell Waters Ltd in 1995 for \u00a314.6\u00a0million and established a subsidiary, Enid Blyton Ltd, to handle all intellectual properties, character brands and media in Blyton's works. The group changed its name to Chorion in 1998, but after financial difficulties in 2012, sold its assets. Hachette UK acquired from Chorion world rights in the Blyton estate in March 2013, including The Famous Five series but excluding the rights to Noddy, which had been sold to DreamWorks Classics (formerly Classic Media, now a subsidiary of DreamWorks Animation) in 2012.\nBlyton's granddaughter, Sophie Smallwood, wrote a new Noddy book to celebrate the character's 60th birthday, 46 years after the last book was published; \"Noddy and the Farmyard Muddle\" (2009) was illustrated by Robert Tyndall. In February 2011, the manuscript of a previously unknown Blyton novel, \"Mr Tumpy's Caravan\", was discovered by the archivist at Seven Stories, National Centre for Children's Books in a collection of papers belonging to Blyton's daughter Gillian, purchased by Seven Stories in 2010 following her death. It was initially thought to belong to a comic strip collection of the same name published in 1949, but it appears to be unrelated and is believed to be something written in the 1930s, which had been rejected by a publisher.\nIn a 1982 survey of 10,000 eleven-year-old children, Blyton was voted their most popular writer. She is the world's fourth most-translated author, behind Agatha Christie, Jules Verne and William Shakespeare with her books being translated into 90 languages. From 2000 to 2010, Blyton was listed as a Top Ten author, selling almost 8 million copies (worth \u00a331.2\u00a0million) in the UK alone. In 2003, \"The Magic Faraway Tree\" was voted 66th in the BBC's Big Read, a year-long survey of the UK's best-loved novels. In a 2008 poll conducted by the Costa Book Awards, Blyton was voted the UK's best-loved author ahead of Roald Dahl, J. K. Rowling, Jane Austen and Shakespeare. Her books continue to be very popular among children in Commonwealth nations such as India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malta, New Zealand and Australia, and around the world. They have also seen a surge of popularity in China, where they are \"big with every generation\". In March 2004, Chorion and the Chinese publisher Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press negotiated an agreement over the Noddy franchise, which included bringing the character to an animated series on television, with a potential audience of a further 95 million children under the age of five. Chorion spent around \u00a310\u00a0million digitising Noddy and, as of 2002, had made television agreements with at least 11 countries worldwide.\nNovelists influenced by Blyton include the crime writer Denise Danks, whose fictional detective Georgina Powers is based on George from the Famous Five. Peter Hunt's \"A Step off the Path\" (1985) is also influenced by the Famous Five, and the St. Clare's and Malory Towers series inspired Jacqueline Wilson's \"Double Act\" (1996) and Ad\u00e8le Geras's Egerton Hall trilogy (1990\u201392) respectively. Blyton was important to Stieg Larsson. \"The series Stieg Larsson most often mentioned were the Famous Five and the Adventure books\".\nCritical backlash.\nA.H. Thompson, who compiled an extensive overview of censorship efforts in the United Kingdom's public libraries, dedicated an entire chapter to \"The Enid Blyton Affair\", and wrote of her in 1975: \nBlyton's range of plots and settings has been described as limited, repetitive and continually recycled. Many of her books were critically assessed by teachers and librarians, deemed unfit for children to read, and removed from syllabuses and public libraries. Responding to claims that her moral views were \"dependably predictable\", Blyton commented that \"most of you could write down perfectly correctly all the things that I believe in and stand for\u00a0\u2013 you have found them in my books, and a writer's books are always a faithful reflection of himself\".\nFrom the 1930s to the 1950s, the BBC operated a \"de facto\" ban on dramatising Blyton's books for radio, considering her to be a \"second-rater\" whose work was without literary merit. The children's literary critic, Margery Fisher, likened Blyton's books to \"slow poison\", and Jean E. Sutcliffe of the BBC's schools broadcast department wrote of Blyton's ability to churn out \"mediocre material\", noting that \"her capacity to do so amounts to genius\u00a0... anyone else would have died of boredom long ago\". Michael Rosen, Children's Laureate from 2007 until 2009, wrote that \"I find myself flinching at occasional bursts of snobbery and the assumed level of privilege of the children and families in the books\". The children's author Anne Fine presented an overview of the concerns about Blyton's work and responses to them on BBC Radio 4 in November 2008, in which she noted the \"drip, drip, drip of disapproval\" associated with the books. Blyton's response to her critics was that she was uninterested in the views of anyone over the age of 12, stating that half the attacks on her work were motivated by jealousy and the rest came from \"stupid people who don't know what they're talking about because they've never read any of my books\".\nDespite criticism by contemporaries that her work's quality began to suffer in the 1950s at the expense of its increasing volume, Blyton nevertheless capitalised on being generally regarded at the time as \"a more 'savoury', English alternative\" to what some considered an \"invasion\" of Britain by American culture, in the form of \"rock music, horror comics, television, teenage culture, delinquency, and Disney\".\nAccording to Nicholas Tucker, the works of Enid Blyton have been \"banned from more public libraries over the years than is the case with any other adult or children's author\", though such attempts to quell the popularity of her books over the years seem to have been largely unsuccessful, and \"she still remains very widely read\".\nSimplicity.\nSome librarians felt that Blyton's restricted use of language, a conscious product of her teaching background, was prejudicial to an appreciation of more literary qualities. In a scathing article published in \"Encounter\" in 1958, the journalist Colin Welch remarked that it was \"hard to see how a diet of Miss Blyton could help with the 11-plus or even with the Cambridge English Tripos\", but reserved his harshest criticism for Blyton's Noddy, describing him as an \"unnaturally priggish\u00a0... sanctimonious\u00a0... witless, spiritless, snivelling, sneaking doll.\"\nThe author and educational psychologist Nicholas Tucker notes that it was common to see Blyton cited as people's favourite or least favourite author according to their age, and argues that her books create an \"encapsulated world for young readers that simply dissolves with age, leaving behind only memories of excitement and strong identification\". Fred Inglis considers Blyton's books to be technically easy to read, but to also be \"emotionally and cognitively easy\". He mentions that the psychologist Michael Woods believed that Blyton was different from many other older authors writing for children in that she seemed untroubled by presenting them with a world that differed from reality. Woods surmised that Blyton \"was a child, she thought as a child, and wrote as a child\u00a0... the basic feeling is essentially pre-adolescent\u00a0... Enid Blyton has no moral dilemmas\u00a0... Inevitably Enid Blyton was labelled by rumour a child-hater. If true, such a fact should come as no surprise to us, for as a child herself all other children can be nothing but rivals for her\". Inglis argues though that Blyton was devoted to children and put an enormous amount of energy into her work, with a powerful belief in \"representing the crude moral diagrams and garish fantasies of a readership\". Blyton's daughter Imogen has stated that she \"loved a relationship with children through her books\", but real children were an intrusion, and there was no room for intruders in the world that Blyton occupied through her writing.\nAccusations of racism, xenophobia and sexism.\nAccusations of racism in Blyton's books were first made by Lena Jeger in the \"Guardian\" article published in 1966. In the context of discussing possible moves to restrict publications inciting racial hatred, Jeger was critical of Blyton's \"The Little Black Doll\", originally published in 1937. Sambo, the black doll of the title, is hated by his owner and other toys owing to his \"ugly black face\", and runs away. A shower of \"magic rain\" washes his face clean, after which he is welcomed back home with his now pink face. Jamaica Kincaid also considers the Noddy books to be \"deeply racist\" because of the blonde children and the black golliwogs. In Blyton's 1944 novel \"The Island of Adventure\", a black servant named Jo-Jo is very intelligent, but is particularly cruel to the children.\nAccusations of xenophobia were also made. As George Greenfield observed, \"Enid was very much part of that between the wars middle class which believed that foreigners were untrustworthy or funny or sometimes both\". The publisher Macmillan conducted an internal assessment of Blyton's \"The Mystery That Never Was\", submitted to them at the height of her fame in 1960. The review was carried out by the author and books editor Phyllis Hartnoll, in whose view \"There is a faint but unattractive touch of old-fashioned xenophobia in the author's attitude to the thieves; they are 'foreign'\u00a0... and this seems to be regarded as sufficient to explain their criminality\". Macmillan rejected the manuscript, but it was published by William Collins in 1961, and then again in 1965 and 1983.\nBlyton's depictions of boys and girls are considered by many critics to be sexist. In a \"Guardian\" article published in 2005, Lucy Mangan proposed that \"The Famous Five\" series depicts a power struggle between Julian, Dick and George (Georgina), in which the female characters either act like boys or are talked down to, as when Dick lectures George: \"it's really time you gave up thinking you're as good as a boy\".\nRevisions to later editions.\nTo address criticisms levelled at Blyton's work, some later editions have been altered to reflect more politically progressive attitudes towards issues such as race, gender, violence between young persons, the treatment of children by adults, and legal changes in Britain as to what is allowable for young children to do (e.g. purchasing fireworks) in the years since the stories were originally written; modern reprints of the Noddy series substitute teddy bears or goblins for golliwogs, for instance. The golliwogs who steal Noddy's car and dump him naked in the Dark Wood in \"Here Comes Noddy Again\" are replaced in the 1986 revision by goblins, who strip Noddy only of his shoes and hat and return at the end of the story to apologise.\n\"The Faraway Tree\"'s Dame Slap, who made regular use of corporal punishment, was changed to Dame Snap, who no longer did so, and the names of Dick and Fanny in the same series (respective slang terms in some dialects for male and female genitals) were changed to Rick and Frannie. Characters in the Malory Towers and St. Clare's series are no longer spanked or threatened with a spanking but are instead scolded. References to George's short hair making her look like a boy were removed in revisions to \"Five on a Hike Together\", reflecting the idea that girls need not have long hair to be considered feminine or normal, as was Anne's remark in \"The Famous Five\" that boys cannot wear pretty dresses or like girls' dolls. In \"The Adventurous Four\", the names of the young twin girls were updated from Jill and Mary to Pippa and Zoe, among changes prompting the Enid Blyton Society's organiser to argue that they were akin to having \u201ca Virgin Express rushing past the Railway Children because the age of steam is over\u2026. [W]e don't want to ruin the charm of something that was written in a particular setting.\u201d\nIn 2010, the publisher of the Famous Five series, Hodder, announced its intention to update the language used in the books, of which it sold more than half a million copies a year. The changes, which Hodder described as \"subtle\", mainly affect the dialogue rather than the narrative. For instance, \"school tunic\" becomes \"uniform\", \"mother and father\" and \"mother and daddy\" (this latter one used by young female characters and deemed sexist) become \"mum and dad\", and \"bathing\" is replaced by \"swimming\" and \"jersey\" and \"pullover\" by \"jumper\". Some commentators see the changes as necessary to encourage modern readers, whereas others regard them as unnecessary and patronising. In 2016, Hodder's parent company, Hachette, announced that they would abandon the revisions, as readers' reaction showed they had not been a success.\nStage, film and television adaptations.\nIn 1954, Blyton adapted Noddy for the stage, producing the \"Noddy in Toyland\" pantomime in just two or three weeks. The production was staged at the 2,660-seat Stoll Theatre in Kingsway, London at Christmas. Its popularity resulted in the show running during the Christmas season for five or six years. Blyton was delighted with its reception by children in the audience and attended the theatre three or four times a week. TV adaptations of Noddy since 1954 include one in the 1970s narrated by Richard Briers. In 1955, a stage play based on the Famous Five was produced, and in January 1997 the King's Head Theatre embarked on a six-month tour of the UK with \"The Famous Five Musical\", to commemorate Blyton's centenary. On 21 November 1998, \"The Secret Seven Save the World\" was first performed at the Sherman Theatre in Cardiff.\nThere have also been several film and television adaptations of the Famous Five: by the Children's Film Foundation in 1957 and 1964, Southern Television in 1978\u201379, and Zenith Productions in 1995\u201397. The series was also adapted for the German film \"F\u00fcnf Freunde\", directed by Mike Marzuk and released in 2011.\nSt. Clare's was adapted into a 1991 anime television series, \"\", by Tokyo Movie Shinsha.\nThe Comic Strip, a group of British comedians, produced two extreme parodies of the Famous Five for Channel 4 television: \"Five Go Mad in Dorset\", broadcast in 1982, and \"Five Go Mad on Mescalin\", broadcast the following year. A third in the series, \"Five Go to Rehab\", was broadcast on Sky in 2012.\nBlyton's \"The Faraway Tree\" series of books has also been adapted to television and film. On 29 September 1997, the BBC began broadcasting an animated series called \"The Enchanted Lands\", based on the series. In 2014, the publishers Hachette, the copyright owners, announced a deal with the production company run by Sam Mendes for a film adaptation of \"The Faraway Tree\" series. Marlene Johnson, for Hachette, said: \"Enid Blyton was a passionate advocate of children's storytelling, and The Magic Faraway Tree is a fantastic example of her creative imagination.\"\nBlyton's \"Malory Towers\" has been adapted into a musical of the same name by Emma Rice's theatre company. It was scheduled to do a UK spring tour in 2020, which has been postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2020, \"Malory Towers\" was adapted as a 13 part TV series for the BBC. It is made partly in Toronto and partly in the UK in association with Canada's Family Channel. The series went to air in the UK in April 2020 and has been renewed for three more series.\nPapers.\nSeven Stories, the National Centre for Children's Books in Newcastle upon Tyne, holds the largest public collection of Blyton's papers and typescripts. The Seven Stories collection contains a significant number of Blyton's typescripts, including the previously unpublished novel, \"Mr Tumpy's Caravan\", as well as personal papers and diaries. The purchase of the material in 2010 was made possible by special funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund, the MLA/V&amp;A Purchase Grant Fund, and two private donations."}
{"id": "10259", "revid": "48785200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10259", "title": "Epipalaeolithic Near East", "text": "The Epipalaeolithic Near East designates the Epipalaeolithic (\"Final Old Stone Age\", also known as Mesolithic) in the prehistory of the Near East. It is the period after the Upper Palaeolithic and before the Neolithic, between approximately 20,000 and 10,000 years Before Present (BP). The people of the Epipalaeolithic were nomadic hunter-gatherers who generally lived in small, seasonal camps rather than permanent villages. They made sophisticated stone tools using microliths\u2014small, finely-produced blades that were hafted in wooden implements. These are the primary artifacts by which archaeologists recognise and classify Epipalaeolithic sites.\nThe start of the Epipalaeolithic is defined by the appearance of microliths. Although this is an arbitrary boundary, the Epipalaeolithic does differ significantly from the preceding Upper Palaeolithic. Epipalaeolithic sites are more numerous, better preserved, and can be accurately radiocarbon dated. The period coincides with the gradual retreat of glacial climatic conditions between the Last Glacial Maximum and the start of the Holocene, and it is characterised by population growth and economic intensification. The Epipalaeolithic ended with the \"Neolithic Revolution\" and the onset of domestication, food production, and sedentism, although archaeologists now recognise that these trends began in the Epipalaeolithic.\nThe period may be subdivided into Early, Middle and Late Epipalaeolithic: The Early Epipalaeolithic corresponds to the Kebaran culture, c. 20,000 to 14,500 years ago, the Middle Epipalaeolithic is the Geometric Kebaran or late phase of the Kebaran, and the Late Epipalaeolithic to the Natufian, 14,500\u201311,500 BP. The Natufian overlaps with the incipient Neolithic Revolution, the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A.\nLevant.\nEarly Epipalaeolithic.\nThe Early Epipalaeolithic, also known as Kebaran, lasted from 20,000 to 12,150\u00a0BP. It followed the Upper Paleolithic Levantine Aurignacian (formerly called Antelian) period throughout the Levant. By the end of the Levantine Aurignacian, gradual changes took place in stone industries. Small stone tools called microliths and retouched bladelets can be found for the first time. The microliths of this culture period differ markedly from the Aurignacian artifacts.\nBy 18,000\u00a0BP the climate and environment had changed, starting a period of transition. The Levant became more arid and the forest vegetation retreated, to be replaced by steppe. The cool and dry period ended at the beginning of Mesolithic 1. The hunter-gatherers of the Aurignacian would have had to modify their way of living and their pattern of settlement to adapt to the changing conditions. The crystallization of these new patterns resulted in Mesolithic 1. The people developed new types of settlements and new stone industries.\nThe inhabitants of a small Mesolithic 1 site in the Levant left little more than their chipped stone tools behind. The industry was of small tools made of bladelets struck off single-platform cores. Besides bladelets, burins and end-scrapers have been found. A few bone tools and some ground stones have also been found. These so-called Mesolithic sites of Asia are far less numerous than those of the Neolithic, and the archeological remains are very poor.\nThe type site is Kebara Cave south of Haifa. The Kebaran was characterized by small, geometric microliths. The people were thought to lack the specialized grinders and pounders found in later Near Eastern cultures.\nThe Kebaran is preceded by the Athlitian phase of the Levantine Aurignacian (formerly called Antelian) and followed by the proto-agrarian Natufian culture of the Epipalaeolithic. The appearance of the Kebaran culture, of microlithic type, implies a significant rupture in the cultural continuity of Levantine Upper Paleolithic. The Kebaran culture, with its use of microliths, is associated also with the use of the bow and arrow and the domestication of the dog. The Kebaran is also characterised by the earliest collecting and processing of wild cereals, known due to the excavation of grain-grinding tools. This was the first step towards the Neolithic Revolution. The Kebaran people are believed to have migrated seasonally, dispersing to upland environments in the summer, and gathering in caves and rock shelters near lowland lakes in the winter. This diversity of environments may be the reason for the variety of tools found in their toolkits.\nThe Kebaran is generally thought to have been ancestral to the later Natufian culture that occupied much of the same range.\nHarvesting of cereals.\nThe earliest evidence for the use of composite cereal harvesting tools are the glossed flint blades that have been found at the site of Ohalo II, a 23,000-year-old fisher-hunter-gatherers\u2019 camp on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, Northern Palestine. The Ohalo site is dated at the junction of the Upper Paleolithic and the Early Epipalaeolithic, and has been attributed to both periods. The wear traces on the tools indicate that these were used for harvesting near-ripe, semi-green wild cereals, shortly before grains ripen enough to disperse naturally. The study shows that the tools were not used intensively, and they reflect two harvesting modes: flint knives held by hand and inserts hafted into a handle. The finds reveal the existence of cereal harvesting techniques and tools some 8,000 years before the Natufian, and 12,000 years before the establishment of sedentary farming communities in the Near East during the Neolithic Revolution. Furthermore, the new finds accord well with evidence for the earliest ever cereal cultivation at the site, and for the use of stone-made grinding implements.\nArtistic expression in the Kebaran culture.\nEvidence for symbolic behavior of Late Pleistocene foragers in the Levant has been found in engraved limestone plaquettes from the Epipalaeolithic open-air site Ein Qashish South in the Jezreel Valley, Palestine. The engravings were uncovered in Kebaran and Geometric Kebaran deposits (ca. 23,000 and ca. 16,500 BP), and include the image of a bird, the first figurative representation known so far from a pre-Natufian Epipalaeolithic site, together with geometric motifs such as chevrons, cross-hatchings, and ladders. Some of the engravings closely resemble roughly contemporary European finds, and may be interpreted as \"systems of notations\" or \"artificial memory systems\" related to the timing of seasonal resources and related important events for nomadic groups.\nSimilar-looking signs and patterns are well known from the context of the local Natufian, a final Epipalaeolithic period when sedentary or semi-sedentary foragers started practicing agriculture.\nLate Epipalaeolithic.\nThe Late Epipalaeolithic is also called the Natufian culture. This period is characterized by the early rise of agriculture, which later emerged more fully in the Neolithic period. Radiocarbon dating places the Natufian culture between 12,500 and 9500\u00a0BCE, just before the end of the Pleistocene. This period is characterised by the beginning of agriculture.\nThe Natufian culture is commonly split into two subperiods: Early Natufian (12,500\u201310,800\u00a0BCE) (Christopher Delage gives 13,000\u201311,500 BP uncalibrated, equivalent to 13,700\u201311,500\u00a0BCE) and Late Natufian (10,800\u20139500\u00a0BCE). The Late Natufian most likely occurred in tandem with the Younger Dryas. The following period is often called the Pre-Pottery Neolithic.\nOther regions.\nArabia.\nUntil recently, it was thought that the Arabian Peninsula was too arid and inhospitable for human settlement in the Late Pleistocene. The earliest known sites belonged to the early Neolithic, c. 9000 to 8000 BP, and it was supposed that people were able to recolonise the region then due to the wetter climate of the early Holocene.\nHowever, in 2014, archaeologists working in the southern Nefud desert discovered an Epipalaeolithic site dating to between 12,000 and 10,000 BP. The site is located in the Jubbah basin, a palaeolake which retained water in the otherwise dry conditions of the Terminal Pleistocene. The stone tools found bore a close resemblance to the Geometric Kebaran, a Levantine industry associated with the Middle Epipalaeolithic. The excavators of the site, therefore, proposed that northern Arabia was colonised by foragers from the Levant around 15,000 years ago. These groups may then have been cut off by the drying climate and retreated to \"refugia\" like the Jubbah palaeolake.\nFood sources.\nThe Epipalaeolithic is best understood when discussing the southern Levant, as the period is well documented due to good preservation at the sites, at least of animal remains. The most prevalent animal food sources in the Levant during this period were: deer, gazelle, and ibex of various species, and smaller animals including birds, lizards, foxes, tortoises, and hares. Less common were aurochs, wild equids, wild boar, wild cattle, and hartebeest. At Neve David near Haifa, 15 mammal species were found, and two reptile species. Despite then being very close to the coast, the rather small number of seashells found (7 genera) and the piercing of many, suggests these may have been collected as ornaments rather than food.\nHowever, the period seems to be marked by an increase in plant foods and a decrease in meat-eating. Over 40 plant species have been found by analysing one site in the Jordan Valley, and some grains were processed and baked. Stones with evidence of grinding have been found. These were most likely the main food sources throughout the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A, which introduced the widespread agricultural growing of crops. "}
{"id": "10263", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10263", "title": "Executive (government)", "text": "The executive branch is the part of government which executes or enforces the law.\nFunction.\nThe scope of executive power varies greatly depending on the political context in which it emerges, and it can change over time in a given country. In democratic countries, the executive often exercises broad influence over national politics, though limitations are often applied to the executive.\nIn political systems based on the separation of powers, such as the United States of America, government authority is distributed between several branches to prevent power from being concentrated in the hands of a single person or group. To achieve this, each branch is subject to checks by the other two; in general, the role of the legislature is to pass laws, which are then enforced by the executive, and interpreted by the judiciary. The executive can also be the source of certain types of law or law-derived rules, such as a decree or executive order.\nIn those that use fusion of powers, typically parliamentary systems, such as the United Kingdom, the executive forms the government, and its members generally belong to the political party that controls the legislature. Since the executive requires the support and approval of the legislature, the two bodies are \"fused\" together, rather than being independent. The principle of parliamentary sovereignty means powers possessed by the executive are solely dependent on those granted by the legislature, which can also subject its actions to judicial review. However, the executive often has wide-ranging powers stemming from the control of the government bureaucracy, especially in the areas of overall economic or foreign policy.\nMinisters.\nIn parliamentary systems, the executive is responsible to the elected legislature, which must maintain the confidence of the legislature or one part of it, if bicameral. In certain circumstances (varying by state), the legislature can express its lack of confidence in the executive, which causes either a change in the governing party or group of parties or a general election. Parliamentary systems have a head of government (who leads the executive, often called ministers) normally distinct from the head of state (who continues through governmental and electoral changes). In the Westminster type of parliamentary system, the principle of separation of powers is not as entrenched as in some others. Members of the executive (ministers), are also members of the legislature, and hence play an important part in both the writing and enforcing of law. In presidential systems, the directly elected head of government appoints the ministers. The ministers can be directly elected by the voters.\nIn this context, the executive consists of a leader or leader of an office or multiple offices. Specifically, the top leadership roles of the executive branch may include:\nPresidents and ministers.\nIn a presidential system, the leader of the executive is both the head of state and government. In some cases, such as South Korea, there is a Prime Minister who assists the President, but who is not the head of government but is the second in the chain.\nIn a parliamentary system, a cabinet minister responsible to the legislature is the head of government, while the head of state is usually a largely ceremonial monarch or president."}
{"id": "10264", "revid": "302229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10264", "title": "Enrico Fermi", "text": "Enrico Fermi (; 29 September 1901 \u2013 28 November 1954) was an Italian and naturalized American physicist, renowned for being the creator of the world's first artificial nuclear reactor, the Chicago Pile-1, and a member of the Manhattan Project. He has been called the \"architect of the nuclear age\" and the \"architect of the atomic bomb\". He was one of very few physicists to excel in both theoretical physics and experimental physics. Fermi was awarded the 1938 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on induced radioactivity by neutron bombardment and for the discovery of transuranium elements. With his colleagues, Fermi filed several patents related to the use of nuclear power, all of which were taken over by the US government. He made significant contributions to the development of statistical mechanics, quantum theory, and nuclear and particle physics.\nFermi's first major contribution involved the field of statistical mechanics. After Wolfgang Pauli formulated his exclusion principle in 1925, Fermi followed with a paper in which he applied the principle to an ideal gas, employing a statistical formulation now known as Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics. Today, particles that obey the exclusion principle are called \"fermions\". Pauli later postulated the existence of an uncharged invisible particle emitted along with an electron during beta decay, to satisfy the law of conservation of energy. Fermi took up this idea, developing a model that incorporated the postulated particle, which he named the \"neutrino\". His theory, later referred to as Fermi's interaction and now called weak interaction, described one of the four fundamental interactions in nature. Through experiments inducing radioactivity with the recently discovered neutron, Fermi discovered that slow neutrons were more easily captured by atomic nuclei than fast ones, and he developed the Fermi age equation to describe this. After bombarding thorium and uranium with slow neutrons, he concluded that he had created new elements. Although he was awarded the Nobel Prize for this discovery, the new elements were later revealed to be nuclear fission products.\nFermi left Italy in 1938 to escape new Italian racial laws that affected his Jewish wife, Laura Capon. He emigrated to the United States, where he worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. Fermi led the team at the University of Chicago that designed and built Chicago Pile-1, which went critical on 2 December 1942, demonstrating the first human-created, self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. He was on hand when the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge, Tennessee went critical in 1943, and when the B Reactor at the Hanford Site did so the next year. At Los Alamos, he headed F Division, part of which worked on Edward Teller's thermonuclear \"Super\" bomb. He was present at the Trinity test on 16 July 1945, the first test of a full nuclear bomb explosion, where he used his Fermi method to estimate the bomb's yield.\nAfter the war, he helped establish the Institute for Nuclear Studies in Chicago, and served on the General Advisory Committee, chaired by J. Robert Oppenheimer, which advised the Atomic Energy Commission on nuclear matters. After the detonation of the first Soviet fission bomb in August 1949, he strongly opposed the development of a hydrogen bomb on both moral and technical grounds. He was among the scientists who testified on Oppenheimer's behalf at the 1954 hearing that resulted in the denial of Oppenheimer's security clearance. \nFermi did important work in particle physics, especially related to pions and muons, and he speculated that cosmic rays arose when the material was accelerated by magnetic fields in interstellar space. Many awards, concepts, and institutions are named after Fermi, including the Fermi 1 (breeder reactor), the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Generating Station, the Enrico Fermi Award, the Enrico Fermi Institute, the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab), the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, the Fermi paradox, and the synthetic element fermium, making him one of 16 scientists who have elements named after them.\nEarly life.\nEnrico Fermi was born in Rome, Italy, on 29 September 1901. He was the third child of Alberto Fermi, a division head in the Ministry of Railways, and Ida de Gattis, an elementary school teacher. His sister, Maria, was two years older, his brother Giulio a year older. After the two boys were sent to a rural community to be wet nursed, Enrico rejoined his family in Rome when he was two and a half. Although he was baptized a Catholic in accordance with his grandparents' wishes, his family was not particularly religious; Enrico was an agnostic throughout his adult life. As a young boy, he shared the same interests as his brother Giulio, building electric motors and playing with electrical and mechanical toys. Giulio died during an operation on a throat abscess in 1915 and Maria died in an airplane crash near Milan in 1959.\nAt a local market in Campo de' Fiori, Fermi found a physics book, the 900-page \"Elementorum physicae mathematicae\". Written in Latin by Jesuit Father , a professor at the Collegio Romano, it presented mathematics, classical mechanics, astronomy, optics, and acoustics as they were understood at the time of its 1840 publication. With a scientifically inclined friend, Enrico Persico, Fermi pursued projects such as building gyroscopes and measuring the acceleration of Earth's gravity.\nIn 1914, Fermi, who used to often meet with his father in front of the office after work, met a colleague of his father called Adolfo Amidei, who would walk part of the way home with Alberto. Enrico had learned that Adolfo was interested in mathematics and physics and took the opportunity to ask Adolfo a question about geometry. Adolfo understood that the young Fermi was referring to projective geometry and then proceeded to give him a book on the subject written by Theodor Reye. Two months later, Fermi returned the book, having solved all the problems proposed at the end of the book, some of which Adolfo considered difficult. Upon verifying this, Adolfo felt that Fermi was \"a prodigy, at least with respect to geometry\", and further mentored the boy, providing him with more books on physics and mathematics. Adolfo noted that Fermi had a very good memory and thus could return the books after having read them because he could remember their content very well.\n\"Scuola Normale Superiore\" in Pisa.\nFermi graduated from high school in July 1918, having skipped the third year entirely. At Amidei's urging, Fermi learned German to be able to read the many scientific papers that were published in that language at the time, and he applied to the \"Scuola Normale Superiore\" in Pisa. Amidei felt that the Scuola would provide better conditions for Fermi's development than the Sapienza University of Rome could at the time. Having lost one son, Fermi's parents only reluctantly allowed him to live in the school's lodgings away from Rome for four years. Fermi took first place in the difficult entrance exam, which included an essay on the theme of \"Specific characteristics of Sounds\"; the 17-year-old Fermi chose to use Fourier analysis to derive and solve the partial differential equation for a vibrating rod, and after interviewing Fermi the examiner declared he would become an outstanding physicist.\nAt the \"Scuola Normale Superiore\", Fermi played pranks with fellow student Franco Rasetti; the two became close friends and collaborators. Fermi was advised by Luigi Puccianti, director of the physics laboratory, who said there was little he could teach Fermi and often asked Fermi to teach him something instead. Fermi's knowledge of quantum physics was such that Puccianti asked him to organize seminars on the topic. During this time Fermi learned tensor calculus, a technique key to general relativity. Fermi initially chose mathematics as his major but soon switched to physics. He remained largely self-taught, studying general relativity, quantum mechanics, and atomic physics.\nIn September 1920, Fermi was admitted to the physics department. Since there were only three students in the department\u2014Fermi, Rasetti, and Nello Carrara\u2014Puccianti let them freely use the laboratory for whatever purposes they chose. Fermi decided that they should research X-ray crystallography, and the three worked to produce a Laue photograph\u2014an X-ray photograph of a crystal. During 1921, his third year at the university, Fermi published his first scientific works in the Italian journal \"Nuovo Cimento\". The first was entitled \"On the dynamics of a rigid system of electrical charges in translational motion\" ('). A sign of things to come was that the mass was expressed as a tensor\u2014a mathematical construct commonly used to describe something moving and changing in three-dimensional space. In classical mechanics, mass is a scalar quantity, but in relativity, it changes with velocity. The second paper was \"On the electrostatics of a uniform gravitational field of electromagnetic charges and on the weight of electromagnetic charges\" ('). Using general relativity, Fermi showed that a charge has a weight equal to U/c2, where U is the electrostatic energy of the system, and c is the speed of light.\nThe first paper seemed to point out a contradiction between the electrodynamic theory and the relativistic one concerning the calculation of the electromagnetic masses, as the former predicted a value of 4/3 U/c2. Fermi addressed this the next year in a paper \"Concerning a contradiction between electrodynamic and the relativistic theory of electromagnetic mass\" in which he showed that the apparent contradiction was a consequence of relativity. This paper was sufficiently well-regarded that it was translated into German and published in the German scientific journal \"Physikalische Zeitschrift\" in 1922. That year, Fermi submitted his article \"On the phenomena occurring near a world line\" (') to the Italian journal '. In this article, he examined the Principle of Equivalence, and introduced the so-called \"Fermi coordinates\". He proved that on a world line close to the timeline, space behaves as if it were a Euclidean space.\nFermi submitted his thesis, \"A theorem on probability and some of its applications\" (\"\"), to the \"Scuola Normale Superiore\" in July 1922, and received his laurea at the unusually young age of 20. The thesis was on X-ray diffraction images. Theoretical physics was not yet considered a discipline in Italy, and the only thesis that would have been accepted was experimental physics. For this reason, Italian physicists were slow to embrace the new ideas like relativity coming from Germany. Since Fermi was quite at home in the lab doing experimental work, this did not pose insurmountable problems for him.\nWhile writing the appendix for the Italian edition of the book \"Fundamentals of Einstein Relativity\" by August Kopff in 1923, Fermi was the first to point out that hidden inside the Einstein equation () was an enormous amount of nuclear potential energy to be exploited. \"It does not seem possible, at least in the near future\", he wrote, \"to find a way to release these dreadful amounts of energy\u2014which is all to the good because the first effect of an explosion of such a dreadful amount of energy would be to smash into smithereens the physicist who had the misfortune to find a way to do it.\"\nIn 1924, Fermi was initiated into the Masonic Lodge \"Adriano Lemmi\" of the Grand Orient of Italy.\nIn 1923\u20131924, Fermi spent a semester studying under Max Born at the University of G\u00f6ttingen, where he met Werner Heisenberg and Pascual Jordan. Fermi then studied in Leiden with Paul Ehrenfest from September to December 1924 on a fellowship from the Rockefeller Foundation obtained through the intercession of the mathematician Vito Volterra. Here Fermi met Hendrik Lorentz and Albert Einstein, and became friends with Samuel Goudsmit and Jan Tinbergen. From January 1925 to late 1926, Fermi taught mathematical physics and theoretical mechanics at the University of Florence, where he teamed up with Rasetti to conduct a series of experiments on the effects of magnetic fields on mercury vapour. He also participated in seminars at the Sapienza University of Rome, giving lectures on quantum mechanics and solid state physics. While giving lectures on the new quantum mechanics based on the remarkable accuracy of predictions of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, Fermi would often say, \"It has no business to fit so well!\"\nAfter Wolfgang Pauli announced his exclusion principle in 1925, Fermi responded with a paper \"On the quantization of the perfect monoatomic gas\" (\"\"), in which he applied the exclusion principle to an ideal gas. The paper was especially notable for Fermi's statistical formulation, which describes the distribution of particles in systems of many identical particles that obey the exclusion principle. This was independently developed soon after by the British physicist Paul Dirac, who also showed how it was related to the Bose\u2013Einstein statistics. Accordingly, it is now known as Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics. After Dirac, particles that obey the exclusion principle are today called \"fermions\", while those that do not are called \"bosons\".\nProfessor in Rome.\nProfessorships in Italy were granted by competition (\"\") for a vacant chair, the applicants being rated on their publications by a committee of professors. Fermi applied for a chair of mathematical physics at the University of Cagliari on Sardinia but was narrowly passed over in favour of Giovanni Giorgi. In 1926, at the age of 24, he applied for a professorship at the Sapienza University of Rome. This was a new chair, one of the first three in theoretical physics in Italy, that had been created by the Minister of Education at the urging of professor Orso Mario Corbino, who was the university's professor of experimental physics, the director of the Institute of Physics, and a member of Benito Mussolini's cabinet. Corbino, who also chaired the selection committee, hoped that the new chair would raise the standard and reputation of physics in Italy. The committee chose Fermi ahead of Enrico Persico and Aldo Pontremoli, and Corbino helped Fermi recruit his team, which was soon joined by notable students such as Edoardo Amaldi, Bruno Pontecorvo, Ettore Majorana and Emilio Segr\u00e8, and by Franco Rasetti, whom Fermi had appointed as his assistant. They soon nicknamed the \"Via Panisperna boys\" after the street where the Institute of Physics was located.\nFermi married Laura Capon, a science student at the university, on 19 July 1928. They had two children: Nella, born in January 1931, and Giulio, born in February 1936. On 18 March 1929, Fermi was appointed a member of the Royal Academy of Italy by Mussolini, and on 27 April he joined the Fascist Party. He later opposed Fascism when the 1938 racial laws were promulgated by Mussolini in order to bring Italian Fascism ideologically closer to German Nazism. These laws threatened Laura, who was Jewish, and put many of Fermi's research assistants out of work.\nDuring their time in Rome, Fermi and his group made important contributions to many practical and theoretical aspects of physics. In 1928, he published his \"Introduction to Atomic Physics\" (\"\"), which provided Italian university students with an up-to-date and accessible text. Fermi also conducted public lectures and wrote popular articles for scientists and teachers in order to spread knowledge of the new physics as widely as possible. Part of his teaching method was to gather his colleagues and graduate students together at the end of the day and go over a problem, often from his own research. A sign of success was that foreign students now began to come to Italy. The most notable of these was the German physicist Hans Bethe, who came to Rome as a Rockefeller Foundation fellow, and collaborated with Fermi on a 1932 paper \"On the Interaction between Two Electrons\" ().\nAt this time, physicists were puzzled by beta decay, in which an electron was emitted from the atomic nucleus. To satisfy the law of conservation of energy, Pauli postulated the existence of an invisible particle with no charge and little or no mass that was also emitted at the same time. Fermi took up this idea, which he developed in a tentative paper in 1933, and then a longer paper the next year that incorporated the postulated particle, which Fermi called a \"neutrino\". His theory, later referred to as Fermi's interaction, and still later as the theory of the weak interaction, described one of the four fundamental forces of nature. The neutrino was detected after his death, and his interaction theory showed why it was so difficult to detect. When he submitted his paper to the British journal \"Nature\", that journal's editor turned it down because it contained speculations which were \"too remote from physical reality to be of interest to readers\". According to Fermi's biographer David N. Schwartz, it is at least strange that Fermi seriously requested publication from the journal, since at that time \"Nature\" only published short notes on articles of this kind, and was not suitable for the publication of even a new physical theory. More suitable, if anything, would have been the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society of London\". He agrees with some scholars' hypothesis, according to which the rejection of the British magazine convinced his young colleagues (some of them Jews and leftists) to give up the boycott of German scientific magazines, after Hitler came to power in January 1933. Thus Fermi saw the theory published in Italian and German before it was published in English.\nIn the introduction to the 1968 English translation, physicist Fred L. Wilson noted that:\nIn January 1934, Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot announced that they had bombarded elements with alpha particles and induced radioactivity in them. By March, Fermi's assistant Gian-Carlo Wick had provided a theoretical explanation using Fermi's theory of beta decay. Fermi decided to switch to experimental physics, using the neutron, which James Chadwick had discovered in 1932. In March 1934, Fermi wanted to see if he could induce radioactivity with Rasetti's polonium-beryllium neutron source. Neutrons had no electric charge, and so would not be deflected by the positively charged nucleus. This meant that they needed much less energy to penetrate the nucleus than charged particles, and so would not require a particle accelerator, which the Via Panisperna boys did not have.\nFermi had the idea to resort to replacing the polonium-beryllium neutron source with a radon-beryllium one, which he created by filling a glass bulb with beryllium powder, evacuating the air, and then adding 50 mCi of radon gas, supplied by . This created a much stronger neutron source, the effectiveness of which declined with the 3.8-day half-life of radon. He knew that this source would also emit gamma rays, but, on the basis of his theory, he believed that this would not affect the results of the experiment. He started by bombarding platinum, an element with a high atomic number that was readily available, without success. He turned to aluminium, which emitted an alpha particle and produced sodium, which then decayed into magnesium by beta particle emission. He tried lead, without success, and then fluorine in the form of calcium fluoride, which emitted an alpha particle and produced nitrogen, decaying into oxygen by beta particle emission. In all, he induced radioactivity in 22 different elements. Fermi rapidly reported the discovery of neutron-induced radioactivity in the Italian journal \"La Ricerca Scientifica\" on 25 March 1934.\nThe natural radioactivity of thorium and uranium made it hard to determine what was happening when these elements were bombarded with neutrons but, after correctly eliminating the presence of elements lighter than uranium but heavier than lead, Fermi concluded that they had created new elements, which he called ausenium and hesperium. The chemist Ida Noddack suggested that some of the experiments could have produced lighter elements than lead rather than new, heavier elements. Her suggestion was not taken seriously at the time because her team had not carried out any experiments with uranium or built the theoretical basis for this possibility. At that time, fission was thought to be improbable if not impossible on theoretical grounds. While physicists expected elements with higher atomic numbers to form from neutron bombardment of lighter elements, nobody expected neutrons to have enough energy to split a heavier atom into two light element fragments in the manner that Noddack suggested.\nThe Via Panisperna boys also noticed some unexplained effects. The experiment seemed to work better on a wooden table than on a marble tabletop. Fermi remembered that Joliot-Curie and Chadwick had noted that paraffin wax was effective at slowing neutrons, so he decided to try that. When neutrons were passed through paraffin wax, they induced a hundred times as much radioactivity in silver compared with when it was bombarded without the paraffin. Fermi guessed that this was due to the hydrogen atoms in the paraffin. Those in wood similarly explained the difference between the wooden and the marble tabletops. This was confirmed by repeating the effect with water. He concluded that collisions with hydrogen atoms slowed the neutrons. The lower the atomic number of the nucleus it collides with, the more energy a neutron loses per collision, and therefore the fewer collisions that are required to slow a neutron down by a given amount. Fermi realised that this induced more radioactivity because slow neutrons were more easily captured than fast ones. He developed a diffusion equation to describe this, which became known as the Fermi age equation.\nIn 1938, Fermi received the Nobel Prize in Physics at the age of 37 for his \"demonstrations of the existence of new radioactive elements produced by neutron irradiation, and for his related discovery of nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons\". After Fermi received the prize in Stockholm, he did not return home to Italy but rather continued to New York City with his family in December 1938, where they applied for permanent residency. The decision to move to America and become US citizens was due primarily to the racial laws in Italy.\nManhattan Project.\nFermi arrived in New York City on 2 January 1939. He was immediately offered positions at five universities, and accepted one at Columbia University, where he had already given summer lectures in 1936. He received the news that in December 1938, the German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann had detected the element barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons, which Lise Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch correctly interpreted as the result of nuclear fission. Frisch confirmed this experimentally on 13 January 1939. The news of Meitner and Frisch's interpretation of Hahn and Strassmann's discovery crossed the Atlantic with Niels Bohr, who was to lecture at Princeton University. Isidor Isaac Rabi and Willis Lamb, two Columbia University physicists working at Princeton, found out about it and carried it back to Columbia. Rabi said he told Enrico Fermi, but Fermi later gave the credit to Lamb:\nNoddack was proven right after all. Fermi had dismissed the possibility of fission on the basis of his calculations, but he had not taken into account the binding energy that would appear when a nuclide with an odd number of neutrons absorbed an extra neutron. For Fermi, the news came as a profound embarrassment, as the transuranic elements that he had partly been awarded the Nobel Prize for discovering had not been transuranic elements at all, but fission products. He added a footnote to this effect to his Nobel Prize acceptance speech.\nThe scientists at Columbia decided that they should try to detect the energy released in the nuclear fission of uranium when bombarded by neutrons. On 25 January 1939, in the basement of Pupin Hall at Columbia, an experimental team including Fermi conducted the first nuclear fission experiment in the United States. The other members of the team were Herbert L. Anderson, Eugene T. Booth, John R. Dunning, G. Norris Glasoe, and Francis G. Slack. The next day, the fifth Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics began in Washington, D.C. under the joint auspices of George Washington University and the Carnegie Institution of Washington. There, the news on nuclear fission was spread even further, fostering many more experimental demonstrations.\nFrench scientists Hans von Halban, Lew Kowarski, and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Joliot-Curie had demonstrated that uranium bombarded by neutrons emitted more neutrons than it absorbed, suggesting the possibility of a chain reaction. Fermi and Anderson did so too a few weeks later. Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd obtained of uranium oxide from Canadian radium producer Eldorado Gold Mines Limited, allowing Fermi and Anderson to conduct experiments with fission on a much larger scale. Fermi and Szil\u00e1rd collaborated on the design of a device to achieve a self-sustaining nuclear reaction\u2014a nuclear reactor. Owing to the rate of absorption of neutrons by the hydrogen in water, it was unlikely that a self-sustaining reaction could be achieved with natural uranium and water as a neutron moderator. Fermi suggested, based on his work with neutrons, that the reaction could be achieved with uranium oxide blocks and graphite as a moderator instead of water. This would reduce the neutron capture rate, and in theory make a self-sustaining chain reaction possible. Szil\u00e1rd came up with a workable design: a pile of uranium oxide blocks interspersed with graphite bricks. Szil\u00e1rd, Anderson, and Fermi published a paper on \"Neutron Production in Uranium\". But their work habits and personalities were different, and Fermi had trouble working with Szil\u00e1rd.\nFermi was among the first to warn military leaders about the potential impact of nuclear energy, giving a lecture on the subject at the Navy Department on 18\u00a0March 1939. The response fell short of what he had hoped for, although the Navy agreed to provide $1,500 towards further research at Columbia. Later that year, Szil\u00e1rd, Eugene Wigner, and Edward Teller sent the letter signed by Einstein to US president Franklin D. Roosevelt, warning that Nazi Germany was likely to build an atomic bomb. In response, Roosevelt formed the Advisory Committee on Uranium to investigate the matter.\nThe Advisory Committee on Uranium provided money for Fermi to buy graphite, and he built a pile of graphite bricks on the seventh floor of the Pupin Hall laboratory. By August 1941, he had six tons of uranium oxide and thirty tons of graphite, which he used to build a still larger pile in Schermerhorn Hall at Columbia.\nThe S-1 Section of the Office of Scientific Research and Development, as the Advisory Committee on Uranium was now known, met on 18 December 1941, with the US now engaged in World War II, making its work urgent. Most of the effort sponsored by the committee had been directed at producing enriched uranium, but Committee member Arthur Compton determined that a feasible alternative was plutonium, which could be mass-produced in nuclear reactors by the end of 1944. He decided to concentrate the plutonium work at the University of Chicago. Fermi reluctantly moved, and his team became part of the new Metallurgical Laboratory there.\nThe possible results of a self-sustaining nuclear reaction were unknown, so it seemed inadvisable to build the first nuclear reactor on the University of Chicago campus in the middle of the city. Compton found a location in the Argonne Woods Forest Preserve, about from Chicago. Stone &amp; Webster was contracted to develop the site, but the work was halted by an industrial dispute. Fermi then persuaded Compton that he could build the reactor in the squash court under the stands of the University of Chicago's Stagg Field. Construction of the pile began on 6 November 1942, and Chicago Pile-1 went critical on 2 December. The shape of the pile was intended to be roughly spherical, but as work proceeded Fermi calculated that criticality could be achieved without finishing the entire pile as planned.\nThis experiment was a landmark in the quest for energy, and it was typical of Fermi's approach. Every step was carefully planned, and every calculation was meticulously done. When the first self-sustained nuclear chain reaction was achieved, Compton made a coded phone call to James B. Conant, the chairman of the National Defense Research Committee.\nTo continue the research where it would not pose a public health hazard, the reactor was disassembled and moved to the Argonne Woods site. There Fermi directed experiments on nuclear reactions, reveling in the opportunities provided by the reactor's abundant production of free neutrons. The laboratory soon branched out from physics and engineering into using the reactor for biological and medical research. Initially, Argonne was run by Fermi as part of the University of Chicago, but it became a separate entity with Fermi as its director in May 1944.\nWhen the air-cooled X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge went critical on 4 November 1943, Fermi was on hand just in case something went wrong. The technicians woke him early so that he could see it happen. Getting X-10 operational was another milestone in the plutonium project. It provided data on reactor design, training for DuPont staff in reactor operation, and produced the first small quantities of reactor-bred plutonium. Fermi became an American citizen in July 1944, the earliest date the law allowed.\nIn September 1944, Fermi inserted the first uranium fuel slug into the B Reactor at the Hanford Site, the production reactor designed to breed plutonium in large quantities. Like X-10, it had been designed by Fermi's team at the Metallurgical Laboratory and built by DuPont, but it was much larger and was water-cooled. Over the next few days, 838 tubes were loaded, and the reactor went critical. Shortly after midnight on 27 September, the operators began to withdraw the control rods to initiate production. At first, all appeared to be well, but around 03:00, the power level started to drop and by 06:30 the reactor had shut down completely. The Army and DuPont turned to Fermi's team for answers. The cooling water was investigated to see if there was a leak or contamination. The next day the reactor suddenly started up again, only to shut down once more a few hours later. The problem was traced to neutron poisoning from xenon-135 or Xe-135, a fission product with a half-life of 9.1 to 9.4 hours. Fermi and John Wheeler both deduced that Xe-135 was responsible for absorbing neutrons in the reactor, thereby sabotaging the fission process. Fermi was recommended by colleague Emilio Segr\u00e8 to ask Chien-Shiung Wu, as she prepared a printed draft on this topic to be published by the Physical Review. Upon reading the draft, Fermi and the scientists confirmed their suspicions: Xe-135 indeed absorbed neutrons, in fact it had a huge neutron cross-section. DuPont had deviated from the Metallurgical Laboratory's original design in which the reactor had 1,500 tubes arranged in a circle, and had added 504 tubes to fill in the corners. The scientists had originally considered this over-engineering a waste of time and money, but Fermi realized that if all 2,004 tubes were loaded, the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium.\nIn April 1943, Fermi raised with Robert Oppenheimer the possibility of using the radioactive byproducts from enrichment to contaminate the German food supply. The background was fear that the German atomic bomb project was already at an advanced stage, and Fermi was also sceptical at the time that an atomic bomb could be developed quickly enough. Oppenheimer discussed the \"promising\" proposal with Edward Teller, who suggested the use of strontium-90. James B. Conant and Leslie Groves were also briefed, but Oppenheimer wanted to proceed with the plan only if enough food could be contaminated with the weapon to kill half a million people.\nIn mid-1944, Oppenheimer persuaded Fermi to join his Project Y at Los Alamos, New Mexico. Arriving in September, Fermi was appointed an associate director of the laboratory, with broad responsibility for nuclear and theoretical physics, and was placed in charge of F Division, which was named after him. F Division had four branches: F-1 Super and General Theory under Teller, which investigated the \"Super\" (thermonuclear) bomb; F-2 Water Boiler under L. D. P. King, which looked after the \"water boiler\" aqueous homogeneous research reactor; F-3 Super Experimentation under Egon Bretscher; and F-4 Fission Studies under Anderson. Fermi observed the Trinity test on 16 July 1945 and conducted an experiment to estimate the bomb's yield by dropping strips of paper into the blast wave. He paced off the distance they were blown by the explosion, and calculated the yield as ten kilotons of TNT; the actual yield was about 18.6 kilotons.\nAlong with Oppenheimer, Compton, and Ernest Lawrence, Fermi was part of the scientific panel that advised the Interim Committee on target selection. The panel agreed with the committee that atomic bombs would be used without warning against an industrial target. Like others at the Los Alamos Laboratory, Fermi found out about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki from the public address system in the technical area. Fermi did not believe that atomic bombs would deter nations from starting wars, nor did he think that the time was ripe for world government. He therefore did not join the Association of Los Alamos Scientists.\nPostwar work.\nFermi became the Charles H. Swift Distinguished Professor of Physics at the University of Chicago on 1 July 1945, although he did not depart the Los Alamos Laboratory with his family until 31 December 1945. He was elected a member of the US National Academy of Sciences in 1945. The Metallurgical Laboratory became the Argonne National Laboratory on 1 July 1946, the first of the national laboratories established by the Manhattan Project. The short distance between Chicago and Argonne allowed Fermi to work at both places. At Argonne he continued experimental physics, investigating neutron scattering with Leona Marshall. He also discussed theoretical physics with Maria Mayer, helping her develop insights into spin\u2013orbit coupling that would lead to her receiving the Nobel Prize.\nThe Manhattan Project was replaced by the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) on 1 January 1947. Fermi served on the AEC General Advisory Committee, an influential scientific committee chaired by Robert Oppenheimer. He also liked to spend a few weeks each year at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, where he collaborated with Nicholas Metropolis, and with John von Neumann on Rayleigh\u2013Taylor instability, the science of what occurs at the border between two fluids of different densities.\nAfter the detonation of the first Soviet fission bomb in August 1949, Fermi, along with Isidor Rabi, wrote a strongly worded report for the committee, opposing the development of a hydrogen bomb on moral and technical grounds. Nonetheless, Fermi continued to participate in work on the hydrogen bomb at Los Alamos as a consultant. Along with Stanislaw Ulam, he calculated that not only would the amount of tritium needed for Teller's model of a thermonuclear weapon be prohibitive, but a fusion reaction could still not be assured to propagate even with this large quantity of tritium. Fermi was among the scientists who testified on Oppenheimer's behalf at the Oppenheimer security hearing in 1954 that resulted in the denial of Oppenheimer's security clearance.\nIn his later years, Fermi continued teaching at the University of Chicago, where he was a founder of what later became the Enrico Fermi Institute. His PhD students in the postwar period included Owen Chamberlain, Geoffrey Chew, Jerome Friedman, Marvin Goldberger, Tsung-Dao Lee, Arthur Rosenfeld and Sam Treiman. Jack Steinberger was a graduate student, and Mildred Dresselhaus was highly influenced by Fermi during the year she overlapped with him as a PhD student. Fermi conducted important research in particle physics, especially related to pions and muons. He made the first predictions of pion-nucleon resonance, relying on statistical methods, since he reasoned that exact answers were not required when the theory was wrong anyway. In a paper coauthored with Chen Ning Yang, he speculated that pions might actually be composite particles. The idea was elaborated by Shoichi Sakata. It has since been supplanted by the quark model, in which the pion is made up of quarks, which completed Fermi's model, and vindicated his approach.\nFermi wrote a paper \"On the Origin of Cosmic Radiation\" in which he proposed that cosmic rays arose through material being accelerated by magnetic fields in interstellar space, which led to a difference of opinion with Teller. Fermi examined the issues surrounding magnetic fields in the arms of a spiral galaxy. He mused about what is now referred to as the \"Fermi paradox\": the contradiction between the presumed probability of the existence of extraterrestrial life and the fact that contact has not been made.\nToward the end of his life, Fermi questioned his faith in society at large to make wise choices about nuclear technology. He said:\nDeath.\nFermi underwent what was called an \"exploratory\" operation in Billings Memorial Hospital in October 1954, after which he returned home. Fifty days later he died of inoperable stomach cancer in his home in Chicago. He was 53. Fermi suspected working near the nuclear pile involved great risk but he pressed on because he felt the benefits outweighed the risks to his personal safety. Two of his graduate student assistants working near the pile also died of cancer.\nA memorial service was held at the University of Chicago chapel, where colleagues Samuel K. Allison, Emilio Segr\u00e8, and Herbert L. Anderson spoke to mourn the loss of one of the world's \"most brilliant and productive physicists.\" His body was interred at Oak Woods Cemetery where a private graveside service for the immediate family took place presided by a Lutheran chaplain.\nImpact and legacy.\nLegacy.\nFermi received numerous awards in recognition of his achievements, including the Matteucci Medal in 1926, the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1938, the Hughes Medal in 1942, the Franklin Medal in 1947, and the Rumford Prize in 1953. He was awarded the Medal for Merit in 1946 for his contribution to the Manhattan Project. Fermi was elected member of the American Philosophical Society in 1939 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1950. The Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence, known as the \"Temple of Italian Glories\" for its many graves of artists, scientists and prominent figures in Italian history, has a plaque commemorating Fermi. In 1999, \"Time\" named Fermi on its list of the top 100 persons of the twentieth century. Fermi was widely regarded as an unusual case of a 20th-century physicist who excelled both theoretically and experimentally. Chemist and novelist C. P. Snow wrote, \"if Fermi had been born a few years earlier, one could well imagine him discovering Rutherford's atomic nucleus, and then developing Bohr's theory of the hydrogen atom. If this sounds like hyperbole, anything about Fermi is likely to sound like hyperbole\".\nFermi was known as an inspiring teacher and was noted for his attention to detail, simplicity, and careful preparation of his lectures. Later, his lecture notes were transcribed into books. His papers and notebooks are today at the University of Chicago. Victor Weisskopf noted how Fermi \"always managed to find the simplest and most direct approach, with the minimum of complication and sophistication.\" He disliked complicated theories, and while he had great mathematical ability, he would never use it when the job could be done much more simply. He was famous for getting quick and accurate answers to problems that would stump other people. Later on, his method of getting approximate and quick answers through back-of-the-envelope calculations became informally known as the \"Fermi method\", and is widely taught.\nFermi was fond of pointing out that when Alessandro Volta was working in his laboratory, Volta had no idea where the study of electricity would lead. Fermi is generally remembered for his work on nuclear power and nuclear weapons, especially the creation of the first nuclear reactor, and the development of the first atomic and hydrogen bombs. His scientific work has stood the test of time. This includes his theory of beta decay, his work with non-linear systems, his discovery of the effects of slow neutrons, his study of pion-nucleon collisions, and his Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics. His speculation that a pion was not a fundamental particle pointed the way towards the study of quarks and leptons.\nThings named after Fermi.\nMany things bear Fermi's name. These include the Fermilab particle accelerator and physics lab in Batavia, Illinois, which was renamed in his honour in 1974, and the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, which was named after him in 2008, in recognition of his work on cosmic rays. Three nuclear reactor installations have been named after him: the Fermi 1 and Fermi 2 nuclear power plants in Newport, Michigan, the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant at Trino Vercellese in Italy, and the RA-1 Enrico Fermi research reactor in Argentina. A synthetic element isolated from the debris of the 1952 Ivy Mike nuclear test was named fermium, in honor of Fermi's contributions to the scientific community. This makes him one of 16 scientists who have elements named after them.\nSince 1956, the United States Atomic Energy Commission has named its highest honour, the Fermi Award, after him. Recipients of the award have included Otto Hahn, Robert Oppenheimer, Edward Teller and Hans Bethe.\nPublications.\nFor a full list of his papers, see pages 75\u201378 in ref."}
{"id": "10267", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10267", "title": "Entente", "text": "Entente, meaning a diplomatic \"understanding\", may refer to a number of agreements:"}
{"id": "10268", "revid": "44613493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10268", "title": "Editor war", "text": "The editor war is the rivalry between users of the Emacs and vi (now usually Vim, or more recently Neovim) text editors. The rivalry has become an enduring part of hacker culture and the free software community.\nThe Emacs versus vi debate was one of the original \"holy wars\" conducted on Usenet groups. Since at least 1985, many flame wars have occurred between those insisting that their editor of choice is the paragon of editing perfection, and insulting the opposing group accordingly. Related battles have been fought over operating systems, programming languages, version control systems, and even source code indent style.\nBackground.\n, both Emacs and vi can lay claim to being among the longest-lived application programs of all time, as well as being the two most commonly used text editors on Linux and Unix. Many operating systems, especially Linux and BSD derivatives, bundle multiple text editors with the operating system to cater to user demand. For example, a default installation of macOS contains ed, pico (nano before MacOS Ventura 12.3), TextEdit, and Vim.\nHumor.\nThe Church of Emacs, formed by Emacs and the GNU Project's creator Richard Stallman, is a parody religion. While it refers to vi as the \"editor of the beast\" (vi-vi-vi being 6-6-6 in Roman numerals), it does not oppose the use of vi; rather, it calls proprietary software a case of anathema. (\"Using a free version of vi is not a sin but a penance.\") The Church of Emacs has its own newsgroup, alt.religion.emacs, that has posts purporting to support this belief system.\nRegarding vi's modal nature (a common point of frustration for new users), some Emacs users joke that vi has two modes \u2013 \"beep repeatedly\" and \"break everything\". vi users enjoy joking that Emacs's key-sequences induce carpal tunnel syndrome, or mentioning one of many satirical expansions of the acronym EMACS. These include \"Escape Meta Alt Control Shift\" (a jab at Emacs's reliance on modifier keys), \"Eight Megabytes And Constantly Swapping\" (in a time when that was a great amount of memory), \"EMACS Makes Any Computer Slow\" (a recursive acronym like those Stallman uses), or \"Eventually Munches All Computer Storage\" in reference to Emacs's high system resource requirements. GNU EMACS has been expanded to \"Generally Not Used, Except by Middle-Aged Computer Scientists\" referencing its most ardent fans and its declining usage among younger programmers in comparison to more graphically oriented editors such as Atom, BBEdit, Sublime Text, TextMate, Notepad%2B%2B, and Visual Studio Code.\nAs a poke at Emacs' creeping featurism, vi advocates have been known to describe Emacs as \"a great operating system, lacking only a decent editor\". Emacs advocates have been known to respond that the editor is actually very good, but the operating system could use improvement (referring to Emacs' famous lack of concurrency, which has now been added).\nA game among UNIX users, either to test the depth of an Emacs user's understanding of the editor or to poke fun at the complexity of Emacs, involved predicting what would happen if a user held down a modifier key (such as or ) and typed their own name. This game humor originated with users of the older TECO editor, which was the implementation basis, via macros, of the original Emacs.\nThe Google search engine also joined in on the joke by having searches for vi resulting in the question \"Did you mean: emacs\" prompted at the top of the page, and searches for emacs resulting in \"Did you mean: vi\".\nIn the web series \"A Murder at the End of the World\", there is a scene referencing the editor wars where a character asks a woman if she uses Vi or Emacs."}
{"id": "10270", "revid": "37922243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10270", "title": "Organization of the Eastern Orthodox Church", "text": "The Eastern Orthodox Church, officially the Orthodox Catholic Church and commonly known simply as the Orthodox Church is a communion composed of up to seventeen separate autocephalous (self-governing) hierarchical churches that profess Eastern Orthodoxy and recognise each other as canonical (regular) Eastern Orthodox Christian churches.\nEach constituent church is self-governing; its highest-ranking bishop called the primate (a patriarch, a metropolitan or an archbishop) reports to no higher authority. Each regional church is composed of constituent eparchies (or dioceses) ruled by bishops. Some autocephalous churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies with varying degrees of autonomy (meaning they have limited self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a \"tomos\" or another document of autonomy. In many cases, autonomous churches are almost completely self-governing, with the mother church retaining only the right to appoint the highest-ranking bishop (often an archbishop or metropolitan) of the autonomous church.\nNormal governance is enacted through a synod of bishops within each church.\nChurch governance.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is decentralised, having no central authority, earthly head or a single bishop in a leadership role. Thus, the Eastern Orthodox use a synodical system canonically, which is significantly different from the hierarchical organisation of the Catholic Church that follows the doctrine of papal supremacy. References to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople as a sole authoritative leader are an erroneous interpretation of his title \u201cfirst among equals\". His title is of honor rather than authority and in fact the Ecumenical Patriarch has no direct authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan Church. The Ecumenical Patriarch's unique role is sometimes referred to as being the \"spiritual leader\" of the Eastern Orthodox Church, although even this is disputed.\nThe autocephalous churches are normally in full communion with each other, so any priest of any of those churches may lawfully minister to any member of any of them, and no member of any is excluded from any form of worship in any of the others, including the reception of the Eucharist. However, there have been varying instances in the history of the Eastern Orthodox Church where communion has been broken between member churches for short periods, particularly over autocephaly issues or disagreements over ecumenism with other Christian denominations.\nFollowing Justinian, the church existed only as a single denomination of five communing churches ruled by five patriarchs: the bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, collectively referred to as the Pentarchy. Each of the five patriarchs had jurisdiction over bishops in a specified geographic region which did not overlap with the jurisdiction of another patriarch. This continued until 927, when the Bulgarian Patriarchate became the first newly promoted patriarchate to join the original five.\nHistorically, the Patriarch of Rome was considered to be the \"first in place of honor\" among the five patriarchs. Disagreement about the limits of his authority was one of the causes of the Great Schism, conventionally dated to the year 1054, which split the previously unified Church into the Roman Catholic Church in the West, headed by the Pope, and the Orthodox Catholic Church (more commonly known today as the Eastern Orthodox Church), led by the four eastern patriarchs. After the schism, the honorary primacy of the Bishop of Rome shifted to the Patriarch of Constantinople, who had previously been accorded second-place rank at the First Council of Constantinople.\nIn the 5th century, Oriental Orthodoxy separated from Chalcedonian Christianity (and is therefore separate from both the Eastern Orthodox Church and Roman Catholic Church), well before the 11th century Great Schism. It should not be confused with Eastern Orthodoxy or Roman Catholicism.\nJurisdictions.\nAutocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches.\nRanked in order of seniority, with the year of independence (autocephaly) given in parentheses, where applicable. There are a total of 17 autocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches which are recognized to various degrees among the communion of the Eastern Orthodox Church.\n\"Canonicity\" refers to the state of being in communion with the larger Eastern Orthodox Church (making the church in question undisputedly a constituent of the Eastern Orthodox Church), whereas \"autocephaly\" refers to the state of being more or less self-governing. Canonicity is binary (two churches are either in communion or not) while autocephaly exists on a spectrum. Disputes over autocephaly often lead to short-term breaks in communion for political reasons. These short-term breaks are typically not due to differences in doctrine or theology.\nFour ancient patriarchates.\nThe four ancient Eastern Orthodox Patriarchates, along with the See of Rome, formed the historical Pentarchy, and remained in communion with each other after the East-West Schism in 1054. The concept of the Pentarchy and the title of \"Patriarch\" itself, as opposed to Archbishop or Exarch, is attributed to St Justinian in AD 531.\nAutocephalous archbishoprics.\nNote:\nAutocephalous metropolises.\nNote:\nInternal ranking.\nThe typical order that the four ancient churches appear in the diptychs is the same order given above. While every major church places the four ancient churches in their diptychs before the other autocephalous churches, this order may still differ slightly. For example, in the diptychs of the Russian Orthodox Church and some of its daughter churches (e.g., the Orthodox Church in America), the ranking of the five junior patriarchates is: Russia, Georgia, Serbia, Romania, Bulgaria. The ranking of the archbishoprics is the same, with the Church of Cyprus being the only ancient one (AD 431).\nUnrecognised churches.\nTrue Orthodox.\nTrue Orthodox Christians are groups of traditionalist Eastern Orthodox churches which have severed communion since the 1920s with the mainstream Eastern Orthodox churches for various reasons, such as calendar reform, the involvement of mainstream Eastern Orthodox in ecumenism, or the refusal to submit to the authority of mainstream Eastern Orthodox Church. The True Orthodox Church in the Soviet Union was also called the Catacomb Church; the True Orthodox in Romania, Bulgaria, Greece and Cyprus are also called Old Calendarists.\nThese groups refrain from concelebration of the Divine Liturgy with the mainstream Eastern Orthodox, while maintaining that they remain fully within the canonical boundaries of the Church: i.e., professing Eastern Orthodox belief, retaining legitimate apostolic succession, and existing in communities with historical continuity. However, their existence outside of communion with the other churches makes the True Orthodox automatically outside of the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nThe churches which follow True Orthodoxy are:\nOld Believers.\nOld Believers are divided into various churches which recognize neither each other nor the mainstream Eastern Orthodox Church.\nChurches that are not recognised despite wanting to.\nThe following churches recognize all other mainstream Eastern Orthodox churches, but are not recognised by any of them due to various disputes:\nChurches that are neither recognised nor fully Eastern Orthodox.\nThe following churches use the term \"Orthodox\" in their name and carry belief or the traditions of Eastern Orthodox church, but blend beliefs and traditions from other denominations outside of Eastern Orthodoxy:"}
{"id": "10271", "revid": "1255425525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10271", "title": "EDT", "text": "EDT may refer to:"}
{"id": "10272", "revid": "1267141431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10272", "title": "Electric guitar", "text": "An electric guitar is a guitar that requires external electric sound amplification in order to be heard at typical performance volumes, unlike a standard acoustic guitar. It uses one or more pickups to convert the vibration of its strings into electrical signals, which ultimately are reproduced as sound by loudspeakers. The sound is sometimes shaped or electronically altered to achieve different timbres or tonal qualities via amplifier settings or knobs on the guitar. Often, this is done through the use of effects such as reverb, distortion and \"overdrive\"; the latter is considered to be a key element of electric blues guitar music and jazz, rock and heavy metal guitar playing. Designs also exist combining attributes of electric and acoustic guitars: the semi-acoustic and acoustic-electric guitars.\nInvented in 1932, the electric guitar was adopted by jazz guitar players, who wanted to play single-note guitar solos in large big band ensembles. Early proponents of the electric guitar on record include Les Paul, Eddie Durham, George Barnes, Lonnie Johnson, Sister Rosetta Tharpe, T-Bone Walker, and Charlie Christian. During the 1950s and 1960s, the electric guitar became the most important instrument in popular music. It has evolved into an instrument that is capable of a multitude of sounds and styles in genres ranging from pop and rock to folk to country music, blues and jazz. It served as a major component in the development of electric blues, rock and roll, rock music, heavy metal music and many other genres of music.\nElectric guitar design and construction varies greatly in the shape of the body and the configuration of the neck, bridge, and pickups. Guitars may have a fixed bridge or a spring-loaded hinged bridge, which lets players \"bend\" the pitch of notes or chords up or down, or perform vibrato effects. The sound of an electric guitar can be modified by new playing techniques such as string bending, tapping, and hammering-on, using audio feedback, or slide guitar playing.\nThere are several types of electric guitar. Early forms were hollow-body semi-acoustic guitars, while solid body guitars developed later. String configurations include the six-string guitar (the most common type), which is usually tuned E, A, D, G, B, E, from lowest to highest strings; the seven-string guitar, which typically adds a low B string below the low E; the eight-string guitar, which typically adds a low E or F# string below the low B; and the twelve-string guitar, which has six two-string courses similar to a mandolin.\nIn rock, the electric guitar is often used in two roles: as a rhythm guitar, which plays the chord sequences or progressions, and riffs, and sets the beat (as part of a rhythm section); and as a lead guitar, which provides instrumental melody lines, melodic instrumental fill passages, and solos. In a small group, such as a power trio, one guitarist may switch between both roles; in larger groups there is often a rhythm guitarist and a lead guitarist.\nHistory.\nMany experiments with electrically amplifying the vibrations of a string instrument were made dating back to the early part of the 20th century. Patents from the 1910s show telephone transmitters were adapted and placed inside violins and banjos to amplify the sound. Hobbyists in the 1920s used carbon button microphones attached to the bridge; however, these detected vibrations from the bridge on top of the instrument, resulting in a weak signal.\nElectric guitars were originally designed by acoustic guitar makers and instrument manufacturers. The demand for amplified guitars began during the big band era; as orchestras increased in size, guitar players soon realized the necessity in guitar amplification and electrification. The first electric guitars used in jazz were hollow archtop acoustic guitar bodies with electromagnetic transducers.\nThe first electrically amplified stringed instrument to be marketed commercially was a cast aluminium lap steel guitar nicknamed the \"Frying Pan\" designed in 1931 by George Beauchamp, the general manager of the National Stringed Instrument Corporation, with Paul Barth, who was vice president. George Beauchamp, along with Adolph Rickenbacker, invented the electromagnetic pickups. Coils that were wrapped around a magnet would create an electromagnetic field that converted the vibrations of the guitar strings into electrical signals, which could then be amplified. Commercial production began in late summer of 1932 by the Ro-Pat-In Corporation (Electro-Patent-Instrument Company), in Los Angeles, a partnership of Beauchamp, Adolph Rickenbacker (originally Rickenbacher), and Paul Barth.\nIn 1934, the company was renamed the Rickenbacker Electro Stringed Instrument Company. In that year Beauchamp applied for a United States patent for an \"Electrical Stringed Musical Instrument\" and the patent was later issued in 1937. By the time it was patented, other manufacturers were already making their own electric guitar designs. Early electric guitar manufacturers include Rickenbacker in 1932; Dobro in 1933; National, AudioVox and Volu-tone in 1934; Vega, Epiphone (Electrophone and Electar), and Gibson in 1935 and many others by 1936.\nBy early-mid 1935, Electro String Instrument Corporation had achieved success with the \"Frying Pan\", and set out to capture a new audience through its release of the Electro-Spanish Model B and the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts, which was the first full 25-inch scale electric guitar ever produced. The Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts was revolutionary for its time, providing players a full 25-inch scale, with easy access to 17 frets free of the body. Unlike other lap-steel electrified instruments produced during the time, the Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts was designed to play while standing upright with the guitar on a strap, as with acoustic guitars. The Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts was also the first instrument to feature a hand-operated vibrato as a standard arrangement, a device called the \"Vibrola\", invented by Doc Kauffman.\n It is estimated that fewer than 50 Electro-Spanish Ken Roberts were constructed between 1933 and 1937; fewer than 10 are known to survive today.\nThe solid-body electric guitar is made of solid wood, without functionally resonating air spaces. The first solid-body Spanish standard guitar was offered by Vivi-Tone no later than 1934. This model featured a guitar-shaped body of a single sheet of plywood affixed to a wood frame. Another early, substantially solid Spanish electric guitar, called the Electro Spanish, was marketed by the Rickenbacker guitar company in 1935 and made of Bakelite. By 1936, the Slingerland company introduced a wooden solid-body electric model, the Slingerland Songster 401 (and a lap steel counterpart, the Songster 400).\nGibson's first production electric guitar, marketed in 1936, was the ES-150 model (\"ES\" for \"Electric Spanish\", and \"150\" reflecting the $150 price of the instrument, along with matching amplifier). The ES-150 guitar featured a single-coil, hexagonally shaped \"bar\" pickup, which was designed by Walt Fuller. It became known as the \"Charlie Christian\" pickup (named for the jazz guitarist who was among the first to perform with the ES-150 guitar). The ES-150 achieved some popularity but suffered from unequal loudness across the six strings.\nA functioning solid-body electric guitar was designed and built in 1940 by Les Paul from an Epiphone acoustic archtop as an experiment. His \"log guitar\" \u2014 a wood post with a neck attached and two hollow-body halves attached to the sides for appearance only \u2014 shares nothing in common for design or hardware with the solid-body Gibson Les Paul, designed by Ted McCarty and introduced in 1952.\nThe feedback associated with amplified hollow-bodied electric guitars was understood long before Paul's \"log\" was created in 1940; Gage Brewer's Ro-Pat-In of 1932 had a top so heavily reinforced that it essentially functioned as a solid-body instrument.\nTypes.\nSolid-body.\nUnlike acoustic guitars, solid-body electric guitars have no vibrating soundboard to amplify string vibration. Instead, solid-body instruments depend on electric pickups, and an amplifier (\"amp\") and speaker. The solid body ensures that the amplified sound reproduces the string vibration alone, thus avoiding the wolf tones and unwanted feedback associated with amplified acoustic guitars. These guitars are generally made of hardwood covered with a hard polymer finish, often polyester or lacquer. In large production facilities, the wood is stored for three to six months in a wood-drying kiln before being cut to shape. Premium custom-built guitars are frequently made with much older, hand-selected wood.\nOne of the first solid-body guitars was invented by Les Paul. Gibson did not present their Gibson Les Paul guitar prototypes to the public, as they did not believe the solid-body style would catch on. Another early solid-body Spanish style guitar, resembling what would become Gibson's Les Paul guitar a decade later, was developed in 1941 by O.W. Appleton, of Nogales, Arizona. Appleton made contact with both Gibson and Fender but was unable to sell the idea behind his \"App\" guitar to either company. In 1946, Merle Travis commissioned steel guitar builder Paul Bigsby to build him a solid-body Spanish-style electric. Bigsby delivered the guitar in 1948. The first mass-produced solid-body guitar was Fender Esquire and Fender Broadcaster (later to become the Fender Telecaster), first made in 1950, five years after Les Paul made his prototype. The Gibson Les Paul appeared soon after to compete with the Broadcaster. Another notable solid-body design is the Fender Stratocaster, which was introduced in 1954 and became extremely popular among musicians in the 1960s and 1970s for its wide tonal capabilities and more comfortable ergonomics than other models. Different styles of guitar have different pick-up styles, the main being 2 or 3 \"single-coil\" pick-ups or a double humbucker, with the Stratocaster being a triple single-coil guitar.\nThe history of electric guitars has been summarized by \"Guitar World\" magazine, and the earliest electric guitar on their top 10 list is the Ro-Pat-In Electro A-25 \"Frying Pan\" (1932) described as \"The first-fully functioning solid-body electric guitar to be manufactured and sold\". It was the first electric guitar used in a publicly promoted performance, performed by Gage Brewer in Wichita, Kansas in October 1932. The most recent electric guitar on this list was the Ibanez Jem (1987) which featured \"24 frets\", an impossibly thin neck\" and was \"designed to be the ultimate shredder machine\". Numerous other important electric guitars are on the list, including Gibson ES-150 (1936), Fender Telecaster (1951), Gibson Les Paul (1952), Gretsch 6128 Duo Jet (1953), Fender Stratocaster (1954), Rickenbacker 360/12 (1964), Van Halen Frankenstrat (1975), Paul Reed Smith Custom (1985) many of these guitars were \"successors\" to earlier designs. Electric guitar designs eventually became culturally important and visually iconic, with various model companies selling miniature model versions of particularly famous electric guitars, for example, the Gibson SG used by Angus Young from the group AC/DC.\nChambered-body.\nSome otherwise solid-bodied guitars, such as the Gibson Les Paul Supreme, the PRS Singlecut, and the Fender Telecaster Thinline, are built with hollow chambers in the body. These chambers are designed to not interfere with the critical bridge and string anchor point on the solid body. In the case of Gibson and PRS, these are called \"chambered bodies\". The motivation for this may be to reduce weight, to achieve a semi-acoustic tone (see below) or both.\nSemi-acoustic.\nSemi-acoustic guitars have a hollow body similar to an acoustic guitar and electromagnetic pickups mounted directly into the body. They work in a similar way to solid-body electric guitars except that because the hollow body also vibrates, the pickups convert a combination of string and body vibration into an electrical signal. Many models, known as semi-hollow bodies, have a solid block running through the middle of the soundbox designed to reduce acoustic feedback. They do not provide enough acoustic volume for live performance, but they can be used unplugged for quiet practice. Semi-acoustic guitars are noted for being able to provide a sweet, plaintive, or funky tone. They are used in many genres, including jazz, blues, funk, sixties pop, and indie rock. They generally have cello-style F-shaped sound holes, which can be blocked off to further reduce feedback. Whereas chambered guitars are made, like solid-body guitars, from a single block of wood, semi-acoustic guitar bodies are made from multiple pieces of wood in an \"archtop\" form, a method of construction different from the typical steel string acoustic guitar. The top is formed from a moderately thick piece of wood which is then carved into a thin outward-curving shape, whereas conventional acoustic guitars have a thin, flat top.\nElectric acoustic.\nSome steel-string acoustic guitars include a built-in system to electrically amplify their output without altering their tone as an alternative to using a separate microphone. The system may consist of piezoelectric pickups mounted under the bridge, or a low-mass microphone (usually a condenser mic) inside the body of the guitar that converts the vibrations in the body into electronic signals. Combinations of these types of pickups may be used, with an integral mixer/preamp/graphic equalizer. Such instruments are called electric acoustic guitars. They are regarded as acoustic guitars rather than electric guitars because the pickups do not produce a signal directly from the vibration of the strings, but rather from the vibration of the guitar top or body, and the amplification of the sound merely increases volume, not alters tone.\nConstruction.\nElectric guitar design and construction vary greatly in the shape of the body and the configuration of the neck, bridge, and pickups. However, some features are present on most guitars. The photo below shows the different parts of an electric guitar. The headstock (1) contains the metal machine heads (1.1), which use a worm gear for tuning. The nut (1.4)\u2014a thin fret-like strip of metal, plastic, graphite, or bone\u2014supports the strings at the headstock end of the instrument. The frets (2.3) are thin metal strips that stop the string at the correct pitch when the player pushes a string against the fingerboard. The truss rod (1.2) is a metal rod (usually adjustable) that counters the tension of the strings to keep the neck straight. Position markers (2.2) provide the player with a reference to the playing position on the fingerboard.\nThe neck and fretboard (2.1) extend from the body. At the neck joint (2.4), the neck is either glued or bolted to the body. The body (3) is typically made of wood with a hard, polymerized finish. Strings vibrating in the magnetic field of the pickups (3.1, 3.2) produce an electric current in the pickup winding that passes through the tone and volume controls (3.8) to the output jack. Some guitars have piezo pickups, in addition to or instead of magnetic pickups.\nSome guitars have a fixed bridge (3.4). Others have a spring-loaded hinged bridge called a \"vibrato bar\", \"tremolo bar\", or \"whammy bar\", which lets players bend notes or chords up or down in pitch or perform a vibrato embellishment. A plastic pickguard on some guitars protects the body from scratches or covers the control cavity, which holds most of the wiring.\nThe degree to which the choice of woods and other materials in the solid-guitar body (3) affects the sonic character of the amplified signal is disputed. Some believe it is highly significant, while others think the difference between woods is subtle. In acoustic and archtop guitars, wood choices more clearly affect tone.\nWoods typically used in solid-body electric guitars include alder, swamp ash and mahogany. Cheaper guitars are often made of cheaper woods, such as plywood, pine, or agathis\u2014not true hardwoods\u2014which can affect durability and tone. Though most guitars are made of wood, any material may be used. Materials such as plastic, metal, and even cardboard have been used in some instruments.\nThe guitar output jack typically provides a monaural signal. Many guitars with active electronics use a jack with an extra contact normally used for stereo. These guitars use the extra contact to break the ground connection to the on-board battery to preserve battery life when the guitar is unplugged. These guitars require a mono plug to close the internal switch and connect the battery to ground. Standard guitar cables use a high-impedance mono plug. These have a tip and sleeve configuration referred to as a TS phone connector. The voltage is usually around 1 to 9 millivolts.\nA few guitars, such as Rickenbacker guitars equipped with \"Rick-O-Sound\", feature stereo output. There are a variety of ways the \"stereo\" effect may be implemented. Commonly, but not exclusively, stereo guitars route the neck and bridge pickups to separate output buses on the guitar. A stereo cable then routes each pickup to its signal chain or amplifier. For these applications, the most popular connector is a high-impedance plug with a tip, ring, and sleeve configuration, also known as a TRS phone connector. Some studio instruments, notably certain Gibson Les Paul models, incorporate a low-impedance three-pin XLR connector for balanced audio. Many exotic arrangements and connectors exist that support features such as midi and hexaphonic pickups.\nBridge and tailpiece systems.\nThe bridge and tailpiece, while serving separate purposes, work closely together to affect playing style and tone. There are four basic types of bridge and tailpiece systems on electric guitars. Within these four types are many variants.\nA hard-tail guitar bridge anchors the strings at or directly behind the bridge and is fastened securely to the top of the instrument. These are common on carved-top guitars, such as the Gibson Les Paul and the Paul Reed Smith models, and on slab-body guitars, such as the Music Man Albert Lee and Fender guitars that are not equipped with a vibrato arm.\nA \"floating\" or \"trapeze\" tailpiece (similar to a violin's) fastens to the body at the base of the guitar. These appear on Rickenbackers, Gretsches, Epiphones, a wide variety of archtop guitars, particularly jazz guitars, and the 1952 Gibson Les Paul.\nPictured is a \"tremolo arm\" or \"vibrato tailpiece-\"style bridge and tailpiece system, often called a \"whammy bar\" or \"trem\". It uses a lever (\"vibrato arm\") attached to the bridge that can temporarily slacken or tighten the strings to alter the pitch. A player can use this to create a vibrato or a portamento effect. Early vibrato systems were often unreliable and made the guitar go out of tune easily. They also had a limited pitch range. Later Fender designs were better, but Fender held the patent on these, so other companies used older designs for many years. \nWith the expiration of the Fender patent on the Stratocaster-style vibrato, various improvements on this type of internal, multi-spring vibrato system are now available. Floyd Rose introduced one of the first improvements on the vibrato system in many years when, in the late 1970s, he experimented with \"locking\" nuts and bridges that prevent the guitar from losing tuning, even under heavy vibrato bar use.\nThe fourth type of system employs string-through body anchoring. The strings pass over the bridge saddles, then through holes through the top of the guitar body to the back. The strings are typically anchored in place at the back of the guitar by metal ferrules. Many believe this design improves a guitar's sustain and timbre. A few examples of string-through body guitars are the Fender Telecaster Thinline, the Fender Telecaster Deluxe, the B.C. Rich IT Warlock and Mockingbird, and the Schecter Omen 6 and 7 series.\nPickups.\nCompared to an acoustic guitar, which has a hollow body, electric guitars make much less audible sound when their strings are plucked, so electric guitars are normally plugged into a guitar amplifier and speaker. When an electric guitar is played, string movement produces a signal by generating (i.e., inducing) a small electric current in the magnetic pickups, which are magnets wound with coils of very fine wire.\nThe signal passes through the tone and volume circuits to the output jack, and through a cable to an amplifier. The current induced is proportional to such factors as string density and the amount of movement over the pickups.\nBecause of their natural qualities, magnetic pickups tend to pick up ambient, usually unwanted electromagnetic interference or EMI. This mains hum results in a tone of 50 or 60 cycles per second depending on the powerline frequency of the local alternating current supply.\nThe resulting hum is particularly strong with single-coil pickups. Double-coil or \"humbucker\" pickups were invented as a way to reduce or counter the sound, as they are designed to \"buck\" (in the verb sense of \"oppose\" or \"resist\") the hum, hence their name. The high combined inductance of the two coils also leads to the richer, \"fatter\" tone associated with humbucking pickups.\nNecks.\nElectric guitar necks vary in composition and shape. The primary metric of guitar necks is the \"scale length\", which is the vibrating length of the strings from nut to bridge. A typical Fender guitar uses a scale length, while Gibson uses a scale length in their \"Les Paul\". While the scale length of the Les Paul is often described as 24.75\u00a0inches, it has varied through the years by as much as a half inch.\nFrets are positioned proportionally to scale length\u2014the shorter the scale length, the closer the fret spacing. Opinions vary regarding the effect of scale length on tone and feel. Popular opinion holds that longer scale length contributes to greater amplitude. Reports of playing feel are greatly complicated by the many factors involved in this perception. String gauge and design, neck construction and relief, guitar setup, playing style, and other factors contribute to the subjective impression of playability or feel.\nNecks are described as \"bolt-on\", \"set-in\", or \"neck-through\", depending on how they attach to the body. Set-in necks are glued to the body at the factory. This is the traditional type of joint. Leo Fender pioneered bolt-on necks on electric guitars to facilitate easy adjustment and replacement. Neck-through instruments extend the neck to the length of the instrument so that it forms the center of the body. While a set-in neck can be carefully unglued by a skilled luthier, and a bolt-on neck can simply be unscrewed, a neck-through design is difficult or even impossible to repair, depending on the damage. Historically, the bolt-on style has been more popular for ease of installation and adjustment. Since bolt-on necks can be easily removed, there is an after-market in replacement bolt-on necks from companies such as Warmoth and Mighty Mite. Some instruments\u2014notably most Gibson models\u2014continue to use set-in glued necks. Neck-through bodies are somewhat more common in bass guitars.\nMaterials for necks are selected for dimensional stability and rigidity, and some allege that they influence tone. Hardwoods are preferred, with maple, mahogany, and ash topping the list. The neck and fingerboard can be made from different materials; for example, a guitar may have a maple neck with a rosewood or ebony fingerboard. Today there are expensive and budget guitars exploring other options for fretboard wood for instance \"Pau-Ferro\", both for availability and cheap price while still maintaining quality. In the 1970s, designers began to use exotic human-made materials such as aircraft-grade aluminum, carbon fiber, and ebonol. Makers known for these unusual materials include John Veleno, Travis Bean, Geoff Gould, and Alembic.\nAside from possible engineering advantages, some feel that with the rising cost of rare tonewoods, human-made materials may be economically preferable and more ecologically sensitive. However, wood remains popular in production instruments, though sometimes in conjunction with new materials. Vigier guitars, for example, use a wooden neck reinforced by embedding a light, carbon fiber rod in place of the usual heavier steel bar or adjustable steel truss rod. After-market necks made entirely from carbon fiber fit existing bolt-on instruments. Few, if any, extensive formal investigations have been widely published that confirm or refute claims over the effects of different woods or materials on the electric guitar sound.\nSeveral neck shapes appear on guitars, including shapes known as C necks, U necks, and V necks. These refer to the cross-sectional shape of the neck (especially near the nut). Several sizes of fret wire are available, with traditional players often preferring thin frets, and metal shredders liking thick frets. Thin frets are considered better for playing chords, while thick frets allow lead guitarists to bend notes with less effort.\nAn electric guitar with a folding neck called the \"Foldaxe\" was designed and built for Chet Atkins by Roger C. Field. Steinberger guitars developed a line of exotic, carbon fiber instruments without headstocks, with tuning done on the bridge instead.\nFingerboards vary as much as necks. The fingerboard surface usually has a cross-sectional radius that is optimized to accommodate finger movement for different playing techniques. Fingerboard radius typically ranges from nearly flat (a very large radius) to radically arched (a small radius). The vintage Fender Telecaster, for example, has a typical small radius of approximately . Some manufacturers have experimented with fret profile and material, fret layout, number of frets, and modifications of the fingerboard surface for various reasons. Some innovations were intended to improve playability by ergonomic means, such as Warmoth Guitars' compound radius fingerboard. Scalloped fingerboards added enhanced microtonality during fast legato runs. Fanned frets intend to provide each string with an optimal playing tension and enhanced musicality. Some guitars have no frets, while others, like the Gittler guitar, have no neck in the traditional sense."}
{"id": "10273", "revid": "128897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10273", "title": "Embryo drawing", "text": "Embryo drawing is the illustration of embryos in their developmental sequence. In plants and animals, an embryo develops from a zygote, the single cell that results when an egg and sperm fuse during fertilization. In animals, the zygote divides repeatedly to form a ball of cells, which then forms a set of tissue layers that migrate and fold to form an early embryo. Images of embryos provide a means of comparing embryos of different ages, and species. To this day, embryo drawings are made in undergraduate developmental biology lessons.\nComparing different embryonic stages of different animals is a tool that can be used to infer relationships between species, and thus biological evolution. This has been a source of quite some controversy, both now and in the past. Ernst Haeckel at the University of Basel pioneered in this field. By comparing different embryonic stages of different vertebrate species, he formulated the recapitulation theory. This theory states that an animal's embryonic development follows exactly the same sequence as the sequence of its evolutionary ancestors. Haeckel's work and the ensuing controversy linked the fields of developmental biology and comparative anatomy into comparative embryology. From a more modern perspective, Haeckel's drawings were the beginnings of the field of evolutionary developmental biology (evo-devo).\nThe study of comparative embryology aims to prove or disprove that vertebrate embryos of different classes (e.g. mammals vs. fish) follow a similar developmental path due to their common ancestry. Such developing vertebrates have similar genes, which determine the basic body plan. However, further development allows for the distinguishing of distinct characteristics as adults.\nFamous embryo illustrators.\nErnst Haeckel (1834\u20131919).\nHaeckel's illustrations show vertebrate embryos at different stages of development, which exhibit embryonic resemblance as support for evolution, recapitulation as evidence of the Biogenetic Law, and phenotypic divergence as evidence of von Baer's laws. The series of twenty-four embryos from the early editions of Haeckel's \"Anthropogenie\" remain the most famous. The different species are arranged in columns, and the different stages in rows. Similarities can be seen along the first two rows; the appearance of specialized characters in each species can be seen in the columns and a diagonal interpretation leads one to Haeckel's idea of recapitulation.\nHaeckel's embryo drawings are primarily intended to express his theory of embryonic development, the Biogenetic Law, which in turn assumes (but is not crucial to) the evolutionary concept of common descent. His postulation of embryonic development coincides with his understanding of evolution as a developmental process. In and around 1800, embryology fused with comparative anatomy as the primary foundation of morphology. Ernst Haeckel, along with Karl von Baer and Wilhelm His, are primarily influential in forming the preliminary foundations of 'phylogenetic embryology' based on principles of evolution. Haeckel's 'Biogenetic Law' portrays the parallel relationship between an embryo's development and phylogenetic history. The term, 'recapitulation,' has come to embody Haeckel's Biogenetic Law, for embryonic development is a recapitulation of evolution. Haeckel proposes that all classes of vertebrates pass through an evolutionarily conserved \"phylotypic\" stage of development, a period of reduced phenotypic diversity among higher embryos. Only in later development do particular differences appear. Haeckel portrays a concrete demonstration of his Biogenetic Law through his \"Gastrea\" theory, in which he argues that the early cup-shaped gastrula stage of development is a universal feature of multi-celled animals. An ancestral form existed, known as the gastrea, which was a common ancestor to the corresponding gastrula.\nHaeckel argues that certain features in embryonic development are conserved and palingenetic, while others are caenogenetic. Caenogenesis represents \"the blurring of ancestral resemblances in development\", which are said to be the result of certain adaptations to embryonic life due to environmental changes. In his drawings, Haeckel cites the notochord, pharyngeal arches and clefts, pronephros and neural tube as palingenetic features. However, the yolk sac, extra-embryonic membranes, egg membranes and endocardial tube are considered caenogenetic features. The addition of terminal adult stages and the telescoping, or driving back, of such stages to descendant's embryonic stages are likewise representative of Haeckelian embryonic development. In addressing his embryo drawings to a general audience, Haeckel does not cite any sources, which gives his opponents the freedom to make assumptions regarding the originality of his work.\nKarl Ernst von Baer (1792\u20131876).\nHaeckel was not the only one to create a series of drawings representing embryonic development. Karl E. von Baer and Haeckel both struggled to model one of the most complex problems facing embryologists at the time: the arrangement of general and special characters during development in different species of animals. In relation to developmental timing, von Baer's scheme of development differs from Haeckel's scheme. Von Baer's scheme of development need not be tied to developmental stages defined by particular characters, where recapitulation involves heterochrony. Heterochrony represents a gradual alteration in the original phylogenetic sequence due to embryonic adaptation.\nAs well, von Baer early noted that embryos of different species could not be easily distinguished from one another as in adults.\nVon Baer's laws governing embryonic development are specific rejections of recapitulation. As a response to Haeckel's theory of recapitulation, von Baer enunciates his most notorious laws of development. Von Baer's laws state that general features of animals appear earlier in the embryo than special features, where less general features stem from the most general, each embryo of a species departs more and more from a predetermined passage through the stages of other animals, and there is never a complete morphological similarity between an embryo and a lower adult. Von Baer's embryo drawings display that individual development proceeds from general features of the developing embryo in early stages through differentiation into special features specific to the species, establishing that linear evolution could not occur. Embryological development, in von Baer's mind, is a process of differentiation, \"a movement from the more homogeneous and universal to the more heterogeneous and individual.\"\nVon Baer argues that embryos will resemble each other before attaining characteristics differentiating them as part of a specific family, genus or species, but embryos are not the same as the final forms of lower organisms.\nWilhelm His (1831\u20131904).\nWilhelm His was one of Haeckel's most authoritative and primary opponents advocating physiological embryology. His \"Anatomie menschlicher Embryonen\" (Anatomy of human embryos) employs a series of his most important drawings chronicling developing embryos from the end of the second week through the end of the second month of pregnancy. In 1878, His begins to engage in serious study of the anatomy of human embryos for his drawings. During the 19th century, embryologists often obtained early human embryos from abortions and miscarriages, postmortems of pregnant women and collections in anatomical museums. In order to construct his series of drawings, His collected specimens which he manipulated into a form that he could operate with.\nIn His' \"Normentafel\", he displays specific individual embryos rather than ideal types. His does not produce norms from aborted specimens, but rather visualizes the embryos in order to make them comparable and specifically subjects his embryo specimens to criticism and comparison with other cases. Ultimately, His' critical work in embryonic development comes with his production of a series of embryo drawings of increasing length and degree of development. His' depiction of embryological development strongly differs from Haeckel's depiction, for His argues that the phylogenetic explanation of ontogenetic events is unnecessary. His argues that all ontogenetic events are the \"mechanical\" result of differential cell growth. His' embryology is not explained in terms of ancestral history.\nThe debate between Haeckel and His ultimately becomes fueled by the description of an embryo that Wilhelm Krause propels directly into the ongoing feud between Haeckel and His. Haeckel speculates that the allantois is formed in a similar way in both humans and other mammals. His, on the other hand, accuses Haeckel of altering and playing with the facts. Although Haeckel is proven right about the allantois, the utilization of Krause's embryo as justification turns out to be problematic, for the embryo is that of a bird rather than a human. The underlying debate between Haeckel and His derives from differing viewpoints regarding the similarity or dissimilarity of vertebrate embryos. In response to Haeckel's evolutionary claim that all vertebrates are essentially identical in the first month of embryonic life as proof of common descent, His responds by insisting that a more skilled observer would recognize even sooner that early embryos can be distinguished. His also counteracts Haeckel's sequence of drawings in the \"Anthropogenie\" with what he refers to as \"exact\" drawings, highlighting specific differences. Ultimately, His goes so far as to accuse Haeckel of \"faking\" his embryo illustrations to make the vertebrate embryos appear more similar than in reality. His also accuses Haeckel of creating early human embryos that he conjured in his imagination rather than obtained through empirical observation. His completes his denunciation of Haeckel by pronouncing that Haeckel had \"'relinquished the right to count as an equal in the company of serious researchers.'\"\nControversy.\nThe exactness of Ernst Haeckel's drawings of embryos has caused much controversy among Intelligent Design proponents recently and Haeckel's intellectual opponents in the past. Although the early embryos of different species exhibit similarities, Haeckel apparently exaggerated these similarities in support of his Recapitulation theory, sometimes known as the Biogenetic Law or \"Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny\". Furthermore, Haeckel even proposed theoretical life-forms to accommodate certain stages in embryogenesis. A recent review concluded that the \"biogenetic law is supported by several recent studies \u2013 if applied to single characters only\".\nCritics in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Karl von Baer and Wilhelm His, did not believe that living embryos reproduce the evolutionary process and produced embryo drawings of their own which emphasized the differences in early embryological development. Late 20th and early 21st century critic Stephen Jay Gould has objected to the continued use of Haeckel's embryo drawings in textbooks.\nOn the other hand, Michael K. Richardson, Professor of Evolutionary Developmental Zoology, Leiden University, while recognizing that some criticisms of the drawings are legitimate (indeed, it was he and his co-workers who began the modern criticisms in 1998), has supported the drawings as teaching aids, and has said that \"on a fundamental level, Haeckel was correct.\"\nOpposition to Haeckel.\nHaeckel encountered numerous oppositions to his artistic depictions of embryonic development during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Haeckel's opponents believe that he de-emphasizes the differences between early embryonic stages in order to make the similarities between embryos of different species more pronounced.\nEarly opponents: Ludwig Rutimeyer, Theodor Bischoff and Rudolf Virchow.\nThe first suggestion of fakery against Haeckel was made in late 1868 by Ludwig Rutimeyer in the \"Archiv f\u00fcr Anthropogenie\". Rutimeyer was a professor of zoology and comparative anatomy at the University of Basel, who rejected natural selection as simply mechanistic and proposed an anti-materialist view of nature. Rutimeyer claimed that Haeckel \"had taken to kinds of liberty with established truth\". Rutimeyer claimed that Haeckel presented the same image three consecutive times as the embryo of the dog, the chicken, and the turtle.\nTheodor Bischoff (1807\u20131882), was a strong opponent of Darwinism. As a pioneer in mammalian embryology, he was one of Haeckel's strongest critics. Although Bischoff's 1840 surveys depict how similar the early embryos of man are to other vertebrates, he later demanded that such hasty generalization was inconsistent with his recent findings regarding the dissimilarity between hamster embryos and those of rabbits and dogs. Nevertheless, Bischoff's main argument was in reference to Haeckel's drawings of human embryos, for Haeckel is later accused of miscopying the dog embryo from him. Throughout Haeckel's time, criticism of his embryo drawings was often due in part to his critics' belief in his representations of embryological development as \"crude schemata\".\nContemporary criticism of Haeckel: Michael Richardson and Stephen Jay Gould.\nMichael Richardson and his colleagues in a July 1997 issue of \"Anatomy and Embryology\", demonstrated that Haeckel falsified his drawings in order to exaggerate the similarity of the phylotypic stage.\nIn a March 2000 issue of \"Natural History\", Stephen Jay Gould argued that Haeckel \"exaggerated the similarities by idealizations and omissions.\" As well, Gould argued that Haeckel's drawings are simply inaccurate and falsified. On the other hand, one of those who criticized Haeckel's drawings, Michael Richardson, has argued that \"Haeckel's much-criticized drawings are important as phylogenetic hypotheses, teaching aids, and evidence for evolution\".\nBut even Richardson admitted in \"Science\" Magazine in 1997 that his team's investigation of Haeckel's drawings were showing them to be \"one of the most famous fakes in biology.\"\nSome version of Haeckel's drawings can be found in many modern biology textbooks in discussions of the history of embryology, with clarification that these are no longer considered valid.\nHaeckel's proponents (past and present).\nAlthough Charles Darwin accepted Haeckel's support for natural selection, he was tentative in using Haeckel's ideas in his writings; with regard to embryology, Darwin relied far more on von Baer's work. Haeckel's work was published in 1866 and 1874, years after Darwin's \"The Origin of Species\" (1859).\nDespite the numerous oppositions, Haeckel has influenced many disciplines in science in his drive to integrate such disciplines of taxonomy and embryology into the Darwinian framework and to investigate phylogenetic reconstruction through his Biogenetic Law. As well, Haeckel served as a mentor to many important scientists, including Anton Dohrn, Richard and Oscar Hertwig, Wilhelm Roux, and Hans Driesch.\nOne of Haeckel's earliest proponents was Carl Gegenbaur at the University of Jena (1865\u20131873), during which both men were absorbing the impact of Darwin's theory. The two quickly sought to integrate their knowledge into an evolutionary program. In determining the relationships between \"phylogenetic linkages\" and \"evolutionary laws of form,\" both Gegenbaur and Haeckel relied on a method of comparison. As Gegenbaur argued, the task of comparative anatomy lies in explaining the form and organization of the animal body in order to provide evidence for the continuity and evolution of a series of organs in the body. Haeckel then provided a means of pursuing this aim with his biogenetic law, in which he proposed to compare an individual's various stages of development with its ancestral line. Although Haeckel stressed comparative embryology and Gegenbaur promoted the comparison of adult structures, both believed that the two methods could work in conjunction to produce the goal of evolutionary morphology.\nThe philologist and anthropologist, Friedrich M\u00fcller, used Haeckel's concepts as a source for his ethnological research, involving the systematic comparison of the folklore, beliefs and practices of different societies. M\u00fcller's work relies specifically on theoretical assumptions that are very similar to Haeckel's and reflects the German practice to maintain strong connections between empirical research and the philosophical framework of science. Language is particularly important, for it establishes a bridge between natural science and philosophy. For Haeckel, language specifically represented the concept that all phenomena of human development relate to the laws of biology. Although M\u00fcller did not specifically have an influence in advocating Haeckel's embryo drawings, both shared a common understanding of development from lower to higher forms, for M\u00fcller specifically saw humans as the last link in an endless chain of evolutionary development.\nModern acceptance of Haeckel's Biogenetic Law, despite current rejection of Haeckelian views, finds support in the certain degree of parallelism between ontogeny and phylogeny. A. M. Khazen, on the one hand, states that \"ontogeny is obliged to repeat the main stages of phylogeny.\" A. S. Rautian, on the other hand, argues that the reproduction of ancestral patterns of development is a key aspect of certain biological systems. Dr. Rolf Siewing acknowledges the similarity of embryos in different species, along with the laws of von Baer, but does not believe that one should compare embryos with adult stages of development. According to M. S. Fischer, reconsideration of the Biogenetic Law is possible as a result of two fundamental innovations in biology since Haeckel's time: cladistics and developmental genetics.\nIn defense of Haeckel's embryo drawings, the principal argument is that of \"schematisation.\" Haeckel's drawings were not intended to be technical and scientific depictions, but rather schematic drawings and reconstructions for a specifically lay audience. Therefore, as R. Gursch argues, Haeckel's embryo drawings should be regarded as \"reconstructions.\" Although his drawings are open to criticism, his drawings should not be considered falsifications of any sort. Although modern defense of Haeckel's embryo drawings still considers the inaccuracy of his drawings, charges of fraud are considered unreasonable. As Erland Nordenski\u00f6ld argues, charges of fraud against Haeckel are unnecessary. R. Bender ultimately goes so far as to reject His's claims regarding the fabrication of certain stages of development in Haeckel's drawings, arguing that Haeckel's embryo drawings are faithful representations of real stages of embryonic development in comparison to published embryos.\nUse of embryo drawings in contemporary biology.\nAlthough Stephen Jay Gould's 1977 book \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\" helps to reassess Haeckelian embryology, it does not address the controversy over Haeckel's embryo drawings. Nevertheless, new interest in evolution in and around 1977 inspired developmental biologists to look more closely at Haeckel's illustrations.\nIn current biology, fundamental research in developmental biology and evolutionary developmental biology is no longer driven by morphological comparisons between embryos, but more by molecular biology. "}
{"id": "10274", "revid": "33839581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10274", "title": "Enthalpy", "text": "Enthalpy () is the sum of a thermodynamic system's internal energy and the product of its pressure and volume. It is a state function in thermodynamics used in many measurements in chemical, biological, and physical systems at a constant external pressure, which is conveniently provided by the large ambient atmosphere. The pressure\u2013volume term expresses the work formula_1 that was done against constant external pressure formula_2 to establish the system's physical dimensions from formula_3 to some final volume formula_4 (as formula_5), i.e. to make room for it by displacing its surroundings.\nThe pressure-volume term is very small for solids and liquids at common conditions, and fairly small for gases. Therefore, enthalpy is a stand-in for energy in chemical systems; bond, lattice, solvation, and other chemical \"energies\" are actually enthalpy differences. As a state function, enthalpy depends only on the final configuration of internal energy, pressure, and volume, not on the path taken to achieve it.\nIn the International System of Units (SI), the unit of measurement for enthalpy is the joule. Other historical conventional units still in use include the calorie and the British thermal unit (BTU).\nThe total enthalpy of a system cannot be measured directly because the internal energy contains components that are unknown, not easily accessible, or are not of interest for the thermodynamic problem at hand. In practice, a change in enthalpy is the preferred expression for measurements at constant pressure, because it simplifies the description of energy transfer. When transfer of matter into or out of the system is also prevented and no electrical or mechanical (stirring shaft or lift pumping) work is done, at constant pressure the enthalpy change equals the energy exchanged with the environment by heat.\nIn chemistry, the standard enthalpy of reaction is the enthalpy change when reactants in their standard states ( usually ) change to products in their standard states.\nThis quantity is the standard heat of reaction at constant pressure and temperature, but it can be measured by calorimetric methods even if the temperature does vary during the measurement, provided that the initial and final pressure and temperature correspond to the standard state. The value does not depend on the path from initial to final state because enthalpy is a state function.\nEnthalpies of chemical substances are usually listed for pressure as a standard state. Enthalpies and enthalpy changes for reactions vary as a function of temperature,\nbut tables generally list the standard heats of formation of substances at . For endothermic (heat-absorbing) processes, the change is a positive value; for exothermic (heat-releasing) processes it is negative.\nThe enthalpy of an ideal gas is independent of its pressure or volume, and depends only on its temperature, which correlates to its thermal energy. Real gases at common temperatures and pressures often closely approximate this behavior, which simplifies practical thermodynamic design and analysis.\nThe word \"enthalpy\" is derived from the Greek word \"enthalpein\", which means \"to heat\".\nDefinition.\nThe enthalpy of a thermodynamic system is defined as the sum of its internal energy and the product of its pressure and volume:\nformula_6\nwhere is the internal energy, is pressure, and is the volume of the system; is sometimes referred to as the pressure energy \u00a0.\nEnthalpy is an extensive property; it is proportional to the size of the system (for homogeneous systems). As intensive properties, the \"specific enthalpy\", is referenced to a unit of mass of the system, and the \"molar enthalpy\", where is the number of moles. For inhomogeneous systems the enthalpy is the sum of the enthalpies of the component subsystems:\nformula_7\nwhere\nA closed system may lie in thermodynamic equilibrium in a static gravitational field, so that its pressure varies continuously with altitude, while, because of the equilibrium requirement, its temperature is invariant with altitude. (Correspondingly, the system's gravitational potential energy density also varies with altitude.) Then the enthalpy summation becomes an integral:\nformula_8\nwhere\nThe integral therefore represents the sum of the enthalpies of all the elements of the volume.\nThe enthalpy of a closed homogeneous system is its energy function with its entropy and its pressure as natural state variables which provide a differential relation for of the simplest form, derived as follows. We start from the first law of thermodynamics for closed systems for an infinitesimal process:\nformula_9\nwhere\nIn a homogeneous system in which only reversible processes or pure heat transfer are considered, the second law of thermodynamics gives with the absolute temperature and the infinitesimal change in entropy of the system. Furthermore, if only work is done, As a result,\nformula_10\nAdding to both sides of this expression gives\nformula_11\nor\nformula_12\nSo\nformula_13\nand the coefficients of the natural variable differentials and are just the single variables and .\nOther expressions.\nThe above expression of in terms of entropy and pressure may be unfamiliar to some readers. There are also expressions in terms of more directly measurable variables such as temperature and pressure:\nformula_14\nHere is the heat capacity at \"constant pressure\" and is the coefficient of (cubic) thermal expansion:\nformula_15\nWith this expression one can, in principle, determine the enthalpy if and are known as functions of and \u00a0. However the expression is more complicated than formula_16 because is not a natural variable for the enthalpy .\nAt constant pressure, formula_17 so that formula_18 For an ideal gas, formula_19 reduces to this form even if the process involves a pressure change, because \nIn a more general form, the first law describes the internal energy with additional terms involving the chemical potential and the number of particles of various types. The differential statement for then becomes\nformula_20\nwhere is the chemical potential per particle for a type\u00a0 particle, and is the number of such particles. The last term can also be written as (with the number of moles of component added to the system and, in this case, the molar chemical potential) or as (with the mass of component added to the system and, in this case, the specific chemical potential).\nCharacteristic functions and natural state variables.\nThe enthalpy, expresses the thermodynamics of a system in the \"energy representation\". As a function of state, its arguments include both one intensive and several extensive state variables. The state variables , and are said to be the \"natural state variables\" in this representation. They are suitable for describing processes in which they are determined by factors in the surroundings. For example, when a virtual parcel of atmospheric air moves to a different altitude, the pressure surrounding it changes, and the process is often so rapid that there is too little time for heat transfer. This is the basis of the so-called adiabatic approximation that is used in meteorology.\nConjugate with the enthalpy, with these arguments, the other characteristic function of state of a thermodynamic system is its entropy, as a function, of the same list of variables of state, except that the entropy, , is replaced in the list by the enthalpy, . It expresses the \"entropy representation\". The state variables , , and are said to be the \"natural state variables\" in this representation. They are suitable for describing processes in which they are experimentally controlled. For example, and can be controlled by allowing heat transfer, and by varying only the external pressure on the piston that sets the volume of the system.\nPhysical interpretation.\nThe term is the energy of the system, and the term can be interpreted as the work that would be required to \"make room\" for the system if the pressure of the environment remained constant. When a system, for example, moles of a gas of volume at pressure and temperature , is created or brought to its present state from absolute zero, energy must be supplied equal to its internal energy plus , where is the work done in pushing against the ambient (atmospheric) pressure.\nIn physics and statistical mechanics it may be more interesting to study the internal properties of a constant-volume system and therefore the internal energy is used.\nIn chemistry, experiments are often conducted at constant atmospheric pressure, and the pressure\u2013volume work represents a small, well-defined energy exchange with the atmosphere, so that is the appropriate expression for the heat of reaction. For a heat engine, the change in its enthalpy after a full cycle is equal to zero, since the final and initial state are equal.\nRelationship to heat.\nIn order to discuss the relation between the enthalpy increase and heat supply, we return to the first law for closed systems, with the physics sign convention: , where the heat is supplied by conduction, radiation, Joule heating. We apply it to the special case with a constant pressure at the surface. In this case the work is given by (where is the pressure at the surface, is the increase of the volume of the system). Cases of long range electromagnetic interaction require further state variables in their formulation, and are not considered here. In this case the first law reads:\nformula_21\nNow,\nformula_22\nSo\nformula_23\nIf the system is under constant pressure, and consequently, the increase in enthalpy of the system is equal to the heat added:\nformula_24 This is why the \nnow-obsolete term \"heat content\" was used for enthalpy in the 19th century.\nApplications.\nIn thermodynamics, one can calculate enthalpy by determining the requirements for creating a system from \"nothingness\"; the mechanical work required, differs based upon the conditions that obtain during the creation of the thermodynamic system.\nEnergy must be supplied to remove particles from the surroundings to make space for the creation of the system, assuming that the pressure remains constant; this is the The supplied energy must also provide the change in internal energy, which includes activation energies, ionization energies, mixing energies, vaporization energies, chemical bond energies, and so forth. Together, these constitute the change in the enthalpy For systems at constant pressure, with no external work done other than the work, the change in enthalpy is the heat received by the system.\nFor a simple system with a constant number of particles at constant pressure, the difference in enthalpy is the maximum amount of thermal energy derivable from an isobaric thermodynamic process.\nHeat of reaction.\nThe total enthalpy of a system cannot be measured directly; the \"enthalpy change\" of a system is measured instead. Enthalpy change is defined by the following equation:\nformula_25\nwhere\nFor an exothermic reaction at constant pressure, the system's change in enthalpy, , is negative due to the products of the reaction having a smaller enthalpy than the reactants, and equals the heat released in the reaction if no electrical or shaft work is done. In other words, the overall decrease in enthalpy is achieved by the generation of heat.\nConversely, for a constant-pressure endothermic reaction, is positive and equal to the heat \"absorbed\" in the reaction.\nFrom the definition of enthalpy as the enthalpy change at constant pressure is However, for most chemical reactions, the work term is much smaller than the internal energy change , which is approximately equal to . As an example, for the combustion of carbon monoxide and \nSince the differences are so small, reaction enthalpies are often described as reaction energies and analyzed in terms of bond energies.\nSpecific enthalpy.\nThe \"specific enthalpy\" of a uniform system is defined as , where is the mass of the system. Its SI unit is joule per kilogram. It can be expressed in other specific quantities by where is the specific internal energy, is the pressure, and is specific volume, which is equal to , where is the density.\nEnthalpy changes.\nAn enthalpy change describes the change in enthalpy observed in the constituents of a thermodynamic system when undergoing a transformation or chemical reaction. It is the difference between the enthalpy after the process has completed, i.e. the enthalpy of the products assuming that the reaction goes to completion, and the initial enthalpy of the system, namely the reactants. These processes are specified solely by their initial and final states, so that the enthalpy change for the reverse is the negative of that for the forward process.\nA common standard enthalpy change is the enthalpy of formation, which has been determined for a large number of substances. Enthalpy changes are routinely measured and compiled in chemical and physical reference works, such as the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. The following is a selection of enthalpy changes commonly recognized in thermodynamics.\nWhen used in these recognized terms the qualifier \"change\" is usually dropped and the property is simply termed \"enthalpy of 'process\"'. Since these properties are often used as reference values it is very common to quote them for a standardized set of environmental parameters, or standard conditions, including:\nFor such standardized values the name of the enthalpy is commonly prefixed with the term \"standard\", e.g. \"standard enthalpy of formation\".\nChemical properties.\nEnthalpy of reaction - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of substance reacts completely.\nEnthalpy of formation - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of a compound is formed from its elementary antecedents.\nEnthalpy of combustion - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of a substance burns completely with oxygen.\nEnthalpy of hydrogenation - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of an unsaturated compound reacts completely with an excess of hydrogen to form a saturated compound.\nEnthalpy of atomization - is defined as the enthalpy change required to separate one mole of a substance into its constituent atoms completely.\nEnthalpy of neutralization - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of water is formed when an acid and a base react.\nStandard Enthalpy of solution - is defined as the enthalpy change observed in a constituent of a thermodynamic system when one mole of a solute is dissolved completely in an excess of solvent, so that the solution is at infinite dilution.\nStandard enthalpy of Denaturation (biochemistry) - is defined as the enthalpy change required to denature one mole of compound.\nEnthalpy of hydration - is defined as the enthalpy change observed when one mole of gaseous ions are completely dissolved in water forming one mole of aqueous ions.\nPhysical properties.\nEnthalpy of fusion - is defined as the enthalpy change required to completely change the state of one mole of substance from solid to liquid.\nEnthalpy of vaporization - is defined as the enthalpy change required to completely change the state of one mole of substance from liquid to gas.\nEnthalpy of sublimation - is defined as the enthalpy change required to completely change the state of one mole of substance from solid to gas.\nLattice enthalpy - is defined as the energy required to separate one mole of an ionic compound into separated gaseous ions to an infinite distance apart (meaning no force of attraction).\nEnthalpy of mixing - is defined as the enthalpy change upon mixing of two (non-reacting) chemical substances.\nOpen systems.\nIn thermodynamic open systems, mass (of substances) may flow in and out of the system boundaries. The first law of thermodynamics for open systems states: The increase in the internal energy of a system is equal to the amount of energy added to the system by mass flowing in and by heating, minus the amount lost by mass flowing out and in the form of work done by the system:\nformula_26\nwhere is the average internal energy entering the system, and is the average internal energy leaving the system.\nThe region of space enclosed by the boundaries of the open system is usually called a control volume, and it may or may not correspond to physical walls. If we choose the shape of the control volume such that all flow in or out occurs perpendicular to its surface, then the flow of mass into the system performs work as if it were a piston of fluid pushing mass into the system, and the system performs work on the flow of mass out as if it were driving a piston of fluid. There are then two types of work performed: \"Flow work\" described above, which is performed on the fluid (this is also often called \" work\"), and \"mechanical work\" (\"shaft work\"), which may be performed on some mechanical device such as a turbine or pump.\nThese two types of work are expressed in the equation\nformula_27\nSubstitution into the equation above for the control volume (cv) yields:\nformula_28\nThe definition of enthalpy, , permits us to use this thermodynamic potential to account for both internal energy and work in fluids for open systems:\nformula_29\nIf we allow also the system boundary to move (e.g. due to moving pistons), we get a rather general form of the first law for open systems.\nIn terms of time derivatives, using Newton's dot notation for time derivatives, it reads:\nformula_30\nwith sums over the various places where heat is supplied, mass flows into the system, and boundaries are moving. The terms represent enthalpy flows, which can be written as\nformula_31\nwith the mass flow and the molar flow at position respectively. The term represents the rate of change of the system volume at position that results in power done by the system. The parameter represents all other forms of power done by the system such as shaft power, but it can also be, say, electric power produced by an electrical power plant.\nNote that the previous expression holds true only if the kinetic energy flow rate is conserved between system inlet and outlet. Otherwise, it has to be included in the enthalpy balance. During steady-state operation of a device (\"see turbine, pump, and engine\"), the average may be set equal to zero. This yields a useful expression for the average power generation for these devices in the absence of chemical reactions:\nformula_32\nwhere the angle brackets denote time averages. The technical importance of the enthalpy is directly related to its presence in the first law for open systems, as formulated above.\nDiagrams.\nThe enthalpy values of important substances can be obtained using commercial software. Practically all relevant material properties can be obtained either in tabular or in graphical form. There are many types of diagrams, such as diagrams, which give the specific enthalpy as function of temperature for various pressures, and diagrams, which give as function of for various . One of the most common diagrams is the temperature\u2013specific entropy diagram ( diagram). It gives the melting curve and saturated liquid and vapor values together with isobars and isenthalps. These diagrams are powerful tools in the hands of the thermal engineer.\nSome basic applications.\nThe points\u00a0 through in the figure play a role in the discussion in this section.\nPoints\u00a0 and are saturated liquids, and point\u00a0 is a saturated gas.\nThrottling.\nOne of the simple applications of the concept of enthalpy is the so-called throttling process, also known as Joule\u2013Thomson expansion. It concerns a steady adiabatic flow of a fluid through a flow resistance (valve, porous plug, or any other type of flow resistance) as shown in the figure. This process is very important, since it is at the heart of domestic refrigerators, where it is responsible for the temperature drop between ambient temperature and the interior of the refrigerator. It is also the final stage in many types of liquefiers.\nFor a steady state flow regime, the enthalpy of the system (dotted rectangle) has to be constant. Hence\nformula_33\nSince the mass flow is constant, the specific enthalpies at the two sides of the flow resistance are the same:\nformula_34\nthat is, the enthalpy per unit mass does not change during the throttling. The consequences of this relation can be demonstrated using the diagram above.\nExample 1.\nPoint\u00a0c is at 200\u00a0bar and room temperature (300\u00a0K). A Joule\u2013Thomson expansion from 200\u00a0bar to 1\u00a0bar follows a curve of constant enthalpy of roughly 425\u00a0 (not shown in the diagram) lying between the 400 and 450\u00a0 isenthalps and ends in point\u00a0d, which is at a temperature of about 270\u00a0K\u00a0. Hence the expansion from 200\u00a0bar to 1\u00a0bar cools nitrogen from 300\u00a0K to 270\u00a0K\u00a0. In the valve, there is a lot of friction, and a lot of entropy is produced, but still the final temperature is below the starting value.\nExample 2.\nPoint\u00a0e is chosen so that it is on the saturated liquid line with It corresponds roughly with and Throttling from this point to a pressure of 1\u00a0bar ends in the two-phase region (point\u00a0f). This means that a mixture of gas and liquid leaves the throttling valve. Since the enthalpy is an extensive parameter, the enthalpy in is equal to the enthalpy in multiplied by the liquid fraction in plus the enthalpy in multiplied by the gas fraction in So\nformula_35\nWith numbers:\nThis means that the mass fraction of the liquid in the liquid\u2013gas mixture that leaves the throttling valve is 64%.\nCompressors.\nA power is applied e.g. as electrical power. If the compression is adiabatic, the gas temperature goes up. In the reversible case it would be at constant entropy, which corresponds with a vertical line in the diagram. For example, compressing nitrogen from 1\u00a0bar (point a) to 2 bar (point b) would result in a temperature increase from 300\u00a0K to 380\u00a0K. In order to let the compressed gas exit at ambient temperature , heat exchange, e.g. by cooling water, is necessary. In the ideal case the compression is isothermal. The average heat flow to the surroundings is . Since the system is in the steady state the first law gives\nformula_36\nThe minimal power needed for the compression is realized if the compression is reversible. In that case the second law of thermodynamics for open systems gives\nformula_37\nEliminating gives for the minimal power\nformula_38\nFor example, compressing 1\u00a0kg of nitrogen from 1\u00a0bar to 200\u00a0bar costs at least :\nWith the data, obtained with the diagram, we find a value of \nThe relation for the power can be further simplified by writing it as\nformula_39\nWith\nthis results in the final relation\nformula_40\nHistory and etymology.\nThe term \"enthalpy\" was coined relatively late in the history of thermodynamics, in the early 20th century. Energy was introduced in a modern sense by Thomas Young in 1802, while entropy by Rudolf Clausius in 1865. \"Energy\" uses the root of the Greek word (\"ergon\"), meaning \"work\", to express the idea of capacity to perform work. \"Entropy\" uses the Greek word (\"trop\u0113\") meaning \"transformation\" or \"turning\". \"Enthalpy\" uses the root of the Greek word (\"thalpos\") \"warmth, heat\".\nThe term expresses the obsolete concept of \"heat content\", as refers to the amount of heat gained in a process at constant pressure only, but not in the general case when pressure is variable. J. W. Gibbs used the term \"a heat function for constant pressure\" for clarity.\nIntroduction of the concept of \"heat content\" is associated with Beno\u00eet Paul \u00c9mile Clapeyron and Rudolf Clausius (Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation, 1850).\nThe term \"enthalpy\" first appeared in print in 1909. It is attributed to Heike Kamerlingh Onnes, who most likely introduced it orally the year before, at the first meeting of the Institute of Refrigeration in Paris. It gained currency only in the 1920s, notably with the \"Mollier Steam Tables and Diagrams\", published in 1927.\nUntil the 1920s, the symbol was used, somewhat inconsistently, for \"heat\" in general. The definition of as strictly limited to enthalpy or \"heat content at constant pressure\" was formally proposed by A. W. Porter in 1922."}
{"id": "10275", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10275", "title": "Erdo\u011fan Atalay", "text": "Erdo\u011fan Atalay (born 22 September 1966) is a German actor. He is known for his role as police detective Semir Gerkhan in \"Alarm f\u00fcr Cobra 11 - Die Autobahnpolizei\".\nEarly life and career.\nAtalay was born in Hanover, West Germany, to a Turkish father and German mother. He was a member of the Theater-AG at the IGS Garbsen. At age 18, he made his first appearance as a supporting role in \"Aladdin and the Magic Lamp\" at the National Theatre of Hanover before studying acting at the Hochschule f\u00fcr Musik und Theater Hamburg. Afterwards he took on guest roles in several German television series such as \"Music Groschenweise\", \"Einsatz f\u00fcr Lohbeck\", \"Doppelter Einsatz\" and \"Die Wache\".\nIn March 1996, Action Concept cast Atalay in what would become his breakthrough role, starring as Semir Gerkhan, a police detective of Turkish origin. Atalay co-wrote the screenplay for one of the series' episodes, titled \"Checkmate,\" and is a consulting producer for the series as of 2016. In 2005, Atalay published a short story, \"Die T\u00fcrkei ist da oben\" (\"Turkey is Up There\"), in the German-Turkish anthology \"Was lebbt du?\". In September 2012 he shot together with Ilka Bessin (Cindy from Marzahn) the short film \"Alarm for Cindy 11\", a parody of Alarm for Cobra 11. The short film was broadcast on September 15, 2012, in the program.\nPersonal life.\nAtalay's first marriage was to film and theatre actress Astrid Pollmann in 2004; the couple separated in late 2009. They have one daughter, Pauletta, who has also starred alongside her father in \"Alarm f\u00fcr Cobra 11\" as Ayda Gerkhan, the middle child of Semir Gerkhan. His second child was born in mid-2012 to makeup artist and manager Katja Ohneck, with whom he is married as of 2017.\nFilmography.\nFilm\nTV\nTheatre"}
{"id": "10276", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10276", "title": "Ex libris", "text": ""}
{"id": "10277", "revid": "16404280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10277", "title": "Ennio Morricone", "text": "Ennio Morricone (; ; 10 November 19286 July 2020) was an Italian composer, orchestrator, conductor, trumpeter, and pianist who wrote music in a wide range of styles. With more than 400 scores for cinema and television, as well as more than 100 classical works, Morricone is widely considered one of the most prolific and greatest film composers of all time. He received numerous accolades including two Academy Awards, three Grammy Awards, three Golden Globes, six BAFTAs, ten David di Donatello, eleven , two European Film Awards, the Golden Lion Honorary Award, and the Polar Music Prize in 2010.\nHis filmography includes more than 70 award-winning films, all Sergio Leone's films since \"A Fistful of Dollars\", all Giuseppe Tornatore's films since \"Cinema Paradiso\", Dario Argento's \"Animal Trilogy\", as well as \"The Battle of Algiers\" (1968), \"1900\" (1976), \"La Cage aux Folles\" (1978), \"Le Professionnel\" (1981), \"The Thing\" (1982), \"The Key\" (1983) by Tinto Brass and \"Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!\" (1989). He received Academy Award for Best Original Score nominations for \"Days of Heaven\" (1978), \"The Mission\" (1986), \"The Untouchables\" (1987), \"Bugsy\" (1991), \"Mal\u00e8na\" (2000) and \"The Hateful Eight\" (2015), winning for the last. He won the Academy Honorary Award in 2007. His score to \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" (1966) is regarded as one of the most recognizable and influential soundtracks in history. It was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.\nAfter playing the trumpet in jazz bands in the 1940s, he became a studio arranger for RCA Victor and in 1955 started ghost writing for film and theatre. Throughout his career, he composed music for artists such as Paul Anka, Mina, Milva, Zucchero, and Andrea Bocelli. From 1960 to 1975, Morricone gained international fame for composing music for Westerns and\u2014with an estimated 10\u00a0million copies sold\u2014\"Once Upon a Time in the West\" is one of the best-selling scores worldwide. From 1966 to 1980, he was a main member of Il Gruppo, one of the first experimental composers collectives, and in 1969 he co-founded Forum Music Village, a prestigious recording studio. He continued to compose music for European productions, such as \"Marco Polo\", \"La piovra\", \"Nostromo\", \"Fateless\", \"\", and \"En mai, fais ce qu'il te plait\".\nMorricone composed for Hollywood directors such as Don Siegel, Mike Nichols, Brian De Palma, Barry Levinson, Oliver Stone, Warren Beatty, John Carpenter, and Quentin Tarantino. He has also worked with directors such as Bernardo Bertolucci, Mauro Bolognini, Tinto Brass, Giuliano Montaldo, Roland Joff\u00e9, Wolfgang Petersen, Roman Polanski, Henri Verneuil, Mario Bava, Lucio Fulci, Umberto Lenzi, Gillo Pontecorvo, and Pier Paolo Pasolini. His best-known compositions include \"The Ecstasy of Gold\", \"Se telefonando\", \"Man with a Harmonica\", \"Here's to You\", \"Chi Mai\", \"Gabriel's Oboe\", and \"E Pi\u00f9 Ti Penso\". He has influenced many artists including Hans Zimmer, Danger Mouse, Dire Straits, Muse, Metallica, Fields of the Nephilim, and Radiohead.\nEarly life and education.\nMorricone was born in Rome, the son of Libera Ridolfi and Mario Morricone, a musician. At the time of his birth Italy was under fascist rule. Morricone had four siblings \u2013 Adriana, Aldo, Maria, and Franca \u2013 and lived in Trastevere in the centre of Rome. His father was a professional trumpeter who performed in light-music orchestras while his mother set up a small textile business. During his early schooldays, Morricone was also a classmate of his later collaborator Sergio Leone.\nMorricone's father first taught him to read music and to play several instruments. He entered the Saint Cecilia Conservatory to take trumpet lessons under the guidance of Umberto Semproni. He formally entered the conservatory in 1940 at age 12, enrolling in a four-year harmony program that he completed within six months. He studied the trumpet, composition, and choral music under the direction of Goffredo Petrassi, to whom Morricone would later dedicate concert pieces.\nIn 1941 Morricone was chosen among the students of the Saint Cecilia Conservatory to be a part of the Orchestra of the Opera, directed by Carlo Zecchi on the occasion of a tour of the Veneto region. He received his diploma in trumpet in 1946, continuing to work in classical composition and arrangement. Morricone received the \"Diploma in Instrumentation for Band Arrangement\" with a mark of 9/10 in 1952. His studies concluded at the Conservatory of Santa Cecilia in 1954 when he obtained a final 9.5/10 in his \"Diploma in Composition\" under Petrassi.\nCareer.\nFirst compositions.\nMorricone wrote his first compositions when he was six years old and he was encouraged to develop his natural talents. In 1946, he composed \"Il Mattino\" (\"The Morning\") for voice and piano on a text by Fukuko, first in a group of seven \"youth\" Lieder.\nIn the following years, he continued to write music for the theatre as well as classical music for voice and piano, such as \"Imitazione\", based on a text by Italian poet Giacomo Leopardi, \"Intimit\u00e0\", based on a text by Olinto Dini, \"Distacco I\" and \"Distacco II\" with words by R. Gnoli, \"Oboe Sommerso\" for baritone and five instruments with words by poet Salvatore Quasimodo, and \"Verr\u00e0 la Morte\", for alto and piano, based on a text by novelist Cesare Pavese.\nIn 1953, Morricone was asked by Gorni Kramer and Lelio Luttazzi to write an arrangement for some medleys in an American style for a series of evening radio shows. The composer continued with the composition of other 'serious' classical pieces, thus demonstrating the flexibility and eclecticism that always has been an integral part of his character. Many orchestral and chamber compositions date, in fact, from the period between 1954 and 1959: \"Musica per archi e pianoforte\" (1954), \"Invenzione, Canone e Ricercare per piano\"; \"Sestetto per flauto, oboe, fagotto, violino, viola, e violoncello\" (1955), \"Dodici Variazione per oboe, violoncello, e piano\"; \"Trio per clarinetto, corno, e violoncello\"; \"Variazione su un tema di Frescobaldi\" (1956); \"Quattro pezzi per chitarra\" (1957); \"Distanze per violino, violoncello, e piano\"; \"Musica per undici violini, Tre Studi per flauto, clarinetto, e fagotto\" (1958); and the \"Concerto per orchestra\" (1957), dedicated to his teacher Goffredo Petrassi.\nMorricone soon gained popularity by writing his first background music for radio dramas and quickly moved into film.\nComposing for radio, television, and pop artists.\nMorricone's career as an arranger began in 1950, by arranging the piece \"Mamma Bianca\" (Narciso Parigi). On occasion of the \"Anno Santo\" (Holy Year), he arranged a long group of popular songs of devotion for radio broadcasting.\nIn 1956, Morricone started to support his family by playing in a jazz band and arranging pop songs for the Italian broadcasting service RAI. He was hired by RAI in 1958 but quit his job on his first day at work when he was told that broadcasting of music composed by employees was forbidden by a company rule. Subsequently, Morricone became a top studio arranger at RCA Victor, working with Renato Rascel, Rita Pavone, Domenico Modugno, and Mario Lanza.\nThroughout his career, Morricone composed songs for several national and international jazz and pop artists, including Gianni Meccia (\"Il barattolo\", 1960), Gianni Morandi (\"Go Kart Twist\", 1962; \"Non son degno di te\", 1964), Alberto Lionello (\"La donna che vale\", 1959), Edoardo Vianello (\"Ornella\", 1960; \"Cicciona cha-cha\", 1960; \"Faccio finta di dormire\", 1961; \"T'ho conosciuta\", 1963; and also \"Pinne, fucine ed occhiali\", \"I Watussi\" and \"Guarda come dondolo\"), Nora Orlandi (\"Arianna\", 1960), Jimmy Fontana (\"Twist no. 9\"; \"Nicole\", 1962), Rita Pavone (\"Come te non c'e' nessuno\" and \"Pel di carota\" from 1962, arranged by Luis Bacalov), Catherine Spaak (\"Penso a te\"; \"Questi vent'anni miei\", 1964), Luigi Tenco (\"Quello che conta\"; \"Tra tanta gente\"; 1962), Gino Paoli (\"Nel corso\" from 1963, written by Morricone with Paoli), Renato Rascel (\"Scirocco\", 1964), Paul Anka (\"Ogni Volta\"), Amii Stewart, Rosy Armen (\"L'Amore Gira\"), Milva (\"Ridevi\", \"Metti Una Sera A Cena\"), Fran\u00e7oise Hardy (\"Je changerais d'avis\", 1966), Mireille Mathieu (\"Mon ami de toujours\"; \"Pas vu, pas pris\", 1971; \"J'oublie la pluie et le soleil\", 1974), and Demis Roussos (\"I Like The World\", 1970).\nIn 1963, the composer co-wrote (with Roby Ferrante) the music for the composition \"Ogni volta\" (\"Every Time\"), a song that was performed by Paul Anka for the first time during the Festival di Sanremo in 1964. This song was arranged and conducted by Morricone and sold more than three million copies worldwide, including one million copies in Italy alone.\nAnother success was his composition \"Se telefonando\". Performed by Mina, it was a track on \"Studio Uno 66\", the 4th studio album by Mina. Morricone's sophisticated arrangement of \"Se telefonando\" was a combination of melodic trumpet lines, Hal Blaine\u2013style drumming, a string set, a 1960s Europop female choir, and intensive subsonic-sounding trombones. The Italian Hitparade No. 7 song had eight transitions of tonality building tension throughout the chorus. During the following decades, the song was recorded by several performers in Italy and abroad including covers by Fran\u00e7oise Hardy and Iva Zanicchi (1966), Delta V (2005), Vanessa and the O's (2007), and Neil Hannon (2008). \"Fran\u00e7oise Hardy \u2013 Mon amie la rose\" site in the reader's poll conducted by the newspaper\" la Repubblica\" to celebrate Mina's 70th anniversary in 2010, 30,000 voters picked the track as the best song ever recorded by Mina.\nIn 1987, Morricone co-wrote \"It Couldn't Happen Here\" with the Pet Shop Boys. Other compositions for international artists include: \"La met\u00e0 di me\" and \"Immagina\" (1988) by Ruggero Raimondi, \"Libera l'amore\" (1989) performed by Zucchero, \"Love Affair\" (1994) by k.d. lang, \"Ha fatto un sogno\" (1997) by Antonello Venditti, \"Di Pi\u00f9\" (1997) by Tiziana Tosca Donati, \"Come un fiume tu\" (1998), \"Un Canto\" (1998) and \"Conradian\" (2006) by Andrea Bocelli, \"Ricordare\" (1998) and \"Salmo\" (2000) by Angelo Branduardi, and \"My heart and I\" (2001) by Sting.\nFirst film scores.\nAfter graduation in 1954, Morricone started to write and arrange music as a ghost writer for films credited to already well-known composers, while also arranging for many light music orchestras of the RAI television network, working especially with Armando Trovajoli, Alessandro Cicognini, and Carlo Savina. He occasionally adopted Anglicized pseudonyms, such as Dan Savio and Leo Nichols.\nIn 1959, Morricone was the conductor (and uncredited co-composer) for Mario Nascimbene's score to \"Morte di un amico\" (\"Death of a Friend\"), an Italian drama directed by Franco Rossi. In the same year, he composed music for the theatre show \"Il lieto fine\" by Luciano Salce.\n1961 marked his real film debut with Luciano Salce's \"Il Federale (The Fascist)\". In an interview with American composer Fred Karlin, Morricone discussed his beginnings, stating, \"My first films were light comedies or costume movies that required simple musical scores that were easily created, a genre that I never completely abandoned even when I went on to much more important films with major directors\".\nWith \"Il Federale\" Morricone began a long-run collaboration with Luciano Salce. In 1962, Morricone composed the jazz-influenced score for Salce's comedy \"La voglia matta (Crazy Desire)\". That year Morricone also arranged Italian singer Edoardo Vianello's summer hit \"Pinne, fucile, e occhiali\", a cha-cha song, peppered with added water effects, unusual instrumental sounds and unexpected stops and starts.\nMorricone wrote works for the concert hall in a more avant-garde style. Some of these have been recorded, such as \"Ut\", a trumpet concerto dedicated to Mauro Maur.\nThe Group and New Consonance.\nFrom 1964 up to their eventual disbandment in 1980, Morricone was part of \"Gruppo di Improvvisazione Nuova Consonanza\" (G.I.N.C.), a group of composers who performed and recorded avant-garde free improvisations. The Rome-based avant-garde ensemble was dedicated to the development of improvisation and new music methods. The ensemble functioned as a laboratory of sorts, working with anti-musical systems and sound techniques in an attempt to redefine the new music ensemble and explore \"New Consonance\".\nKnown as \"The Group\" or \"Il Gruppo\", they released seven albums across the Deutsche Grammophon, RCA, and Cramps labels: \"Gruppo di Improvvisazione Nuova Consonanza\" (1966), \"The Private Sea of Dreams\" (1967), \"Improvisationen\" (1968), \"The Feedback\" (1970), \"Improvvisazioni a Formazioni Variate\" (1973), \"Nuova Consonanza\" (1975), and \"Musica su Schemi\" (1976). Perhaps the most famous of these is their album entitled \"The Feed-back\", which combines free jazz and avant-garde classical music with funk; the album frequently is sampled by hip hop DJs and is considered to be one of the most collectable records in existence, often fetching more than $1,000 at auction.\nMorricone played a key role in The Group and was among the core members in its revolving line-up; in addition to serving as their trumpet player, he directed them on many occasions and they can be heard on a large number of his scores. Held in high regard in avant-garde music circles, they are considered to be the first experimental composers collective, their only peers being the British improvisation collective AMM. Their influence can be heard in free improvising ensembles from the European movements including the Evan Parker Electro-Acoustic Ensemble, the Swiss electronic free improvisation group Voice Crack, John Zorn, and in the techniques of modern classical music and avant-garde jazz groups. The ensemble's groundbreaking work informed their work in composition. The ensemble also performed in varying capacities with Morricone, contributing to some of his 1960s and 1970s Italian soundtracks, including \"A Quiet Place in the Country\" (1969) and \"Cold Eyes of Fear\" (1971).\nFilm music genres.\nComedy.\nMorricone's earliest scores were Italian light comedy and costume pictures, where he learned to write simple, memorable themes. During the 1960s and 1970s he composed the scores for comedies such as \"Eighteen in the Sun\" (\"Diciottenni al sole\", 1962), \"Il Successo\" (1963), Lina Wertm\u00fcller's \"I basilischi\" (\"The Basilisks\"/\"The Lizards\", 1963), \"Slalom\" (1965), \"Menage all'italiana\" (\"Menage Italian Style\", 1965), \"How I Learned to Love Women\" (\"Come imparai ad amare le donne\", 1966), \"Her Harem\" (\"L'harem\", 1967), \"A Fine Pair\" (\"Ruba al prossimo tuo\", 1968), \"L'Alibi\" (1969), \"This Kind of Love\" (\"Questa specie d'amore\", 1972), \"Winged Devils\" (\"Forza \"G\"\", 1972), and \"Fiorina la vacca\" (1972).\nHis best-known scores for comedies includes \"La Cage aux Folles\" (1978) and \"La Cage aux Folles II\" (1980), both directed by \u00c9douard Molinaro, \"Il ladrone\" (\"The Good Thief\", 1980), Georges Lautner's \"\" (1985), Pedro Almod\u00f3var's \"Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!\" (1990) and Warren Beatty's \"Bulworth\" (1998). Morricone never ceased to arrange and write music for comedies. In 2007, he composed a lighthearted score for the Italian romantic comedy \"Tutte le Donne della mia Vita\" by Simona Izzo, the director who co-wrote the Morricone-scored religious mini-series \"Il Papa Buono\".\nWesterns.\nAlthough his first films were undistinguished, Morricone's arrangement of an American folk song intrigued director and former schoolmate Sergio Leone. Before being associated with Leone, Morricone already had composed some music for less-known western movies such as \"Duello nel Texas\" (aka \"Gunfight at Red Sands\") (1963). In 1962, Morricone met American folksinger Peter Tevis, with the two collaborating on a version of Woody Guthrie's \"Pastures of Plenty\". Tevis is credited with singing the lyrics of Morricone's songs such as \"A Gringo Like Me\" (from \"Gunfight at Red Sands\") and \"Lonesome Billy\" (from \"Bullets Don't Argue\"). Tevis later recorded a vocal version of \"A Fistful of Dollars\" that was not used in the film.\nAssociation with Sergio Leone.\nThe turning point in Morricone's career took place in 1964, the year in which his third child, Andrea Morricone, who would also become a film composer, was born. Film director and former schoolmate Sergio Leone hired Morricone, and together they created a distinctive score to accompany Leone's different version of the Western, \"A Fistful of Dollars\" (1964).\nThe Dollars Trilogy.\nBecause budget strictures limited Morricone's access to a full orchestra, he used gunshots, cracking whips, whistle, voices, jew's harp, trumpets, and the new Fender electric guitar, instead of orchestral arrangements of Western standards \u00e0 la John Ford. Morricone used his special effects to punctuate and comically tweak the action\u2014cluing in the audience to the taciturn man's ironic stance. \nAs memorable as Leone's close-ups, harsh violence, and black comedy, Morricone's work helped to expand the musical possibilities of film scoring. Initially, Morricone was billed on the film as Dan Savio, a name they had used on Duello nel Texas to help its appeal on the international market. \"A Fistful of Dollars\" came out in Italy in 1964 and was released in America three years later, greatly popularising the so-called Spaghetti Western genre. For the American release, Sergio Leone followed Morricone and Massimo Dallamano's lead and decided to adopt an American-sounding name, Bob Robertson. Over the film's theatrical release, it grossed more than any other Italian film up to that point. The film debuted in the United States in January 1967, where it grossed for the year. It eventually grossed $14.5\u00a0million in its American release, against its budget of 200,000.\nWith the score of \"A Fistful of Dollars\", Morricone began his 20-year collaboration with his childhood friend Alessandro Alessandroni and his Cantori Moderni. Alessandroni provided the whistling and the twanging guitar on the film scores, while his Cantori Moderni were a flexible troupe of modern singers. Morricone in particular drew on the solo soprano of the group, Edda Dell'Orso, at the height of her powers \"an extraordinary voice at my disposal\".\nThe composer subsequently scored Leone's other two \"Dollars Trilogy\" (or \"Man with No Name Trilogy\") spaghetti westerns: \"For a Few Dollars More\" (1965) and \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\" (1966). All three films starred the American actor Clint Eastwood as \"The Man With No Name\" and depicted Leone's own intense vision of the mythical West. Morricone commented in 2007: \"Some of the music was written before the film, which was unusual. Leone's films were made like that because he wanted the music to be an important part of it; he kept the scenes longer because he did not want the music to end.\" According to Morricone this explains \"why the films are so slow\".\nDespite the small film budgets, the \"Dollars Trilogy\" was a box-office success. The available budget for \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\" was about 1.2\u00a0million, but it became the most successful film of the \"Dollars Trilogy\", grossing 25.1\u00a0million in the United States and more than Lire\u00a02.3\u00a0billion (1.2\u00a0million EUR) in Italy alone. Morricone's score became a major success and sold more than three million copies worldwide. On 14 August 1968 the original score was certified by the RIAA with a golden record for the sale of 500,000 copies in the United States alone.\nThe main theme to \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\", also titled \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\", was a hit in 1968 for Hugo Montenegro, whose rendition was a No.2 Billboard pop single in the U.S. and a U.K. No.1 single (for four weeks from mid-November that year).\n\"The Ecstasy of Gold\" became one of Morricone's best-known compositions. The opening scene of Jeff Tremaine's \"Jackass Number Two\" (2006), in which the cast is chased through a suburban neighbourhood by bulls, is accompanied by this piece. While punk rock band The Ramones used \"The Ecstasy of Gold\" as a closing theme during their live performances, Metallica uses \"The Ecstasy of Gold\" as the introductory music for its concerts since 1983. This composition is also included on Metallica's live symphonic album \"S&amp;M\" as well as the live album \"\". An instrumental metal cover by Metallica (with minimal vocals by lead singer James Hetfield) appeared on the 2007 Morricone tribute album \"We All Love Ennio Morricone\". This metal version was nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of Best Rock Instrumental Performance. In 2009, the Grammy Award-winning hip-hop artist Coolio extensively sampled the theme for his song \"Change\".\n\"Once Upon a Time in the West\" and others.\nSubsequent to the success of the \"Dollars trilogy\", Morricone also composed the scores for \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" (1968) and Leone's last credited western film \"A Fistful of Dynamite\" (1971), as well as the score for \"My Name Is Nobody\" (1973).\nMorricone's score for \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" is one of the best-selling original instrumental scores in the world today, with as many as 10\u00a0million copies sold, including one million copies in France, and more than 800,000 copies in the Netherlands.\nThe collaboration with Leone is considered one of the exemplary collaborations between a director and a composer. Morricone's last score for Leone was for his last film, the gangster drama \"Once Upon a Time in America\" (1984). Leone died on 30 April 1989 of a heart attack at the age of 60. Before his death in 1989, Leone was part-way through planning a film on the Siege of Leningrad, set during World War II. By 1989, Leone had been able to acquire 100\u00a0million in financing from independent backers for the war epic. He had convinced Morricone to compose the film score. The project was cancelled when Leone died two days before he was to officially sign on for the film.\nIn early 2003, Italian filmmaker Giuseppe Tornatore announced he would direct a film called \"Leningrad\". The film has yet to go into production and Morricone was cagey as to details on account of Tornatore's superstitious nature.\nAssociation with Sergio Corbucci and Sergio Sollima.\nTwo years after the start of his collaboration with Sergio Leone, Morricone also started to score music for another Spaghetti Western director, Sergio Corbucci. The composer wrote music for Corbucci's \"Navajo Joe\" (1966), \"The Hellbenders\" (1967), \"The Mercenary/The Professional Gun\" (1968), \"The Great Silence\" (1968), \"Compa\u00f1eros\" (1970), \"Sonny and Jed\" (1972), and \"What Am I Doing in the Middle of the Revolution?\" (1972).\nIn addition, Morricone composed music for the western films by Sergio Sollima, \"The Big Gundown\" (with Lee Van Cleef, 1966), \"Face to Face\" (1967), and \"Run, Man, Run\" (1968), as well as the 1970 crime thriller \"Violent City\" (with Charles Bronson) and the poliziottesco film \"Revolver\" (1973).\nOther westerns.\nOther relevant scores for less popular Spaghetti Westerns include \"Duello nel Texas\" (1963), \"Bullets Don't Argue\" (1964), \"A Pistol for Ringo\" (1965), \"The Return of Ringo\" (1965), \"Seven Guns for the MacGregors\" (1966), \"The Hills Run Red\" (1966), Giulio Petroni's \"Death Rides a Horse\" (1967) and \"Tepepa\" (1968), \"A Bullet for the General\" (1967), \"Guns for San Sebastian\" (with Charles Bronson and Anthony Quinn, 1968), \"A Sky Full of Stars for a Roof\" (1968), \"The Five Man Army\" (1969), Don Siegel's \"Two Mules for Sister Sara\" (1970), \"Life Is Tough, Eh Providence?\" (1972), and \"Buddy Goes West\" (1981).\nDramas and political movies.\nWith Leone's films, Ennio Morricone's name had been put firmly on the map. Most of Morricone's film scores of the 1960s were composed outside the Spaghetti Western genre, while still using Alessandroni's team. Their music included the themes for \"Il Malamondo\" (1964), \"Slalom\" (1965), and \"Listen, Let's Make Love\" (1967). In 1968, Morricone reduced his work outside the movie business and wrote scores for 20 films in the same year. The scores included psychedelic accompaniment for Mario Bava's superhero romp \"\" (1968).\nMorricone collaborated with Marco Bellocchio (\"Fists in the Pocket\", 1965), Gillo Pontecorvo (\"The Battle of Algiers\" (1966), and \"Queimada!\" (1969) with Marlon Brando), Roberto Faenza (H2S, 1968), Giuliano Montaldo (\"Sacco e Vanzetti\", 1971), Giuseppe Patroni Griffi (\"'Tis Pity She's a Whore\", 1971), Mauro Bolognini (\"Drama of the Rich\", 1974), Umberto Lenzi (\"Almost Human\", 1974), Pier Paolo Pasolini (\"Sal\u00f2, or the 120 Days of Sodom\", 1975), Bernardo Bertolucci (\"Novecento\", 1976), and Tinto Brass (\"The Key\", 1983 and \"Senso '45\", 2002).\nIn 1970, Morricone wrote the score for \"Violent City\". That same year, he received his first for the music in \"Metti una sera a cena\" (Giuseppe Patroni Griffi, 1969) and his second only a year later for \"Sacco e Vanzetti\" (Giuliano Montaldo, 1971), in which he collaborated with the legendary American folk singer and activist Joan Baez. His soundtrack for \"Sacco e Vanzetti\" contains another well-known composition by Morricone, the folk song \"Here's to You\", sung by Baez. For the writing of the lyrics, Baez was inspired by a letter from Bartolomeo Vanzetti: \"Father, yes, I am a prisoner / Fear not to relay my crime\". The song was later included in movies such as \"The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou\".\n\"Giallo\" and horror.\nMorricone's eclecticism found its way to films in the horror genre, such as the giallo thrillers of Dario Argento, from \"The Bird with the Crystal Plumage\" (1970), \"The Cat o' Nine Tails\" (1971), and \"Four Flies on Grey Velvet\" (1971) to \"The Stendhal Syndrome\" (1996) and \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1998). His other horror scores include \"Nightmare Castle\" (1965), \"A Quiet Place in the Country\" (1968), \"The Antichrist\" (1974), and \"Night Train Murders\" (1975).\nIn addition, Morricone composed music for many popular and cult Italian \"giallo\" films, such as \"Unknown Woman\" (1969), \"Forbidden Photos of a Lady Above Suspicion\" (1970), \"A Lizard in a Woman's Skin\" (1971), \"Cold Eyes of Fear\" (1971), \"The Fifth Cord\" (1971), \"Short Night of Glass Dolls\" (1971), \"The Black Belly of the Tarantula\" (1971) \"My Dear Killer\" (1972), \"What Have You Done to Solange?\" (1972), \"Who Saw Her Die?\" (1972), \"Spasmo\" (1974), and \"Autopsy\" (1975).\nIn 1977 Morricone scored John Boorman's \"\" and Alberto De Martino's apocalyptic horror film \"Holocaust 2000\", starring Kirk Douglas. In 1982 he composed the score for John Carpenter's science fiction horror movie \"The Thing\". Morricone's main theme for the film was reflected in Marco Beltrami's film's score of prequel of the 1982 film, which was released in 2011.\nHollywood career.\nThe \"Dollars Trilogy\" was not released in the United States until 1967 when United Artists, who had already enjoyed success distributing the British-produced James Bond films in the United States, decided to release Sergio Leone's Spaghetti Westerns. The American release gave Morricone an exposure in America and his film music became quite popular in the United States.\nOne of Morricone's first contributions to an American director concerned his music for the religious epic film \"\" by John Huston. According to Sergio Miceli's book \"Morricone, la musica, il cinema\", Morricone wrote about 15 or 16\u00a0minutes of music, which were recorded for a screen test and conducted by Franco Ferrara. At first Morricone's teacher Goffredo Petrassi had been engaged to write the score for the great big-budget epic, but Huston preferred another composer. RCA Records then proposed Morricone who was under contract with them, but a conflict between the film's producer Dino De Laurentiis and RCA occurred. The producer wanted to have exclusive rights for the soundtrack, while RCA still had the monopoly on Morricone at that time and did not want to release the composer. Subsequently, Morricone's work was rejected because he did not get permission from RCA to work for Dino De Laurentiis alone. The composer reused the parts of his unused score for \"The Bible: In the Beginning\" in such films as \"The Return of Ringo\" (1965) by Duccio Tessari and Alberto Negrin's \"The Secret of the Sahara\" (1987).\nMorricone never left Rome to compose his music and never learned to speak English. But given that he always worked in a wide field of composition genres, from \"absolute music\", which he always produced, to \"applied music\", working as orchestrator as well as conductor in the recording field, and then as a composer for theatre, radio, and cinema, the impression arises that he never really cared about his standing in the eyes of Hollywood.\n1970\u20131985: From \"Two Mules\" to \"Red Sonja\".\nIn 1970, Morricone composed the music for Don Siegel's \"Two Mules for Sister Sara\", an American-Mexican western film starring Shirley MacLaine and Clint Eastwood. The same year the composer also delivered the title theme \"The Men from Shiloh\" for the American Western television series The Virginian.\nIn 1974\u20131975 Morricone wrote music for \"Spazio 1999\", an Italian-produced compilation movie made to launch the Italian-British television series ', while the original episodes featured music by Barry Gray. A soundtrack album was only released on CD in 2016 and on LP in 2017. In 1975 he scored the George Kennedy revenge thriller \"The \"Human\" Factor\", which was the final film of director Edward Dmytryk. Two years later he composed the score for the sequel to William Friedkin's 1973 film \"The Exorcist\", directed by John Boorman: '. The horror film was a major disappointment at the box office. The film grossed 30,749,142 in the United States.\nIn 1978, the composer worked with Terrence Malick for \"Days of Heaven\" starring Richard Gere, for which he earned his first nomination at the Oscars for Best Original Score.\nDespite the fact that Morricone had produced some of the most popular and widely imitated film music ever written throughout the 1960s and 1970s, \"Days of Heaven\" earned him his first Oscar nomination for Best Original Score, with his score up against Jerry Goldsmith's \"The Boys from Brazil\", Dave Grusin's \"Heaven Can Wait\", Giorgio Moroder's \"Midnight Express\" (the eventual winner), and John Williams's \"Superman: The Movie\" at the Oscar ceremonies in 1979.\n1986\u20132020: From \"The Mission\" to \"The Hateful Eight\".\nAssociation with Roland Joff\u00e9\n\"The Mission\", directed by Joff\u00e9, was about a piece of history considerably more distant, as Spanish Jesuit missionaries see their work undone as a tribe of Paraguayan natives fall within a territorial dispute between the Spanish and Portuguese. At one point the score was one of the world's best-selling film scores, selling over 3\u00a0million copies worldwide.\nMorricone finally received a second Oscar nomination for \"The Mission\". Morricone's original score lost out to Herbie Hancock's coolly arranged jazz on Bertrand Tavernier's \"Round Midnight\". It was considered a surprising win and a controversial one, given that much of the music in the film was pre-existing. Morricone stated the following during a 2001 interview with \"The Guardian\": \"I definitely felt that I should have won for \"The Mission\". Especially when you consider that the Oscar winner that year was \"Round Midnight\", which was not an original score. It had a very good arrangement by Herbie Hancock, but it used existing pieces. So there could be no comparison with \"The Mission\". There was a theft!\" His score for \"The Mission\" was ranked at number 1 in a poll of the all-time greatest film scores. The top 10 list was compiled by 40 film composers such as Michael Giacchino and Carter Burwell. The score is ranked 23rd on the AFI's list of 25 greatest film scores of all time.\nAssociation with De Palma and Levinson.\nOn three occasions, Brian De Palma worked with Morricone: \"The Untouchables\" (1987), the 1989 war drama \"Casualties of War\" and the science fiction film \"Mission to Mars\" (2000). Morricone's score for \"The Untouchables\" resulted in his third nomination for Academy Award for Best Original Score.\nIn a 2001 interview with \"The Guardian\", Morricone stated that he had good experiences with De Palma: \"De Palma is delicious! He respects music, he respects composers. For \"The Untouchables\", everything I proposed to him was fine, but then he wanted a piece that I didn't like at all, and of course, we didn't have an agreement on that. It was something I didn't want to write \u2013 a triumphal piece for the police. I think I wrote nine different pieces for this in total and I said, 'Please don't choose the sixth!' because it was the worst. And guess what he chose? The sixth one. But it really suits the movie.\"\nAnother American director, Barry Levinson, commissioned the composer on two occasions. First, for the crime-drama \"Bugsy\", starring Warren Beatty, which received ten Oscar nominations, winning two for Best Art Direction-Set Decoration (Dennis Gassner, Nancy Haigh) and Best Costume Design.\n\"He doesn't have a piano in his studio, I always thought that with composers, you sit at the piano, and you try to find the melody. There's no such thing with Morricone. He hears a melody, and he writes it down. He hears the orchestration completely done\", said Levinson in an interview.\nOther notable Hollywood scores.\nDuring his career in Hollywood, Morricone was approached for numerous other projects, including the Gregory Nava drama \"A Time of Destiny\" (1988), \"Frantic\" by Polish-French director Roman Polanski (1988, starring Harrison Ford), Franco Zeffirelli's 1990 drama film \"Hamlet\" (starring Mel Gibson and Glenn Close), the neo-noir crime film \"State of Grace\" by Phil Joanou (1990, starring Sean Penn and Ed Harris), \"Rampage\" (1992) by William Friedkin, and the romantic drama \"Love Affair\" (1994) by Warren Beatty.\nAssociation with Quentin Tarantino.\nIn 2009, Tarantino originally wanted Morricone to compose the film score for \"Inglourious Basterds\". Morricone was unable to, because the film's sped-up production schedule conflicted with his scoring of Giuseppe Tornatore's \"Baar\u00eca\". However, Tarantino did use eight tracks composed by Morricone in the film, with four of them included on the soundtrack. The tracks came originally from Morricone's scores for \"The Big Gundown\" (1966), \"Revolver\" (1973) and \"Allonsanf\u00e0n\" (1974).\nIn 2012, Morricone composed the song \"Ancora Qui\" with lyrics by Italian singer Elisa for Tarantino's \"Django Unchained\", a track that appeared together with three existing music tracks composed by Morricone on the soundtrack. \"Ancora Qui\" was one of the contenders for an Academy Award nomination in the Best Original Song category, but eventually the song was not nominated. On 4 January 2013 Morricone presented Tarantino with a Life Achievement Award at a special ceremony being cast as a continuation of the International Rome Film Festival. In 2014, Morricone was misquoted as claiming that he would \"never work\" with Tarantino again, and later agreed to write an original film score for Tarantino's \"The Hateful Eight\", which won him an Academy Award in 2016 in the Best Original Score category. His nomination for this film marked him at that time as the second oldest nominee in Academy history, behind Gloria Stuart. Morricone's win marked his first competitive Oscar, and at the age of 87, he became the oldest person at the time to win a competitive Oscar.\nComposer for Giuseppe Tornatore.\nIn 1988, Morricone started an ongoing and very successful collaboration with Italian director Giuseppe Tornatore. His first score for Tornatore was for the drama film \"Cinema Paradiso\". The international version of the film won the Special Jury Prize at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival and the 1989 Best Foreign Language Film Oscar. Morricone received a BAFTA award with his son Andrea, and a David di Donatello for his score. In 2002, the director's cut 173-minute version was released (known in the US as \"Cinema Paradiso: The New Version\").\nAfter the success of \"Cinema Paradiso\", the composer wrote the music for all subsequent films by Tornatore: the drama film \"Everybody's Fine\" (Stanno Tutti Bene, 1990), \"A Pure Formality\" (1994) starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu and Roman Polanski, \"The Star Maker\" (1995), \"The Legend of 1900\" (1998) starring Tim Roth, the 2000 romantic drama \"Mal\u00e8na\" (which featured Monica Bellucci) and the psychological thriller mystery film \"La sconosciuta\" (2006). Morricone also composed the scores for \"Baar\u00eca\" (2009), \"The Best Offer\" (2013) starring Geoffrey Rush, Jim Sturgess and Donald Sutherland and the romantic drama \"The Correspondence\" (2015)\nThe composer won several music awards for his scores in Tornatore's movies. Morricone received a fifth Academy Award nomination and a Golden Globe nomination for \"Mal\u00e8na\". For \"Legend of 1900\", he won a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score. In September 2021 Tornatore presented out of competition at the 78th Venice International Film Festival a documentary film about Morricone, \"Ennio\".\nTelevision series and last works.\nMorricone wrote the score for the Mafia television series \"La piovra\" seasons 2 to 10 from 1985 to 2001, including the themes \"Droga e sangue\" (\"Drugs and Blood\"), \"La Morale\", and \"L'Immorale\". Morricone worked as the conductor of seasons 3 to 5 of the series. He also worked as the music supervisor for the television project \"La bibbia\" (\"The Bible\").\nIn the late 1990s, he collaborated with his son Andrea on the \"Ultimo\" crime dramas, resulting in \"Ultimo\" (1998), \"Ultimo 2 \u2013 La sfida\" (1999), \"Ultimo 3 \u2013 L'infiltrato\" (2004) and \"Ultimo 4 \u2013 L'occhio del falco\" (2013). For \"Canone inverso\" (2000) based on the music-themed novel of the same name by the Paolo Maurensig, directed by Ricky Tognazzi and starring Hans Matheson, Morricone won Best Score awards in the David di Donatello Awards and Silver Ribbons.\nIn the 2000s, Morricone continued to compose music for successful television series such as \"Il Cuore nel Pozzo\" (2005), \"\" (2005), \"La provinciale\" (2006), \"Giovanni Falcone\" (2007), \"Pane e libert\u00e0\" (2009) and \"Come Un Delfino 1\u20132\" (2011\u20132013).\nMorricone provided the string arrangements on Morrissey's \"Dear God Please Help Me\" from the album \"Ringleader of the Tormentors\" in 2006.\nIn 2008, the composer recorded music for a Lancia commercial, featuring Richard Gere and directed by Harald Zwart (known for directing \"The Pink Panther 2\").\nIn spring and summer 2010, Morricone worked with Hayley Westenra for a collaboration on her album \"Paradiso\". The album features new songs written by Morricone, as well as some of his best-known film compositions of the last 50 years. Westenra recorded the album with Morricone's orchestra in Rome during the summer of 2010.\nSince 1995, he composed the music for several advertising campaigns of Dolce &amp; Gabbana. The commercials were directed by Giuseppe Tornatore.\nIn 2013, Morricone collaborated with Italian singer-songwriter Laura Pausini on a new version of her hit single \"La solitudine\" for her 20 years anniversary greatest hits album \"20 \u2013 The Greatest Hits\".\nMorricone composed the music for \"The Best Offer\" (2013) by Giuseppe Tornatore.\nHe wrote the score for Christian Carion's \"En mai, fais ce qu'il te plait\" (2015) and the most recent movie by Tornatore: \"The Correspondence\" (2016), featuring Jeremy Irons and Olga Kurylenko. In July 2015, Quentin Tarantino announced after the screening of footage of his movie \"The Hateful Eight\" at San Diego Comic-Con that Morricone would score the film, the first Western that Morricone scored since 1981. The score was critically acclaimed and won several awards including the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score and the Academy Award for Best Original Score.\nIn June 2015, Morricone premiered his \"Missa Papae Francisci (Mass for Pope Francis)\" at Rome's Chiesa del Ges\u00f9 with the Orchestra Roma Sinfonietta and choruses from the Accademia Santa Cecilia and the Rome Opera Theater.\nLive performances.\nBefore receiving his diplomas in trumpet, composition and instrumentation from the conservatory, Morricone was already active as a trumpet player, often performing in an orchestra that specialised in music written for films. After completing his education at Saint Cecilia, the composer honed his orchestration skills as an arranger for Italian radio and television. In order to support himself, he moved to RCA in the early sixties and entered the front ranks of the Italian recording industry. Since 1964, Morricone was also a founding member of the Rome-based avant-garde ensemble Gruppo di Improvvisazione Nuova Consonanza. During the existence of the group (until 1978), Morricone performed several times with the group as trumpet player.\nTo ready his music for live performance, he joined smaller pieces of music together into longer suites. Rather than single pieces, which would require the audience to applaud every few minutes, Morricone thought the best idea was to create a series of suites lasting from 15 to 20 minutes, which form a sort of symphony in various movements \u2013 alternating successful pieces with personal favourites. In concert, Morricone normally had 180 to 200 musicians and vocalists under his baton, performing multiple genre-crossing collections of music. Rock, symphonic and traditional indigenous instruments share the stage.\nOn 20 September 1984 Morricone conducted the Orchestre national des Pays de la Loire at \"Cin\u00e9symphonie '84\" (\"Premi\u00e8re nuit de la musique de film/First night of film music\") in the French concert hall Salle Pleyel in Paris. He performed some of his best-known compositions such as \"Metti una sera a cena\", \"Novecento\" and \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\". Michel Legrand and Georges Delerue performed on the same evening.\nOn 15 October 1987 Morricone gave a concert in front of 12,000 people in the Sportpaleis in Antwerp, Belgium, with the Dutch Metropole Orchestra and the Italian operatic soprano Alide Maria Salvetta. A live-album with a recording of this concert was released in the same year.\nOn 9 June 2000 Morricone went to the Flanders International Film Festival Ghent to conduct his music together with the National Orchestra of Belgium. During the concert's first part, the screening of \"The Life and Death of King Richard III\" (1912) was accompanied with live music by Morricone. It was the very first time that the score was performed live in Europe. The second part of the evening consisted of an anthology of the composer's work. The event took place on the eve of Euro 2000, the European Football Championship in Belgium and the Netherlands.\nMorricone performed over 250 concerts as of 2001. The composer started a world tour in 2001, the latter part sponsored by Giorgio Armani, with the Orchestra Roma Sinfonietta, touring London (Barbican 2001; 75th birthday \"Concerto\", Royal Albert Hall 2003 with singer Dulce Pontes), Paris, Verona, and Tokyo. Morricone performed his classic film scores at the Gasteig in Munich in 2004.\nHe made his North American concert debut on 3 February 2007 at Radio City Music Hall in New York City. The previous evening, Morricone had already presented at the United Nations a concert comprising some of his film themes, as well as the cantata \"Voci dal silenzio\" to welcome the new Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon. A \"Los Angeles Times\" review bemoaned the poor acoustics and opined of Morricone: \"His stick technique is adequate, but his charisma as a conductor is zero.\"\nOn 26 February 2012 Morricone made his Australian concert debut when he conducted the Western Australian Youth Orchestra together with a 100 voice chorus (made up primarily of West Australian Symphony Orchestra chorus members) at the Burswood Theatre (part of Crown Perth in Perth. On 2 March 2012 he conducted the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra at Elder Park, Adelaide, as part of the Adelaide Festival of Arts.\nOn 22 December 2012 Morricone conducted the 85-piece Belgian orchestra \"Orkest der Lage Landen\" and a 100-piece choir during a two-hour concert in the Sportpaleis in Antwerp.\nIn November 2013 Morricone began a world tour to coincide with the 50th anniversary of his film music career and performed in locations such as the Crocus City Hall in Moscow, Santiago, Chile, Berlin, Germany (O2 World, Germany), Budapest, Hungary, and Vienna (Stadthalle). Back in June 2014, Morricone had to cancel a US tour in New York (Barclays Center) and Los Angeles (Nokia Theatre LA Live) due to a back procedure on 20 February. Morricone postponed the rest of his world tour.\nIn November 2014 Morricone stated that he would resume his European tour starting from February 2015 along with Dulce Pontes.\nPersonal life.\nOn 13 October 1956, Morricone married Maria Travia (born 31 December 1932), whom he had met in 1950. Travia wrote lyrics to complement her husband's pieces. Her works include the Latin texts for \"The Mission\". Together, they had four children: Marco (b. 1957), Alessandra (b. 1961), conductor and film composer Andrea (b. 1964) and Giovanni (b. 1966), a filmmaker who lives in New York City. They remained married for 63 years until his death.\nMorricone lived in Italy his entire life and never desired to live in Hollywood. He described himself as a Christian leftist, stating that he voted for the Christian Democracy (DC) for more than 40 years and then, after its dissolution in 1994, he approached the centre-left coalition, becoming also a founding member of the Democratic Party (PD) in 2007.\nMorricone loved chess, having learned the game when he was 11. Before his musical career took off, he played in club tournaments in Rome in the mid-1950s. His first official tournament was in 1964, where he won a prize in the third category for amateurs. He was even coached by 12-time Italian champion IM Stefano Tatai for a while. Soon he got too busy for chess, but he would always keep a keen interest in the game and estimated his peak Elo rating to be nearly 1700. Over the years, Morricone played chess with many big names including GMs Garry Kasparov, Anatoly Karpov, Judit Polgar, and Peter Leko. He once held GM Boris Spassky to a draw in a simultaneous competition with 27 players, where Morricone was the last one standing.\nOn 6 July 2020, Morricone died at the Universit\u00e0 Campus Bio-Medico in Rome, aged 91, as a result of injuries sustained to his femur during a fall. Following a private funeral in the hospital's chapel, he was entombed in Cimitero Laurentino.\nInfluence.\nEnnio Morricone influenced many artists from other styles and genres, including Danger Mouse, Dire Straits, Muse, Metallica, Radiohead and Hans Zimmer.\nDiscography.\nMorricone sold well over 70\u00a0million records worldwide during his career that spanned over seven decades, including 6.5\u00a0million albums and singles in France, over three million in the United States and more than two million albums in South Korea. In 1971, the composer received his first golden record (disco d'oro) for the sale of 1,000,000 records in Italy and a \"Targa d'Oro\" () for the worldwide sales of 22\u00a0million.\nSelected long-time collaborations with directors\nAwards and honors.\nMorricone received his first Academy Award nomination in 1979 for the score to \"Days of Heaven\" (Terrence Malick, 1978). He received his second Oscar nomination for \"The Mission\". He also received Oscar nominations for his scores to \"The Untouchables\" (1987), \"Bugsy\" (1991), \"Mal\u00e8na\" (2000), and \"The Hateful Eight\" (2016). In February 2016, Morricone won his first competitive Academy Award for his score to \"The Hateful Eight\". Morricone and Alex North are the only composers to receive the Academy Honorary Award since its introduction in 1928. He received the award in February 2007, \"for his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music.\"\nIn 2005, four film scores by Ennio Morricone were nominated by the American Film Institute for an honoured place in the AFI's Top 25 of Best American Film Scores of All Time. His score for \"The Mission\" was ranked 23rd in the Top 25 list. Morricone was nominated seven times for a Grammy Award. In 2009 The Recording Academy inducted his score for \"The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly\" (1966) into the Grammy Hall of Fame. In 2010 Ennio Morricone and Icelandic singer Bj\u00f6rk won the Polar Music Prize. The Polar Music Prize is Sweden's biggest music award and is typically shared by a pop artist and a classical musician. It was founded by Stig Anderson, manager of Swedish pop group ABBA, in 1989. A \"Variety\" poll of 40 top current film composers selected \"The Mission\" as the greatest film score of all time.\nIn 1971, he received a \"Targa d'Oro\" for worldwide sales of 22\u00a0million, and by 2016 Morricone had sold more than 70\u00a0million records worldwide. In 2007, he received the Academy Honorary Award \"for his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music\". He was nominated for a further six Oscars, and in 2016, received his only competitive Academy Award for his score to Quentin Tarantino's film \"The Hateful Eight\", at the time becoming the oldest person ever to win a competitive Oscar. His other achievements include three Grammy Awards, three Golden Globes, six BAFTAs, ten David di Donatello, eleven , two European Film Awards, the Golden Lion Honorary Award, and the Polar Music Prize in 2010. The soundtrack for \"The Mission\" (1986) was certified gold in the United States. The album \"Yo-Yo Ma Plays Ennio Morricone\" stayed for 105 weeks on the \"Billboard\" Top Classical Albums."}
{"id": "10278", "revid": "45801262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10278", "title": "List of explosives used during World War II", "text": "Almost all the common explosives listed here were mixtures of several common components:\nThis is only a partial list; there were many others. Many of these compositions are now obsolete and only encountered in legacy munitions and unexploded ordnance.\nTwo nuclear explosives, containing mixtures of uranium and plutonium, respectively, were also used at the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"}
{"id": "10279", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10279", "title": "Endlosung", "text": ""}
{"id": "10280", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10280", "title": "Euclids algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "10283", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10283", "title": "Erlang (unit)", "text": "The erlang (symbol E) is a dimensionless unit that is used in telephony as a measure of offered load or carried load on service-providing elements such as telephone circuits or telephone switching equipment. A single cord circuit has the capacity to be used for 60 minutes in one hour. Full utilization of that capacity, 60 minutes of traffic, constitutes 1 erlang.\nCarried traffic in erlangs is the average number of concurrent calls measured over a given period (often one hour), while offered traffic is the traffic that would be carried if all call-attempts succeeded. How much offered traffic is carried in practice will depend on what happens to unanswered calls when all servers are busy.\nThe CCITT named the international unit of telephone traffic the erlang in 1946 in honor of Agner Krarup Erlang. In Erlang's analysis of efficient telephone line usage he derived the formulae for two important cases, Erlang-B and Erlang-C, which became foundational results in teletraffic engineering and queueing theory. His results, which are still used today, relate quality of service to the number of available servers. Both formulae take offered load as one of their main inputs (in erlangs), which is often expressed as call arrival rate times average call length.\nA distinguishing assumption behind the Erlang B formula is that there is no queue, so that if all service elements are already in use then a newly arriving call will be blocked and subsequently lost. The formula gives the probability of this occurring. In contrast, the Erlang C formula provides for the possibility of an unlimited queue and it gives the probability that a new call will need to wait in the queue due to all servers being in use. Erlang's formulae apply quite widely, but they may fail when congestion is especially high causing unsuccessful traffic to repeatedly retry. One way of accounting for retries when no queue is available is the Extended Erlang B method.\nTraffic measurements of a telephone circuit.\nWhen used to represent carried traffic, a value (which can be a non-integer such as 43.5) followed by \u201cerlangs\u201d represents the average number of concurrent calls carried by the circuits (or other service-providing elements), where that average is calculated over some reasonable period of time. The period over which the average is calculated is often one hour, but shorter periods (e.g., 15 minutes) may be used where it is known that there are short spurts of demand and a traffic measurement is desired that does not mask these spurts.\nOne erlang of carried traffic refers to a single resource being in continuous use, or two channels each being in use fifty percent of the time, and so on. For example, if an office has two telephone operators who are both busy all the time, that would represent two erlangs (2 E) of traffic; or a radio channel that is occupied continuously during the period of interest (e.g. one hour) is said to have a load of 1 erlang.\nWhen used to describe offered traffic, a value followed by \u201cerlangs\u201d represents the average number of concurrent calls that would have been carried if there were an unlimited number of circuits (that is, if the call-attempts that were made when all circuits were in use had not been rejected). The relationship between offered traffic and carried traffic depends on the design of the system and user behavior. Three common models are (a) callers whose call-attempts are rejected go away and never come back, (b) callers whose call-attempts are rejected try again within a fairly short space of time, and (c) the system allows users to wait in queue until a circuit becomes available.\nA third measurement of traffic is instantaneous traffic, expressed as a certain number of erlangs, meaning the exact number of calls taking place at a point in time. In this case the number is a non-negative integer. Traffic-level-recording devices, such as moving-pen recorders, plot instantaneous traffic.\nErlang's analysis.\nThe concepts and mathematics introduced by Agner Krarup Erlang have broad applicability beyond telephony. They apply wherever users arrive more or less at random to receive exclusive service from any one of a group of service-providing elements without prior reservation, for example, where the service-providing elements are ticket-sales windows, toilets on an airplane, or motel rooms. (Erlang's models do not apply where the service-providing elements are shared between several concurrent users or different amounts of service are consumed by different users, for instance, on circuits carrying data traffic.)\nThe goal of Erlang's traffic theory is to determine exactly how many service-providing elements should be provided in order to satisfy users, without wasteful over-provisioning. To do this, a target is set for the grade of service (GoS) or quality of service (QoS). For example, in a system where there is no queuing, the GoS may be that no more than 1 call in 100 is blocked (i.e., rejected) due to all circuits being in use (a GoS of 0.01), which becomes the target probability of call blocking, \"P\"b, when using the Erlang B formula.\nThere are several resulting formulae, including Erlang B, Erlang C and the related Engset formula, based on different models of user behavior and system operation. These may each be derived by means of a special case of continuous-time Markov processes known as a birth\u2013death process. The more recent Extended Erlang B method provides a further traffic solution that draws on Erlang's results.\nCalculating offered traffic.\nOffered traffic (in erlangs) is related to the call arrival rate, \"\u03bb\", and the average call-holding time (the average time of a phone call), \"h\", by:\nprovided that \"h\" and \"\u03bb\" are expressed using the same units of time (seconds and calls per second, or minutes and calls per minute).\nThe practical measurement of traffic is typically based on continuous observations over several days or weeks, during which the instantaneous traffic is recorded at regular, short intervals (such as every few seconds). These measurements are then used to calculate a single result, most commonly the busy-hour traffic (in erlangs). This is the average number of concurrent calls during a given one-hour period of the day, where that period is selected to give the highest result. (This result is called the time-consistent busy-hour traffic). An alternative is to calculate a busy-hour traffic value separately for each day (which may correspond to slightly different times each day) and take the average of these values. This generally gives a slightly higher value than the time-consistent busy-hour value.\nWhere the existing busy-hour carried traffic, \"E\"c, is measured on an already overloaded system, with a significant level of blocking, it is necessary to take account of the blocked calls in estimating the busy-hour offered traffic \"E\"o (which is the traffic value to be used in the Erlang formulae). The offered traffic can be estimated by . For this purpose, where the system includes a means of counting blocked calls and successful calls, \"P\"b can be estimated directly from the proportion of calls that are blocked. Failing that, \"P\"b can be estimated by using \"E\"c in place of \"E\"o in the Erlang formula and the resulting estimate of \"P\"b can then be used in to provide a first estimate of \"E\"o.\nAnother method of estimating \"E\"o in an overloaded system is to measure the busy-hour call arrival rate, \"\u03bb\" (counting successful calls and blocked calls), and the average call-holding time (for successful calls), \"h\", and then estimate \"E\"o using the formula .\nFor a situation where the traffic to be handled is completely new traffic, the only choice is to try to model expected user behavior. For example, one could estimate active user population, \"N\", expected level of use, \"U\" (number of calls/transactions per user per day), busy-hour concentration factor, \"C\" (proportion of daily activity that will fall in the busy hour), and average holding time/service time, \"h\" (expressed in minutes). A projection of busy-hour offered traffic would then be . (The division by 60 translates the busy-hour call/transaction arrival rate into a per-minute value, to match the units in which \"h\" is expressed.)\nErlang B formula.\nThe Erlang B formula (or Erlang-B with a hyphen), also known as the Erlang loss formula, is a formula for the blocking probability that describes the probability of call losses for a group of identical parallel resources (telephone lines, circuits, traffic channels, or equivalent), sometimes referred to as an M/M/c/c queue. It is, for example, used to dimension a telephone network's links. The formula was derived by Agner Krarup Erlang and is not limited to telephone networks, since it describes a probability in a queuing system (albeit a special case with a number of servers but no queueing space for incoming calls to wait for a free server). Hence, the formula is also used in certain inventory systems with lost sales.\nThe formula applies under the condition that an unsuccessful call, because the line is busy, is not queued or retried, but instead really vanishes forever. It is assumed that call attempts arrive following a Poisson process, so call arrival instants are independent. Further, it is assumed that the message lengths (holding times) are exponentially distributed (Markovian system), although the formula turns out to apply under general holding time distributions.\nThe Erlang B formula assumes an infinite population of sources (such as telephone subscribers), which jointly offer traffic to \"N\" servers (such as telephone lines). The rate expressing the frequency at which new calls arrive, \u03bb, (birth rate, traffic intensity, etc.) is constant, and does \"not\" depend on the number of active sources. The total number of sources is assumed to be infinite.\nThe Erlang B formula calculates the blocking probability of a buffer-less loss system, where a request that is not served immediately is aborted, causing that no requests become queued. Blocking occurs when a new request arrives at a time where all available servers are currently busy. The formula also assumes that blocked traffic is cleared and does not return.\nThe formula provides the GoS (grade of service) which is the probability \"P\"b that a new call arriving to the resources group is rejected because all resources (servers, lines, circuits) are busy: where \"E\" is the total offered traffic in erlang, offered to \"m\" identical parallel resources (servers, communication channels, traffic lanes).\nwhere:\nNote: The \"erlang\" is a dimensionless load unit calculated as the mean arrival rate, \"\u03bb\", multiplied by the mean call holding time, \"h\".\nSee Little's law to prove that the erlang unit has to be dimensionless for Little's Law to be dimensionally sane.\nThis may be expressed recursively as follows, in a form that is used to simplify the calculation of tables of the Erlang B formula:\nTypically, instead of \"B\"(\"E\", \"m\") the inverse 1/\"B\"(\"E\", \"m\") is calculated in numerical computation in order to ensure numerical stability:\nFunction ErlangB (E As Double, m As Integer) As Double\n Dim InvB As Double\n Dim j As Integer\n InvB = 1.0\n For j = 1 To m\n InvB = 1.0 + InvB * j / E\n Next j\n ErlangB = 1.0 / InvB\nEnd Function\nor a Python version\ndef erlang_b(E, m: int) -&gt; float:\n \"\"\"Calculate the probability of call losses.\"\"\"\n inv_b = 1.0\n for j in range(1, m + 1):\n inv_b = 1.0 + inv_b * j / E\n return 1.0 / inv_b\nThe Erlang B formula is decreasing and convex in \"m\".\nIt requires that call arrivals can be modeled by a Poisson process, which is not always a good match, but is valid for any statistical distribution of call holding times with a finite mean.\nIt applies to traffic transmission systems that do not buffer traffic.\nMore modern examples compared to POTS where Erlang B is still applicable, are optical burst switching (OBS) and several current approaches to optical packet switching (OPS).\nErlang B was developed as a trunk sizing tool for telephone networks with holding times in the minutes range, but being a mathematical equation it applies on any time-scale.\nExtended Erlang B.\nExtended Erlang B differs from the classic Erlang-B assumptions by allowing for a proportion of blocked callers to try again, causing an increase in offered traffic from the initial baseline level. It is an iterative calculation rather than a formula and adds an extra parameter, the recall factor formula_7, which defines the recall attempts.\nThe steps in the process are as follows. It starts at iteration formula_8 with a known initial baseline level of traffic formula_9, which is successively adjusted to calculate a sequence of new offered traffic values formula_10, each of which accounts for the recalls arising from the previously calculated offered traffic formula_11.\nOnce a satisfactory value of formula_21 has been found, the blocking probability formula_23 and the recall factor can be used to calculate the probability that all of a caller's attempts are lost, not just their first call but also any subsequent retries.\nErlang C formula.\nThe Erlang C formula expresses the probability that an arriving customer will need to queue (as opposed to immediately being served). Just as the Erlang B formula, Erlang C assumes an infinite population of sources, which jointly offer traffic of formula_21 erlangs to formula_25 servers. However, if all the servers are busy when a request arrives from a source, the request is queued. An unlimited number of requests may be held in the queue in this way simultaneously. This formula calculates the probability of queuing offered traffic, assuming that blocked calls stay in the system until they can be handled. This formula is used to determine the number of agents or customer service representatives needed to staff a call centre, for a specified desired probability of queuing. However, the Erlang C formula assumes that callers never hang up while in queue, which makes the formula predict that more agents should be used than are really needed to maintain a desired service level.\nwhere:\nIt is assumed that the call arrivals can be modeled by a Poisson process and that call holding times are described by an exponential distribution, therefore the Erlang C formula follows from the assumptions of the M/M/c queue model.\nLimitations of the Erlang formula.\nWhen Erlang developed the Erlang-B and Erlang-C traffic equations, they were developed on a set of assumptions. These assumptions are accurate under most conditions; however in the event of extremely high traffic congestion, Erlang's equations fail to accurately predict the correct number of circuits required because of re-entrant traffic. This is termed a high-loss system, where congestion breeds further congestion at peak times. In such cases, it is first necessary for many additional circuits to be made available so that the high loss can be alleviated. Once this action has been taken, congestion will return to reasonable levels and Erlang's equations can then be used to determine how exactly many circuits are really required.\nAn example of an instance which would cause such a High Loss System to develop would be if a TV-based advertisement were to announce a particular telephone number to call at a specific time. In this case, a large number of people would simultaneously phone the number provided. If the service provider had not catered for this sudden peak demand, extreme traffic congestion will develop and Erlang's equations cannot be used."}
{"id": "10285", "revid": "11745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10285", "title": "Eligible receiver", "text": "In gridiron football, not all players on offense are entitled to receive a forward pass: only an eligible pass receiver may legally catch a forward pass, and only an eligible receiver may advance beyond the neutral zone if a forward pass crosses into the neutral zone. If the pass is received by a non-eligible receiver, it is \"illegal touching\" (resulting in a penalty of five yards and loss of down). If an ineligible receiver is beyond the neutral zone when a forward pass crossing the neutral zone is thrown, a foul of \"ineligible receiver downfield\" (resulting in a penalty of five yards, but no loss of down) is called. Each league has slightly different rules regarding who is considered an eligible receiver.\nCollege football.\nThe NCAA rulebook defines eligible receivers for college football in Rule 7, Section 3, Article 3. The determining factors are the player's position on the field at the snap and their jersey number. Specifically, any players on offense wearing numbers between 50 and 79 are always ineligible. All defensive players are eligible receivers and offensive players who are not wearing an ineligible number are eligible receivers if they meet one of the following three criteria:\nPlayers may only wear eligible numbers at an ineligible position when it is obvious that a punt or field goal is to be attempted.\nIf a player is to change between eligible and ineligible positions, they must physically change jersey numbers to reflect the position.\nA receiver loses his eligibility by leaving the field of play unless he was forced out by a defensive player and immediately attempts to get back inbounds (Rule 7\u20133\u20134). All players on the field become eligible as soon as the ball is touched by a defensive player or an official during play (Rule 7\u20133\u20135).\nProfessional football.\nIn both American and Canadian professional football, every player on the defensive team is considered eligible. The offensive team must have at least seven players lined up on the line of scrimmage. Of the players on the line of scrimmage, only the two players on the ends of the line of scrimmage are eligible receivers. The remaining players are in the backfield (four in American football, five in Canadian football), including the quarterback. These backfield players are also eligible receivers. In the National Football League (NFL), a quarterback who takes his stance behind center as a T-formation quarterback is not eligible unless, before the ball is snapped, he legally moves to a position at least one yard behind the line of scrimmage or on the end of the line, and is stationary in that position for at least one second before the snap, but is nonetheless not counted toward the seven men required on the line of scrimmage.\nIf, for example, eight men line up on the line of scrimmage, the team loses an eligible receiver. This can often happen when a flanker or slot receiver, who is supposed to line up behind the line of scrimmage, instead lines up on the line of scrimmage between the offensive line and a split end. In most cases where a pass is caught by an ineligible receiver, it is usually because the quarterback was under pressure and threw it to an offensive lineman out of desperation.\nEligible receivers must wear certain uniform numbers, so that the officials can more easily distinguish between eligible and ineligible receivers. In the NFL, running backs, wide receivers, and tight ends must wear numbers 0 to 49 and 80 to 89. Numbers 50 to 79 are reserved for linemen and are always ineligible on offense unless they report as eligible. In the CFL ineligible receivers must wear numbers 50 to 69; all other numbers (including 0 and 00) may be worn by eligible receivers. A player who is not wearing a number that corresponds to an eligible receiver is ineligible even if he lines up in an eligible position. However, a player who reports to the referee that he intends to be eligible in the following play is allowed to line up and act as an eligible receiver. An example of this was a 1985 NFL game in which William Perry, wearing number 72 and normally a defensive lineman, was made an eligible receiver on an offensive play, and successfully caught a touchdown pass attempt. A more recent example, and more commonly used, has been former New England Patriots linebacker Mike Vrabel lining up as a tight end in goal line situations. In the 2018 season, George Fant has also lined up in the tight end position for the Seattle Seahawks due to injuries to the starting tight ends Ed Dickson and Will Dissly. In the 2019 season the Atlanta Falcons declared right tackle Ty Sambrailo eligible on many plays before throwing the ball to him for a 35-yard touchdown against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.\nBefore the snap of the ball, in the American game, backfield players may only move parallel to the line of scrimmage, only one back may be in motion at any given time, and if forward motion has occurred, the back must be still for a full second before the snap. The receiver may be in motion laterally or away from the line of scrimmage at the snap. A breach of this rule results in a penalty for illegal procedure (five yards). However, in the Canadian game, eligible receivers may move in any direction before the snap, any number may be in motion at any one time, and there is no need to be motionless before the snap.\nThe rules on eligible receivers only apply to forward passes. Any player may legally catch a backwards or lateral pass.\nIn the American game, once the play has started, eligible receivers can become ineligible depending on how the play develops. Any eligible receiver that goes out of bounds is no longer an eligible receiver and cannot receive a forward pass, unless that player re-establishes by taking three steps in bounds. Also, if a pass is touched by any defensive player or eligible offensive receiver (tipped by a defensive lineman, slips through a receiver's hands, etc.), every offensive player immediately becomes eligible. In the CFL all players become eligible receivers if a pass is touched by a member of the defensive team. A proposed rule change in the XFL would make all players behind the line of scrimmage eligible receivers, regardless of position or number.\nHigh school.\nIn high school football, the rules of eligibility are roughly the same as in the college game. However, as of February 2009, at least five players must wear numbers between 50 and 79 on first, second, or third down, which by rule would make them ineligible receivers. This was because of a change in the definition of a scrimmage-kick formation made by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS). The change was intended to close a loophole in the rules which allowed teams to run an A-11 offense, in which a team would be exempted from eligibility numbering restrictions if the player receiving the snap was at least seven yards behind the line of scrimmage.\nIn 2019, the NFHS changed the rules slightly, instead measuring the number of players behind the line of scrimmage, limiting that number to four. The minimum number of players on the offensive line was reduced from seven to five."}
{"id": "10286", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10286", "title": "Enver Hoxha", "text": "Enver Halil Hoxha (; ; 16 October 190811 April 1985) was an Albanian communist revolutionary and politician who was the leader of Albania from 1944 until his death in 1985. He was the First Secretary of the Party of Labour of Albania from 1941 until his death, a member of its Politburo, chairman of the Democratic Front of Albania, and commander-in-chief of the Albanian People's Army. He was the twenty-second prime minister of Albania from 1944 to 1954 and at various times was both foreign minister and defence minister of the country.\nHoxha was born in Gjirokast\u00ebr near Greece in 1908. He was a grammar school teacher in 1936. After the Italian invasion of Albania, he joined the Party of Labour of Albania at its creation in 1941 in the Soviet Union. He was elected First Secretary in March 1943 at the age of 34. Less than two years after the liberation of the country, the monarchy of King Zog I was formally abolished, and Hoxha became the country's \"de facto\" head of state.\nAdopting Stalinism, Hoxha converted Albania into a one-party communist state. As a Stalinist, he implemented state atheism and ordered anti-religious persecution of Muslims and Christians. Implementing his radical program, Hoxha used totalitarian methods of governance. His government outlawed traveling abroad and it also outlawed private proprietorship. The government imprisoned, executed, or exiled thousands of landowners, rural clan leaders, peasants who resisted collectivization, and allegedly disloyal party officials. Hoxha was succeeded by Ramiz Alia, who was in charge during the fall of communism in Albania.\nHoxha's government was characterised by his proclaimed firm adherence to anti-revisionist Marxism\u2013Leninism from the mid/late-1960s onwards. After his break with Maoism in the 1976\u20131978 period, numerous Maoist parties around the world declared themselves Hoxhaist. The International Conference of Marxist\u2013Leninist Parties and Organisations (Unity &amp; Struggle) is the best-known association of these parties.\nEarly life.\nHoxha was born in Gjirokast\u00ebr in southern Albania (then a part of the Ottoman Empire) in October 1908, the son of Halil Hoxha, a Muslim cloth merchant who travelled widely across Europe and the United States, and Gjylihan Hoxha (\"n\u00e9e\" \u00c7u\u00e7i). Enver was named after Enver Pasha, a leading figure of the Young Turk Revolution. The Hoxha family was attached to the Bektashi Order.\nAfter elementary school, Enver followed his studies in the city senior high school \"Liria\". He started his studies at the Gjirokast\u00ebr Lyceum in 1923. After the lyceum was closed, due to intervention of Ekrem Libohova, Enver Hoxha was awarded a state scholarship for the continuation of his studies in Kor\u00e7\u00eb, at the French language Albanian National Lyceum until 1930.\nIn 1930, Hoxha went to study at the University of Montpellier in Montpellier, France on a state scholarship for the faculty of natural science, but lost the scholarship for neglecting his studies. He later went to Paris, where he presented himself to anti-Zogist immigrants as the brother-in-law of Bahri Omari. From 1935 to 1936, he was employed as a secretary at the Albanian consulate in Brussels. After returning to Albania, he worked as a contract teacher in the Gymnasium of Tirana (a school). Hoxha taught French and morals in the Kor\u00e7a Liceum from 1937 to 1939 and also was the caretaker of the school library.\nOn 7 April 1939, the Albanian Kingdom was invaded by fascist Italy. The Italians established a puppet government, called the Kingdom of Albania, under Shefqet V\u00ebrlaci. At the end of 1939, Hoxha was transferred to the Gjirokastra Gymnasium, but he soon returned to Tirana. He was helped by his best friend, Esat Dishnica, who introduced Hoxha to Dishnica's cousin Ibrahim Bi\u00e7ak\u00e7iu. Hoxha began to sleep in Bi\u00e7ak\u00e7iu's tobacco factory \"Flora\", and after a while Dishnica opened a shop with the same name, where Hoxha began working. He was a sympathiser of Kor\u00e7a's Communist Group.\nWorld War II.\nOn 8 November 1941, the Communist Party of Albania (later renamed the Party of Labour of Albania in 1948) was founded. Hoxha was chosen from the \"Kor\u00e7a group\" as a Muslim representative by the two Yugoslav envoys as one of the seven members of the provisional Central Committee. The First Consultative Meeting of Activists of the Communist Party of Albania was held in Tirana from 8 to 11 April 1942, with Hoxha himself delivering the main report on 8 April 1942.\nIn July 1942, Hoxha wrote \"Call to the Albanian Peasantry\", issued in the name of the Communist Party of Albania. The call sought to enlist support in Albania for the war against the fascists. The peasants were encouraged to hoard their grain and refuse to pay taxes or livestock levies brought by the government. After the September 1942 Conference at Pez\u00eb, the National Liberation Movement was founded with the purpose of uniting the anti-fascist Albanians, regardless of ideology or class.\nBy March 1943, the first National Conference of the Communist Party elected Hoxha formally as First Secretary. During WWII, the Soviet Union's role in Albania was negligible. On 10 July 1943, the Albanian partisans were organised in regular units of companies, battalions and brigades and named the Albanian National Liberation Army. The organization received military support from the British intelligence service, SOE.\nWithin Albania, repeated attempts were made during the war to remedy the communications difficulties which faced partisan groups. In August 1943, a secret meeting, the Mukje Conference, was held between the anti-communist Balli Komb\u00ebtar (National Front) and the Communist Party of Albania. To encourage the Balli Komb\u00ebtar to sign, the Greater Albania sections that included Kosovo (part of Yugoslavia) and Cham\u00ebria were made part of the Agreement.\nDisagreement with the Yugoslav Communists.\nA problem developed when the Yugoslav Communists disagreed with the goal of establishing a Greater Albania and asked the Communists in Albania to withdraw their agreement. According to Hoxha, Josip Broz Tito did not believe that \"Kosovo was Albanian\" and Serbian opposition to the transfer made it an unwise option. After the Albanian Communists repudiated the Greater Albania agreement, the Balli Komb\u00ebtar condemned the Communists, who in turn accused the Balli Komb\u00ebtar of siding with the Italians. The Balli Komb\u00ebtar lacked support from the people. After judging the Communists as an immediate threat, the Balli Komb\u00ebtar sided with Nazi Germany, fatally damaging its image among those fighting the fascists. The Communists quickly added to their ranks many of those disillusioned with the Balli Komb\u00ebtar and took centre stage in the fight for liberation.\nThe Permet National Congress held during that time called for a \"new democratic Albania for the people\". Although the monarchy was not formally abolished, King Zog I of the Albanians was barred from returning to the country, which further increased the Communists' control. The Anti-Fascist Committee for National Liberation was founded, chaired by Hoxha. On 22 October 1944, the Committee became the Democratic Government of Albania after a meeting in Berat and Hoxha was chosen to serve as the interim Prime Minister of Albania. Tribunals were established for the purpose of trying alleged war criminals who were also accused of being \"enemies of the people\" and they were presided over by Ko\u00e7i Xoxe. From the beginning, the Democratic Government was an undisguised Communist regime. In the rest of what became the Soviet bloc, the Communist parties were at least nominally parts of coalitions before they dropped all pretenses of pluralism and established one-party states.\nAfter Albania's liberation on 29 November 1944, several Albanian partisan divisions crossed the border into German-occupied Yugoslavia, where they fought alongside Tito's partisans and the Soviet Red Army in a joint campaign which succeeded in driving out the last pockets of German resistance. During a Yugoslavian conference in later years, Marshal Tito thanked Hoxha for the Albanian partisans' assistance during the War for National Liberation (\"Lufta Nacional\u00e7lirimtare\"). The Democratic Front, dominated by the Albanian Communist Party, succeeded the National Liberation Front in August 1945, and the first post-war election was held on 2 December of that year. The Front was the only legal political organisation which was allowed to stand in the elections, and the government reported that 93% of Albanians voted for it.\nOn 11 January 1946, Zog was officially deposed and the People's Republic of Albania was established (it was renamed the People's Socialist Republic of Albania in 1976), despite the fact that the country had been a Communist state since its liberation. As First Secretary of the party, Hoxha was \"de facto\" head of state and as a result, he was the most powerful man in the country.\nAlbanians celebrate their independence day on 28 November (which is the date on which they declared their independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1912), while in the former People's Socialist Republic of Albania the national day was 29 November, the day the country was liberated from Nazi Germany. Both days are currently national holidays.\nEarly leadership (1944\u20131965).\nHoxha declared himself a Marxist\u2013Leninist and strongly admired Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin. \nDuring the period of 1945\u20131950, the government adopted policies and actions intended to consolidate power which included extrajudicial killings and executions that targeted and eliminated anti-communists. The Agrarian Reform Law was passed in August 1945. It confiscated land from beys and large landowners, giving it without compensation to peasants. 52% of all land was owned by large landowners before the law was passed; this declined to 16% after the law's passage. Illiteracy, which was 90\u201395% in rural areas in 1939 and perhaps 85% of the total population in 1946, fell to 30% by 1950, and by 1985 it was equal to that of a Western country.\nBorder disputes with Yugoslavia.\nIn 1948, a border conflict erupted between Albania and Yugoslavia. Enver Hoxha and the Albanian Military Intelligence services, the Sigurimi, played a significant role in promoting separatism in Kosovo and the idea of a \"Greater Albania.\"\nBy 1949, the US and British intelligence organisations were working with the former King Zog and the mountain men of his personal guard. They recruited Albanian refugees and \u00e9migr\u00e9s from Egypt, Italy and Greece, trained them in Cyprus, Malta and the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany), and infiltrated them into Albania. Guerrilla units entered Albania in 1950 and 1952, but they were killed or captured by Albanian security forces. Kim Philby, a Soviet double agent working as a liaison officer between MI6 and the CIA, had leaked details of the infiltration plan to Moscow, and the security breach claimed the lives of about 300 infiltrators.\nOn 19 February 1951, a bombing occurred at the Soviet embassy in Tirana, after which 23 accused intellectuals were arrested and put in prison. One of them, Jonuz Kaceli, was killed by Mehmet Shehu during interrogation. Subsequently, the 22 others were executed without trial under Hoxha's orders.\nThe State University of Tirana was established in 1957, which was the first of its kind in Albania. The medieval Gjakmarrja (blood feud) was banned. Malaria, the most widespread disease, was successfully fought through advances in health care, the use of DDT, and through the draining of swampland. From 1965 to 1985, no cases of malaria were reported, whereas previously Albania had the greatest number of infected patients in Europe. No cases of syphilis had been recorded for 30 years. In 1938 the number of physicians was 1.1 per 10,000 and there was only one hospital bed per 1,000 people. In 1950, while the number of physicians had not increased, there were four times as many hospital beds per head, and health expenditures had risen to 5% of the budget, up from 1% before the war.\nRelations with Yugoslavia.\nAt this point, relations with Yugoslavia had begun to change. The roots of the change began on 20 October 1944 at the Second Plenary Session of the Communist Party of Albania. The Session considered the problems that the post-independence Albanian government would face. However, the Yugoslav delegation which was led by Velimir Stoini\u0107 accused the party of \"sectarianism and opportunism\" and blamed Hoxha for these errors. He also stressed the view that the Yugoslav Communist partisans spearheaded the Albanian partisan movement.\nAnti-Yugoslav members of the Albanian Communist Party had begun to think that this was a plot by Tito who intended to destabilize the Party. Ko\u00e7i Xoxe, Sejfulla Mal\u00ebshova and others who supported Yugoslavia were looked upon with deep suspicion. Tito's position on Albania was that it was too weak to stand on its own and that it would do better as a part of Yugoslavia. Hoxha alleged that Tito had made it his goal to get Albania into Yugoslavia, firstly by creating the Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Mutual Aid in 1946. In time, Albania began to feel that the treaty was heavily slanted towards Yugoslav interests, much like the Italian agreements with Albania under Zog that made the nation dependent upon Italy.\nThe first issue was that the Albanian lek became revalued in terms of the Yugoslav dinar as a customs union was formed and Albania's economic plan was decided more by Yugoslavia. Albanian economists H. Banja and V. To\u00e7i stated that the relationship between Albania and Yugoslavia during this period was exploitative and that it constituted attempts by Yugoslavia to make the Albanian economy an \"appendage\" to the Yugoslav economy. Hoxha then began to accuse Yugoslavia of misconduct:\nStalin advised Hoxha that Yugoslavia was attempting to annex Albania: \"We did not know that the Yugoslavs, under the pretext of 'defending' your country against an attack from the Greek fascists, wanted to bring units of their army into the PRA [People's Republic of Albania]. They tried to do this in a very secretive manner. In reality, their aim in this direction was utterly hostile, for they intended to overturn the situation in Albania.\" By June 1947, the Central Committee of Yugoslavia began publicly condemning Hoxha, accusing him of taking an individualistic and anti-Marxist line. When Albania responded by making agreements with the Soviet Union to purchase a supply of agricultural machinery, Yugoslavia said that Albania could not enter into any agreements with other countries without Yugoslav approval.\nKo\u00e7i Xoxe tried to stop Hoxha from improving relations with Bulgaria, reasoning that Albania would be more stable with one trading partner rather than with many. Nako Spiru, an anti-Yugoslav member of the Party, condemned Xoxe and vice versa. With no one coming to Spiru's defense, he viewed the situation as hopeless and feared that Yugoslav domination of his nation was imminent, which caused him to commit suicide in November.\nAt the Eighth Plenum of the Central Committee of the Party which lasted from 26 February to 8 March 1948, Xoxe was implicated in a plot to isolate Hoxha and consolidate his own power. He accused Hoxha of being responsible for the decline in relations with Yugoslavia and stated that a Soviet military mission should be expelled in favor of a Yugoslav counterpart. Hoxha managed to remain firm and his support had not declined. When Yugoslavia publicly broke with the Soviet Union, Hoxha's support base grew stronger. Then, on 1 July 1948, Tirana called on all Yugoslav technical advisors to leave the country and unilaterally declared all treaties and agreements between the two countries null and void. Xoxe was expelled from the party and on 13 June 1949, he was executed by hanging.\nRelations with the Soviet Union.\nAfter the break with Yugoslavia, Hoxha aligned himself with the Soviet Union. From 1948 to 1960, $200\u00a0million in Soviet aid was given to Albania for technical and infrastructural expansion. Albania was admitted to the Comecon on 22 February 1949 and it served as a pro-Soviet force on the Adriatic. A Soviet submarine base was built on the Albanian island of Sazan near Vlor\u00eb, posing a hypothetical threat to the U.S. Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean. Relations with the Soviet Union remained close until the death of Stalin in March 1953. It was followed by 14 days of national mourning in Albania \u2013 more than in the Soviet Union. Hoxha assembled the population of Tirana in the capital's largest square, which featured a Stalin statue, requested that they kneel and take a 2,000-word oath of \"eternal fidelity\" and \"gratitude\" to their \"beloved father\" and \"great liberator\".\nUnder Nikita Khrushchev, Stalin's eventual successor, aid was reduced and Albania was encouraged to adopt Khrushchev's specialisation policy. Under it, Albania would develop its agricultural output in order to supply the Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries while they would be developing products of their own, which would, in theory, strengthen the Warsaw Pact. However, this also meant that Albanian industrial development, which was heavily stressed by Hoxha, would be hindered.\nIn May\u2013June 1955, Nikolai Bulganin and Anastas Mikoyan visited Yugoslavia while Khrushchev renounced the expulsion of Yugoslavia from the Communist bloc. Khrushchev also began making references to Palmiro Togliatti's polycentrism theory. Hoxha had not been consulted on this and was offended. Yugoslavia began asking for Hoxha to rehabilitate the image of Xoxe, which Hoxha steadfastly rejected. In 1956 at the Twentieth Party Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev condemned the cult of personality that had been built up around Stalin and denounced his excesses. Khrushchev then announced the theory of peaceful coexistence, which angered the Stalinist Hoxha greatly. The Institute of Marxist\u2013Leninist Studies, led by Hoxha's wife Nexhmije, quoted Vladimir Lenin: \"The fundamental principle of the foreign policy of a socialist country and of a Communist party is proletarian internationalism; not peaceful coexistence.\" Hoxha now took a more active stand against perceived revisionism.\nUnity within the Albanian Party of Labour began to decline as well, with a special delegate meeting held in Tirana in April 1956, composed of 450 delegates and having unexpected results. The delegates \"criticized the conditions in the party, the negative attitude toward the masses, the absence of party and socialist democracy, the economic policy of the leadership, etc.\" while also calling for discussions on the cult of personality and the Twentieth Party Congress.\nMovement towards China and Maoism.\nIn 1956, Hoxha called for a resolution which would confirm the existing leadership of the Party. The resolution was accepted, and all of the delegates who had spoken against it were expelled from the party and imprisoned. Hoxha claimed that Yugoslavia had attempted to overthrow the leadership of Albania. This incident increased Hoxha's power, effectively making Khrushchev-style reforms impossible there. In the same year, Hoxha travelled to China, then embroiled in the Sino-Soviet split, and met Mao Zedong. Chinese aid to Albania rose sharply during the next two years.\nIn an effort to keep Albania in the Soviet sphere, increased Soviet aid was given but Albania's relations with the Soviet Union remained at the same level until 1960, when Khrushchev met Sofoklis Venizelos, a liberal Greek politician. Khrushchev sympathised with the concept of an autonomous Greek North Epirus and he wanted to use Greek claims on North Epirus to keep the Albanian leadership in line. Hoxha reacted by only sending Hysni Kapo, a member of the Albanian Political Bureau, to the Third Congress of the Romanian Workers' Party in Bucharest, an event which Communist heads of state were normally expected to attend. As relations between the two countries continued to deteriorate during the course of the meeting, Khrushchev said:\nFriction with the Soviet Union.\nRelations with the Soviet Union rapidly deteriorated. A hardline policy was adopted and the Soviets reduced grain shipments at a time when Albania needed them due to the possibility of a flood-induced famine. In July 1960, a plot to overthrow the Albanian government was discovered. It was to be organised by Soviet-trained Rear Admiral Teme Sejko. After that two pro-Soviet members of the Party, Liri Belishova and Ko\u00e7o Tashko, were expelled.\nIn August, the Party's Central Committee sent a protest letter to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union about the presence of an anti-Albanian Soviet Ambassador in Tirana. The Fourth Congress of the Party, held from 13 to 20 February 1961, was the last meeting that the Soviet Union or other Eastern European nations attended in Albania. During the congress, Mehmet Shehu said that while many members of the Party were accused of tyranny, this was a baseless charge and unlike the Soviet Union, Albania was led by genuine Marxists.\nThe Soviet Union retaliated by threatening Albania with \"dire consequences\" if the condemnations were not retracted. Days later, Khrushchev and Anton\u00edn Novotn\u00fd, President of Czechoslovakia, threatened to cut off economic aid. In March, Albania was not invited to attend the meeting of the Warsaw Pact nations, and in April all Soviet technicians were withdrawn from Albania. In May nearly all Soviet troops at the Soviet submarine base were withdrawn.\nOn 7 November 1961, Hoxha made a speech in which he called Khrushchev a \"revisionist, an anti-Marxist and a defeatist\". Hoxha portrayed Stalin as the last Communist leader of the Soviet Union and alluded to Albania's independence. By 11 November, the USSR and every other Warsaw Pact nation broke diplomatic relations with Albania. Albania was unofficially excluded from the Warsaw Pact and Comecon. The Soviet Union also attempted to claim control of the submarine base. The Albanian Party then passed a law prohibiting any other nation from owning an Albanian port. The Albanian\u2013Soviet split was now complete.\nLater rule (1965\u20131985).\nAs Hoxha's leadership continued, he took on an increasingly theoretical stance. He wrote criticisms which were based on theory and current events which occurred at the time; his most notable criticisms were his condemnations of Maoism after 1978.\nDuring World War II, the Albanian Communists encouraged women to join the partisans and following the war, women were encouraged to take up menial jobs, as the education necessary for higher level work was out of most women's reach. In 1938, 4% worked in various sectors of the economy. In 1970, this number had risen to 38%, and in 1982 to 46%. \nIn 1978, 15.1 times as many females attended eight-year schools as had done so in 1938 and 175.7 times as many females attended secondary schools. By 1978, 101.9 times as many women attended higher schools as in 1957.\nDuring the Cultural and Ideological Revolution, women were encouraged to take up all jobs, including government posts, which resulted in 40.7% of the People's Councils and 30.4% of the People's Assembly being made up of women, including two women in the Central Committee by 1985. Hoxha said of women's rights in 1967:The entire party and country should hurl into the fire and break the neck of anyone who dared trample underfoot the sacred edict of the party on the defense of women's rights.\nAn electrification campaign was begun in 1960 and the entire nation was expected to have electricity by 1985. Instead, it achieved this on 25 October 1970. During the Cultural and Ideological Revolution of 1967\u20131968 the military changed from traditional Communist army tactics and began to adhere to the Maoist strategy known as people's war, which included the abolition of military ranks, which were not fully restored until 1991.\nHoxha's legacy also included a complex of 173,371 one-man concrete bunkers across a country of 3 million inhabitants, to act as look-outs and gun emplacements along with chemical weapons. The bunkers were built strong and mobile, with the intention that they could be easily placed by a crane or a helicopter in a hole. The types of bunkers vary from machine gun pillboxes, beach bunkers, to underground naval facilities and even Air Force Mountain and underground bunkers.\nHoxha's internal policies were true to Stalin's paradigm which he admired, and the personality cult which was developed in the 1970s and organised around him by the Party also bore a striking resemblance to that of Stalin. At times it even reached an intensity which was as extreme as the personality cult of Kim Il Sung (which Hoxha condemned) with Hoxha being portrayed as a genius commenting on virtually all facets of life from culture to economics to military matters. Each schoolbook required one or more quotations from him on the subjects being studied. The Party honored him with titles such as Supreme Comrade, Sole Force and Great Teacher. He adopted a different type military salute for the People's Army to render honors which was known as the \"Hoxhaist salute\", which involves soldiers curling their right fist and raising it to shoulder level. It replaced the Zogist salute, which was used by the Royal Albanian Army for many years.\nHoxha's governance was also distinguished by his encouragement of a high birthrate policy. For instance, a woman who bore an above-average number of children would be given the government award of \"Heroine Mother\" (in Albanian: \"N\u00ebn\u00eb Heroin\u00eb\") along with cash rewards. Abortion was essentially restricted (to encourage high birth rates), except if the birth posed a danger to the mother's life, though it was not completely banned; the process was decided by district medical commissions. As a result, the population of Albania tripled from 1 million in 1944 to around 3\u00a0million in 1985.\nRelations with China.\nAt the start of Albania's third five-year plan, China offered Albania a loan of $125\u00a0million which would be used to build twenty-five chemical, electrical and metallurgical plants in accordance with the plan. However, the nation discovered that the task of completing these building projects was difficult, because Albania's relations with its neighbors were poor and because matters were also complicated by the long distance between Albania and China. Unlike Yugoslavia or the USSR, China had less economic influence on Albania during Hoxha's rule. During the previous fifteen years (1946\u20131961), at least 50% of Albania's economy was dependent on foreign commerce.\nBy the time the 1976 constitution was promulgated, Albania had mostly become self-sufficient, but it lacked modern technology. Ideologically, Hoxha found that Mao's initial views were in line with Marxism\u2013Leninism, due to his condemnation of Khrushchev's alleged revisionism and his condemnation of Yugoslavia. The financial aid which China provided to Albania was interest-free and it did not have to be repaid until Albania could afford to do so.\nChina never intervened in Albania's economic output, and Chinese technicians and Albanian workers both worked for the same wages. Albanian newspapers were reprinted in Chinese newspapers, and they were also read on Chinese radio, and Albania led the movement to give the People's Republic of China a seat on the UN Security Council. During this period, Albania became the second largest producer of chromium in the world, which China considered important. Strategically, the Adriatic Sea was attractive to China, because China hoped that it could gain more allies in Eastern Europe through Albania - a hope which was misplaced. Zhou Enlai visited Albania in January 1964. On 9 January, \"The 1964 Sino-Albanian Joint Statement\" was signed in Tirana. The statement said of relations between socialist countries:\nLike Albania, China defended the \"purity\" of Marxism by attacking American imperialism and \"Soviet and Yugoslav revisionism\", both of them were equally attacked as part of a \"dual adversary\" theory. Yugoslavia was viewed as both a \"special detachment of U.S. imperialism\" and a \"saboteur against world revolution\". However, these views began to change in China, which was one of the major issues which Albania had with the alliance. Additionally, unlike Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, the Sino-Albanian alliance lacked \"...\u00a0an organisational structure for regular consultations and policy coordination, and it was also characterized by an informal relationship which was conducted on an \"ad hoc\" basis.\" Mao made a speech on 3 November 1966 in which he claimed that Albania was the only Marxist\u2013Leninist state in Europe and in the same speech, he also stated that \"an attack on Albania will have to reckon with the great People's Republic of China. If the U.S. imperialists, the modern Soviet revisionists or any of their lackeys dare to touch Albania in the slightest, nothing lies ahead for them but a complete, shameful and memorable defeat.\" Likewise, Hoxha stated that \"You may rest assured, comrades, that come what may in the world at large, our two parties and our two peoples will certainly remain together. They will fight together and they will win together.\"\nShift in China's foreign policy after the Cultural Revolution.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, China entered into a four-year period of relative diplomatic isolation, however, its relations with Albania were positive. On 20 August 1968, the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia was condemned by Albania, along with the Brezhnev doctrine. Albania refused to send troops to Czechoslovakia in support of the invasion, and it officially withdrew from the Warsaw Pact on 5 September.\nAlbania's relations with China began to deteriorate on 15 July 1971, when United States President Richard Nixon agreed to visit China in order to meet with Zhou Enlai. Hoxha believed that China had betrayed Albania, and on 6 August, the Central Committee of the PLA sent a letter to the Central Committee of the CCP in which it called Nixon a \"frenzied anti-Communist\". The letter stated:\nThe result of this criticism was a message from the Chinese leadership in 1971 in which it stated that Albania could not depend on an indefinite flow of aid from China, and in 1972 Albania was advised to \"curb its expectations about further Chinese contributions to its economic development\". By 1972, Hoxha wrote in his diary \"Reflections on China\" that China was no longer a socialist country, instead aligning itself with the interests of a powerful nation that prioritized pragmatic relations over socialist principles. In 1973, he wrote that the Chinese leaders had \"cut off their contacts\" with Albania, reducing their interactions to merely formal diplomatic exchanges. While China maintained its economic agreements, Hoxha remarked that their \"initial ardor\" had waned.\nIn response, trade with COMECON (although trade with the Soviet Union was still blocked) and Yugoslavia grew. Trade with Third World nations was $0.5\u00a0million in 1973, but $8.3\u00a0million in 1974. Trade rose from 0.1% to 1.6%. Following Mao's death on 9 September 1976, Hoxha remained optimistic about Sino-Albanian relations, but in August 1977, Hua Guofeng, the new leader of China, stated that Mao's Three Worlds Theory would become official foreign policy. Hoxha viewed this as a way for China to justify having the U.S. as the \"secondary enemy\" while viewing the Soviet Union as the main one, thus allowing China to trade with the U.S. He condemned this as a \"diabolical plan\" for China to position itself as a superpower at the head of the \"third world\" and the \"non-aligned world.\"\nFrom 30 August to 7 September 1977, Tito visited Beijing and was welcomed by the Chinese leadership. Following this, the PLA declared that China was now a revisionist state akin to the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and that Albania was the only Marxist\u2013Leninist state on Earth. Hoxha stated:\nOn 13 July 1978, China announced that it was cutting off all of its aid to Albania. For the first time in modern history, Albania did not have a major ally nor a major trading partner.\nPolitical repression and emigration.\nCertain clauses in the 1976 constitution circumscribed the exercise of political liberties which the government interpreted as being contrary to the established order. The government denied the population access to information other than that which was disseminated by government-controlled media outlets. Internally, the Sigurimi used the same repressive methods which were used by the NKVD, the MGB, the KGB and the East German Stasi. At one point, every third Albanian had either been interrogated by the Sigurimi or they had been incarcerated in labour camps. The government imprisoned thousands of people in forced-labour camps or it executed them for alleged crimes such as treachery or disrupting the proletarian dictatorship. After 1968, travel abroad was forbidden to all but those people who were on official business. Western European culture was looked upon with deep suspicion, resulting in bans on all unauthorised foreign materials and arrests: Art was required to reflect the styles of socialist realism. Beards were banned as unhygienic in order to curb the influence of Islam (many imams and babas had beards) and the Eastern Orthodox faith. The justice system's legal proceedings regularly degenerated into show trials. An American human rights group described the proceedings of one trial, noting that the defendant was not allowed to question the witnesses. While he could express objections to certain aspects of the case, the prosecutor dismissed them, telling him to \"sit down and be quiet\" because they claimed to know better.\n In order to lessen the threat of political dissidents and other exiles, relatives of the accused were often arrested, ostracised, and accused of being \"enemies of the people\". Political executions were common, and at least 5,000 people\u2014possibly as many as 25,000\u2014were killed by the regime. Torture was often used to obtain confessions:\nDuring Hoxha's rule, there were six institutions for political prisoners and fourteen labour camps where political prisoners and common criminals worked together. It has been estimated that there were approximately 32,000 people imprisoned in Albania in 1985.\nArticle 47 of the Albanian Criminal Code stated that to \"escape outside the state, as well as refusal to return to the Fatherland by a person who has been sent to serve or has been permitted temporarily to go outside the state\" was an act of treason, a crime punishable by a minimum sentence of ten years and a maximum sentence of death. The Albanian government went to great lengths to prevent people from defecting by leaving the country:An electrically-wired metal fence stands 600 meters to one kilometer from the actual border. Anyone touching the fence not only risks electrocution, but also sets off alarm bells and lights which alert guards stationed at approximately one-kilometre intervals along the fence. Two meters of soil on either side of the fence are cleared in order to check for footprints of escapees and infiltrators. The area between the fence and the actual border is seeded with booby traps such as coils of wire, noise makers consisting of thin pieces of metal strips on top of two wooden slats with stones in a tin container which rattle if stepped on, and flares that are triggered by contact, thus illuminating would-be escapees during the night.\nReligion.\nAlbania was a predominantly Muslim country after the demise of the Ottoman Empire, in which social structure was based on confessional communities not on ethnic groups. After the rise of nationalism in the Ottoman Empire, Muslims were classified as Turks, Eastern Orthodox Christians were classified as Greeks, and Catholics were classified as Latins. Hoxha believed that this division of Albanian society along religious and ethnic lines was a serious issue, because it fueled Greek separatists in southern Albania in particular and it also divided the nation in general. The Agrarian Reform Law of 1945 confiscated much of the church's property in the country. Catholics were the earliest religious community to be targeted because the Vatican was considered an agent of Fascism and anti-Communism. In 1946 the Jesuit Order was banned and the Franciscans were banned in 1947. \"Decree No. 743\" (On religion) sought the establishment of a national church and it also forbade religious leaders from associating with foreign powers.\nMother Teresa, a Catholic nun whose relatives resided in Albania during Hoxha's rule, was denied a chance to see them because she was considered a dangerous agent of the Vatican. Despite multiple requests and despite the fact that many countries made requests on her behalf, she was not granted the opportunity to see her mother and sister. Mother Teresa's mother and sister both died during Hoxha's rule, and the nun herself was only able to visit Albania five years after the Communist regime collapsed. \nThe Party focused on atheist education in schools. This tactic was effective, primarily as a result of the high birthrate policy which was encouraged after the war. During periods which are considered \"holy periods\" by religious people, such as Lent and Ramadan, many foods and non-water beverages were distributed in schools and factories, and religious people who refused to eat those foods and drink those beverages when they were offered to them during their \"fasting times\" were denounced.\nStarting on 6February 1967, the party began to promote secularism in place of Abrahamic religions. Hoxha, who had launched a Cultural and Ideological Revolution after being partially inspired by China's Cultural Revolution, encouraged Communist students and workers to use more forceful tactics in order to discourage people from continuing their religious practices; the use of violence was initially condemned.\nAccording to Hoxha, the surge in anti-theist activities began with the youth. The result of this \"spontaneous, unprovoked movement\" was the demolition or conversion of all 2,169 churches and mosques in Albania. State atheism became official policy, and Albania was declared the world's first atheist state. Town and city names which echoed Abrahamic religious themes were abandoned for neutral secular ones, as well as personal names. By 1968, Hoxha stated in a speech in that \"Religion is a fuel kindling fires of all evils\". During this period religiously based names were also made illegal. The \"Dictionary of People's Names\", published in 1982, contained 3,000 approved, secular names. In 1992, Monsignor Dias, the Papal Nuncio for Albania appointed by Pope John Paul II, said that of the three hundred Catholic priests present in Albania prior to the Communists coming to power, only thirty were still active. The promotion of religion was banned, and all clerics were labeled reactionaries and outlawed. Those religious figures who refused to embrace the principles of Marxism\u2013Leninism were either arrested or carried on their activities in hiding.\nCultivating ultranationalism.\nDuring the anti-religious campaign, Enver Hoxha declared that \"the only religion of Albania is Albanianism\", a quotation from the poem \"O moj Shqiperi\" (\"O Albania\") by the 19th-century Albanian writer Pashko Vasa.\nMuzafer Korkuti, one of the dominant figures in post-war Albanian archaeology and now the Director of the Institute of Archaeology in Tirana, stated the following in an interview on 10 July 2002:\nEfforts were focused on an Illyrian-Albanian continuity issue. An Illyrian origin of the Albanians (without denying \"Pelasgian\" roots) continued to play a significant role in Albanian nationalism, resulting in a revival of given names supposedly of \"Illyrian\" origin, at the expense of given names associated with Christianity. At first, Albanian nationalist writers opted for the Pelasgians as the forefathers of the Albanians, but as this form of nationalism flourished in Albania under Enver Hoxha, the Pelasgians became a secondary element to the Illyrian theory of Albanian origins, which could claim some support in scholarship.\nThe Illyrian descent theory soon became one of the pillars of Albanian nationalism, especially because it could provide some evidence in support of the belief that there was a continuous Albanian presence in Kosovo and Southern Albania, i.e. areas that were subjected to ethnic conflicts between Albanians, Serbs and Greeks. Under the government of Enver Hoxha, an autochthonous ethnogenesis was promoted and physical anthropologists tried to prove that Albanians were different from all other Indo-European populations, a theory which is currently discredited. They claimed that the Illyrians were the most ancient people in the Balkans and greatly extended the age of the Illyrian language.\nRejecting Western mass media culture.\nHoxha and his government were also hostile to Western popular culture as it was manifested in the mass media, along with the consumerism and cultural liberalism which were associated with it. In a speech on the Fourth Plenum of the Central Committee of the PLA (PLA-CC) on 26 June 1973, Hoxha declared a definitive break with any such Western bourgeois influence and what he described as its \"degenerated bourgeois culture\". In a speech in which he also criticised the \"spread of certain vulgar, alien tastes in music and art\", which ran \"contrary to socialist ethics and the positive traditions of our people\", including \"degenerate importations such as long hair, extravagant dress, screaming jungle music, coarse language, shameless behaviour and so on\", Hoxha declared:\nLater life and death.\nIn 1974, Hoxha accused Beqir Balluku, Minister of Defence and longtime ally, of being an agent of China and attempting a coup d'\u00e9tat, since Balluku had criticized Hoxha's bunker program and said that a U.S. and Soviet invasion of Albania was unlikely. Hoxha sentenced Balluku and a group of his accused associates to death and appointed Mehmet Shehu as Minister of Defence.\nA new Constitution was decided upon by the Seventh Congress of the Albanian Party of Labour on 1\u20137 November 1976. According to Hoxha, \"The old Constitution was the Constitution of the building of the foundations of socialism, whereas the new Constitution will be the Constitution of the complete construction of a socialist society.\"\nSelf-reliance was now stressed more than ever. Citizens were encouraged to train in the use of weapons, and this activity was also taught in schools. The purpose of this training was to encourage the creation of quick partisans.\nBorrowing and foreign investment were banned under Article 26 of the Constitution, which read: \"The granting of concessions to, and the creation of foreign economic and financial companies and other institutions or ones formed jointly with bourgeois and revisionist capitalist monopolies and states as well as obtaining credits from them are prohibited in the People's Socialist Republic of Albania.\" Hoxha said of borrowing money and allowing investment from other countries:\nAlbania was the most isolated country in Europe. In 1983, Albania imported goods which were worth $280\u00a0million but it exported goods which were worth $290\u00a0million, producing a trade surplus of $10\u00a0million.\nIn 1981, Hoxha ordered the execution of several party and government officials in a new purge. Prime Minister Mehmet Shehu, the second-most powerful man in Albania and Hoxha's closest comrade-in-arms for 40 years, was reported to have committed suicide in December 1981. He was subsequently condemned as a \"traitor\" to Albania, and he was also accused of operating in the service of multiple intelligence agencies. It is generally believed that he was either killed or he shot himself during a power struggle which may have resulted from differing foreign policy matters with Hoxha. Hoxha also wrote a large assortment of books during this period, resulting in over 65 volumes of collected works, condensed into six volumes of selected works.\nIn 1973, Hoxha suffered a heart attack from which he never fully recovered. In increasingly precarious health from the late 1970s onward, he turned most state functions over to Ramiz Alia. In his final days, he was confined to a wheelchair and suffered from diabetes, with which he was diagnosed in 1948, along with cerebral ischemia, with which he was diagnosed in 1983. On 9 April 1985, he was struck by a ventricular fibrillation. Over the next 48 hours, he suffered repeated episodes of this arrhythmia, and he died in the early morning hours of 11 April 1985 at the age of 76. The Albanian government announced seven days of mourning with flags flown at half-mast and entertainment and cultural events cancelled.\nHoxha's body lay in state at the building of the Presidium of the People's Assembly for three days before he was buried on 15 April after a memorial service on Skanderbeg Square. The government refused to accept any foreign delegations during Hoxha's funeral and it even condemned the Soviet message of condolences as \"unacceptable\". After his burial, Hoxha was succeeded as head of state by Ramiz Alia, who gained control of the party's leadership two days later.\nHoxha left Albania with a legacy of isolation and fear of the outside world. Despite some economic progress which Albania made during Hoxha's rule, the country was in economic stagnation; Albania had been the poorest European country throughout much of the Cold War period.\nFamily.\nThe surname \"Hoxha\" is the Albanian variant of hodja (from ), a title which was given to his ancestors due to their efforts to teach Albanians about Islam. Hoxha's parents were Halil and Gjylihan (Gjylo) Hoxha, and Hoxha had three sisters, Fahrije, Haxhire and Sanije. Hysen Hoxha () was Enver Hoxha's uncle and was a militant who campaigned vigorously for the independence of Albania, which occurred when Enver was four years old. His grandfather Beqir was involved in the Gjirokast\u00ebr section of the League of Prizren.\nHoxha's son Sokol Hoxha was the CEO of the Albanian Post and Telecommunication service and he is married to Liliana Hoxha. Sali Berisha, a later democratic president of Albania, was often seen socialising with Sokol Hoxha and other close relatives of leading Communist figures in Albania.\nHoxha's daughter, Pranvera, is an architect. Along with her husband, Klement Kolaneci, she designed the Enver Hoxha Museum in Tirana, a white-tiled pyramid. Some sources have referred to the edifice, said to be the most expensive edifice ever constructed in Albanian history, as the \"Enver Hoxha Mausoleum\", but this was not an official appellation. The museum was opened in 1988, three years after her father's death, and in 1991, it was transformed into a conference centre and an exhibition venue and it was renamed the Pyramid of Tirana.\nCoup attempts.\nThe Mustafa Band was a gang which was connected to counter-revolutionary elements such as the Albanian mafia and members of the royal House of Zogu, and in 1982, it attempted to assassinate Enver Hoxha. The plan failed and two of its members were killed and another member was arrested.\nAccording to Hoxha, after Albania's long-time prime minister Mehmet Shehu died in 1981, documents were found in a vault which previously belonged to him and according to them, he would poison Hoxha and assume the leadership of the country, orders which were issued by Yugoslav intelligence. In his book \"The Titoites\", Hoxha argued that this plan failed because Shehu was a coward who could not go through with the task and he figured that suicide would, at the very least, save his family from the punishment which he deserved for his counter-revolutionary activities.\nLegacy.\nIn 2016, the results of a survey which was conducted by the Institute for Development Research and Alternatives (IDRA) showed that 45% of Albanians believed that Hoxha had a positive impact on the history of Albania, whereas 42% of Albanians believed that he had a negative impact on the history of Albania. Younger generations (16\u201335 years old; born after 1981) tend to have a more negative view of Hoxha's contributions, while older generations (over 35 years old; born before 1981) tend to have a more positive view. Citizens in the regions of southeastern and southwestern Albania who were interviewed had the most positive view of Hoxha, respectively, they comprised 50% and 55% of the entire population. Others have viewed him as a dictator."}
{"id": "10287", "revid": "30973818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10287", "title": "Hirohito", "text": "Hirohito (29 April 19017 January 1989), posthumously honored as Emperor Sh\u014dwa, was the 124th emperor of Japan according to the traditional order of succession, reigning from 1926 until his death in 1989. He was the longest-reigning Japanese emperor and one of the world's longest-reigning monarchs. As emperor during the Sh\u014dwa era, Hirohito oversaw the rise of Japanese militarism, Japan's expansionism in Asia, the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War and World War II, as well as the postwar Japanese economic miracle. \nHirohito was the first child of Crown Prince Yoshihito and Crown Princess Sadako, later Emperor Taish\u014d and Empress Teimei. After his father's accession to the throne in 1912, Hirohito was proclaimed crown prince and heir apparent in 1916. In 1921, he made an official visit to Great Britain and Western Europe, marking the first time a Japanese crown prince traveled abroad. Owing to his father's ill health, Hirohito became his regent that year. In 1924, he married Princess Nagako Kuni, with whom he had seven children.\nUpon his father\u2019s death in 1926, Hirohito became emperor, serving as head of state during the 1930s as the military increasingly dominated Japanese politics. When Japan's Kwantung Army staged the Mukden incident as a pretext for its invasion of Manchuria in 1931, Hirohito made no objection. Following the onset of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937, tensions steadily grew between Japan and the United States. Once Hirohito formally sanctioned his government's decision to go to war against the U.S. and its allies on 1 December 1941, the Pacific War began one week later with a Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor as well as on other U.S. and British colonies in the region. After atomic bombs were dropped on Japan and the Soviet Union invaded Japanese-occupied Manchuria, Hirohito called upon his country's forces to surrender in a radio broadcast on 15 August 1945. The extent of his involvement in military decision-making and wartime culpability remain subjects of historical debate.\nFollowing the surrender of Japan, Emperor Hirohito was not prosecuted for war crimes at the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal even though the Japanese had waged war in his name. The head of the Allied occupation of the country, Douglas MacArthur, believed that a cooperative emperor would facilitate a peaceful occupation and other U.S. postwar objectives. MacArthur therefore excluded any evidence from the tribunal which could have incriminated Hirohito or other members of the royal family. In 1946, Hirohito was pressured by the Allies into renouncing his divinity. Under Japan's new constitution drafted by U.S. officials, his role as emperor was redefined in 1947 as \"the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people\". He died in 1989, and was succeeded as emperor by his eldest son, Akihito.\nEarly life and education.\nHirohito was born on 29 April 1901 at T\u014dg\u016b Palace in Aoyama, Tokyo during the reign of his grandfather, Emperor Meiji, the first son of 21-year-old Crown Prince Yoshihito (the future Emperor Taish\u014d) and 16-year-old Crown Princess Sadako, the future Empress Teimei. He was the grandson of Emperor Meiji and Yanagiwara Naruko. His childhood title was Prince Michi.\nTen weeks after he was born, Hirohito was removed from the court and placed in the care of Count Kawamura Sumiyoshi, who raised him as his grandchild. At the age of 3, Hirohito and his brother Yasuhito were returned to court when Kawamura died\u00a0\u2013 first to the imperial mansion in Numazu, Shizuoka, then back to the Aoyama Palace.\nIn 1908, he began elementary studies at the Gakush\u016bin (Peers School). Emperor Mutsuhito, then appointed General Nogi Maresuke to be the Gakush\u016bin's tenth president as well as the one in-charge on educating his grandson. The main aspect that they focused was on physical education and health, primarily because Hirohito was a sickly child, on par with the impartment or inculcation of values such as frugality, patience, manliness, self-control, and devotion to the duty at hand.\nDuring 1912, at the age of 11, Hirohito was commissioned into the Imperial Japanese Army as a Second Lieutenant and in the Imperial Japanese Navy as an Ensign. He was also bestowed with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum. When his grandfather, Emperor Meiji died on 30 July 1912, Yoshihito assumed the throne and his eldest son, Hirohito became heir apparent.\nAfter learning about the death of his instructor, General Nogi, he along with his brothers were reportedly overcome with emotions. He would later acknowledge the lasting influence of Nogi in his life. At that time he was still two years away from completing primary school, henceforth his education was compensated by Fleet Admiral Togo Heihachiro and Naval Captain Ogasawara Naganari, wherein later on, would become his major opponents with regards to his national defense policy.\nShiratori Kurakichi, one of his middle-school instructors, was one of the personalities who deeply influenced the life of Hirohito. Kurakichi was a trained historian from Germany, imbibing the positivist historiographic trend by Leopold von Ranke. He was the one who inculcated in the mind of the young Hirohito that there is a connection between the divine origin of the imperial line and the aspiration of linking it to the myth of the racial superiority and homogeneity of the Japanese. The emperors were often a driving force in the modernization of their country. He taught Hirohito that the Empire of Japan was created and governed through diplomatic actions (taking into accounts the interests of other nations benevolently and justly).\nCrown Prince era.\nOn 2 November 1916, Hirohito was formally proclaimed crown prince and heir apparent. An investiture ceremony was not required to confirm this status.\nOverseas travel.\nFrom 3 March to 3 September 1921 (Taisho 10), the Crown Prince made official visits to the United Kingdom, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Italy, Vatican City and Malta (then a protectorate of the British Empire). This was the first visit to Western Europe by the Crown Prince. Despite strong opposition in Japan, this was realized by the efforts of elder Japanese statesmen (Genr\u014d) such as Yamagata Aritomo and Saionji Kinmochi.\nThe departure of Prince Hirohito was widely reported in newspapers. The Japanese battleship \"Katori\" was used, and departed from Yokohama, sailed to Naha, Hong Kong, Singapore, Colombo, Suez, Cairo, and Gibraltar. In April, Hirohito was present in Malta for the opening of the Maltese Parliament. After sailing for two months, the Katori arrived in Portsmouth on 9 May, on the same day reaching the British capital, London. Hirohito was welcomed in the UK as a partner of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance and met with King George V and Prime Minister David Lloyd George.\nThat evening, a banquet was held at Buckingham Palace, where Hirohito met with George V and Prince Arthur of Connaught. George V said that he treated his father like Hirohito, who was nervous in an unfamiliar foreign country, and that relieved his tension. The next day, he met Prince Edward (the future Edward VIII) at Windsor Castle, and a banquet was held every day thereafter. In London, he toured the British Museum, the Tower of London, the Bank of England, Lloyd's Marine Insurance, Oxford University, Army University, and the Naval War College. He also enjoyed theater at the New Oxford Theatre and the Delhi Theatre.\nAt the University of Cambridge, he listened to Professor J. R. Tanner's lecture on \"Relationship between the British Royal Family and its People\", and was awarded an honorary doctorate degree. He visited Edinburgh, Scotland, from 19 to 20 May, and was also awarded an Honorary Doctor of Laws at the University of Edinburgh. He stayed at the residence of John Stewart-Murray, 8th Duke of Atholl, for three days. On his stay with Stuart-Murray, the prince was quoted as saying, \"The rise of Bolsheviks won't happen if you live a simple life like Duke Athol.\"\nIn Italy, he met with King Vittorio Emanuele III and others, attended official international banquets, and visited places such as the fierce battlefields of World War I.\nRegency.\nAfter returning (from Europe) to Japan, Hirohito became Regent of Japan (\"Sessh\u014d\") on 25 November 1921, in place of his ailing father, who was affected by mental illness. In 1923 he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel in the army and Commander in the navy, and army Colonel and Navy Captain in 1925.\nVisit of colonial Taiwan.\nOver 12 days in April 1923, Hirohito visited Taiwan, which had been a Japanese colony since 1895. This was a voyage his father, the then Crown Prince Yoshihito had planned in 1911 but never completed.\nIt was widely reported in Taiwanese newspapers that famous high-end restaurants served typical Chinese luxury dishes for the Prince, such as swallow's nest and shark fin, as Taiwanese cuisine. This was the first time an Emperor or a Crown Prince has ever eaten local cuisine on a colony, or had foreign dishes other than Western cuisine abroad, thus exceptional preparations were required: The eight chefs and other cooking staff were purified for a week (through fasting and ritual bathing) before the cooking of the feast could begin. This tasting of \u201cTaiwanese cuisine\u201d of the Prince Regent as part of an integration ceremony of incorporating the colony into the empire, which can be seen as the context and purpose of Hirohito's Taiwanese visit.\nHaving visited several sites outside of Taipei, Hirohito returned to the capital on the 24th and on 25 April, just one day before his departure, he visited the Beitou hotspring district of Taipei and its oldest facility. The original structure had been built in 1913 in the style of a traditional Japanese bathhouse. However, in anticipation of Hirohito's visit an additional residential wing was added to the earlier building, this time in the style of an Edwardian country house. The new building was subsequently opened to the public and was deemed the largest public bathhouse in the Japanese Empire.\nCrown Prince Hirohito was a student of science, and he had heard that Beitou Creek was one of only two hot springs in the world that contained a rare radioactive mineral. So, he decided to walk into the creek to investigate.\nNaturally, concerned for a royal family member's safety, his entourage scurried around, seeking flat rocks to use as stepping stones. After that, these stones were carefully mounted and given the official name: \u201cHis Imperial Highness Crown Prince of Japan's Stepping Stones for River Crossing,\u201d with a stele alongside to tell the story.\nCrown Prince Hirohito handed his Imperial Notice to Governor-General Den Kenjiro and departed from Keelung on 26 April 1923.\nEarthquake and assassination attempt.\nThe Great Kant\u014d earthquake devastated Tokyo on 1 September 1923, killing some 100,000 people and leveling vast areas. The city could be rebuilt drawing on the then massive timber reserves of Taiwan. In the aftermath of the tragical disaster, the military authorities saw an opportunity to annihilate the communist movement in Japan. During the Kant\u014d Massacre an estimated 6000 people, mainly ethnic Koreans, were annihilated. The backlash culminated in an assassination attempt by Daisuke Namba on the Prince Regent on 27 December 1923 in the so-called Toranomon incident, but the attempt failed. During interrogation, the failed assassin claimed to be a communist and was executed.\nMarriage.\nPrince Hirohito married his distant cousin Princess Nagako Kuni, the eldest daughter of Prince Kuniyoshi Kuni, on 26 January 1924. They had two sons and five daughters (see Issue).\nThe daughters who lived to adulthood left the imperial family as a result of the American reforms of the Japanese imperial household in October 1947 (in the case of Princess Shigeko) or under the terms of the Imperial Household Law at the moment of their subsequent marriages (in the cases of Princesses Kazuko, Atsuko, and Takako).\nReign.\nAccession.\nOn 25 December 1926, Yoshihito died and Hirohito became emperor. The Crown Prince was said to have received the succession (\"senso\"). The Taish\u014d era's end and the Sh\u014dwa era's beginning (Enlightened Peace) were proclaimed. The deceased Emperor was posthumously renamed Emperor Taish\u014d within days. Following Japanese custom, the new Emperor was never referred to by his given name but rather was referred to simply as \"His Majesty the Emperor\" which may be shortened to \"His Majesty.\" In writing, the Emperor was also referred to formally as \"The Reigning Emperor.\"\nIn November 1928, Hirohito's accession was confirmed in ceremonies (\"sokui\") which are conventionally identified as \"enthronement\" and \"coronation\" (\"Sh\u014dwa no tairei-shiki\"); but this formal event would have been more accurately described as a public confirmation that he possessed the Japanese Imperial Regalia, also called the Three Sacred Treasures, which have been handed down through the centuries. However, his enthronement events were planned and staged under the economic conditions of a recession whereas the 55th Imperial Diet unanimously passed $7,360,000 for the festivities.\nEarly reign.\nThe first part of Hirohito's reign took place against a background of financial crisis and increasing military power within the government through both legal and extralegal means. The Imperial Japanese Army and Imperial Japanese Navy held veto power over the formation of cabinets since 1900. Between 1921 and 1944, there were 64 separate incidents of political violence.\nHirohito narrowly escaped assassination by a hand grenade thrown by a Korean independence activist, Lee Bong-chang, in Tokyo on 9 January 1932, in the Sakuradamon Incident.\nAnother notable case was the assassination of moderate Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi in 1932, marking the end of civilian control of the military. The February 26 incident, an attempted coup d'\u00e9tat, followed in February 1936. It was carried out by junior Army officers of the \"K\u014dd\u014dha\" faction who had the sympathy of many high-ranking officers including Yasuhito, Prince Chichibu, one of Hirohito's brothers. This revolt was occasioned by a loss of political support by the militarist faction in Diet elections. The coup resulted in the murders of several high government and Army officials.\nWhen Chief Aide-de-camp Shigeru Honj\u014d informed him of the revolt, Hirohito immediately ordered that it be put down and referred to the officers as \"rebels\" (\"b\u014dto\"). Shortly thereafter, he ordered Army Minister Yoshiyuki Kawashima to suppress the rebellion within the hour. He asked for reports from Honj\u014d every 30 minutes. The next day, when told by Honj\u014d that the high command had made little progress in quashing the rebels, the Emperor told him \"I Myself, will lead the Konoe Division and subdue them.\" The rebellion was suppressed following his orders on 29 February.\nSecond Sino-Japanese War.\nBeginning from the Mukden Incident in 1931 in which Japan staged a false flag operation and made a false accusation against Chinese dissidents as a pretext to invade Manchuria, Japan occupied Chinese territories and established puppet governments. Such aggression was recommended to Hirohito by his chiefs of staff and prime minister Fumimaro Konoe; Hirohito did not voice objection to the invasion of China.\nA diary by chamberlain Kuraji Ogura says that he was reluctant to start war against China in 1937 because they had underestimated China's military strength and Japan should be cautious in its strategy. In this regard, Ogura writes that Hirohito stated \"once you start (a war), it cannot easily be stopped in the middle ... What's important is when to end the war\" and \"one should be cautious in starting a war, but once begun, it should be carried out thoroughly.\"\nNonetheless, according to Herbert Bix, Hirohito's main concern seems to have been the possibility of an attack by the Soviet Union given his questions to his chief of staff, Prince Kan'in Kotohito, and army minister, Hajime Sugiyama, about the time it could take to crush Chinese resistance and how could they prepare for the eventuality of a Soviet incursion. Based on Bix's findings, Hirohito was displeased by Prince Kan'in's evasive responses about the substance of such contingency plans but nevertheless still approved the decision to move troops to North China.\nAccording to Akira Fujiwara, Hirohito endorsed the policy of qualifying the invasion of China as an \"incident\" instead of a \"war\"; therefore, he did not issue any notice to observe international law in this conflict (unlike what his predecessors did in previous conflicts officially recognized by Japan as wars), and the Deputy Minister of the Japanese Army instructed the chief of staff of Japanese China Garrison Army on 5 August not to use the term \"prisoners of war\" for Chinese captives. This instruction led to the removal of the constraints of international law on the treatment of Chinese prisoners. The works of Yoshiaki Yoshimi and Seiya Matsuno show that Hirohito also authorized, by specific orders (\"rinsanmei\"), the use of chemical weapons against the Chinese.\nLater in his life, Hirohito looked back on his decision to give the go-ahead to wage a 'defensive' war against China and opined that his foremost priority was not to wage war with China but to prepare for a war with the Soviet Union, as his army had reassured him that the China war would end within three months, but that decision of his had haunted him since he forgot that the Japanese forces in China were drastically fewer than that of the Chinese, hence the shortsightedness of his perspective was evident.\nOn 1 December 1937, Hirohito had given formal instruction to General Iwane Matsui to capture and occupy the enemy capital of Nanking. He was very eager to fight this battle since he and his council firmly believed that all it would take is a one huge blow to bring forth the surrender of Chiang Kai-shek. He even gave an Imperial Rescript to Iwane when he returned to Tokyo a year later, despite the brutality that his officers had inflicted on the Chinese populace in Nanking; thus Hirohito had seemingly turned a blind eye to and condoned these monstrosities.\nDuring the invasion of Wuhan, from August to October 1938, Hirohito authorized the use of toxic gas on 375 separate occasions, despite the resolution adopted by the League of Nations on 14 May condemning Japanese use of toxic gas.\nWorld War II.\nPreparations.\nIn July 1939, Hirohito quarrelled with his brother, Prince Chichibu, over whether to support the Anti-Comintern Pact, and reprimanded the army minister, Seishir\u014d Itagaki. But after the success of the Wehrmacht in Europe, Hirohito consented to the alliance. On 27 September 1940, ostensibly under Hirohito's leadership, Japan became a contracting partner of the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy forming the Axis powers.\nThe objectives to be obtained were clearly defined: a free hand to continue with the conquest of China and Southeast Asia, no increase in U.S. or British military forces in the region, and cooperation by the West \"in the acquisition of goods needed by our Empire.\"\nOn 5 September, Prime Minister Konoe informally submitted a draft of the decision to Hirohito, just one day in advance of the Imperial Conference at which it would be formally implemented. On this evening, Hirohito had a meeting with the chief of staff of the army, Sugiyama, chief of staff of the navy, Osami Nagano, and Prime Minister Konoe. Hirohito questioned Sugiyama about the chances of success of an open war with the Occident. As Sugiyama answered positively, Hirohito scolded him:\nChief of Naval General Staff Admiral Nagano, a former Navy Minister and vastly experienced, later told a trusted colleague, \"I have never seen the Emperor reprimand us in such a manner, his face turning red and raising his voice.\"\nNevertheless, all speakers at the Imperial Conference were united in favor of war rather than diplomacy. Baron Yoshimichi Hara, President of the Imperial Council and Hirohito's representative, then questioned them closely, producing replies to the effect that war would be considered only as a last resort from some, and silence from others.\nOn 8 October, Sugiyama signed a 47-page report to the Emperor (s\u014dj\u014dan) outlining in minute detail plans for the advance into Southeast Asia. During the third week of October, Sugiyama gave Hirohito a 51-page document, \"Materials in Reply to the Throne,\" about the operational outlook for the war.\nAs war preparations continued, Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe found himself increasingly isolated, and he resigned on 16 October. He justified himself to his chief cabinet secretary, Kenji Tomita, by stating:\nThe army and the navy recommended the appointment of Prince Naruhiko Higashikuni, one of Hirohito's uncles, as prime minister. According to the Sh\u014dwa \"Monologue\", written after the war, Hirohito then said that if the war were to begin while a member of the imperial house was prime minister, the imperial house would have to carry the responsibility and he was opposed to this. Instead, Hirohito chose the hard-line General Hideki T\u014dj\u014d, who was known for his devotion to the imperial institution, and asked him to make a policy review of what had been sanctioned by the Imperial Conferences.\nOn 2 November T\u014dj\u014d, Sugiyama, and Nagano reported to Hirohito that the review of eleven points had been in vain. Emperor Hirohito gave his consent to the war and then asked: \"Are you going to provide justification for the war?\" The decision for war against the United States was presented for approval to Hirohito by General T\u014dj\u014d, Naval Minister Admiral Shigetar\u014d Shimada, and Japanese Foreign Minister Shigenori T\u014dg\u014d.\nOn 3 November, Nagano explained in detail the plan of the attack on Pearl Harbor to Hirohito. On 5 November Emperor Hirohito approved in imperial conference the operations plan for a war against the Western world and had many meetings with the military and T\u014dj\u014d until the end of the month. He initially showed hesitance towards engaging in war, but eventually approved the decision to strike Pearl Harbor despite opposition from certain advisors. In the period leading up to Pearl Harbor, he expanded his control over military matters and participated in the Conference of Military Councillors, which was considered unusual of him. Additionally, he sought additional information regarding the attack plans. An aide reported that he openly showed joy upon learning of the success of the surprise attacks.\nOn 25 November Henry L. Stimson, United States Secretary of War, noted in his diary that he had discussed with U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt the severe likelihood that Japan was about to launch a surprise attack and that the question had been \"how we should maneuver them [the Japanese] into the position of firing the first shot without allowing too much danger to ourselves.\"\nOn the following day, 26 November 1941, U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull presented the Japanese ambassador with the Hull note, which as one of its conditions demanded the complete withdrawal of all Japanese troops from French Indochina and China. Japanese Prime Minister Hideki Tojo said to his cabinet, \"This is an ultimatum.\" On 1 December an Imperial Conference sanctioned the \"War against the United States, United Kingdom and the Kingdom of the Netherlands.\"\nWar: advance and retreat.\nOn 8 December (7 December in Hawaii), 1941, in simultaneous attacks, Japanese forces struck at the Hong Kong Garrison, the United States Fleet in Pearl Harbor and in the Philippines, and began the invasion of Malaya.\nWith the nation fully committed to the war, Hirohito took a keen interest in military progress and sought to boost morale. According to Akira Yamada and Akira Fujiwara, Hirohito made major interventions in some military operations. For example, he pressed Sugiyama four times, on 13 and 21 January and 9 and 26 February, to increase troop strength and launch an attack on Bataan. On 9 February 19 March, and 29 May, Hirohito ordered the Army Chief of staff to examine the possibilities for an attack on Chongqing in China, which led to Operation Gogo.\nWhile some authors, like journalists Peter Jennings and Todd Brewster, say that throughout the war, Hirohito was \"outraged\" at Japanese war crimes and the political dysfunction of many societal institutions that proclaimed their loyalty to him, and sometimes spoke up against them, others, such as historians Herbert P. Bix and Mark Felton, as well as the expert on China's international relations Michael Tai, point out that Hirohito personally sanctioned the \"Three Alls policy\" (), a scorched earth strategy implemented in China from 1942 to 1945 and which was both directly and indirectly responsible for the deaths of \"more than 2.7 million\" Chinese civilians.\nAs the tide of war began to turn against Japan (around late 1942 and early 1943), the flow of information to the palace gradually began to bear less and less relation to reality, while others suggest that Hirohito worked closely with Prime Minister Hideki Tojo, continued to be well and accurately briefed by the military, and knew Japan's military position precisely right up to the point of surrender. The chief of staff of the General Affairs section of the Prime Minister's office, Shuichi Inada, remarked to T\u014dj\u014d's private secretary, Sadao Akamatsu:\nIn the first six months of war, all the major engagements had been victories. Japanese advances were stopped in the summer of 1942 with the Battle of Midway and the landing of the American forces on Guadalcanal and Tulagi in August. Hirohito played an increasingly influential role in the war; in eleven major episodes he was deeply involved in supervising the actual conduct of war operations. Hirohito pressured the High Command to order an early attack on the Philippines in 1941\u201342, including the fortified Bataan peninsula. He secured the deployment of army air power in the Guadalcanal campaign. Following Japan's withdrawal from Guadalcanal he demanded a new offensive in New Guinea, which was duly carried out but failed badly. Unhappy with the navy's conduct of the war, he criticized its withdrawal from the central Solomon Islands and demanded naval battles against the Americans for the losses they had inflicted in the Aleutians. The battles were disasters. Finally, it was at his insistence that plans were drafted for the recapture of Saipan and, later, for an offensive in the Battle of Okinawa. With the Army and Navy bitterly feuding, he settled disputes over the allocation of resources. He helped plan military offenses.\nIn September 1944, Hirohito declared that it must be his citizens' resolve to smash the evil purposes of the Westerners so that their imperial destiny might continue, but all along, it is just a mask for the urgent need of Japan to scratch a victory against the counter-offensive campaign of the Allied Forces.\nOn 18 October 1944, the Imperial headquarters had resolved that the Japanese must make a stand in the vicinity of Leyte to prevent the Americans from landing in the Philippines. This view was widely frowned upon and disgruntled the policymakers from both the army and navy sectors. Hirohito was quoted that he approved of such since if they won in that campaign, they would be finally having a room to negotiate with the Americans. As high as their spirits could go, the reality check for the Japanese would also come into play since the forces they have sent in Leyte, was practically the ones that would efficiently defend the island of Luzon, hence the Japanese had struck a huge blow in their own military planning.\nThe media, under tight government control, repeatedly portrayed him as lifting the popular morale even as the Japanese cities came under heavy air attack in 1944\u201345 and food and housing shortages mounted. Japanese retreats and defeats were celebrated by the media as successes that portended \"Certain Victory.\" Only gradually did it become apparent to the Japanese people that the situation was very grim owing to growing shortages of food, medicine, and fuel as U.S. submarines began wiping out Japanese shipping. Starting in mid 1944, American raids on the major cities of Japan made a mockery of the unending tales of victory. Later that year, with the downfall of Tojo's government, two other prime ministers were appointed to continue the war effort, Kuniaki Koiso and Kantar\u014d Suzuki\u2014each with the formal approval of Hirohito. Both were unsuccessful and Japan was nearing disaster.\nSurrender.\nIn early 1945, in the wake of the losses in the Battle of Leyte, Emperor Hirohito began a series of individual meetings with senior government officials to consider the progress of the war. All but ex-Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe advised continuing the war. Konoe feared a communist revolution even more than defeat in war and urged a negotiated surrender. In February 1945, during the first private audience with Hirohito he had been allowed in three years, Konoe advised Hirohito to begin negotiations to end the war. According to Grand Chamberlain Hisanori Fujita, Hirohito, still looking for a \"tennozan\" (a great victory) in order to provide a stronger bargaining position, firmly rejected Konoe's recommendation.\nWith each passing week victory became less likely. In April, the Soviet Union issued notice that it would not renew its neutrality agreement. Japan's ally Germany surrendered in early May 1945. In June, the cabinet reassessed the war strategy, only to decide more firmly than ever on a fight to the last man. This strategy was officially affirmed at a brief Imperial Council meeting, at which, as was normal, Hirohito did not speak.\nThe following day, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal K\u014dichi Kido prepared a draft document which summarized the hopeless military situation and proposed a negotiated settlement. Extremists in Japan were also calling for a death-before-dishonor mass suicide, modeled on the \"47 Ronin\" incident. By mid-June 1945, the cabinet had agreed to approach the Soviet Union to act as a mediator for a negotiated surrender but not before Japan's bargaining position had been improved by repulse of the anticipated Allied invasion of mainland Japan.\nOn 22 June, Hirohito met with his ministers saying, \"I desire that concrete plans to end the war, unhampered by existing policy, be speedily studied and that efforts be made to implement them.\" The attempt to negotiate a peace via the Soviet Union came to nothing. There was always the threat that extremists would carry out a coup or foment other violence. On 26 July 1945, the Allies issued the Potsdam Declaration demanding unconditional surrender. The Japanese government council, the Big Six, considered that option and recommended to Hirohito that it be accepted only if one to four conditions were agreed upon, including a guarantee of Hirohito's continued position in Japanese society.\nThat changed after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the Soviet declaration of war. On 9 August, Emperor Hirohito told K\u014dichi Kido: \"The Soviet Union has declared war and today began hostilities against us.\" On 10 August, the cabinet drafted an \"Imperial Rescript ending the War\" following Hirohito's indications that the declaration did not compromise any demand which prejudiced his prerogatives as a sovereign ruler.\nOn 12 August 1945, Hirohito informed the imperial family of his decision to surrender. One of his uncles, Prince Yasuhiko Asaka, asked whether the war would be continued if the \"kokutai\" (national polity) could not be preserved. Hirohito simply replied \"Of course.\" On 14 August, Hirohito made the decision to surrender \"unconditionally\" and the Suzuki government notified the Allies that it had accepted the Potsdam Declaration.\nOn 15 August, a recording of Hirohito's surrender speech was broadcast over the radio (the first time Hirohito was heard on the radio by the Japanese people) announcing Japan's acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration. During the historic broadcast Hirohito stated: \"Moreover, the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb, the power of which to do damage is, indeed, incalculable, taking the toll of many innocent lives. Should we continue to fight, not only would it result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation, but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization.\" The speech also noted that \"the war situation has developed not necessarily to Japan's advantage\" and ordered the Japanese to \"endure the unendurable.\" The speech, using formal, archaic Japanese, was not readily understood by many commoners. According to historian Richard Storry in \"A History of Modern Japan\", Hirohito typically used \"a form of language familiar only to the well-educated\" and to the more traditional samurai families.\nA faction of the army opposed to the surrender attempted a coup d'\u00e9tat on the evening of 14 August, prior to the broadcast. They seized the Imperial Palace (the Ky\u016bj\u014d incident), but the physical recording of Hirohito's speech was hidden and preserved overnight. The coup failed, and the speech was broadcast the next morning.\nIn his first ever press conference given in Tokyo in 1975, when he was asked what he thought of the bombing of Hiroshima, Hirohito answered: \"It's very regrettable that nuclear bombs were dropped and I feel sorry for the citizens of Hiroshima but it couldn't be helped because that happened in wartime\" (\"shikata ga nai\", meaning \"it cannot be helped\").\nPostwar reign.\nAfter the Japanese surrender in August 1945, there was a large amount of pressure that came from both Allied countries and Japanese leftists that demanded Hirohito step down and be indicted as a war criminal. Australia, Britain and 70 percent of the American public wanted Hirohito tried as a Class-A war criminal. General Douglas MacArthur did not like the idea, as he thought that an ostensibly cooperating emperor would help establish a peaceful allied occupation regime in Japan. MacArthur saw Hirohito as a symbol of the continuity and cohesion of the Japanese people. To avoid the possibility of civil unrest in Japan, any possible evidence that would incriminate Hirohito and his family were excluded from the International Military Tribunal for the Far East. MacArthur created a plan that separated Hirohito from the militarists, retained Hirohito as a constitutional monarch but only as a figurehead, and used Hirohito to retain control over Japan to help achieve American postwar objectives in Japan.\nAs Hirohito appointed his uncle and daughter's father-in-law, Prince Naruhiko Higashikuni as the Prime Minister to replace Kantar\u014d Suzuki, who resigned owing to responsibility for the surrender, to assist the American occupation, there were attempts by numerous leaders to have him put on trial for alleged war crimes. Many members of the imperial family, such as Princes Chichibu, Takamatsu, and Higashikuni, pressured Hirohito to abdicate so that one of the Princes could serve as regent until his eldest son, Crown Prince Akihito came of age. On 27 February 1946, Hirohito's youngest brother, Prince Mikasa, even stood up in the privy council and indirectly urged Hirohito to step down and accept responsibility for Japan's defeat. According to Minister of Welfare Ashida's diary, \"Everyone seemed to ponder Mikasa's words. Never have I seen His Majesty's face so pale.\"\nBefore the war crime trials actually convened, the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers, its International Prosecution Section (IPS) and Japanese officials worked behind the scenes not only to prevent the Imperial family from being indicted, but also to influence the testimony of the defendants to ensure that no one implicated Hirohito. High officials in court circles and the Japanese government collaborated with Allied General Headquarters in compiling lists of prospective war criminals, while the individuals arrested as \"Class A\" suspects and incarcerated solemnly vowed to protect their sovereign against any possible taint of war responsibility. Thus, \"months before the Tokyo tribunal commenced, MacArthur's highest subordinates were working to attribute ultimate responsibility for Pearl Harbor to Hideki T\u014dj\u014d\" by allowing \"the major criminal suspects to coordinate their stories so that Hirohito would be spared from indictment.\" According to John W. Dower, \"This successful campaign to absolve Hirohito of war responsibility knew no bounds. Hirohito was not merely presented as being innocent of any formal acts that might make him culpable to indictment as a war criminal, he was turned into an almost saintly figure who did not even bear moral responsibility for the war.\" According to Bix, \"MacArthur's truly extraordinary measures to save Hirohito from trial as a war criminal had a lasting and profoundly distorting impact on Japanese understanding of the lost war.\"\nHistorian Gary J. Bass presented evidence supporting Hirohito's responsibility in the war, noting that had he been prosecuted as some judges and others advocated, a compelling case could have been constructed against him. However, the Americans were apprehensive that removing the emperor from power and subjecting him to trial could trigger widespread chaos and collapse of Japan, given his revered status among the Japanese populace. Additionally, the advent of the Cold War brought about harsh political circumstances. Chiang Kai-shek's Chinese nationalists were losing the Chinese Civil War to Mao Zedong's Chinese Communist Party, prompting the Truman administration to consider the potential loss of China as an ally and strategic partner. As a result, ensuring Japan's strength and stability became imperative for securing a reliable postwar ally.\nImperial status.\nHirohito was not put on trial, but he was forced to explicitly reject the quasi-official claim that Hirohito of Japan was an \"arahitogami\", i.e., an incarnate divinity. This was motivated by the fact that, according to the Japanese constitution of 1889, Hirohito had a divine power over his country which was derived from the Shinto belief that the Japanese Imperial Family were the descendants of the sun goddess Amaterasu. Hirohito was however persistent in the idea that the Emperor of Japan should be considered a descendant of the gods. In December 1945, he told his vice-grand-chamberlain Michio Kinoshita: \"It is permissible to say that the idea that the Japanese are descendants of the gods is a false conception; but it is absolutely impermissible to call chimerical the idea that the Emperor is a descendant of the gods.\" In any case, the \"renunciation of divinity\" was noted more by foreigners than by Japanese, and seems to have been intended for the consumption of the former. The theory of a constitutional monarchy had already had some proponents in Japan. In 1935, when Tatsukichi Minobe advocated the theory that sovereignty resides in the state, of which the Emperor is just an organ (the \"tenn\u014d kikan setsu\"), it caused a furor. He was forced to resign from the House of Peers and his post at the Tokyo Imperial University, his books were banned, and an attempt was made on his life. Not until 1946 was the tremendous step made to alter the Emperor's title from \"imperial sovereign\" to \"constitutional monarch.\"\nAlthough the Emperor had supposedly repudiated claims to divinity, his public position was deliberately left vague, partly because General MacArthur thought him probable to be a useful partner to get the Japanese to accept the occupation and partly owing to behind-the-scenes maneuvering by Shigeru Yoshida to thwart attempts to cast him as a European-style monarch.\nNevertheless, Hirohito's status as a limited constitutional monarch was formalized with the enactment of the 1947 constitution\u2013officially, an amendment to the Meiji Constitution. It defined the Emperor as \"the symbol of the state and the unity of the people.\" His role was redefined as entirely ceremonial and representative, without even nominal governmental powers. He was limited to performing matters of state as delineated in the Constitution, and in most cases his actions in that realm were carried out in accordance with the binding instructions of the Cabinet. In 1947, Hirohito became the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people under the nation's new constitution, which was written by the United States.\nFollowing the Iranian Revolution and the end of the short-lived Central African Empire, both in 1979, Hirohito found himself the last monarch in the world to bear any variation of the highest royal title \"emperor.\"\nPublic figure.\nHe was not only the first reigning Japanese emperor to visit foreign countries, but also the first to meet an American president. His status and image became strongly positive in the United States.\nVisit to Europe.\nThe talks between Emperor Hirohito and President Nixon were not planned at the outset, because initially the stop in the United States was only for refueling to visit Europe. However, the meeting was decided in a hurry at the request of the United States. Although the Japanese side accepted the request, Minister for Foreign Affairs Takeo Fukuda made a public telephone call to the Japanese ambassador to the United States Nobuhiko Ushiba, who promoted talks, saying, \"that will cause me a great deal of trouble. We want to correct the perceptions of the other party.\" At that time, Foreign Minister Fukuda was worried that President Nixon's talks with Hirohito would be used to repair the deteriorating Japan\u2013U.S. relations, and he was concerned that the premise of the symbolic emperor system could fluctuate.\nThere was an early visit with deep royal exchanges in Denmark and Belgium. In France, Hirohito was warmly welcomed, and reunited with Edward VIII, who had abdicated in 1936 and was virtually in exile, and they chatted for a while. However, protests were held in Britain and the Netherlands by veterans who had served in the South-East Asian theatre of World War II and civilian victims of the brutal occupation there. In the Netherlands, raw eggs and vacuum flasks were thrown. The protest was so severe that Empress Nagako, who accompanied the Emperor, was exhausted. In the United Kingdom, protestors stood in silence and turned their backs when Hirohito's carriage passed them while others wore red gloves to symbolize the dead. The satirical magazine \"Private Eye\" used a racist double entendre to refer to Hirohito's visit (\"nasty Nip in the air\"). In West Germany, the Japanese monarch's visit was met with hostile far-left protests, participants of which viewed Hirohito as the East Asian equivalent of Adolf Hitler and referred to him as \"Hirohitler\", and prompted a wider comparative discussion of the memory and perception of Axis war crimes. The protests against Hirohito's visit also condemned and highlighted what they perceived as mutual Japanese and West German complicity in and enabling of the American war effort against communism in Vietnam.\nRegarding these protests and opposition, Emperor Hirohito was not surprised to have received a report in advance at a press conference on 12 November after returning to Japan and said that \"I do not think that welcome can be ignored\" from each country. Also, at a press conference following their golden wedding anniversary three years later, along with the Empress, he mentioned this visit to Europe as his most enjoyable memory in 50 years.\nVisit to the United States.\nIn 1975, Hirohito and Nagako visited the United States for 14 days from 30 September to 14 October, at the invitation of President Gerald Ford. The visit was the first such event in US\u2013Japanese history. The United States Army, Navy and Air Force, as well as the Marine Corps and the Coast Guard honored the state visit. Before and after the visit, a series of terrorist attacks in Japan were caused by anti-American left-wing organizations such as the East Asia Anti-Japan Armed Front.\nAfter arriving in Williamsburg on 30 September 1975, Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako stayed in the United States for two weeks. The official meeting with President Ford occurred on 2 October. On 3 October, Hirohito visited Arlington National Cemetery. On 6 October, Emperor Hirohito and Empress Nagako visited Vice President and Mrs. Rockefeller at their home in Westchester County, New York.\nIn a speech at the White House state dinner, Hirohito read, \"Thanks to the United States for helping to rebuild Japan after the war.\" During his stay in Los Angeles, he visited Disneyland, and a smiling photo next to Mickey Mouse adorned the newspapers, and there was talk about the purchase of a Mickey Mouse watch. Two types of commemorative stamps and stamp sheets were issued on the day of their return to Japan which demonstrated that the visit had been a significant undertaking. This was the last visit of Emperor Sh\u014dwa to the United States. The official press conference held by the Emperor and Empress before and after their visit also marked a breakthrough.\nMarine biology.\nHirohito was deeply interested in and well-informed about marine biology, and the Tokyo Imperial Palace contained a laboratory from which Hirohito published several papers in the field under his personal name \"Hirohito\". His contributions included the description of several dozen species of Hydrozoa new to science.\nYasukuni Shrine.\nHirohito maintained an official boycott of the Yasukuni Shrine after it was revealed to him that Class-A war criminals had secretly been enshrined after its post-war rededication. This boycott lasted from 1978 until his death and has been continued by his successors, Akihito and Naruhito.\nOn 20 July 2006, \"Nihon Keizai Shimbun\" published a front-page article about the discovery of a memorandum detailing the reason that Hirohito stopped visiting Yasukuni. The memorandum, kept by former chief of Imperial Household Agency Tomohiko Tomita, confirms for the first time that the enshrinement of 14 Class-A war criminals in Yasukuni was the reason for the boycott. Tomita recorded in detail the contents of his conversations with Hirohito in his diaries and notebooks. According to the memorandum, in 1988, Hirohito expressed his strong displeasure at the decision made by Yasukuni Shrine to include Class-A war criminals in the list of war dead honored there by saying, \"At some point, Class-A criminals became enshrined, including Matsuoka and Shiratori. I heard Tsukuba acted cautiously.\" Tsukuba is believed to refer to Fujimaro Tsukuba, the former chief Yasukuni priest at the time, who decided not to enshrine the war criminals despite having received in 1966 the list of war dead compiled by the government. \"What's on the mind of Matsudaira's son, who is the current head priest?\" \"Matsudaira had a strong wish for peace, but the child didn't know the parent's heart. That's why I have not visited the shrine since. This is my heart.\" Matsudaira is believed to refer to Yoshitami Matsudaira, who was the grand steward of the Imperial Household immediately after the end of World War II. His son, Nagayoshi, succeeded Fujimaro Tsukuba as the chief priest of Yasukuni and decided to enshrine the war criminals in 1978.\nDeath and state funeral.\nOn 22 September 1987, Hirohito underwent surgery on his pancreas after having digestive problems for several months. The doctors discovered that he had duodenal cancer. Hirohito appeared to be making a full recovery for several months after the surgery. About a year later, however, on 19 September 1988, he collapsed in his palace, and his health worsened over the next several months as he suffered from continuous internal bleeding.\nThe Emperor died at 6:33 am on 7 January 1989 at the age of 87. The announcement from the grand steward of Japan's Imperial Household Agency, Shoichi Fujimori, revealed details about his cancer for the first time. Hirohito was survived by his wife, his five surviving children, ten grandchildren, and one great-grandchild.\nAt the time of his death, he was both the oldest and longest-reigning historical Japanese emperor, as well as the longest-reigning living monarch in the world at that time, a distinction which passed to the Prince of Liechtenstein, Franz Joseph II, until his own death in November of the same year.\nThe Emperor was succeeded by his eldest son, Akihito (), whose enthronement ceremony was held on 12 November 1990 at the Tokyo Imperial Palace.\nHirohito's death ended the Sh\u014dwa era. On the next day, 8 January 1989, a new era began: the Heisei era, effective at midnight the following day. From 7 January until 31 January, Hirohito's formal appellation was . His definitive posthumous name, , was determined on 13 January and formally released on 31 January by Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita.\nOn 24 February, Hirohito's state funeral was held at the Shinjuku Gyo-en, and unlike that of his predecessor, it was formal but not conducted in a strictly Shinto manner. A large number of world leaders attended the funeral. Hirohito is buried in the Musashi Imperial Graveyard in Hachi\u014dji, Tokyo alongside his late parents, Emperor Taish\u014d and Empress Teimei, and his wife, Empress Nagako, who died in 2000.\nLegacy and honors.\nAccountability for Japanese war crimes.\nThe issue of Emperor Hirohito's war responsibility is contested. During the war, the Allies frequently depicted Hirohito to equate with Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini as the three Axis dictators. After the war, since the U.S. thought that the retention of the emperor would help establish a peaceful allied occupation regime in Japan, and help the U.S. achieve their postwar objectives, they depicted Hirohito as a \"powerless figurehead\" without any implication in wartime policies. Starting with the publication of specific archival records in the 1960s and continuing after Hirohito's death in 1989, a growing body of evidence and historical studies started to dispute the theory that he was a powerless figurehead. In recent years, the debate over the Emperor's role in the war has focused on the exact extent of his involvement in political and military affairs (as it is now widely accepted that he had at least some degree of involvement). \nHistorian Peter Wetzler said that: \"The debate, however, about Hirohito's participation in political and military affairs during the Second World War -whether or not (at first) and to what extent (later)- still continues. It will animate authors for years to come. Now most historians acknowledge that the Emperor was deeply involved, like all nation-state leaders at that time.\" \nJennifer Lind, associate professor of government at Dartmouth College and a specialist in Japanese war memory, states that: \"Over the years, these different pieces of evidence have trickled out and historians have amassed this picture of culpability and how he was reflecting on that. This is another piece of the puzzle that very much confirms that the picture that was taking place before, which is that he was extremely culpable, and after the war he was devastated about this.\" As new evidence surfaced over the years, historians concluded that he bore at least some amount of culpability for the war's outbreak and the crimes perpetrated by Japan's military during that period.\nEvidence for wartime culpability.\nHistorians who point to a higher degree of the Emperor's involvement in the war have stated that Hirohito was directly responsible for the atrocities committed by the imperial forces in the Second Sino-Japanese War and in World War II. They have said that he and some members of the imperial family, such as his brother Prince Chichibu, his cousins the princes Takeda and Fushimi, and his uncles the princes Kan'in, Asaka, and Higashikuni, should have been tried for war crimes. In a study published in 1996, historian Mitsuyoshi Himeta said that the Three Alls policy (\"Sank\u014d Sakusen\"), a Japanese scorched earth policy adopted in China and sanctioned by Emperor Hirohito himself, was both directly and indirectly responsible for the deaths of \"more than 2.7 million\" Chinese civilians. In \"Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan\", Herbert P. Bix said the \"Sank\u014d Sakusen\" far surpassed Nanking Massacre not only in terms of numbers, but in brutality. According to Bix, \"[t]hese military operations caused death and suffering on a scale incomparably greater than the totally unplanned orgy of killing in Nanking, which later came to symbolize the war\". While the Nanking Massacre was unplanned, Bix said \"Hirohito knew of and approved annihilation campaigns in China that included burning villages thought to harbor guerrillas.\" Likewise, in August 2000, the Los Angeles Times reported that top U.S. government officials were fully aware of the emperor's intimate role during the war.\nAccording to Yuki Tanaka, Emeritus Research Professor of History at Hiroshima City University, the war records at the Defense Agency National Institute provide evidence that Hirohito was heavily involved in creating war policies. He further stated that Japanese statesmen Kido K\u014dichi's wartime journal undeniably proves that Hirohito had a crucial role in the final decision to wage a war against the Allied nations in December 1941.\nAccording to Francis Pike, Hirohito was deeply engaged in military operations and commissioned a war room beneath the Tokyo Imperial Palace to closely monitor Japan's military activities. Pike further noted that the extensive resources required for regular updates to the Emperor often drew complaints from military officials. To celebrate significant military victories, he rode his white horse in parades in front of the Imperial Palace.\nAccording to Peter Wetzler, he was actively involved in the decision to launch the war as well as in other political and military decisions. \nPoison gas weapons, such as phosgene, were produced by Unit 731 and authorized by specific orders given by Hirohito himself, transmitted by the chief of staff of the army. Hirohito authorized the use of toxic gas 375 times during the Battle of Wuhan from August to October 1938. He rewarded Shiro Ishii, who was the head of the medical experimentation unit and Unit 731, with a special service medal.\nPrince Mikasa, the younger brother of Hirohito, informed the Yomiuri Shimbun that during 1944, he compiled a thorough report detailing the wartime atrocities perpetrated by Japanese soldiers in China. He clarified that he didn't directly discuss the report with Hirohito;however, he added that \"when I met with him, I did report on the China situation in bits and pieces.\" Additionally, he recalled showing Hirohito a Chinese-produced film depicting Japanese atrocities.\nOfficially, the imperial constitution, adopted under Emperor Meiji, gave full power to the Emperor. Article 4 prescribed that, \"The Emperor is the head of the Empire, combining in Himself the rights of sovereignty, and exercises them, according to the provisions of the present Constitution.\" Likewise, according to article 6, \"The Emperor gives sanction to laws and orders them to be promulgated and executed,\" and article 11, \"The Emperor has the supreme command of the Army and the Navy.\" The Emperor was thus the leader of the Imperial General Headquarters.\nAccording to Bob Tadashi Wakabayashi of York University, Hirohito's authority up to 1945 depended on three elements: \n First, he was a constitutional monarch subject to legal restrictions and binding conventions, as he has so often stressed. Second, he was supreme commander of Japanese armed forces, though his orders were often ignored and sometimes defied. Third, he wielded absolute moral authority in Japan by granting imperial honors that conveyed incontestable prestige and by issuing imperial rescripts that had coercive power greater than law. [\u00b6] In the postwar era, the Japanese Government, some Japanese historians, and Hirohito himself have downplayed or ignored these second and third elements, where were strongest up to 1945; and they have overemphasized the first, which was weakest. Hirohito was no despot. But he did retain 'absolute' power in the sense of ultimate and final authority to sanction a particular policy decision by agreeing with it, or to force its reformulation or abandonment by disagreeing with it. When he really wanted to put his foot down, he did \u2013\u2013 even to the army.\"\nWakabayashi further adds:\n...as a matter of course, [Hirohito] wanted to keep what his generals conquered -- though he was less greedy than some of them. None of this should surprise us. Hirohito would no more have granted Korea independence or returned Manchuria to China than Roosevelt would have granted Hawaii independence or returned Texas to Mexico.\nHistorians such as Herbert Bix, Akira Fujiwara, Peter Wetzler, and Akira Yamada assert that post-war arguments favoring the view that Hirohito was a mere figurehead overlook the importance of numerous \"behind the chrysanthemum curtain\" meetings where the real decisions were made between the Emperor, his chiefs of staff, and the cabinet. Using primary sources and the monumental work of Shir\u014d Hara as a basis, Fujiwara and Wetzler have produced evidence suggesting that the Emperor actively participated in making political and military decisions and was neither bellicose nor a pacifist but an opportunist who governed in a pluralistic decision-making process. Historian Peter Wetzler states that the emperor was thoroughly informed of military matters, and comensurate with his position and Japanese methods of forming policies, he participated in making political and military decisions as the constitutional emperor of Imperial Japan and head of the imperial house. For his part, American historian Herbert P. Bix maintains that Emperor Hirohito worked through intermediaries to exercise a great deal of control over the military and might have been the prime mover behind most of Japan's military aggression during the Sh\u014dwa era.\nThe view promoted by the Imperial Palace and American occupation forces immediately after World War II portrayed Emperor Hirohito as a purely ceremonial figure who behaved strictly according to protocol while remaining at a distance from the decision-making processes. This view was endorsed by Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita in a speech on the day of Hirohito's death in which Takeshita asserted that the war \"had broken out against [Hirohito's] wishes.\" Takeshita's statement provoked outrage in nations in East Asia and Commonwealth nations such as the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. According to historian Fujiwara, \"The thesis that the Emperor, as an organ of responsibility, could not reverse cabinet decision is a myth fabricated after the war.\"\nAccording to Yinan He, associate professor of international relations at Lehigh University, allied countries and Japanese leftists demanded the emperor to abdicate and be tried as a war criminal. However, conservative Japanese elites concocted jingoistic myths that exonerated the nation's ruling class and downplayed Japan's wartime culpability. Such revisionist campaigns depicted the Emperor as a peace-seeking diplomat, while blaming the militarists for hijacking the government and leading the country into a disastrous war. This narrative sought to exonerate the Emperor by shifting responsibility onto a small group of military leaders. Furthermore, numerous Japanese conservative elites lobbied the United States to spare the emperor from war crimes investigations and advocated instead for the prosecution of General Hideki Tojo, who held office as prime minister for most of the Pacific War. This narrative also narrowly focuses on the U.S.\u2013Japan conflict, completely ignores the wars Japan waged in Asia, and disregards the atrocities committed by Japanese troops during the war. Japanese elites created the narrative in an attempt to avoid tarnishing the national image and regain the international acceptance of the country.\n said that post-war Japanese public opinion supporting protection of the Emperor was influenced by United States propaganda promoting the view that the Emperor together with the Japanese people had been fooled by the military.\nIn the years immediately after Hirohito's death, scholars who spoke out against the emperor were threatened and attacked by right-wing extremists. Susan Chira reported, \"Scholars who have spoken out against the late Emperor have received threatening phone calls from Japan's extremist right wing.\" One example of actual violence occurred in 1990 when the mayor of Nagasaki, Hitoshi Motoshima, was shot and critically wounded by a member of the ultranationalist group, Seikijuku. A year before, in 1989, Motoshima had broken what was characterized as \"one of [Japan's] most sensitive taboos\" by asserting that Emperor Hirohito bore responsibility for World War II.\nRegarding Hirohito's exemption from trial before the International Military Tribunal of the Far East, opinions were not unanimous. Sir William Webb, the president of the tribunal, declared: \"This immunity of the Emperor is contrasted with the part he played in launching the war in the Pacific, is, I think, a matter which the tribunal should take into consideration in imposing the sentences.\" Likewise, the French judge, Henri Bernard, wrote about Hirohito's accountability that the declaration of war by Japan \"had a principal author who escaped all prosecution and of whom in any case the present defendants could only be considered accomplices.\"\nAn account from the Vice Interior Minister in 1941, Michio Yuzawa, asserts that Hirohito was \"at ease\" with the attack on Pearl Harbor \"once he had made a decision.\"\nSince his death in 1989, historians have discovered evidence that prove Hirohito's culpability for the war, and that he was not a passive figurehead manipulated by those around him.\nShowa Tenno Dokuhaku Roku.\nIn December 1990, the Bungeishunj\u016b published the Showa tenno dokuhaku roku (Dokuhaku roku), which recorded conversations Hirohito held with five Imperial Household Ministry officials between March and April 1946, containing twenty-four sections. The Dokuhaku roku recorded Hirohito speaking retroactively on topics arranged chronologically from 1919 to 1946, right before the Tokyo War Crimes Trials.\nIn Hirohito's monologue: It doesn't matter much if an incident occurs in Manchuria, as it is rural; however, if something were to happen in the Tientsin-Peking area, Anglo-American intervention would likely worsen and could lead to a clash.\nWhile he could justify the aggression of his military in China's northeastern provinces, he lacked confidence in Japan's capacity to win a war against the United States and Britain. He was also more aware than his military commanders of Japan's vulnerability to an economic blockade by Western powers.\nJapan signed the Tripartite Pact in 1940 and another agreement in December 1941 that forbade Japan from signing a separate peace treaty with the United States. In the Dokuhaku roku, Hirohito said:\n(In 1941,) we thought we could achieve a draw with the US, or at best win by a six to four margin; but total victory was nearly impossible ... When the war actually began, however, we gained a miraculous victory at Pearl Harbor and our invasions of Malaya and Burma succeeded far quicker than expected. So, if not for this (agreement), we might have achieved peace when we were in an advantageous position.\nThe passage in the Dokuhaku roku refutes the theory that Hirohito wanted an early conclusion to the war owing to his value for peace. Instead, it provides evidence that he desired its end because of Japan's early military victories in Pearl Harbor and Southeast Asia.\nIn September 1944, Prime Minister Kuniaki Koiso proposed that a settlement and concessions, such as the return of Hong Kong, should be given to Chiang Kai-shek, so that Japanese troops in China could be diverted to the Pacific War. Hirohito rejected the proposal and did not want to give concessions to China because he feared it would signal Japanese weakness, create defeatism at home, and trigger independence movements in occupied countries.\nAs the war shifted unfavorably for Japan, his sentiments were recorded in the Dokuhaku roku as follows:\n I hoped to give the enemy one good bashing somewhere, and then seize a chance for peace. Yet I didn't want to ask for peace before Germany did because then we would lose trust in the international community for having violated that corollary agreement.\nAs the war front progressed northward, Hirohito persistently hoped for the Japanese military to deliver a \"good bashing\" at some point during the war, which meant securing a decisive victory and then leveraging that success to negotiate the most favorable terms possible for Japan. In the autumn of 1944, he hoped for a victory at Battle of Leyte Gulf, but Japan suffered defeat. On 14 February 1945, Fumimaro Konoe wrote a proposal to Hirohito, urging him to quell extremist elements within the military and end the war. Konoe argued that although surrendering to America might preserve imperial rule, it would not survive a communist revolution he believed was imminent. Hirohito was troubled by the ambiguity surrounding America's commitment to upholding imperial rule. He considered the advice of Army Chief of Staff Yoshijir\u014d Umezu, who advocated for continuing the fight to the bitter end, believing that the Americans could be lured into a trap on Taiwan, where they could be defeated. However, the Americans avoided Taiwan. Despite the defeat at the Battle of Okinawa and acknowledging Japan's imminent unconditional surrender following this defeat, Hirohito persisted in seeking another battlefield where a \"good bashing\" could be achieved, considering locations such as Yunnan or Burma.\nIn August 1945, Hirohito agreed to the Potsdam Declaration because he thought that the American occupation of Japan would uphold imperial rule in Japan.\nShinobu Kobayashi's diary.\nShinobu Kobayashi was the Emperor's chamberlain from April 1974 until June 2000. Kobayashi kept a diary with near-daily remarks of Hirohito for 26 years. It was made public on Wednesday 22 August 2018. According to Takahisa Furukawa, a professor of modern Japanese history at Nihon University, the diary reveals that the emperor \"gravely took responsibility for the war for a long time, and as he got older, that feeling became stronger.\"\nJennifer Lind, associate professor of government at Dartmouth College and a specialist in Japanese war memory said:\nAn entry dated 27 May 1980 said the Emperor wanted to express his regret about the Sino-Japanese war to former Chinese Premier Hua Guofeng who visited at the time, but was stopped by senior members of the Imperial Household Agency owing to fear of backlash from far right groups.\nAn entry dated 7 April 1987 said the Emperor was haunted by discussions of his wartime responsibility and, as a result, was losing his will to live.\nMichiji Tajima's notes in 1952.\nAccording to notebooks by Michiji Tajima, a top Imperial Household Agency official who took office after the war, Emperor Hirohito privately expressed regret about the atrocities that were committed by Japanese troops during the Nanjing Massacre. In addition to feeling remorseful about his own role in the war, he \"fell short by allowing radical elements of the military to drive the conduct of the war.\"\nVice Interior Minister Yuzawa's account on Hirohito's role in Pearl Harbor raid.\nIn late July 2018, the bookseller Takeo Hatano, an acquaintance of the descendants of Michio Yuzawa (Japanese Vice Interior Minister in 1941), released to Japan's \"Yomiuri Shimbun\" newspaper a memo by Yuzawa that Hatano had kept for nine years since he received it from Yuzawa's family. The bookseller said: \"It took me nine years to come forward, as I was afraid of a backlash. But now I hope the memo would help us figure out what really happened during the war, in which 3.1 million people were killed.\"\nTakahisa Furukawa, expert on wartime history from Nihon University, confirmed the authenticity of the memo, calling it \"the first look at the thinking of Emperor Hirohito and Prime Minister Hideki Tojo on the eve of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.\"\nIn this document, Yuzawa details a conversation he had with Tojo a few hours before the attack. The Vice Minister quotes Tojo saying:\nHistorian Furukawa concluded from Yuzawa's memo:\nDiary of Chief Military Aide-de-Camp Takeji Nara.\nThe diary of Japanese general Takeji Nara documented Nara's interactions with the emperor and described Hirohito's reactions to Japan's role in instigating the Mukden Incident. Nara's diary entries show that Hirohito was well aware of the Mukden Incident and acknowledged that Japanese General Kanji Ishiwara was its instigator. However, once the emperor justified that the army's actions in Manchuria as necessary, he gradually adapted to the new circumstances and showed little desire to punish those responsible.\nHirohito's preparations for war described in Sabur\u014d Hyakutake's diary.\nIn September 2021, 25 diaries, pocket notebooks and memos by Sabur\u014d Hyakutake (Emperor Hirohito's Grand Chamberlain from 1936 to 1944) deposited by his relatives to the library of the University of Tokyo's graduate schools for law and politics became available to the public.\nHyakutake's diary quotes some of Hirohito's ministers and advisers as being worried that the Emperor was getting ahead of them in terms of battle preparations.\nThus, Hyakutake quotes Tsuneo Matsudaira, the Imperial Household Minister, saying:\nLikewise, Koichi Kido, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, is quoted as saying:\nSeiichi Chadani, professor of modern Japanese history with Shigakukan University who has studied Hirohito's actions before and during the war said on the discovery of Hyakutake's diary:\nDocuments that suggest limited wartime responsibility.\nThe declassified January 1989 British government assessment of Hirohito describes him as \"too weak to alter the course of events\" and Hirohito was \"powerless\" and comparisons with Hitler are \"ridiculously wide off the mark.\" Hirohito's power was limited by ministers and the military and if he asserted his views too much he would have been replaced by another member of the royal family.\nIndian jurist Radhabinod Pal opposed the International Military Tribunal and made a 1,235-page judgment. He found the entire prosecution case to be weak regarding the conspiracy to commit an act of aggressive war with brutalization and subjugation of conquered nations. Pal said there is \"no evidence, testimonial or circumstantial, concomitant, prospectant, restrospectant, that would in any way lead to the inference that the government in any way permitted the commission of such offenses\". He added that conspiracy to wage aggressive war was not illegal in 1937, or at any point since. Pal supported the acquittal of all of the defendants. He considered the Japanese military operations as justified, because Chiang Kai-shek supported the boycott of trade operations by the Western Powers, particularly the United States boycott of oil exports to Japan. Pal argued the attacks on neighboring territories were justified to protect the Japanese Empire from an aggressive environment, especially the Soviet Union. He considered that to be self-defense operations which are not criminal. Pal said \"the real culprits are not before us\" and concluded that \"only a lost war is an international crime\".\nBritish government assessment of Hirohito.\nA January 1989 declassified British government assessment of Hirohito said the Emperor was \"uneasy with Japan's drift to war in the 1930s and 1940s but was too weak to alter the course of events.\" The dispatch by John Whitehead, former ambassador of the United Kingdom to Japan, to Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe was declassified on Thursday 20 July 2017 at the National Archives in London. The letter was written shortly after Hirohito's death.\nBritain's ambassador to Japan John Whitehead stated in 1989:\nWhitehead concludes that ultimately Hirohito was \"powerless\" and comparisons with Hitler are \"ridiculously wide off the mark.\" If Hirohito acted too insistently with his views he could have been isolated or replaced with a more pliant member of the royal family. The pre-war Meiji Constitution defined Hirohito as \"sacred\" and all-powerful, but according to Whitehead, Hirohito's power was limited by ministers and the military. Whitehead explained after World War II that Hirohito's humility was fundamental for the Japanese people to accept the new 1947 constitution and allied occupation.\nIssue.\nEmperor Sh\u014dwa and Empress K\u014djun had seven children (two sons and five daughters)."}
{"id": "10288", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10288", "title": "Emission trading", "text": ""}
{"id": "10289", "revid": "1271531087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10289", "title": "Emsworth", "text": "Emsworth is a town in the Borough of Havant in the county of Hampshire, on the south coast of England near the border with West Sussex. It lies at the north end of an arm of Chichester Harbour, a large and shallow inlet from the English Channel, and is equidistant between Portsmouth and Chichester.\nEmsworth had a population of 10,269 at the 2021 Census. The town has a basin for yachts and fishing boats, which fills at high tide and can be emptied through a sluice at low tide. In geodemographic segmentation the town is the heart of the Emsworth (cross-county) built-up area, the remainder of which is Westbourne, Southbourne and Nutbourne. The area had a combined population of 18,777 in 2011, with a density of 30.5 people per hectare, and shares two railway stations.\nEtymology.\nAccording to Richard Coates the meaning of Emsworth is derived from the Old English , which translates as '\u00c6mmele's curtilage'. Similarly, Eilert Ekwall says that \"Emsworth\" was derived from \"Amils worth\", with \"worth\" meaning the fence around the property (owned by Amil).\nIt is popularly thought that Emsworth derived its name from the River Ems, but this is not true; before the 16th century the stream was actually called the Bourne. The river was renamed by the 16th century chronicler Raphael Holinshed:\nHolinshed writes that the Emille flows in to the sea at Emilswort or Emmesworth. Therefore, it appears that the river was named after Emsworth and not the other way round.\nHistory.\nPre-Roman.\nIn prehistoric and early historical times the River Ems was tidal as far as Westbourne and the Westbrook creek reached to Victoria Road, leaving Emsworth almost isolated at high tide. A coastal route developed that led from Hayling Island through Havant and Rowlands Castle to the Downs. A part of the coastal route followed the Portsdown ridgeway and from Chichester to Belmont Hill in Bedhampton probably skirted the heads of the various creeks which entered the harbour, passing through country still covered with the original thick forest of oak and beech.\nRoman.\nIn Roman times a villa existed to the south of the road to Noviomagus Reginorum in the fields of what is now Warblington Castle Farm. Archaeological finds show that the building was a sizeable brick and stone edifice, with floors paved with red brick and coloured sandstone and a view of the harbour and wooded shores of Hayling Island. The fertile landscape suggests the area to have been under continuous cultivation for 1500\u20131800 years.\nAnglo-Saxon.\nSaxons began settling the area after AD 500. Charters were granted by Kings \u00c6thelstan and \u00c6thelred in AD 935 and AD 980 establishing and confirming the boundaries of Warblington. From AD 980\u20131066 the manor was held by Godwin, Earl of Wessex and his son Harold Godwinson.\nMedieval.\nAfter the Norman Conquest, the Manor of Warblington was given to Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury as part of the manor of Westbourne. The Domesday Book lists the latter with two churches, a mill, 29 families and two slaves (about 120 people). There were also seven plough teams, indicating about 850 acres of land under cultivation.\nThe first recorded mention of Emsworth as a separate entity was in AD 1216, when King John divided the manor of Warblington, accepting annual rent of 'a pair of gilt spurs yearly' from William Aguillon for land at \"Emelsworth\". In AD 1239, Henry III granted the town a weekly market on Wednesdays and an annual fair on 7 July. The town was mentioned in a patent roll of a hospital in the Hermitage area in AD 1251.\nIn AD 1341 Emsworth was designated as one of five English towns required to provide a ship for defence of the Channel Islands. It was designated as a customs landing for Chichester in AD 1346 and in AD 1348 was investigated by a special commission for smuggling.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nDuring the 18th and 19th centuries, Emsworth was still a port. Emsworth was known for shipbuilding, boat building and rope making. Grain from the area was ground into flour by tidal mills and transported by ship to places such as London and Portsmouth. Timber from the area was also exported in the 18th and 19th centuries. The River Ems, which is named after the town (not, as often believed, the town being named after the river), flows into the Slipper millpond. The mill itself is now used as offices.\nIn the 19th century Emsworth had as many as 30 pubs and beer houses; today, only nine remain.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, Emsworth had a population of less than 1,200 but it was still considered a large village for the time. By the end of the 18th century, it became fashionable for wealthy people to spend the summer by the sea. In 1805 a bathing house was built where people could have a bath in seawater.\nSt Peter's Chapel was completed in 1790, later becoming Emsworth Town Hall. The parish Church of St James was built in 1840 to a design by John Elliott. It was expanded in the late 1850s this time to a design by John Colson. Colson's designs were again used in an expansion of 1865. A final round of building took place in the early 1890s this time to a design by Arthur Blomfield. The reredos added in the 1920s features a painting by Percy George Bentham.\nQueen Victoria visited Emsworth in 1842, resulting in Queen Street and Victoria Road being named after her. In 1847 the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway (now the West Coastway line) came to Emsworth, with a railway station built to serve the town.\nHollybank House to the north of the town was built in 1825 and is now a hotel.\nEmsworth became part of Warblington Urban District which held its first meeting in 1895. The Urban District was abolished in 1932. Emsworth subsequently became part of Havant Urban District.\nModern.\nBy 1901 the population of Emsworth was about 2,000. It grew rapidly during the 20th century to about 5,000 by the middle of the century. In 1906 construction began on the post office, with local cricketer George Wilder laying an inscribed brick. The renamed Emsworth Recreation Ground dates from 1909 and is the current home of Emsworth Cricket Club, which was founded in 1811. Cricket in Emsworth has been played at the same ground, Cold Harbour Lawn, since 1761.\nIn 1902 the once famous Emsworth oyster industry went into rapid decline. This was after many of the guests at mayoral banquets in Southampton and Winchester became seriously ill and four died after consuming oysters. The infection was due to oysters sourced from Emsworth, as the oyster beds had been contaminated with raw sewage. Fishing oysters at Emsworth was subsequently halted until new sewers were dug, though the industry never completely recovered. J D Foster, an oyster merchant, who had for many years been in occupation of the oyster beds sued Warblington Urban District Council (the owners of the sewers) for nuisance. This was a test case as he could not prove title to the land. However, the Court of Appeal held that Foster had a right to sue, as exclusive occupier of the oyster beds, whether or not he had acquired an interest in the land itself. The judges view was that: \nFoster went on to win his case.\nRecently, Emsworth's last remaining oyster boat, \"The Terror,\" was restored and is now sailing again. But the oyster industry is again under threat, because the reproductive rate of the oysters has plunged, as they now contain microscopic glass spicules that are shed into the water from the hulls of the numerous plastic fibreglass boats in Chichester Harbour.\nDuring the Second World War, nearby Thorney Island was used as a Royal Air Force station, playing a role in defence in the Battle of Britain. The north of Emsworth at this time was used for growing flowers and further north was woodland (today Hollybank Woods). In the run up to D-Day, the Canadian Army used these woods as one of their pre-invasion assembly points for men and materiel. Today the foundations of their barracks can still be seen. In the 1960s large parts of this area were developed with a mix of bungalow and terraced housing.\nFor a few years (2001 to 2007), Emsworth held a food festival. It was the largest event of its type in the UK, with more than 50,000 visitors in 2007. The festival was cancelled due to numerous complaints of disruption to residents and businesses in the proximity.\nA Baptist church was constructed in North Street in 2015.\nThe harbour is now used for recreational sailing, paddle boarding, kayaking and swimming. The town has two sailing clubs, Emsworth Sailing Club (established in 1919) and Emsworth Slipper Sailing Club (in 1921), the latter based at Quay Mill, a former tide mill. Both clubs organise a programme of racing and social events during the sailing season.\nCulture and community.\nEmsworth Library was considered for closure in 2020 but following public consultation, was reprieved.\nEmsworth Museum is administered by the Emsworth Maritime &amp; Historical Trust.\nThe town is twinned with Saint-Aubin-sur-Mer in Normandy, France.\nThere are a large number of community groups in Emsworth and the immediate surrounding area such as cadets, scout and guide groups.\nLocal landmark Thorney Island is home to a detachment of the Sussex Army Cadet Force, a volunteer youth organisation, sponsored by the Ministry of Defence, which accepts cadets aged between 12 and 18 years of age.\n1st Emsworth Scouts meet several times per week with different sections aimed at different age groups and abilities.\nIn 2014 retired Royal Navy Captain Clifford \"John\" Caughey drove his car into the clubhouse of Emsworth Sailing Club, causing an explosion and requiring thirty firefighters to put out the fire.\nPolitics.\nThe town is part of the Havant constituency, which since the 1983 election has been a Conservative seat. The current Member of Parliament (MP) is Alan Mak MP. The town is represented at Havant Borough Council by councillors Richard Kennet and Lulu Bowerman of the Conservative Party and Grainne Rason of the Green Party. The local Hampshire County Councillor is Lulu Bowerman. The town has branches of the Conservative Party, Liberal Democrats, the Labour Party, the United Kingdom Independence Party and the Green Party.\nTransport.\nEmsworth railway station is on the West Coastway Line. It has services that run to Portsmouth, Southampton, Brighton and London Victoria.\nStagecoach South operates the Coastliner 700 which runs between Chichester and Portsmouth\n Havant Borough Council claims local bus services are provided by Emsworth &amp; District, First and Stagecoach."}
{"id": "10290", "revid": "1246627899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10290", "title": "Emulsion", "text": "An emulsion is a mixture of two or more liquids that are normally immiscible (unmixable or unblendable) owing to liquid-liquid phase separation. Emulsions are part of a more general class of two-phase systems of matter called colloids. Although the terms \"colloid\" and \"emulsion\" are sometimes used interchangeably, \"emulsion\" should be used when both phases, dispersed and continuous, are liquids. In an emulsion, one liquid (the dispersed phase) is dispersed in the other (the continuous phase). Examples of emulsions include vinaigrettes, homogenized milk, liquid biomolecular condensates, and some cutting fluids for metal working.\nTwo liquids can form different types of emulsions. As an example, oil and water can form, first, an oil-in-water emulsion, in which the oil is the dispersed phase, and water is the continuous phase. Second, they can form a water-in-oil emulsion, in which water is the dispersed phase and oil is the continuous phase. Multiple emulsions are also possible, including a \"water-in-oil-in-water\" emulsion and an \"oil-in-water-in-oil\" emulsion.\nEmulsions, being liquids, do not exhibit a static internal structure. The droplets dispersed in the continuous phase (sometimes referred to as the \"dispersion medium\") are usually assumed to be statistically distributed to produce roughly spherical droplets.\nThe term \"emulsion\" is also used to refer to the photo-sensitive side of photographic film. Such a photographic emulsion consists of silver halide colloidal particles dispersed in a gelatin matrix. Nuclear emulsions are similar to photographic emulsions, except that they are used in particle physics to detect high-energy elementary particles.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emulsion\" comes from the Latin \"emulgere\" \"to milk out\", from \"ex\" \"out\" + \"mulgere\" \"to milk\", as milk is an emulsion of fat and water, along with other components, including colloidal casein micelles (a type of secreted biomolecular condensate).\nAppearance and properties.\nEmulsions contain both a dispersed and a continuous phase, with the boundary between the phases called the \"interface\". Emulsions tend to have a cloudy appearance because the many phase interfaces scatter light as it passes through the emulsion. Emulsions appear white when all light is scattered equally. If the emulsion is dilute enough, higher-frequency (shorter-wavelength) light will be scattered more, and the emulsion will appear bluer\u00a0\u2013 this is called the \"Tyndall effect\". If the emulsion is concentrated enough, the color will be distorted toward comparatively longer wavelengths, and will appear more yellow. This phenomenon is easily observable when comparing skimmed milk, which contains little fat, to cream, which contains a much higher concentration of milk fat. One example would be a mixture of water and oil.\nTwo special classes of emulsions\u00a0\u2013 microemulsions and nanoemulsions, with droplet sizes below 100\u00a0nm\u00a0\u2013 appear translucent. This property is due to the fact that light waves are scattered by the droplets only if their sizes exceed about one-quarter of the wavelength of the incident light. Since the visible spectrum of light is composed of wavelengths between 390 and 750 nanometers (nm), if the droplet sizes in the emulsion are below about 100\u00a0nm, the light can penetrate through the emulsion without being scattered. Due to their similarity in appearance, translucent nanoemulsions and microemulsions are frequently confused. Unlike translucent nanoemulsions, which require specialized equipment to be produced, microemulsions are spontaneously formed by \"solubilizing\" oil molecules with a mixture of surfactants, co-surfactants, and co-solvents. The required surfactant concentration in a microemulsion is, however, several times higher than that in a translucent nanoemulsion, and significantly exceeds the concentration of the dispersed phase. Because of many undesirable side-effects caused by surfactants, their presence is disadvantageous or prohibitive in many applications. In addition, the stability of a microemulsion is often easily compromised by dilution, by heating, or by changing pH levels.\nCommon emulsions are inherently unstable and, thus, do not tend to form spontaneously. Energy input\u00a0\u2013 through shaking, stirring, homogenizing, or exposure to power ultrasound\u00a0\u2013 is needed to form an emulsion. Over time, emulsions tend to revert to the stable state of the phases comprising the emulsion. An example of this is seen in the separation of the oil and vinegar components of vinaigrette, an unstable emulsion that will quickly separate unless shaken almost continuously. There are important exceptions to this rule\u00a0\u2013 microemulsions are thermodynamically stable, while translucent nanoemulsions are kinetically stable.\nWhether an emulsion of oil and water turns into a \"water-in-oil\" emulsion or an \"oil-in-water\" emulsion depends on the volume fraction of both phases and the type of emulsifier (surfactant) (see \"Emulsifier\", below) present.\nInstability.\nEmulsion stability refers to the ability of an emulsion to resist change in its properties over time. There are four types of instability in emulsions: flocculation, coalescence, creaming/sedimentation, and Ostwald ripening. Flocculation occurs when there is an attractive force between the droplets, so they form flocs, like bunches of grapes. This process can be desired, if controlled in its extent, to tune physical properties of emulsions such as their flow behaviour. Coalescence occurs when droplets bump into each other and combine to form a larger droplet, so the average droplet size increases over time. Emulsions can also undergo creaming, where the droplets rise to the top of the emulsion under the influence of buoyancy, or under the influence of the centripetal force induced when a centrifuge is used. Creaming is a common phenomenon in dairy and non-dairy beverages (i.e. milk, coffee milk, almond milk, soy milk) and usually does not change the droplet size. Sedimentation is the opposite phenomenon of creaming and normally observed in water-in-oil emulsions. Sedimentation happens when the dispersed phase is denser than the continuous phase and the gravitational forces pull the denser globules towards the bottom of the emulsion. Similar to creaming, sedimentation follows Stokes' law.\nAn appropriate surface active agent (or surfactant) can increase the kinetic stability of an emulsion so that the size of the droplets does not change significantly with time. The stability of an emulsion, like a suspension, can be studied in terms of zeta potential, which indicates the repulsion between droplets or particles. If the size and dispersion of droplets does not change over time, it is said to be stable. For example, oil-in-water emulsions containing mono- and diglycerides and milk protein as surfactant showed that stable oil droplet size over 28 days storage at 25\u00a0\u00b0C.\nMonitoring physical stability.\nThe stability of emulsions can be characterized using techniques such as light scattering, focused beam reflectance measurement, centrifugation, and rheology. Each method has advantages and disadvantages.\nAccelerating methods for shelf life prediction.\nThe kinetic process of destabilization can be rather long\u00a0\u2013 up to several months, or even years for some products. Often the formulator must accelerate this process in order to test products in a reasonable time during product design. Thermal methods are the most commonly used \u2013 these consist of increasing the emulsion temperature to accelerate destabilization (if below critical temperatures for phase inversion or chemical degradation). Temperature affects not only the viscosity but also the interfacial tension in the case of non-ionic surfactants or, on a broader scope, interactions between droplets within the system. Storing an emulsion at high temperatures enables the simulation of realistic conditions for a product (e.g., a tube of sunscreen emulsion in a car in the summer heat), but also accelerates destabilization processes up to 200 times.\nMechanical methods of acceleration, including vibration, centrifugation, and agitation, can also be used.\nThese methods are almost always empirical, without a sound scientific basis.\nEmulsifiers.\nAn emulsifier is a substance that stabilizes an emulsion by reducing the oil-water interface tension. Emulsifiers are a part of a broader group of compounds known as surfactants, or \"surface-active agents\". Surfactants are compounds that are typically amphiphilic, meaning they have a polar or hydrophilic (i.e., water-soluble) part and a non-polar (i.e., hydrophobic or lipophilic) part. Emulsifiers that are more soluble in water (and, conversely, less soluble in oil) will generally form oil-in-water emulsions, while emulsifiers that are more soluble in oil will form water-in-oil emulsions.\nExamples of food emulsifiers are:\nIn food emulsions, the type of emulsifier greatly affects how emulsions are structured in the stomach and how accessible the oil is for gastric lipases, thereby influencing how fast emulsions are digested and trigger a satiety inducing hormone response.\nDetergents are another class of surfactant, and will interact physically with both oil and water, thus stabilizing the interface between the oil and water droplets in suspension. This principle is exploited in soap, to remove grease for the purpose of cleaning. Many different emulsifiers are used in pharmacy to prepare emulsions such as creams and lotions. Common examples include emulsifying wax, polysorbate 20, and ceteareth 20.\nSometimes the inner phase itself can act as an emulsifier, and the result is a nanoemulsion, where the inner state disperses into \"nano-size\" droplets within the outer phase. A well-known example of this phenomenon, the \"ouzo effect\", happens when water is poured into a strong alcoholic anise-based beverage, such as ouzo, pastis, absinthe, arak, or raki. The anisolic compounds, which are soluble in ethanol, then form nano-size droplets and emulsify within the water. The resulting color of the drink is opaque and milky white.\nMechanisms of emulsification.\nA number of different chemical and physical processes and mechanisms can be involved in the process of emulsification:\nUses.\nIn food.\nOil-in-water emulsions are common in food products:\nWater-in-oil emulsions are less common in food, but still exist:\nOther foods can be turned into products similar to emulsions, for example meat emulsion is a suspension of meat in liquid that is similar to true emulsions.\nIn health care.\nIn pharmaceutics, hairstyling, personal hygiene, and cosmetics, emulsions are frequently used. These are usually oil and water emulsions but dispersed, and which is continuous depends in many cases on the pharmaceutical formulation. These emulsions may be called creams, ointments, liniments (balms), pastes, films, or liquids, depending mostly on their oil-to-water ratios, other additives, and their intended route of administration. The first 5 are topical dosage forms, and may be used on the surface of the skin, transdermally, ophthalmically, rectally, or vaginally. A highly liquid emulsion may also be used orally, or may be injected in some cases.\nMicroemulsions are used to deliver vaccines and kill microbes. Typical emulsions used in these techniques are nanoemulsions of soybean oil, with particles that are 400\u2013600\u00a0nm in diameter. The process is not chemical, as with other types of antimicrobial treatments, but mechanical. The smaller the droplet the greater the surface tension and thus the greater the force required to merge with other lipids. The oil is emulsified with detergents using a high-shear mixer to stabilize the emulsion so, when they encounter the lipids in the cell membrane or envelope of bacteria or viruses, they force the lipids to merge with themselves. On a mass scale, in effect this disintegrates the membrane and kills the pathogen. The soybean oil emulsion does not harm normal human cells, or the cells of most other higher organisms, with the exceptions of sperm cells and blood cells, which are vulnerable to nanoemulsions due to the peculiarities of their membrane structures. For this reason, these nanoemulsions are not currently used intravenously (IV). The most effective application of this type of nanoemulsion is for the disinfection of surfaces. Some types of nanoemulsions have been shown to effectively destroy HIV-1 and tuberculosis pathogens on non-porous surfaces.\nIn firefighting.\nEmulsifying agents are effective at extinguishing fires on small, thin-layer spills of flammable liquids (class B fires). Such agents encapsulate the fuel in a fuel-water emulsion, thereby trapping the flammable vapors in the water phase. This emulsion is achieved by applying an aqueous surfactant solution to the fuel through a high-pressure nozzle. Emulsifiers are not effective at extinguishing large fires involving bulk/deep liquid fuels, because the amount of emulsifier agent needed for extinguishment is a function of the volume of the fuel, whereas other agents such as aqueous film-forming foam need cover only the surface of the fuel to achieve vapor mitigation.\nChemical synthesis.\nEmulsions are used to manufacture polymer dispersions \u2013 polymer production in an emulsion 'phase' has a number of process advantages, including prevention of coagulation of product. Products produced by such polymerisations may be used as the emulsions \u2013 products including primary components for glues and paints. Synthetic latexes (rubbers) are also produced by this process."}
{"id": "10291", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10291", "title": "Estonia ship", "text": ""}
{"id": "10292", "revid": "7161152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10292", "title": "Lord Mountbatten", "text": "Louis Francis Albert Victor Nicholas Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma (born Prince Louis of Battenberg; 25 June 1900 \u2013 27 August 1979), commonly known as Lord Mountbatten, was a British statesman, Royal Navy officer and close relative of the British royal family. He was born in the United Kingdom to the prominent Battenberg family. He was a maternal uncle of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and a second cousin of King George VI. He joined the Royal Navy during the First World War and was appointed Supreme Allied Commander, South East Asia Command, in the Second World War. He later served as the last Viceroy of India and briefly as the first Governor-General of the Dominion of India.\nMountbatten attended the Royal Naval College, Osborne, before entering the Royal Navy in 1916. He saw action during the closing phase of the First World War, and after the war briefly attended Christ's College, Cambridge. During the interwar period, Mountbatten continued to pursue his naval career, specialising in naval communications. Following the outbreak of the Second World War, he commanded the destroyer and the 5th Destroyer Flotilla. He saw considerable action in Norway, in the English Channel, and in the Mediterranean. In August 1941, he received command of the aircraft carrier . He was appointed chief of Combined Operations and a member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee in early 1942, and organised the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe. In August 1943, Mountbatten became Supreme Allied Commander South East Asia Command and oversaw the recapture of Burma and Singapore from the Japanese by the end of 1945. For his service during the war, Mountbatten was created viscount in 1946 and earl the following year.\nIn February 1947, Mountbatten was appointed Viceroy and Governor-General of India and oversaw the Partition of India into India and Pakistan. He then served as the first Governor-General of the Union of India until June 1948 and played a significant role in persuading princely states to accede to India. In 1952, Mountbatten was appointed commander-in-chief of the British Mediterranean Fleet and NATO Commander Allied Forces Mediterranean. From 1955 to 1959, he was First Sea Lord, a position that had been held by his father, Prince Louis of Battenberg, some forty years earlier. Thereafter he served as chief of the Defence Staff until 1965, making him the longest-serving professional head of the British Armed Forces to date. During this period Mountbatten also served as chairman of the NATO Military Committee for a year.\nIn August 1979, Mountbatten was assassinated by a bomb planted aboard his fishing boat in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ireland, by members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army. He received a ceremonial funeral at Westminster Abbey and was buried in Romsey Abbey in Hampshire.\nEarly life.\nMountbatten, then named Prince Louis of Battenberg, was born on 25 June 1900 at Frogmore House in the Home Park, Windsor, Berkshire. He was the youngest child and the second son of Prince Louis of Battenberg and his wife Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine. Mountbatten's maternal grandparents were Louis IV, Grand Duke of Hesse, and Princess Alice of the United Kingdom, who was a daughter of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. His paternal grandparents were Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine and Julia, Princess of Battenberg. Mountbatten's paternal grandparents' marriage was morganatic because his grandmother was not of royal lineage; as a result, he and his father were styled \"Serene Highness\" rather than \"Grand Ducal Highness\", were not eligible to be titled Princes of Hesse, and were given the less exalted Battenberg title. Mountbatten's elder siblings were Princess Alice of Battenberg (mother of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh), Princess Louise of Battenberg (later Queen Louise of Sweden), and Prince George of Battenberg (later George Mountbatten, 2nd Marquess of Milford Haven).\nMountbatten was baptised in the large drawing room of Frogmore House on 17 July 1900 by the Dean of Windsor, Philip Eliot. His godparents were Queen Victoria (his maternal great-grandmother), Nicholas II of Russia (his maternal uncle through marriage and paternal second cousin, represented by the child's father) and Prince Francis Joseph of Battenberg (his paternal uncle, represented by Lord Edward Clinton). He wore the original 1841 royal christening gown at the ceremony.\nMountbatten's nickname among family and friends was \"Dickie\"; however \"Richard\" was not among his given names. This was because his great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, had suggested the nickname of \"Nicky\", but to avoid confusion with the many Nickys of the Russian Imperial Family (\"Nicky\" was particularly used to refer to Nicholas II, the last Tsar), \"Nicky\" was changed to \"Dickie\".\nMountbatten was educated at home for the first 10 years of his life; he was then sent to Lockers Park School in Hertfordshire and on to the Royal Naval College, Osborne, in May 1913.\nMountbatten's mother's younger sister was Russian Empress Alexandra Feodorovna. In childhood he visited the Imperial Court of Russia at St Petersburg and became intimate with the Russian Imperial Family, harbouring romantic feelings towards his maternal first cousin Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna, whose photograph he kept at his bedside for the rest of his life.\nMountbatten adopted his surname as a result of World War I. From 1914 to 1918, Britain and its allies were at war with the Central Powers, led by the German Empire. To appease British nationalist sentiment, in 1917 King George V issued a royal proclamation changing the name of the British royal house from the German House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha to the House of Windsor. The king's British relatives with German names and titles followed suit with Mountbatten's father adopting the surname Mountbatten, an anglicisation of Battenberg. The elder Mountbatten was subsequently created Marquess of Milford Haven.\nFirst World War.\nAt the age of 16, Mountbatten was posted as midshipman to the battlecruiser in July 1916 and, after seeing action in August 1916, transferred to the battleship during the closing phases of the First World War. In June 1917, when the royal family stopped using their German names and titles and adopted the more British-sounding \"Windsor\", Mountbatten acquired the courtesy title appropriate to a younger son of a marquess, becoming known as \"Lord Louis Mountbatten\" (\"Lord Louis\" for short) until he was created a peer in his own right in 1946. He paid a visit of ten days to the Western Front in July 1918.\nWhile still an acting-sub-lieutenant, Mountbatten was appointed first lieutenant (second-in-command) of the P-class sloop HMS\u00a0\"P.\u00a031\" on 13 October 1918 and was confirmed as a substantive sub-lieutenant on 15 January 1919. HMS\u00a0\"P.\u00a031\" took part in the Peace River Pageant on 4 April 1919. Mountbatten attended Christ's College, Cambridge, for two terms, starting in October 1919, where he studied English literature (including John Milton and Lord Byron) in a programme designed to augment the education of junior officers which had been curtailed by the war. He was elected for a term to the Standing Committee of the Cambridge Union Society and was suspected of sympathy for the Labour Party, then emerging as a potential party of government for the first time.\nInterwar period.\nMountbatten was posted to the battlecruiser in March 1920 and accompanied Edward, Prince of Wales, on a royal tour of Australia in her. He was promoted lieutenant on 15 April 1920. HMS\u00a0\"Renown\" returned to Portsmouth on 11 October 1920. Early in 1921 Royal Navy personnel were used for civil defence duties as serious industrial unrest seemed imminent. Mountbatten had to command a platoon of stokers, many of whom had never handled a rifle before, in Northern England. He transferred to the battlecruiser in March 1921 and accompanied the Prince of Wales on a Royal tour of India and Japan. Edward and Mountbatten formed a close friendship during the trip. Mountbatten survived the deep defence cuts known as the Geddes Axe. Fifty-two percent of the officers of his year had had to leave the Royal Navy by the end of 1923; although he was highly regarded by his superiors, it was rumoured that wealthy and well-connected officers were more likely to be retained. Mountbatten was posted to the battleship in the Mediterranean Fleet in January 1923.\nPursuing his interests in technological development and gadgetry, Mountbatten joined the Portsmouth Signals School in August 1924 and then went on briefly to study electronics at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich. Mountbatten became a Member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE), now the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET). He was posted to the battleship in the Reserve Fleet in 1926 and became Assistant Fleet Wireless and Signals Officer of the Mediterranean Fleet under the command of Admiral Sir Roger Keyes in January 1927. Promoted lieutenant commander on 15 April 1928, Mountbatten returned to the Signals School in July 1929 as Senior Wireless Instructor. He was appointed Fleet Wireless Officer to the Mediterranean Fleet in August 1931 and, having been promoted commander on 31 December 1932, was posted to the battleship .\nIn 1934, Mountbatten was appointed to his first command \u2013 the destroyer . His ship was a new destroyer, which he was to sail to Singapore and exchange for an older ship, . He successfully brought \"Wishart\" back to port in Malta and then attended the funeral of George V in January 1936. Mountbatten was appointed a personal naval aide-de-camp to King Edward VIII on 23 June 1936 and, having joined the Naval Air Division of the Admiralty in July 1936, he attended the coronation of George VI and Elizabeth in May 1937. Mountbatten was promoted captain on 30 June 1937 and was then given command of the destroyer in June 1939.\nWithin the Admiralty, Mountbatten was called \"The Master of Disaster\" for his penchant of getting into messes.\nSecond World War.\nWhen war broke out in September 1939, Mountbatten became Captain (D) (commander) of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla aboard HMS \"Kelly\", which became famous for its exploits. In late 1939 he brought the Duke of Windsor back from exile in France and in early May 1940 Mountbatten led a British convoy in through the fog to evacuate the Allied forces participating in the Namsos Campaign during the Norwegian Campaign.\nOn the night of 9\u201310 May 1940, \"Kelly\" was torpedoed amidships by a German E-boat \"S\u00a031\" off the Dutch coast, and Mountbatten thereafter commanded the 5th Destroyer Flotilla from the destroyer . On 29 November 1940 the 5th Flotilla engaged three German destroyers off Lizard Point, Cornwall. Mountbatten turned to port to match a German course change. This was \"a rather disastrous move as the directors swung off and lost target\" and it resulted in \"Javelin\" being struck by two torpedoes. He rejoined \"Kelly\" in December 1940, by which time the torpedo damage had been repaired.\n\"Kelly\" was sunk by German dive bombers on 23 May 1941 during the Battle of Crete; the incident serving as the basis for No\u00ebl Coward's film \"In Which We Serve\". Coward was a personal friend of Mountbatten and copied some of his speeches into the film. Mountbatten was mentioned in despatches on 9 August 1940 and 21 March 1941 and awarded the Distinguished Service Order in January 1941.\nIn August 1941, Mountbatten was appointed captain of the aircraft carrier which lay in Norfolk, Virginia, for repairs following action at Malta in January. During this period of relative inactivity, he paid a flying visit to Pearl Harbor, three months before the Japanese attack on it. Mountbatten, appalled at the US naval base's lack of preparedness, drawing on Japan's history of launching wars with surprise attacks as well as the successful British surprise attack at the Battle of Taranto which had effectively knocked Italy's fleet out of the war, and the sheer effectiveness of aircraft against warships, accurately predicted that the US would enter the war after a Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor.\nMountbatten was a favourite of Winston Churchill. On 27 October 1941, Mountbatten replaced Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes as Chief of Combined Operations Headquarters and was promoted to commodore.\nHis duties in this role included inventing new technical aids to assist with opposed landings. Noteworthy technical achievements of Mountbatten and his staff include the construction of \"PLUTO\", an underwater oil pipeline to Normandy, an artificial Mulberry harbour constructed of concrete caissons and sunken ships, and the development of tank-landing ships. Another project Mountbatten proposed to Churchill was Project Habakkuk. It was to be an unsinkable 600-metre aircraft carrier made from reinforced ice (\"Pykrete\"); Habakkuk was never carried out due to its enormous cost.\nAs commander of Combined Operations, Mountbatten and his staff planned the highly successful Bruneval raid, which gained important information and captured part of a German W\u00fcrzburg radar installation and one of the machine's technicians on 27 February 1942. It was Mountbatten who recognised that surprise and speed were essential to capture the radar, and saw that an airborne assault was the only viable method.\nOn 18 March 1942, he was promoted to the acting rank of vice admiral and given the honorary ranks of lieutenant general and air marshal to have the authority to carry out his duties in Combined Operations; and, despite the misgivings of General Sir Alan Brooke, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Mountbatten was placed in the Chiefs of Staff Committee. He was in large part responsible for the planning and organisation of the St Nazaire Raid on 28 March, which put out of action one of the most heavily defended docks in Nazi-occupied France until well after the war's end, the ramifications of which contributed to allied supremacy in the Battle of the Atlantic. After these two successes came the Dieppe Raid of 19 August 1942. He was central in the planning and promotion of the raid on the port of Dieppe. The raid was a marked failure, with casualties of almost 60%, the great majority of them Canadians. Following the Dieppe Raid, Mountbatten became a controversial figure in Canada, with the Royal Canadian Legion distancing itself from him during his visits there during his later career. His relations with Canadian veterans, who blamed him for the losses, \"remained frosty\" after the war.\nMountbatten claimed that the lessons learned from the Dieppe Raid were necessary for planning the Normandy invasion on D-Day nearly two years later. However, military historians such as Major-General Julian Thompson, a former member of the Royal Marines, have written that these lessons should not have needed a debacle such as Dieppe to be recognised. Nevertheless, as a direct result of the failings of the Dieppe Raid, the British made several innovations, most notably Hobart's Funnies \u2013 specialised armoured vehicles which, in the course of the Normandy Landings, undoubtedly saved many lives on those three beachheads upon which Commonwealth soldiers were landing (Gold Beach, Juno Beach and Sword Beach).\nSEAC and Burma campaign.\nIn August 1943, Churchill appointed Mountbatten the Supreme Allied Commander South East Asia Command (SEAC) with promotion to acting full admiral. His less practical ideas were sidelined by an experienced planning staff led by Lieutenant-Colonel James Allason, though some, such as a proposal to launch an amphibious assault near Rangoon, got as far as Churchill before being quashed.\nBritish interpreter Hugh Lunghi recounted an embarrassing episode during the Potsdam Conference when Mountbatten, desiring to receive an invitation to visit the Soviet Union, repeatedly attempted to impress Joseph Stalin with his former connections to the Russian imperial family. The attempt fell predictably flat, with Stalin dryly inquiring whether \"it was some time ago that he had been there\". Says Lunghi, \"The meeting was embarrassing because Stalin was so unimpressed. He offered no invitation. Mountbatten left with his tail between his legs.\"\nDuring his time as Supreme Allied Commander of the Southeast Asia Theatre, his command oversaw the recapture of Burma from the Japanese by General Sir William Slim. A personal high point was the receipt of the Japanese surrender in Singapore when British troops returned to the island to receive the formal surrender of Japanese forces in the region led by General Itagaki Seishiro on 12 September 1945, codenamed Operation Tiderace. South East Asia Command was disbanded in May 1946 and Mountbatten returned home with the substantive rank of rear-admiral. That year, he was made a Knight Companion of the Garter and created Viscount Mountbatten of Burma, of Romsey in the County of Southampton, as a victory title for war service. He was then in 1947 further created Earl Mountbatten of Burma and Baron Romsey, of Romsey in the County of Southampton.\nFollowing the war, Mountbatten was known to have largely shunned the Japanese for the rest of his life out of respect for his men killed during the war and, as per his will, Japan was not invited to send diplomatic representatives to his funeral in 1979, though he did meet Emperor Hirohito during his state visit to Britain in 1971, reportedly at the urging of the Queen.\nViceroy of India.\nMountbatten's experience in the region and in particular his perceived Labour sympathies at that time, alongside his wife's longstanding friendship and collaboration with V. K. Krishna Menon, led to Menon putting forth Mountbatten's name alone as a viceregal candidate acceptable to the Indian National Congress, in clandestine meetings with Sir Stafford Cripps and Clement Attlee. Attlee advised King George VI to appoint Mountbatten Viceroy of India on 20 February 1947 charged with overseeing the transition of British India to independence no later than 30 June 1948. Mountbatten's instructions were to avoid partition and preserve a united India as a result of the transfer of power but authorised him to adapt to a changing situation in order to get Britain out promptly with minimal reputational damage.\nMountbatten arrived in India on 22 March by air, from London. In the evening, he was taken to his residence and two days later, he took the Viceregal oath. His arrival saw large-scale communal riots in Delhi, Bombay and Rawalpindi. Mountbatten concluded that the situation was too volatile to wait even a year before granting independence to India. Although his advisers favoured a gradual transfer of independence, Mountbatten decided the only way forward was a quick and orderly transfer of power before 1947 was out. In his view, any longer would mean civil war. Mountbatten also hurried so he could return to the Royal Navy.\nMountbatten was fond of Congress leader Jawaharlal Nehru and his liberal outlook for the country, and, through the efforts of their close mutual friend, Krishna Menon, developed a certain depth of feeling and intimacy with Nehru that was shared by his wife, Edwina. He felt differently about the Muslim League leader Muhammad Ali Jinnah, but was aware of his power, stating \"If it could be said that any single man held the future of India in the palm of his hand in 1947, that man was Mohammad Ali Jinnah.\" During his meeting with Jinnah on 5 April 1947, Mountbatten tried to persuade him of a united India, citing the difficult task of dividing the mixed states of Punjab and Bengal, but the Muslim leader was unyielding in his goal of establishing a separate Muslim state called Pakistan.\nGiven the British government's recommendations to grant independence quickly, Mountbatten concluded that a united India was an unachievable goal and resigned himself to a plan for partition, creating the independent nations of India and Pakistan. Mountbatten set a date for the transfer of power from the British to the Indians, arguing that a fixed timeline would convince Indians of his and the British government's sincerity in working towards a swift and efficient independence, excluding all possibilities of stalling the process.\nAmong the Indian leaders, Mahatma Gandhi emphatically insisted on maintaining a united India and for a while successfully rallied people to this goal. During his meeting with Mountbatten, Gandhi asked Mountbatten to invite Jinnah to form a new central government, but Mountbatten never uttered a word of Gandhi's ideas to Jinnah. When Mountbatten's timeline offered the prospect of attaining independence soon, sentiments took a different turn. Given Mountbatten's determination, Nehru and Sardar Patel's inability to deal with the Muslim League and, lastly, Jinnah's obstinacy, all Indian party leaders (except Gandhi) acquiesced to Jinnah's plan to divide India, which in turn eased Mountbatten's task. Mountbatten also developed a strong relationship with the Indian princes, who ruled those portions of India not directly under British rule. His intervention was decisive in persuading the vast majority of them to see advantages in opting to join the Indian Union. On one hand, the integration of the princely states can be viewed as one of the positive aspects of his legacy but on the other, the refusal of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, and Junagadh to join one of the dominions led to future wars between Pakistan and India.\nMountbatten brought forward the date of the partition from June 1948 to 15 August 1947. The uncertainty of the borders caused Muslims and Hindus to move into the direction where they felt they would get the majority. Hindus and Muslims were thoroughly terrified, and the Muslim movement from the East was balanced by the similar movement of Hindus from the West. A boundary committee chaired by Sir Cyril Radcliffe was charged with drawing boundaries for the new nations. With a mandate to leave as many Hindus and Sikhs in India and as many Muslims in Pakistan as possible, Radcliffe came up with a map that split the two countries along the Punjab and Bengal borders. This left 14\u00a0million people on the \"wrong\" side of the border, and very many of them fled to \"safety\" on the other side when the new lines were announced.\nIndependence of India and Pakistan.\nWhen India and Pakistan attained independence at midnight of 14\u201315 August 1947, Mountbatten was alone in his study at the Viceroy's house saying to himself just before the clock struck midnight that for still a few minutes, he was the most powerful man on Earth. At 12 am, as a last act of showmanship, he created Joan Falkiner, the Australian wife of the Nawab of Palanpur, a highness, an act that was apparently one of his favourite duties that was annulled at the stroke of midnight.\nNotwithstanding the self-promotion of his own part in Indian independence\u00a0\u2013 notably in the television series \"The Life and Times of Admiral of the Fleet Lord Mountbatten of Burma\", produced by his son-in-law Lord Brabourne, and \"Freedom at Midnight\" by Dominique Lapierre and Larry Collins (of which he was the main quoted source)\u00a0\u2013 his record is seen as very mixed. One common view is that he hastened the process of independence unduly and recklessly, foreseeing vast disruption and loss of life and not wanting this to occur on his watch, but thereby actually helping it to occur (albeit in an indirect manner), especially in Punjab and Bengal. John Kenneth Galbraith, the Canadian-American Harvard University economist, who advised governments of India during the 1950s and was an intimate of Nehru who served as the American ambassador from 1961 to 1963, was a particularly harsh critic of Mountbatten in this regard. However, another view is that the British were forced to expedite the partition process to avoid involvement in a potential civil war with law and order having already broken down and Britain with limited resources after the Second World War. According to historian Lawrence James, Mountbatten was left with no other option but to cut and run, with the alternative being involvement in a potential civil war that would be difficult to get out of.\nThe creation of Pakistan was never emotionally accepted by many British leaders, among them Mountbatten. Mountbatten clearly expressed his lack of support and faith in the Muslim League's idea of Pakistan. Jinnah refused Mountbatten's offer to serve as Governor-General of Pakistan. When Mountbatten was asked by Collins and Lapierre if he would have sabotaged the creation of Pakistan had he known that Jinnah was dying of tuberculosis, he replied, \"Most probably\".\nGovernor-General of India.\nMountbatten became the first Governor-General of independent India on 15 August 1947 upon the request of Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. \"Life\" magazine noted on his reception in India that, \"The people gathered in the streets to cheer Mountbatten as no European had ever been cheered before.\"\nDuring his reign as governor-general until 21 June 1948, he played a significant role in the political integration of India and persuaded many princely states to join India. On Mountbatten's advice, India took the issue of Kashmir to the newly formed United Nations in January 1948. Accounts differ on the future which Mountbatten desired for Kashmir. Pakistani accounts suggest that Mountbatten favoured the accession of Kashmir to India, citing his close relationship to Nehru. Mountbatten's own account says that he simply wanted Maharaja Hari Singh to make up his mind. The viceroy made several attempts to mediate between the Congress leaders, Muhammad Ali Jinnah and Hari Singh on issues relating to the accession of Kashmir, though he was largely unsuccessful in resolving the conflict. After the tribal invasion of Kashmir, it was on his suggestion that India moved to secure the accession of Kashmir from Hari Singh before sending in military forces for his defence.\nAfter his tenure as governor-general concluded, Mountbatten continued to enjoy close relations with Nehru and the post-Independence Indian leadership, and was welcomed as a former governor-general of India on subsequent visits to the country, including during an official trip in March 1956. The Pakistani government, by contrast, lacked a positive view of Mountbatten for his perceived hostile attitude towards Pakistan and deemed him \"persona non grata\", barring him from transiting their airspace during the same visit.\nLater career.\nAfter India, Mountbatten served as commander of the 1st Cruiser Squadron in the Mediterranean Fleet and, having been granted the substantive rank of vice-admiral on 22 June 1949, he became Second-in-Command of the Mediterranean Fleet in April 1950. He became Fourth Sea Lord at the Admiralty in June 1950. He then returned to the Mediterranean to serve as Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Fleet and NATO Commander Allied Forces Mediterranean from June 1952. He was promoted to the substantive rank of full admiral on 27 February 1953. In March 1953, he was appointed Personal Aide-de-Camp to the Queen.\nMountbatten served his final posting at the Admiralty as First Sea Lord and Chief of the Naval Staff from April 1955 to July 1959, the position which his father had held some forty years before. This was the first time in Royal Naval history that a father and son had both attained such high office. He was promoted to Admiral of the Fleet on 22 October 1956.\nIn the Suez Crisis of 1956, Mountbatten strongly advised his old friend Prime Minister Anthony Eden against the Conservative government's plans to seize the Suez Canal in conjunction with France and Israel. He argued that such a move would destabilize the Middle East, undermine the authority of the United Nations, divide the Commonwealth and diminish Britain's global standing. His advice was not taken. Eden insisted that Mountbatten not resign. Instead, he worked hard to prepare the Royal Navy for war with characteristic professionalism and thoroughness.\nDespite his military rank, Mountbatten was ignorant as to the physics involved in a nuclear explosion and had to be reassured that the fission reactions from the Bikini Atoll tests would not spread through the oceans and blow up the planet. As Mountbatten became more familiar with this new form of weaponry, he increasingly grew opposed to its use in combat. Yet, he realised the potential for nuclear energy, especially with regard to submarines. Mountbatten expressed his feelings towards the use of nuclear weapons in combat in his article \"A Military Commander Surveys The Nuclear Arms Race\", which was published shortly after his death in \"International Security\" in the Winter of 1979\u20131980.\nAfter leaving the Admiralty, Mountbatten took the position of Chief of the Defence Staff. He served in this post for six years during which he was able to consolidate the three service departments of the military branch into a single Ministry of Defence. Ian Jacob, co-author of the 1963 \"Report on the Central Organisation of Defence\" that served as the basis of these reforms, described Mountbatten as \"universally mistrusted in spite of his great qualities\". On their election in October 1964, the Wilson ministry had to decide whether to renew his appointment the following July. The Defence Secretary, Denis Healey, interviewed the forty most senior officials in the Ministry of Defence; only one, Sir Kenneth Strong, a personal friend of Mountbatten, recommended his reappointment. \"When I told Dickie of my decision not to reappoint him,\" recalls Healey, \"he slapped his thigh and roared with delight; but his eyes told a different story.\"\nMountbatten was appointed Colonel of The Life Guards and Gold Stick in Waiting on 29 January 1965 and Life Colonel Commandant of the Royal Marines the same year. He was Governor of the Isle of Wight from 20 July 1965 and then the first Lord Lieutenant of the Isle of Wight from 1 April 1974.\nMountbatten was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and had received an honorary doctorate from Heriot-Watt University in 1968.\nIn 1969, Mountbatten tried unsuccessfully to persuade his second cousin, the Spanish pretender Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona, to ease the eventual accession of his son, Juan Carlos, to the Spanish throne by signing a declaration of abdication while in exile. The next year Mountbatten attended an official White House dinner during which he took the opportunity to have a 20-minute conversation with Richard Nixon and Secretary of State William P. Rogers, about which he later wrote, \"I was able to talk to the President a bit about both Tino [Constantine II of Greece] and Juanito [Juan Carlos of Spain] to try and put over their respective points of view about Greece and Spain, and how I felt the US could help them.\" In January 1971, Nixon hosted Juan Carlos and his wife Sofia (sister of the exiled King Constantine) during a visit to Washington and later that year \"The Washington Post\" published an article alleging that Nixon's administration was seeking to persuade Franco to retire in favour of the young Bourbon prince.\nFrom 1967 until 1978, Mountbatten was president of the United World Colleges Organisation, then represented by a single college: that of Atlantic College in South Wales. Mountbatten supported the United World Colleges and encouraged heads of state, politicians, and personalities throughout the world to share his interest. Under his presidency and personal involvement, the United World College of South East Asia was established in Singapore in 1971, followed by the United World College of the Pacific in Victoria, British Columbia, in 1974. In 1978, Mountbatten passed the presidency of the college to his great-nephew, Charles, Prince of Wales.\nMountbatten also helped to launch the International Baccalaureate; in 1971 he presented the first IB diplomas in the Greek Theatre of the International School of Geneva, Switzerland.\nIn 1975 Mountbatten finally visited the Soviet Union, leading the delegation from UK as personal representative of Queen Elizabeth II at the celebrations to mark the 30th anniversary of Victory Day in Second World War in Moscow.\nAlleged plots against Harold Wilson.\nPeter Wright, in his 1987 book \"Spycatcher\", claimed that in May 1968 Mountbatten attended a private meeting with press baron Cecil King and the government's Chief Scientific Adviser, Solly Zuckerman. Wright alleged that \"up to thirty\" MI5 officers had joined a secret campaign to undermine the crisis-stricken Labour government of Harold Wilson and that King was an MI5 agent. In the meeting, King allegedly urged Mountbatten to become the leader of a government of national salvation. Solly Zuckerman pointed out that it was \"rank treachery\" and the idea came to nothing because of Mountbatten's reluctance to act. In contrast, Andrew Lownie has suggested that it took the intervention of the Queen to dissuade Mountbatten from plotting against Wilson.\nIn 2006, the BBC documentary \"The Plot Against Harold Wilson\" alleged that there had been another plot involving Mountbatten to oust Wilson during his second term in office (1974\u20131976). The period was characterised by high inflation, increasing unemployment, and widespread industrial unrest. The alleged plot revolved around right-wing former military figures who were supposedly building private armies to counter the perceived threat from trade unions and the Soviet Union. They believed that the Labour Party was unable and unwilling to counter these developments and that Wilson was either a Soviet agent or at the very least a Communist sympathiser\u00a0\u2013 claims Wilson strongly denied. The documentary makers alleged that a coup was planned to overthrow Wilson and replace him with Mountbatten using the private armies and sympathisers in the military and MI5.\nThe first official history of MI5, \"The Defence of the Realm\" (2009), implied that there was a plot against Wilson and that MI5 did have a file on him. Yet it also made clear that the plot was in no way official and that any activity centred on a small group of discontented officers. This much had already been confirmed by former cabinet secretary Lord Hunt, who concluded in a secret inquiry conducted in 1996 that \"there is absolutely no doubt at all that a few, a very few, malcontents in MI5\u00a0... a lot of them like Peter Wright who were right-wing, malicious and had serious personal grudges \u2013 gave vent to these and spread damaging malicious stories about that Labour government.\"\nPersonal life.\nMarriage.\nMountbatten was married on 18 July 1922 to Edwina Cynthia Annette Ashley, daughter of Wilfred William Ashley, later 1st\u00a0Baron Mount Temple, himself a grandson of the 7th\u00a0Earl of Shaftesbury. She was the favourite granddaughter of the Edwardian magnate Sir Ernest Cassel and the principal heir to his fortune. The couple spent heavily on households, luxuries, and entertainment. There followed a honeymoon tour of European royal courts and North America which included a visit to Niagara Falls (because \"all honeymooners went there\"). During their honeymoon in California, the newlyweds starred in a silent home movie by Charlie Chaplin called \"Nice And Friendly\", which was not shown in cinemas.\nMountbatten admitted: \"Edwina and I spent all our married lives getting into other people's beds.\" He maintained an affair for several years with Yola Letellier, the wife of Henri Letellier, publisher of \"Le Journal\" and mayor of Deauville (1925\u201328). Yola Letellier's life story was the inspiration for Colette's novel \"Gigi\".\nAfter Edwina died in 1960, Mountbatten was involved in relationships with young women, according to his daughter Patricia, his secretary John Barratt, his valet Bill Evans, and William Stadiem, an employee of Madame Claude. He had a long-running affair with American actress Shirley MacLaine, whom he met in the 1960s.\nSexual allegations.\nIn 2019, Ron Perks, Mountbatten's driver in Malta in 1948, alleged that he used to visit the Red House, an upmarket gay brothel in Rabat used by naval officers. Andrew Lownie, a fellow of the Royal Historical Society, wrote that the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) maintained files regarding Mountbatten's alleged homosexuality. Lownie also interviewed several young men who claimed to have been in a relationship with Mountbatten. John Barratt, Mountbatten's personal and private secretary for 20 years, has said Mountbatten was not a homosexual, and that it would have been impossible for such a fact to have been hidden from him.\nIn 2019, files became public showing that the FBI knew in the 1940s of allegations that Mountbatten was homosexual and a paedophile. The FBI file on Mountbatten, begun after he took on the role of Supreme Allied Commander in Southeast Asia in 1944, describes Mountbatten and his wife Edwina as \"persons of extremely low morals\", and contains a claim by American author Elizabeth, Baroness Decies, that Mountbatten was known to be a homosexual and had \"a perversion for young boys\". Norman Nield, Mountbatten's driver from 1942 to 1943, told the tabloid \"New Zealand Truth\" that he transported young boys aged 8 to 12 who had been procured for the Admiral to Mountbatten's official residence and was paid to keep quiet. Robin Bryans had also claimed to the Irish magazine \"Now\" that Mountbatten and Anthony Blunt, along with others, were part of a ring that engaged in homosexual orgies and procured boys in their first year at public schools such as the Portora Royal School in Enniskillen. Former residents of the Kincora Boys' Home in Belfast have asserted that they were trafficked to Mountbatten at Classiebawn Castle, his residence in Mullaghmore, County Sligo. These claims were dismissed by the Historical Institution Abuse (HIA) Inquiry. The HIA stated that the article making the original allegations \"did not give any basis for the assertions that any of these people [Mountbatten and others] were connected with Kincora\".\nIn October 2022 Arthur Smyth, a former resident of Kincora, waived his anonymity to make allegations of child abuse against Mountbatten. The allegations are part of a civil case against state authorities responsible for the care of children in Kincora. Smyth claims that he was raped twice by Mountbatten in encounters facilitated by the house father of Kincora.\nDaughter as heir.\nLord and Lady Mountbatten had two daughters: Patricia Knatchbull (14 February 1924 \u2013 13 June 2017), sometime lady-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth II, and Lady Pamela Hicks (born 19 April 1929), who accompanied them to India in 1947\u20131948 and was also sometime lady-in-waiting to the Queen.\nSince Mountbatten had no sons when he was created Viscount Mountbatten of Burma, of Romsey in the County of Southampton on 27 August 1946 and then Earl Mountbatten of Burma and Baron Romsey, in the County of Southampton on 18 October 1947, the Letters Patent were drafted such that in the event he left no sons or issue in the male line, the titles could pass to his daughters, in order of seniority of birth.\nLeisure interests.\nMountbatten was passionate about genealogy, an interest he shared with other European royalty and nobility; according to Ziegler, he spent a great deal of his leisure time in studying his links with European royal houses. From 1957 until his death, Lord Mountbatten was Patron of the Cambridge University Heraldic and Genealogical Society. He was equally passionate about orders, decorations and military ranks and uniforms, though he considered this interest to be a sign of vanity and constantly tried to distance himself from it, with limited success. Over the course of his career, he consistently attempted to secure as many orders and decorations as possible. Particular about details of dress, Mountbatten took an interest in fashion design, introducing trouser zips, a tail-coat with broad, high lapels and a \"buttonless waistcoat\" that could be pulled on over the head. In 1949, having by then relinquished the office of Governor-General of India but retaining a keen interest in Indian affairs, he designed new flags, insignia, and details of uniforms for the Indian Armed Forces ahead of the transition from British dominion to republic; many of his designs were implemented and remain in use.\nLike many members of the royal family, Mountbatten was an aficionado of polo. Mountbatten introduced the sport to the Royal Navy in the 1920s and wrote a book on the subject. He received US patent 1,993,334 in 1931 for a polo stick. He also served as Commodore of Emsworth Sailing Club in Hampshire from 1931. He was a long-serving Patron of the Society for Nautical Research (1951\u20131979). Apart from official documents, Mountbatten was not much of a reader, though he liked P. G. Wodehouse's books. He enjoyed the cinema; his favourite stars were Fred Astaire, Rita Hayworth, Grace Kelly and Shirley MacLaine. In general, however, he had a limited interest in the arts.\nMentorship of King Charles III.\nMountbatten was a strong influence in the upbringing of his great-nephew, the future King Charles III, and later as a mentor \u2013 \"Honorary Grandfather\" and \"Honorary Grandson\", they fondly called each other according to the Jonathan Dimbleby biography of the then-Prince \u2013 though according to both the Ziegler biography of Mountbatten and the Dimbleby biography of the Prince, the results may have been mixed. He from time to time strongly upbraided the Prince for showing tendencies towards the idle pleasure-seeking dilettantism of his predecessor as Prince of Wales, King Edward VIII, whom Mountbatten had known well in their youth. Yet he also encouraged the Prince to enjoy the bachelor life while he could, and then to marry a young and inexperienced girl so as to ensure a stable married life.\nMountbatten's qualification for offering advice to this particular heir to the throne was unique; it was he who had arranged the visit of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth to Dartmouth Royal Naval College on 22 July 1939, taking care to include the young Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret in the invitation, but assigning his nephew, Cadet Prince Philip of Greece, to keep them amused while their parents toured the facility. This was the first recorded meeting of Charles's future parents but a few months later, Mountbatten's efforts nearly came to naught when he received a letter from his sister Alice in Athens informing him that Philip was visiting her and had agreed to repatriate permanently to Greece. Within days, Philip received a command from his cousin and sovereign, King George II of Greece, to resume his naval career in Britain which, though given without explanation, the young prince obeyed.\nIn 1974, Mountbatten began corresponding with Charles about a potential marriage to his granddaughter, Amanda Knatchbull, who was also Charles's second cousin. It was about this time he also recommended that the 25-year-old prince get on with \"sowing some wild oats\". Charles dutifully wrote to Amanda's mother (who was also his godmother and his father's first cousin), Lady Brabourne, about his interest. Her answer was supportive, but advised him that she thought her daughter still rather young to be courted.\nIn February 1975, Charles visited New Delhi to play polo and was shown around Rashtrapati Bhavan, the former Viceroy's House, by Mountbatten.\nFour years later, Mountbatten secured an invitation for himself and Amanda to accompany Charles on his planned 1980 tour of India. Their fathers promptly objected. Prince Philip thought that the Indian public's reception would more likely reflect their response to the uncle than to the nephew. Lord Brabourne counselled that the intense scrutiny of the press would be more likely to drive Mountbatten's godson and granddaughter apart than together.\nCharles was rescheduled to tour India alone, but Mountbatten did not live to the planned date of departure. When Charles finally did propose marriage to Amanda later in 1979, the circumstances were changed and she refused him.\nTelevision appearances.\nIn 1969, a documentary consisting of 12 mini-series titled \"The Life and Times of Lord Mountbatten\" which were presented by the latter, retraced his debut which crossed path which historical events of the century.\nOn 27 April 1977, shortly before his 77th\u00a0birthday, Mountbatten became the first member of the Royal Family to appear on the TV guest show \"This Is Your Life\". In the UK, 22.22 million people tuned in to watch the programme.\nAssassination.\nMountbatten usually holidayed at his summer home, Classiebawn Castle, on the Mullaghmore Peninsula in County Sligo, in the north-west of Ireland. The village was only from the border with County Fermanagh in Northern Ireland and near an area known to be used as a cross-border refuge by IRA members. In 1978, the IRA had allegedly attempted to shoot Mountbatten as he was aboard his boat, but poor weather had prevented the sniper taking his shot.\nOn 27 August 1979, Mountbatten went lobster-potting and tuna fishing in his wooden boat, \"Shadow\u00a0V\", which had been moored in the harbour at Mullaghmore. IRA member Thomas McMahon had slipped onto the unguarded boat the previous night and attached a radio-controlled bomb weighing . When Mountbatten and his party had taken the boat just a few hundred yards from the shore, the bomb was detonated. The boat was destroyed by the force of the blast and Mountbatten's legs were almost blown off. Mountbatten, then aged\u00a079, was pulled alive from the water by nearby fishermen, but died from his injuries before being brought to shore.\nAlso aboard the boat were his elder daughter Patricia, Lady Brabourne; her husband Lord Brabourne; their twin sons Nicholas and Timothy Knatchbull; Lord Brabourne's mother Doreen, Dowager Lady Brabourne; and Paul Maxwell, a young crew member from Enniskillen in County Fermanagh. Nicholas (aged\u00a014) and Paul (aged\u00a015) were killed by the blast and the others were seriously injured. Doreen, Dowager Lady Brabourne (aged\u00a083), died from her injuries the following day.\nThe attack triggered outrage and condemnation around the world. Queen Elizabeth II received messages of condolence from leaders including US President Jimmy Carter and Pope John Paul II. Carter expressed his \"profound sadness\" at the death. The Irish American community was disgusted with the attack, especially since many American soldiers served under Mountbatten during World War II. Jim Rooney, son of Pittsburgh Steelers president Dan M. Rooney (who co-founded The Ireland Funds in 1976), recalled that:Mountbatten's murder shocked many Irish-Americans, my parents included, because they remembered him for the role he played in defeating the Axis. \"It was quite sad because being in America, you were familiar with Lord Mountbatten because of World War II,\" my mother recalled. \"It was a very sad time.\" But my father didn't give in to despair. \"That didn't show down [my father] one bit. It more or less gave him more energy,\" my mother said.\nPrime Minister Margaret Thatcher said:His death leaves a gap that can never be filled. The British people give thanks for his life and grieve at his passing.\nGeorge Colley, the \"T\u00e1naiste\" (Deputy head of the Government of Ireland), said:No effort will be spared to bring those responsible to justice. It is understood that subversives have claimed responsibility for the explosion. Assuming that police investigations substantiate the claim, I know that the Irish people will join me in condemning this heartless and terrible outrage.\nThe IRA issued a statement afterward, saying:The IRA claim responsibility for the execution of Lord Louis Mountbatten. This operation is one of the discriminate ways we can bring to the attention of the English people the continuing occupation of our country.\u00a0... The death of Mountbatten and the tributes paid to him will be seen in sharp contrast to the apathy of the British Government and the English people to the deaths of over three hundred British soldiers, and the deaths of Irish men, women, and children at the hands of their forces.\nSix weeks later, Sinn F\u00e9in vice-president Gerry Adams said of Mountbatten's death:The IRA gave clear reasons for the execution. I think it is unfortunate that anyone has to be killed, but the furor created by Mountbatten's death showed up the hypocritical attitude of the media establishment. As a member of the House of Lords, Mountbatten was an emotional figure in both British and Irish politics. What the IRA did to him is what Mountbatten had been doing all his life to other people; and with his war record I don't think he could have objected to dying in what was clearly a war situation. He knew the danger involved in coming to this country. In my opinion, the IRA achieved its objective: people started paying attention to what was happening in Ireland.\nIndian prime minister Charan Singh remarked:\nHere in India, he will be remembered as a Viceroy and a Governor General who at the time of India's Independence gave us abundantly of his wisdom and goodwill. It was in recognition of our affection for him, respect for his impartiality and regard for his concern for India's freedom that the entire nation readily accepted Lord Mountbatten as the first Governor General of Independent India . His drive and vigour helped in the difficult period after our Independence.\nIn India, a week of national mourning was declared over Mountbatten's death. Burma had announced a 3-day period of mourning.\nIn 2015, Adams said in an interview, \"I stand over what I said then. I'm not one of those people that engages in revisionism. Thankfully the war is over.\"\nOn the day of the bombing, the IRA also ambushed and killed eighteen British soldiers at the gates of Narrow Water Castle, just outside Warrenpoint, in County Down in Northern Ireland, sixteen of them from the Parachute Regiment, in what became known as the Warrenpoint ambush. It was the deadliest attack on the British Army during the Troubles.\nFuneral.\nOn 5 September 1979, Mountbatten received a ceremonial funeral at Westminster Abbey, which was attended by Queen Elizabeth II, the royal family, and members of the European royal houses. Watched by thousands of people, the funeral procession, which started at Wellington Barracks, included representatives of all three British Armed Services, and military contingents from Burma, India, the United States (represented by 70 sailors of the US Navy and 50 US Marines), France (represented by the French Navy) and Canada. His coffin was drawn on a gun carriage by 118 Royal Navy ratings. Mountbatten's funeral was the first major royal funeral to be held in the Abbey since the 18th century. During the televised service, his great-nephew Charles read the lesson from Psalm 107. In an address, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Donald Coggan, highlighted his various achievements and his \"lifelong devotion to the Royal Navy\". After the public ceremonies, which he had planned himself, Mountbatten was buried in Romsey Abbey. As part of the funeral arrangements, his body had been embalmed by Desmond Henley.\nAftermath.\nTwo hours before the bomb detonated, Thomas McMahon had been arrested at a Garda checkpoint between Longford and Granard on suspicion of driving a stolen vehicle. He was tried for the assassinations in Ireland and convicted on 23 November 1979 based on forensic evidence supplied by James O'Donovan that showed flecks of paint from the boat and traces of nitroglycerine on his clothes. He was released in 1998 under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement.\nOn hearing of Mountbatten's death, the then Master of the Queen's Music, Malcolm Williamson, wrote the \"Lament in Memory of Lord Mountbatten of Burma\" for violin and string orchestra. The 11-minute work was given its first performance on 5 May 1980 by the Scottish Baroque Ensemble, conducted by Leonard Friedman.\nOn his death his estate was valued for probate purposes at \u00a32,196,494 ().\nLegacy.\nMountbatten's faults, according to his biographer Philip Ziegler, like everything else about him, \"were on the grandest scale. His vanity though child-like, was monstrous, his ambition unbridled\u00a0... He sought to rewrite history with cavalier indifference to the facts to magnify his own achievements.\" However, Ziegler concludes that Mountbatten's virtues outweighed his defects:\nHe was generous and loyal\u00a0... He was warm-hearted, predisposed to like everyone he met, quick-tempered but never bearing grudges\u00a0... His tolerance was extraordinary; his readiness to respect and listen to the views of others was remarkable throughout his life.\nZiegler argues he was truly a great man, and despite being an executor of a policy, not initiator, he came to be known as its creator.\nWhat he could do with superlative aplomb was to identify the object at which he was aiming, and force it through to its conclusion. A powerful, analytic mind of crystalline clarity, a superabundance of energy, great persuasive powers, endless resilience in the face of setback or disaster rendered him the most formidable of operators. He was infinitely resourceful, quick in his reactions, always ready to cut his losses and start again\u00a0... He was an executor of policy rather than an initiator; but whatever the policy, he espoused it with such energy and enthusiasm, made it so completely his own, that it became identified with him and, in the eyes of the outside world as well as his own, his creation.\nOthers were not so conflicted. Field Marshal Sir Gerald Templer, the former Chief of the Imperial General Staff, once told him, \"You are so crooked, Dickie, that if you swallowed a nail, you would shit a corkscrew\".\nMountbatten supported the burgeoning nationalist movements which grew up in the shadow of Japanese occupation. His priority was to maintain practical, stable government, but driving him was an idealism in which he believed every people should be allowed to control their own destiny. Critics said he was too ready to overlook their faults, and especially their subordination to communist control. Ziegler says that in Malaya, where the main resistance to the Japanese came from Chinese who were under considerable communist influence, \"Mountbatten proved to have been na\u00efve in his assessment.\u00a0... He erred, however, not because he was 'soft on Communism'\u00a0... but from an over-readiness to assume the best of those with whom he had dealings.\" Furthermore, Ziegler argues, he was following a practical policy based on the assumption that it would take a long and bloody struggle to drive the Japanese out, and he needed the support of all the anti-Japanese elements, most of which were either nationalists or communists.\nMountbatten took pride in enhancing intercultural understanding and in 1984, with his elder daughter as the patron, the Mountbatten Institute was developed to allow young adults the opportunity to enhance their intercultural appreciation and experience by spending time abroad. The IET annually awards the Mountbatten Medal for an outstanding contribution, or contributions over a period, to the promotion of electronics or information technology and their application.\nCanada's capital city of Ottawa named Mountbatten Avenue in his memory. Java Street in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia was renamed \"Jalan Mountbatten\" after the Second World War; it was renamed again to Jalan Tun Perak in 1981. The Mountbatten estate in Singapore and Mountbatten MRT station were named after him.\nMountbatten's personal papers (containing approximately 250,000 papers and 50,000 photographs) are preserved in the University of Southampton Library.\nAwards and decorations.\nHe was appointed personal aide-de-camp by Edward VIII, George VI and Elizabeth II, and therefore bore the unusual distinction of being allowed to wear three royal cyphers on his epaulettes."}
{"id": "10293", "revid": "40178246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10293", "title": "Elbridge Gerry", "text": "Elbridge Gerry ( ; July 17, 1744 \u2013 November 23, 1814) was an American Founding Father, merchant, politician, and diplomat who served as the fifth vice president of the United States under President James Madison from 1813 until his death in 1814. He is known to be the father and namesake of the political practice of gerrymandering.\nBorn into a wealthy merchant family, Gerry vocally opposed British colonial policy in the 1760s and was active in the early stages of organizing the resistance in the American Revolutionary War. Elected to the Second Continental Congress, Gerry signed both the Declaration of Independence and Articles of Confederation. He was one of three men who attended the Constitutional Convention in 1787, but refused to sign the Constitution because originally it did not include a Bill of Rights. After its ratification, he was elected to the inaugural United States Congress, where he was actively involved in the drafting and passage of the Bill of Rights as an advocate of individual and state liberties.\nGerry was at first opposed to the idea of political parties and cultivated enduring friendships on both sides of the political divide between Federalists and Democratic-Republicans. He was a member of a diplomatic delegation to France that was treated poorly in the XYZ Affair, in which Federalists held him responsible for a breakdown in negotiations. Gerry thereafter became a Democratic-Republican, running unsuccessfully for Governor of Massachusetts several times before winning the office in 1810. During his second term, the legislature approved new state senate districts that led to the coining of the word \"gerrymander\"; he lost the next election, although the state senate remained Democratic-Republican.\nGerry was nominated by the Democratic-Republican party and elected as vice president in the 1812 election. Advanced in age and in poor health, Gerry served 21 months of his term before dying in office. Gerry is the only signatory of the Declaration of Independence to be buried in Washington, D.C.\nEarly life and education.\nGerry was born on July 17, 1744, in the North Shore town of Marblehead, Massachusetts. His father, Thomas Gerry (1702\u20131774), was a merchant who operated ships out of Marblehead, and his mother, Elizabeth (Greenleaf) Gerry (1716\u20131771), was the daughter of a successful Boston merchant. Gerry's first name came from John Elbridge, one of his mother's ancestors. Gerry's parents had 11 children in all, although only five survived to adulthood. Of these, Elbridge was the third. He was first educated by private tutors and entered Harvard College shortly before turning 14. After receiving a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1762 and a Master of Arts in 1765, he entered his father's merchant business. By the 1770s, the Gerrys numbered among the wealthiest Massachusetts merchants, with trading connections in Spain, the West Indies, and along the North American coast. Gerry's father, who had emigrated from England in 1730, was active in local politics and had a leading role in the local militia.\nColonial business and politics.\nGerry was from an early time a vocal opponent of Parliamentary efforts to tax the colonies after the French and Indian War ended in 1763. In 1770, he sat on a Marblehead committee that sought to enforce importation bans on taxed British goods. He frequently communicated with other Massachusetts opponents of British policy, including Samuel Adams, John Adams, Mercy Otis Warren, and others.\nIn May 1772, he won election to the Great and General Court of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, which served as the state's legislative assembly. He worked closely with Samuel Adams to advance colonial opposition to Parliamentary colonial policies. He was responsible for establishing Marblehead's committee of correspondence, one of the first to be set up after that of Boston. However, an incident of mob action prompted him to resign from the committee the next year. Gerry and other prominent Marbleheaders had established a hospital for performing smallpox inoculations on Cat Island; because the means of transmission of the disease were not known at the time, fears amongst the local population led to protests which escalated into violence that wrecked the hospital and threatened the proprietors' other properties.\nGerry reentered politics after the Boston Port Act closed that city's port in 1774, and Marblehead became an alternative port to which relief supplies from other colonies could be delivered. As one of the town's leading merchants and Patriots, Gerry played a major role in ensuring the storage and delivery of supplies from Marblehead to Boston, interrupting those activities only to care for his dying father. He was elected as a representative to the First Continental Congress in September 1774, but declined, still grieving the loss of his father.\nAmerican Revolution.\nGerry was elected to the provincial assembly, which reconstituted itself as the Massachusetts Provincial Congress after Governor Thomas Gage dissolved the body in October 1774. He was assigned to its committee of safety, responsible for ensuring that the province's limited supplies of weapons and gunpowder did not fall into British hands. His actions were partly responsible for the storage of weapons and ammunition in Concord; these stores were the target of the British expedition that sparked the start of the American Revolutionary War with the battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775. (Gerry was staying at an inn at Menotomy, now Arlington, when the British Army marched through on the night of April 18.) During the Siege of Boston that followed, Gerry continued to take a leading role in supplying the nascent Continental Army, something he would continue to do as the war progressed. He leveraged business contacts in France and Spain to acquire not just munitions, but supplies of all types, and was involved in the transfer of financial subsidies from Spain to Congress. He sent ships to ports all along the American coast and dabbled in financing privateering operations against British merchant shipping.\nUnlike some other merchants, there is no evidence that Gerry profiteered directly from the hostilities. He spoke out against price gouging and in favor of price controls, although his war-related merchant activities notably increased the family's wealth. His gains were tempered to some extent by the precipitous decline in the value of paper currencies, which he held in large quantities and speculated in.\nGerry served in the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia from February 1776 to 1780, when matters of the ongoing war occupied the body's attention. He was influential in convincing several delegates to support passage of the Declaration of Independence in the debates held during the summer of 1776; John Adams wrote of him, \"If every Man here was a Gerry, the Liberties of America would be safe against the Gates of Earth and Hell.\" He was implicated as a member of the so-called \"Conway Cabal\", a group of Congressmen and military officers who were dissatisfied with the performance of General George Washington during the 1777 military campaign. However, Gerry took Pennsylvania leader Thomas Mifflin, one of Washington's critics, to task early in the episode and specifically denied knowledge of any sort of conspiracy against Washington in February 1778.\nGerry's political philosophy was one of limited central government, and he regularly advocated for the maintenance of civilian control of the military. He held these positions fairly consistently throughout his political career (wavering principally on the need for stronger central government in the wake of the 1786\u201387 Shays' Rebellion) and was well known for his personal integrity. In later years he opposed the idea of political parties, remaining somewhat distant from both the developing Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties until later in his career. It was not until 1800 that he formally associated with the Democratic-Republicans in opposition to what he saw as attempts by the Federalists to centralize too much power in the national government.\nIn 1780, he resigned from the Continental Congress over the issue and refused offers from the state legislature to return to the Congress. He also refused appointment to the state senate, claiming he would be more effective in the state's lower chamber, and also refused appointment as a county judge, comparing the offer by Governor John Hancock to those made by royally-appointed governors to benefit their political allies. He was elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1781.\nGerry was convinced to rejoin the Confederation Congress in 1783, when the state legislature agreed to support his call for needed reforms. He served in that body, which met in New York City, until September 1785. The following year, he married Ann Thompson, the daughter of a wealthy New York City merchant who was 20 years his junior; his best man was his good friend James Monroe. The couple had ten children between 1787 and 1801, straining Ann's health.\nThe war made Gerry sufficiently wealthy that when it ended he sold off his merchant interests and began investing in land. In 1787, he purchased the Cambridge, Massachusetts, estate of the last royal lieutenant governor of Massachusetts, Thomas Oliver, which had been confiscated by the state. This property, known as Elmwood, became the family home for the rest of Gerry's life. He continued to own property in Marblehead and bought several properties in other Massachusetts communities. He also owned shares in the Ohio Company, prompting some political opponents to characterize him as an owner of vast tracts of western lands.\nConstitutional Convention.\nGerry played a major role in the Constitutional Convention held in Philadelphia during the summer of 1787. In its deliberations, he consistently advocated for a strong delineation between state and federal government powers, with state legislatures shaping the membership of federal government positions. Gerry's opposition to popular election of representatives was rooted in part by the events of Shays' Rebellion in western Massachusetts in the year preceding the convention. He also sought to maintain individual liberties by providing checks on government power that might abuse or limit those freedoms.\nHe supported the idea that the Senate composition should not be determined by population; the view that it should instead be composed of equal numbers of members for each state prevailed in the Connecticut Compromise. The compromise was adopted on a narrow vote in which the Massachusetts delegation was divided, Gerry and Caleb Strong voting in favor. Gerry further proposed that senators of a state, rather than casting a single vote on behalf of the state, vote instead as individuals. Gerry was also vocal in opposing the Three-fifths Compromise, which counted slaves as three-fifths of a person for the purposes of determining the number of each states' votes in the House of Representatives and the Electoral College. The Southern states wanted each slave to count as a full person, whereas the Northern states did not want them to count at all. Gerry asked, why should \"blacks, who were property in the South\", count toward representation \"any more than the Cattle &amp; horses of the North\"? Gerry opposed slavery and said the constitution should have \"nothing to do\" with slavery so as \"not to sanction it.\"\nBecause of his fear of demagoguery and belief the people of the United States could be easily misled, Gerry also advocated indirect elections. Although he was unsuccessful in obtaining them for the lower house of Congress, Gerry did obtain such indirect elections for the Senate, whose members were to be selected by the state legislatures. Gerry also advanced numerous proposals for indirect elections of the President of the United States, most of them involving limiting the right to vote to the state governors and electors.\nGerry was unhappy about the lack of enumeration of any specific individual liberties in the proposed constitution and generally opposed proposals that strengthened the central government. He was one of only three delegates who voted against the proposed constitution in the convention (the others were George Mason and Edmund Randolph), citing a concern about the convention's lack of authority to enact such major changes to the nation's system of government and to the constitution's lack of \"federal features.\" Ultimately, Gerry refused to sign because of concerns over the rights of private citizens and the power of the legislature to raise armies and revenue.\nState ratification and Bill of Rights.\nDuring the ratification debates that took place in the states following the convention, Gerry continued his opposition, publishing a widely circulated letter documenting his objections to the proposed constitution. In the document, he cites the lack of a Bill of Rights as his primary objection but also expresses qualified approval of the Constitution, indicating that he would accept it with some amendment. Strong pro-Constitution forces attacked him in the press, comparing him unfavorably to the Shaysites. Henry Jackson was particularly vicious: \"[Gerry has] done more injury to this country by that infamous Letter than he will be able to make atonement in his whole life\", and Oliver Ellsworth, a convention delegate from Connecticut, charged him with deliberately courting the Shays faction.\nOne consequence of the furor over his letter was that he was not selected as a delegate to the Massachusetts ratifying convention although he was later invited to attend by the convention's leadership. The convention leadership was dominated by Federalists, and Gerry was not given any formal opportunity to speak. He left the convention after a shouting match with convention chair Francis Dana. Massachusetts ratified the constitution by a vote of 187 to 168. The debate had the result of estranging Gerry from several previously-friendly politicians, including chairman Dana and Rufus King.\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nAnti-Federalist forces nominated Gerry for governor in 1788, but he was predictably defeated by the popular incumbent John Hancock. Following its ratification, Gerry recanted his opposition to the Constitution, noting that other state ratifying conventions had called for amendments that he supported. He was nominated by friends (over his own opposition to the idea) for a seat in the inaugural House of Representatives, where he served two terms.\nIn June 1789, Gerry proposed that Congress consider all of the proposed constitutional amendments that various state ratifying conventions had called for (notably those of Rhode Island and North Carolina, which had at the time still not ratified the Constitution). In the debate that followed, he led opposition to some of the proposals, arguing that they did not go far enough in ensuring individual liberties. He successfully lobbied for inclusion of freedom of assembly in the First Amendment and was a leading architect of the Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure. He sought unsuccessfully to insert the word \"expressly\" into the Tenth Amendment, which might have more significantly limited the federal government's power.\nHe was successful in efforts to severely limit the federal government's ability to control state militias. In tandem with this protection, he had once argued against the idea of the federal government controlling a large standing army, saying, \"A standing army is like a standing member. It's an excellent assurance of domestic tranquility, but a dangerous temptation to foreign adventure.\"\nGerry vigorously supported Alexander Hamilton's reports on public credit, including the assumption at full value of state debts, and supported Hamilton's Bank of the United States, positions consistent with earlier calls he had made for economic centralization. Although he had speculated in depreciated Continental bills of credit (the IOUs at issue), there is no evidence he participated in large-scale speculation that attended the debate when it took place in 1790, and he became a major investor in the new bank. He used the floor of the House to speak out against aristocratic and monarchical tendencies he saw as threats to republican ideals, and generally opposed laws and their provisions that he perceived as limiting individual and state liberties. He opposed any attempt to give officers of the executive significant powers, specifically opposing establishment of the Treasury Department because its head might gain more power than the president. He opposed measures that strengthened the presidency, such as the ability to fire Cabinet officers, seeking instead to give the legislature more power over appointments.\nGerry did not stand for re-election in 1792, returning home to raise his children and care for his sickly wife. He agreed to serve as a presidential elector for John Adams in the 1796 election. \nDuring Adams' term in office, Gerry maintained good relations with both Adams and Vice President Thomas Jefferson, hoping that the divided executive might lead to less friction. His hopes were not realized: the split between Federalists (Adams) and Democratic-Republicans (Jefferson) widened.\nXYZ Affair.\nPresident Adams appointed Gerry to be a member of a special diplomatic commission sent to Republican France in 1797. Tensions had risen between the two nations after the 1796 ratification of the Jay Treaty, made between the United States and Great Britain. It was seen by French leaders as signs of an Anglo-American alliance, and France had consequently stepped up seizures of American ships. Adams chose Gerry over his cabinet's opposition (on political grounds that Gerry was insufficiently Federalist), because of their long-standing relationship; Adams described Gerry as one of the \"two most impartial men in America\" (Adams himself being the other).\nGerry joined co-commissioners Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and John Marshall in France in October 1797 and met briefly with Foreign Minister Talleyrand. Some days after that meeting, the delegation was approached by three French agents (at first identified as \"X\", \"Y\", and \"Z\" in published papers, leading the controversy to be called the \"XYZ Affair\") who demanded substantial bribes from the commissioners before negotiations could continue. The commissioners refused and sought unsuccessfully to engage Talleyrand in formal negotiations. Believing Gerry to be the most approachable of the commissioners, Talleyrand successively froze first Pinckney and then Marshall out of the informal negotiations, and they left France in April 1798. Gerry, who sought to leave with them, stayed behind because Talleyrand threatened war if he left. Gerry refused to make any significant negotiations afterward and left Paris in August.\nBy then, dispatches describing the commission's reception had been published in the United States, raising calls for war. The undeclared naval Quasi-War (1798\u20131800) followed. Federalists, notably Secretary of State Timothy Pickering, accused Gerry of supporting the French and abetting the breakdown of the talks, while Adams and Republicans such as Thomas Jefferson supported him. The negative press damaged Gerry's reputation, and he was burned in effigy by protestors in front of his home. He was only later vindicated, when his correspondence with Talleyrand was published in 1799. In response to the Federalist attacks on him, and because of his perception that the Federalist-led military buildup threatened republican values, Gerry formally joined the Democratic-Republican Party in early 1800, standing for election as Governor of Massachusetts.\nGovernor of Massachusetts.\nFor years (in the 1800, 1801, 1802, and 1803 elections) Gerry unsuccessfully sought the governorship of Massachusetts. His opponent in these races, Caleb Strong, was a popular moderate Federalist, whose party dominated the state's politics despite a national shift toward the Republicans. In 1803, Republicans in the state were divided, and Gerry only had regional support of the party. He decided not to run in the 1804 election, returning to semi-retirement and to deal with a personal financial crisis. His brother Samuel Russell had mismanaged his own business affairs, and Gerry had propped him up by guaranteeing a loan that was due. The matter ultimately ruined Gerry's finances for his remaining years.\nRepublican James Sullivan won the governor's seat from Strong in the 1807 election, but his successor was unable to hold the seat in the 1809 election, which went to Federalist Christopher Gore. Gerry stood for election again in the 1810 election against Gore and won a narrow victory. Republicans cast Gore as an ostentatious British-loving Tory who wanted to restore the monarchy (his parents were Loyalists during the Revolution), and Gerry as a patriotic American, while Federalists described Gerry as a \"French partizan\" and Gore as an honest man devoted to ridding the government of foreign influence. A temporary lessening in the threat of war with Britain aided Gerry. The two battled again in 1811, with Gerry once again victorious in a highly acrimonious campaign.\nGerry's first year as governor was less controversial than his second, because the Federalists controlled the state senate. He preached moderation in the political discourse, noting that it was important that the nation present a unified front in its dealings with foreign powers. In his second term, with full Republican control of the legislature, he became notably more partisan, purging much of the state government of Federalist appointees. The legislature also enacted \"reforms\" of the court system that resulted in an increase in the number of judicial appointments, which Gerry filled with Republican partisans. However, infighting within the party and a shortage of qualified candidates played against Gerry, and the Federalists scored points by complaining vocally about the partisan nature of the reforms.\nOther legislation passed during Gerry's second year included a bill broadening the membership of Harvard's Board of Overseers to diversify its religious membership, and another that liberalized religious taxes. The Harvard bill had significant political slant because the recent split between orthodox Congregationalists and Unitarians also divided the state to some extent along party lines, and Federalist Unitarians had recently gained control over the Harvard board.\nIn 1812, the state adopted new constitutionally mandated electoral district boundaries. The Republican-controlled legislature had created district boundaries designed to enhance their party's control over state and national offices, leading to some oddly shaped legislative districts. Although Gerry was unhappy about the highly partisan districting (according to his son-in-law, he thought it \"highly disagreeable\"), he signed the legislation. The shape of one of the state senate districts in Essex County was compared to a salamander by a local Federalist newspaper in a political cartoon, calling it a \"Gerry-mander\". Ever since, the creation of such districts has been called gerrymandering.\nGerry also engaged in partisan investigations of potential libel against him by elements of the Federalist press, further damaging his popularity with moderates. The redistricting controversy, along with the libel investigation and the impending War of 1812, contributed to Gerry's defeat in 1812 (once again at the hands of Caleb Strong, whom the Federalists had brought out of retirement). The gerrymandering of the state Senate was a notable success in the 1812 election: the body was thoroughly dominated by Republicans, even though the house and the governor's seat went to Federalists by substantial margins.\nVice presidency.\nGerry's financial difficulties prompted him to ask President James Madison for a federal position after his loss in the 1812 election (which was held early in the year). He was chosen by the party Congressional nominating caucus to be Madison's vice presidential running mate in the 1812 presidential election, although the nomination was first offered to John Langdon. He was viewed as a relatively safe choice who would attract Northern votes but not pose a threat to James Monroe, who was thought likely to succeed Madison. Madison narrowly won re-election, and Gerry took the oath of office at Elmwood in March 1813. At that time the office of vice president was largely a sinecure; Gerry's duties included advancing the administration's agenda in Congress and dispensing patronage positions in New England. Gerry's actions in support of the War of 1812 had a partisan edge: he expressed concerns over a possible Federalist seizure of Fort Adams (as Boston's Fort Independence was then known) as a prelude to Anglo-Federalist cooperation and sought the arrest of printers of Federalist newspapers.\nDeath and burial.\nOn November 23, 1814, Gerry suffered a heart attack while visiting Joseph Nourse of the Treasury Department, and he died soon after returning to his home in the Seven Buildings. He was 70 years old.\nHe is buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., with a memorial by John Frazee. He is the only signer of the Declaration of Independence who was buried in the nation's capital city. The estate he left his wife and children was rich in land and poor in cash, but he had managed to repay his brother's debts with his pay as vice president. Aged 68 at the start of his vice presidency, he was the oldest person to become vice president until Charles Curtis in 1929.\nLegacy.\nGerry is generally remembered for the use of his name in the word \"gerrymander\", for his refusal to sign the United States Constitution, and for his role in the XYZ Affair and for his time as Vice President. His path through the politics of the age has been difficult to characterize. Early biographers, including his son-in-law James T. Austin and Samuel Eliot Morison, struggled to explain his apparent changes in position. Biographer George Athan Billias posits that Gerry was a consistent advocate and practitioner of republicanism as it was originally envisioned, and that his role in the Constitutional Convention had a significant impact on the document it eventually produced.\nGerry had ten children, nine of whom survived into adulthood:\nGerry's grandson Elbridge Thomas Gerry became a distinguished lawyer and philanthropist in New York. His great-grandson, Peter G. Gerry, was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives and later a U.S. Senator from Rhode Island.\nGerry is depicted in two of John Trumbull's paintings, the \"Declaration of Independence\" and \"General George Washington Resigning His Commission\". Both are on view in the rotunda of the United States Capitol.\nThe upstate New York town of Elbridge is believed to have been named in his honor, as is the western New York town of Gerry. The town of Phillipston, Massachusetts was originally incorporated in 1786 under the name Gerry in his honor but was changed to its present name after the town submitted a petition in 1812, citing Democratic-Republican support for the War of 1812.\nGerry's Landing Road in Cambridge, Massachusetts, is located near the Eliot Bridge not far from Elmwood. During the 19th century, the area was known as Gerry's Landing (formerly known as Sir Richard's Landing) and was used by a Gerry relative for a short time as a landing and storehouse. The supposed house of his birth, the Elbridge Gerry House (it is uncertain whether he was born in the house currently standing on the site or an earlier structure) stands in Marblehead, and Marblehead's Elbridge Gerry School is named in his honor.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "10294", "revid": "1272589748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10294", "title": "Encryption", "text": "In cryptography, encryption (more specifically, encoding) is the process of transforming information in a way that, ideally, only authorized parties can decode. This process converts the original representation of the information, known as plaintext, into an alternative form known as ciphertext. Despite its goal, encryption does not itself prevent interference but denies the intelligible content to a would-be interceptor.\nFor technical reasons, an encryption scheme usually uses a pseudo-random encryption key generated by an algorithm. It is possible to decrypt the message without possessing the key but, for a well-designed encryption scheme, considerable computational resources and skills are required. An authorized recipient can easily decrypt the message with the key provided by the originator to recipients but not to unauthorized users.\nHistorically, various forms of encryption have been used to aid in cryptography. Early encryption techniques were often used in military messaging. Since then, new techniques have emerged and become commonplace in all areas of modern computing. Modern encryption schemes use the concepts of public-key and symmetric-key. Modern encryption techniques ensure security because modern computers are inefficient at cracking the encryption.\nHistory.\nAncient.\nOne of the earliest forms of encryption is symbol replacement, which was first found in the tomb of Khnumhotep II, who lived in 1900 BC Egypt. Symbol replacement encryption is \u201cnon-standard,\u201d which means that the symbols require a cipher or key to understand. This type of early encryption was used throughout Ancient Greece and Rome for military purposes. One of the most famous military encryption developments was the Caesar cipher, in which a plaintext letter is shifted a fixed number of positions along the alphabet to get the encoded letter. A message encoded with this type of encryption could be decoded with a fixed number on the Caesar cipher.\nAround 800 AD, Arab mathematician Al-Kindi developed the technique of frequency analysis \u2013 which was an attempt to crack ciphers systematically, including the Caesar cipher. This technique looked at the frequency of letters in the encrypted message to determine the appropriate shift: for example, the most common letter in English text is E and is therefore likely to be represented by the letter that appears most commonly in the ciphertext. This technique was rendered ineffective by the polyalphabetic cipher, described by Al-Qalqashandi (1355\u20131418) and Leon Battista Alberti (in 1465), which varied the substitution alphabet as encryption proceeded in order to confound such analysis.\n19th\u201320th century.\nAround 1790, Thomas Jefferson theorized a cipher to encode and decode messages to provide a more secure way of military correspondence. The cipher, known today as the Wheel Cipher or the Jefferson Disk, although never actually built, was theorized as a spool that could jumble an English message up to 36 characters. The message could be decrypted by plugging in the jumbled message to a receiver with an identical cipher.\nA similar device to the Jefferson Disk, the M-94, was developed in 1917 independently by US Army Major Joseph Mauborne. This device was used in U.S. military communications until 1942.\nIn World War II, the Axis powers used a more advanced version of the M-94 called the Enigma Machine. The Enigma Machine was more complex because unlike the Jefferson Wheel and the M-94, each day the jumble of letters switched to a completely new combination. Each day's combination was only known by the Axis, so many thought the only way to break the code would be to try over 17,000 combinations within 24 hours. The Allies used computing power to severely limit the number of reasonable combinations they needed to check every day, leading to the breaking of the Enigma Machine.\nModern.\nToday, encryption is used in the transfer of communication over the Internet for security and commerce. As computing power continues to increase, computer encryption is constantly evolving to prevent eavesdropping attacks. One of the first \"modern\" cipher suites, DES, used a 56-bit key with 72,057,594,037,927,936 possibilities; it was cracked in 1999 by EFF's brute-force DES cracker, which required 22 hours and 15 minutes to do so. Modern encryption standards often use stronger key sizes, such as AES (256-bit mode), TwoFish, ChaCha20-Poly1305, Serpent (configurable up to 512-bit). Cipher suites that use a 128-bit or higher key, like AES, will not be able to be brute-forced because the total amount of keys is 3.4028237e+38 possibilities. The most likely option for cracking ciphers with high key size is to find vulnerabilities in the cipher itself, like inherent biases and backdoors or by exploiting physical side effects through Side-channel attacks. For example, RC4, a stream cipher, was cracked due to inherent biases and vulnerabilities in the cipher.\nEncryption in cryptography.\nIn the context of cryptography, encryption serves as a mechanism to ensure confidentiality. Since data may be visible on the Internet, sensitive information such as passwords and personal communication may be exposed to potential interceptors. The process of encrypting and decrypting messages involves keys. The two main types of keys in cryptographic systems are symmetric-key and public-key (also known as asymmetric-key).\nMany complex cryptographic algorithms often use simple modular arithmetic in their implementations.\nTypes.\nIn symmetric-key schemes, the encryption and decryption keys are the same. Communicating parties must have the same key in order to achieve secure communication. The German Enigma Machine used a new symmetric-key each day for encoding and decoding messages.\nIn public-key encryption schemes, the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages. However, only the receiving party has access to the decryption key that enables messages to be read. Public-key encryption was first described in a secret document in 1973; beforehand, all encryption schemes were symmetric-key (also called private-key). Although published subsequently, the work of Diffie and Hellman was published in a journal with a large readership, and the value of the methodology was explicitly described. The method became known as the Diffie-Hellman key exchange.\nRSA (Rivest\u2013Shamir\u2013Adleman) is another notable public-key cryptosystem. Created in 1978, it is still used today for applications involving digital signatures. Using number theory, the RSA algorithm selects two prime numbers, which help generate both the encryption and decryption keys.\nA publicly available public-key encryption application called Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) was written in 1991 by Phil Zimmermann, and distributed free of charge with source code. PGP was purchased by Symantec in 2010 and is regularly updated.\nUses.\nEncryption has long been used by militaries and governments to facilitate secret communication. It is now commonly used in protecting information within many kinds of civilian systems. For example, the Computer Security Institute reported that in 2007, 71% of companies surveyed used encryption for some of their data in transit, and 53% used encryption for some of their data in storage. Encryption can be used to protect data \"at rest\", such as information stored on computers and storage devices (e.g. USB flash drives). In recent years, there have been numerous reports of confidential data, such as customers' personal records, being exposed through loss or theft of laptops or backup drives; encrypting such files at rest helps protect them if physical security measures fail. Digital rights management systems, which prevent unauthorized use or reproduction of copyrighted material and protect software against reverse engineering (see also copy protection), is another somewhat different example of using encryption on data at rest.\nEncryption is also used to protect data in transit, for example data being transferred via networks (e.g. the Internet, e-commerce), mobile telephones, wireless microphones, wireless intercom systems, Bluetooth devices and bank automatic teller machines. There have been numerous reports of data in transit being intercepted in recent years. Data should also be encrypted when transmitted across networks in order to protect against eavesdropping of network traffic by unauthorized users.\nData erasure.\nConventional methods for permanently deleting data from a storage device involve overwriting the device's whole content with zeros, ones, or other patterns \u2013 a process which can take a significant amount of time, depending on the capacity and the type of storage medium. Cryptography offers a way of making the erasure almost instantaneous. This method is called crypto-shredding. An example implementation of this method can be found on iOS devices, where the cryptographic key is kept in a dedicated 'effaceable storage'. Because the key is stored on the same device, this setup on its own does not offer full privacy or security protection if an unauthorized person gains physical access to the device.\nLimitations.\nEncryption is used in the 21st century to protect digital data and information systems. As computing power increased over the years, encryption technology has only become more advanced and secure. However, this advancement in technology has also exposed a potential limitation of today's encryption methods.\nThe length of the encryption key is an indicator of the strength of the encryption method. For example, the original encryption key, DES (Data Encryption Standard), was 56 bits, meaning it had 2^56 combination possibilities. With today's computing power, a 56-bit key is no longer secure, being vulnerable to brute force attacks.\nQuantum computing uses properties of quantum mechanics in order to process large amounts of data simultaneously. Quantum computing has been found to achieve computing speeds thousands of times faster than today's supercomputers. This computing power presents a challenge to today's encryption technology. For example, RSA encryption uses the multiplication of very large prime numbers to create a semiprime number for its public key. Decoding this key without its private key requires this semiprime number to be factored, which can take a very long time to do with modern computers. It would take a supercomputer anywhere between weeks to months to factor in this key. However, quantum computing can use quantum algorithms to factor this semiprime number in the same amount of time it takes for normal computers to generate it. This would make all data protected by current public-key encryption vulnerable to quantum computing attacks. Other encryption techniques like elliptic curve cryptography and symmetric key encryption are also vulnerable to quantum computing.\nWhile quantum computing could be a threat to encryption security in the future, quantum computing as it currently stands is still very limited. Quantum computing currently is not commercially available, cannot handle large amounts of code, and only exists as computational devices, not computers. Furthermore, quantum computing advancements will be able to be used in favor of encryption as well. The National Security Agency (NSA) is currently preparing post-quantum encryption standards for the future. Quantum encryption promises a level of security that will be able to counter the threat of quantum computing.\nAttacks and countermeasures.\nEncryption is an important tool but is not sufficient alone to ensure the security or privacy of sensitive information throughout its lifetime. Most applications of encryption protect information only at rest or in transit, leaving sensitive data in clear text and potentially vulnerable to improper disclosure during processing, such as by a cloud service for example. Homomorphic encryption and secure multi-party computation are emerging techniques to compute encrypted data; these techniques are general and Turing complete but incur high computational and/or communication costs.\nIn response to encryption of data at rest, cyber-adversaries have developed new types of attacks. These more recent threats to encryption of data at rest include cryptographic attacks, stolen ciphertext attacks, attacks on encryption keys, insider attacks, data corruption or integrity attacks, data destruction attacks, and ransomware attacks. Data fragmentation and active defense data protection technologies attempt to counter some of these attacks, by distributing, moving, or mutating ciphertext so it is more difficult to identify, steal, corrupt, or destroy.\nThe debate around encryption.\nThe question of balancing the need for national security with the right to privacy has been debated for years, since encryption has become critical in today's digital society. The modern encryption debate started around the '90s when US government tried to ban cryptography because, according to them, it would threaten national security. The debate is polarized around two opposing views. Those who see strong encryption as a problem making it easier for criminals to hide their illegal acts online and others who argue that encryption keep digital communications safe. The debate heated up in 2014, when Big Tech like Apple and Google set encryption by default in their devices. This was the start of a series of controversies that puts governments, companies and internet users at stake.\nIntegrity protection of Ciphertexts.\nEncryption, by itself, can protect the confidentiality of messages, but other techniques are still needed to protect the integrity and authenticity of a message; for example, verification of a message authentication code (MAC) or a digital signature usually done by a hashing algorithm or a PGP signature. Authenticated encryption algorithms are designed to provide both encryption and integrity protection together. Standards for cryptographic software and hardware to perform encryption are widely available, but successfully using encryption to ensure security may be a challenging problem. A single error in system design or execution can allow successful attacks. Sometimes an adversary can obtain unencrypted information without directly undoing the encryption. See for example traffic analysis, TEMPEST, or Trojan horse.\nIntegrity protection mechanisms such as MACs and digital signatures must be applied to the ciphertext when it is first created, typically on the same device used to compose the message, to protect a message end-to-end along its full transmission path; otherwise, any node between the sender and the encryption agent could potentially tamper with it. Encrypting at the time of creation is only secure if the encryption device itself has correct keys and has not been tampered with. If an endpoint device has been configured to trust a root certificate that an attacker controls, for example, then the attacker can both inspect and tamper with encrypted data by performing a man-in-the-middle attack anywhere along the message's path. The common practice of TLS interception by network operators represents a controlled and institutionally sanctioned form of such an attack, but countries have also attempted to employ such attacks as a form of control and censorship.\nCiphertext length and padding.\nEven when encryption correctly hides a message's content and it cannot be tampered with at rest or in transit, a message's \"length\" is a form of metadata that can still leak sensitive information about the message. For example, the well-known CRIME and BREACH attacks against HTTPS were side-channel attacks that relied on information leakage via the length of encrypted content. Traffic analysis is a broad class of techniques that often employs message lengths to infer sensitive implementation about traffic flows by aggregating information about a large number of messages.\nPadding a message's payload before encrypting it can help obscure the cleartext's true length, at the cost of increasing the ciphertext's size and introducing or increasing bandwidth overhead. Messages may be padded randomly or deterministically, with each approach having different tradeoffs. Encrypting and padding messages to form padded uniform random blobs or PURBs is a practice guaranteeing that the cipher text leaks no metadata about its cleartext's content, and leaks asymptotically minimal formula_1 information via its length."}
{"id": "10296", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10296", "title": "Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen paradox", "text": "The Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen (EPR) paradox is a thought experiment proposed by physicists Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, which argues that the description of physical reality provided by quantum mechanics is incomplete. In a 1935 paper titled \"Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?\", they argued for the existence of \"elements of reality\" that were not part of quantum theory, and speculated that it should be possible to construct a theory containing these hidden variables. Resolutions of the paradox have important implications for the interpretation of quantum mechanics.\nThe thought experiment involves a pair of particles prepared in what would later become known as an entangled state. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen pointed out that, in this state, if the position of the first particle were measured, the result of measuring the position of the second particle could be predicted. If instead the momentum of the first particle were measured, then the result of measuring the momentum of the second particle could be predicted. They argued that no action taken on the first particle could instantaneously affect the other, since this would involve information being transmitted faster than light, which is impossible according to the theory of relativity. They invoked a principle, later known as the \"EPR criterion of reality\", which posited that: \"If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with probability equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element of reality corresponding to that quantity.\" From this, they inferred that the second particle must have a definite value of both position and of momentum prior to either quantity being measured. But quantum mechanics considers these two observables incompatible and thus does not associate simultaneous values for both to any system. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen therefore concluded that quantum theory does not provide a complete description of reality.\nThe \"Paradox\" paper.\nThe term \"Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen paradox\" or \"EPR\" arose from a paper written in 1934 after Einstein joined the Institute for Advanced Study, having .\nThe original paper purports to describe what must happen to \"two systems I and II, which we permit to interact\", and after some time \"we suppose that there is no longer any interaction between the two parts.\" The EPR description involves \"two particles, A and B, [which] interact briefly and then move off in opposite directions.\" According to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, it is impossible to measure both the momentum and the position of particle B exactly; however, it is possible to measure the exact position of particle A. By calculation, therefore, with the exact position of particle A known, the exact position of particle B can be known. Alternatively, the exact momentum of particle A can be measured, so the exact momentum of particle B can be worked out. As Manjit Kumar writes, \"EPR argued that they had proved that ... [particle] B can have simultaneously exact values of position and momentum. ... Particle B has a position that is real and a momentum that is real. EPR appeared to have contrived a means to establish the exact values of \"either\" the momentum \"or\" the position of B due to measurements made on particle A, without the slightest possibility of particle B being physically disturbed.\"\nEPR tried to set up a paradox to question the range of true application of quantum mechanics: quantum theory predicts that both values cannot be known for a particle, and yet the EPR thought experiment purports to show that they must all have determinate values. The EPR paper says: \"We are thus forced to conclude that the quantum-mechanical description of physical reality given by wave functions is not complete.\" The EPR paper ends by saying: \"While we have thus shown that the wave function does not provide a complete description of the physical reality, we left open the question of whether or not such a description exists. We believe, however, that such a theory is possible.\" The 1935 EPR paper condensed the philosophical discussion into a physical argument. The authors claim that given a specific experiment, in which the outcome of a measurement is known before the measurement takes place, there must exist something in the real world, an \"element of reality\", that determines the measurement outcome. They postulate that these elements of reality are, in modern terminology, local, in the sense that each belongs to a certain point in spacetime. Each element may, again in modern terminology, only be influenced by events that are located in the backward light cone of its point in spacetime (i.e. in the past). These claims are founded on assumptions about nature that constitute what is now known as local realism.\nThough the EPR paper has often been taken as an exact expression of Einstein's views, it was primarily authored by Podolsky, based on discussions at the Institute for Advanced Study with Einstein and Rosen. Einstein later expressed to Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger that, \"it did not come out as well as I had originally wanted; rather, the essential thing was, so to speak, smothered by the formalism.\" Einstein would later go on to present an individual account of his local realist ideas. Shortly before the EPR paper appeared in the \"Physical Review,\" \"The New York Times\" ran a news story about it, under the headline \"Einstein Attacks Quantum Theory\". The story, which quoted Podolsky, irritated Einstein, who wrote to the \"Times,\" \"Any information upon which the article 'Einstein Attacks Quantum Theory' in your issue of May 4 is based was given to you without authority. It is my invariable practice to discuss scientific matters only in the appropriate forum and I deprecate advance publication of any announcement in regard to such matters in the secular press.\"\nThe \"Times\" story also sought out comment from physicist Edward Condon, who said, \"Of course, a great deal of the argument hinges on just what meaning is to be attached to the word 'reality' in physics.\" The physicist and historian Max Jammer later noted, \"[I]t remains a historical fact that the earliest criticism of the EPR paper \u2013 moreover, a criticism that correctly saw in Einstein's conception of physical reality the key problem of the whole issue \u2013 appeared in a daily newspaper prior to the publication of the criticized paper itself.\"\nBohr's reply.\nThe publication of the paper prompted a response by Niels Bohr, which he published in the same journal (\"Physical Review\"), in the same year, using the same title. (This exchange was only one chapter in a prolonged debate between Bohr and Einstein about the nature of quantum reality.)\nHe argued that EPR had reasoned fallaciously. Bohr said measurements of position and of momentum are complementary, meaning the choice to measure one excludes the possibility of measuring the other. Consequently, a fact deduced regarding one arrangement of laboratory apparatus could not be combined with a fact deduced by means of the other, and so, the inference of predetermined position and momentum values for the second particle was not valid. Bohr concluded that EPR's \"arguments do not justify their conclusion that the quantum description turns out to be essentially incomplete.\"\nEinstein's own argument.\nIn his own publications and correspondence, Einstein indicated that he was not satisfied with the EPR paper and that Rosen had authored most of it. He later used a different argument to insist that quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory. He explicitly de-emphasized EPR's attribution of \"elements of reality\" to the position and momentum of particle B, saying that \"I couldn't care less\" whether the resulting states of particle B allowed one to predict the position and momentum with certainty.\nFor Einstein, the crucial part of the argument was the demonstration of nonlocality, that the choice of measurement done in particle A, either position or momentum, would lead to \"two different\" quantum states of particle B. He argued that, because of locality, the real state of particle B could not depend on which kind of measurement was done in A and that the quantum states therefore cannot be in one-to-one correspondence with the real states. Einstein struggled unsuccessfully for the rest of his life to find a theory that could better comply with his idea of locality.\nLater developments.\nBohm's variant.\nIn 1951, David Bohm proposed a variant of the EPR thought experiment in which the measurements have discrete ranges of possible outcomes, unlike the position and momentum measurements considered by EPR. The EPR\u2013Bohm thought experiment can be explained using electron\u2013positron pairs. Suppose we have a source that emits electron\u2013positron pairs, with the electron sent to destination \"A\", where there is an observer named Alice, and the positron sent to destination \"B\", where there is an observer named Bob. According to quantum mechanics, we can arrange our source so that each emitted pair occupies a quantum state called a spin singlet. The particles are thus said to be entangled. This can be viewed as a quantum superposition of two states, which we call state I and state II. In state I, the electron has spin pointing upward along the \"z\"-axis (+\"z\") and the positron has spin pointing downward along the \"z\"-axis (\u2212\"z\"). In state II, the electron has spin \u2212\"z\" and the positron has spin +\"z\". Because it is in a superposition of states, it is impossible without measuring to know the definite state of spin of either particle in the spin singlet.\nAlice now measures the spin along the \"z\"-axis. She can obtain one of two possible outcomes: +\"z\" or \u2212\"z\". Suppose she gets +\"z\". Informally speaking, the quantum state of the system collapses into state I. The quantum state determines the probable outcomes of any measurement performed on the system. In this case, if Bob subsequently measures spin along the \"z\"-axis, there is 100% probability that he will obtain \u2212\"z\". Similarly, if Alice gets \u2212\"z\", Bob will get +\"z\". There is nothing special about choosing the \"z\"-axis: according to quantum mechanics the spin singlet state may equally well be expressed as a superposition of spin states pointing in the \"x\" direction.\nWhatever axis their spins are measured along, they are always found to be opposite. In quantum mechanics, the \"x\"-spin and \"z\"-spin are \"incompatible observables\", meaning the Heisenberg uncertainty principle applies to alternating measurements of them: a quantum state cannot possess a definite value for both of these variables. Suppose Alice measures the \"z\"-spin and obtains \"+z\", so that the quantum state collapses into state I. Now, instead of measuring the \"z\"-spin as well, Bob measures the \"x\"-spin. According to quantum mechanics, when the system is in state I, Bob's \"x\"-spin measurement will have a 50% probability of producing +\"x\" and a 50% probability of -\"x\". It is impossible to predict which outcome will appear until Bob actually \"performs\" the measurement. Therefore, Bob's positron will have a definite spin when measured along the same axis as Alice's electron, but when measured in the perpendicular axis its spin will be uniformly random. It seems as if information has propagated (faster than light) from Alice's apparatus to make Bob's positron assume a definite spin in the appropriate axis.\nBell's theorem.\nIn 1964, John Stewart Bell published a paper investigating the puzzling situation at that time: on one hand, the EPR paradox purportedly showed that quantum mechanics was nonlocal, and suggested that a hidden-variable theory could heal this nonlocality. On the other hand, David Bohm had recently developed the first successful hidden-variable theory, but it had a grossly nonlocal character. Bell set out to investigate whether it was indeed possible to solve the nonlocality problem with hidden variables, and found out that first, the correlations shown in both EPR's and Bohm's versions of the paradox could indeed be explained in a local way with hidden variables, and second, that the correlations shown in his own variant of the paradox couldn't be explained by \"any\" local hidden-variable theory. This second result became known as the Bell theorem.\nTo understand the first result, consider the following toy hidden-variable theory introduced later by J.J. Sakurai: in it, quantum spin-singlet states emitted by the source are actually approximate descriptions for \"true\" physical states possessing definite values for the \"z\"-spin and \"x\"-spin. In these \"true\" states, the positron going to Bob always has spin values opposite to the electron going to Alice, but the values are otherwise completely random. For example, the first pair emitted by the source might be \"(+\"z\", \u2212\"x\") to Alice and (\u2212\"z\", +\"x\") to Bob\", the next pair \"(\u2212\"z\", \u2212\"x\") to Alice and (+\"z\", +\"x\") to Bob\", and so forth. Therefore, if Bob's measurement axis is aligned with Alice's, he will necessarily get the opposite of whatever Alice gets; otherwise, he will get \"+\" and \"\u2212\" with equal probability.\nBell showed, however, that such models can only reproduce the singlet correlations when Alice and Bob make measurements on the same axis or on perpendicular axes. As soon as other angles between their axes are allowed, local hidden-variable theories become unable to reproduce the quantum mechanical correlations. This difference, expressed using inequalities known as \"Bell's inequalities\", is in principle experimentally testable. After the publication of Bell's paper, a variety of experiments to test Bell's inequalities were carried out, notably by the group of Alain Aspect in the 1980s; all experiments conducted to date have found behavior in line with the predictions of quantum mechanics. The present view of the situation is that quantum mechanics flatly contradicts Einstein's philosophical postulate that any acceptable physical theory must fulfill \"local realism\". The fact that quantum mechanics violates Bell inequalities indicates that any hidden-variable theory underlying quantum mechanics must be non-local; whether this should be taken to imply that quantum mechanics \"itself\" is non-local is a matter of continuing debate.\nSteering.\nInspired by Schr\u00f6dinger's treatment of the EPR paradox back in 1935, Howard M. Wiseman et al. formalised it in 2007 as the phenomenon of quantum steering. They defined steering as the situation where Alice's measurements on a part of an entangled state \"steer\" Bob's part of the state. That is, Bob's observations cannot be explained by a \"local hidden state\" model, where Bob would have a fixed quantum state in his side, that is classically correlated but otherwise independent of Alice's.\nLocality.\n\"Locality\" has several different meanings in physics. EPR describe the principle of locality as asserting that physical processes occurring at one place should have no immediate effect on the elements of reality at another location. At first sight, this appears to be a reasonable assumption to make, as it seems to be a consequence of special relativity, which states that energy can never be transmitted faster than the speed of light without violating causality; however, it turns out that the usual rules for combining quantum mechanical and classical descriptions violate EPR's principle of locality without violating special relativity or causality. Causality is preserved because there is no way for Alice to transmit messages (i.e., information) to Bob by manipulating her measurement axis. Whichever axis she uses, she has a 50% probability of obtaining \"+\" and 50% probability of obtaining \"\u2212\", completely at random; according to quantum mechanics, it is fundamentally impossible for her to influence what result she gets. Furthermore, Bob is able to perform his measurement only \"once\": there is a fundamental property of quantum mechanics, the no-cloning theorem, which makes it impossible for him to make an arbitrary number of copies of the electron he receives, perform a spin measurement on each, and look at the statistical distribution of the results. Therefore, in the one measurement he is allowed to make, there is a 50% probability of getting \"+\" and 50% of getting \"\u2212\", regardless of whether or not his axis is aligned with Alice's.\nAs a summary, the results of the EPR thought experiment do not contradict the predictions of special relativity. Neither the EPR paradox nor any quantum experiment demonstrates that superluminal signaling is possible; however, the principle of locality appeals powerfully to physical intuition, and Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen were unwilling to abandon it. Einstein derided the quantum mechanical predictions as \"spooky action at a distance\". The conclusion they drew was that quantum mechanics is not a complete theory.\nMathematical formulation.\nBohm's variant of the EPR paradox can be expressed mathematically using the quantum mechanical formulation of spin. The spin degree of freedom for an electron is associated with a two-dimensional complex vector space \"V\", with each quantum state corresponding to a vector in that space. The operators corresponding to the spin along the \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" direction, denoted \"Sx\", \"Sy\", and \"Sz\" respectively, can be represented using the Pauli matrices:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the reduced Planck constant (or the Planck constant divided by 2\u03c0).\nThe eigenstates of \"Sz\" are represented as\nformula_3\nand the eigenstates of \"Sx\" are represented as\nformula_4\nThe vector space of the electron-positron pair is formula_5, the tensor product of the electron's and positron's vector spaces. The spin singlet state is\nformula_6\nwhere the two terms on the right hand side are what we have referred to as state I and state II above.\nFrom the above equations, it can be shown that the spin singlet can also be written as\nformula_7\nwhere the terms on the right hand side are what we have referred to as state Ia and state IIa.\nTo illustrate the paradox, we need to show that after Alice's measurement of \"Sz\" (or \"Sx\"), Bob's value of \"Sz\" (or \"Sx\") is uniquely determined and Bob's value of \"Sx\" (or \"Sz\") is uniformly random. This follows from the principles of measurement in quantum mechanics. When \"Sz\" is measured, the system state formula_8 collapses into an eigenvector of \"S\"z. If the measurement result is +\"z\", this means that immediately after measurement the system state collapses to\nformula_9\nSimilarly, if Alice's measurement result is \u2212\"z\", the state collapses to\nformula_10\nThe left hand side of both equations show that the measurement of \"S\"z on Bob's positron is now determined, it will be \u2212\"z\" in the first case or +\"z\" in the second case. The right hand side of the equations show that the measurement of \"Sx\" on Bob's positron will return, in both cases, +\"x\" or \u2212\"x\" with probability 1/2 each."}
{"id": "10301", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10301", "title": "Encapsulation", "text": "Encapsulation may refer to:"}
{"id": "10302", "revid": "29146395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10302", "title": "Ethnologue", "text": "Ethnologue: Languages of the World is an annual reference publication in print and online that provides statistics and other information on the living languages of the world. It is the world's most comprehensive catalogue of languages. It was first issued in 1951, and is now published by SIL International, an American evangelical Christian non-profit organization.\nOverview and content.\n\"Ethnologue\" has been published by SIL Global (formerly known as the Summer Institute of Linguistics), a Christian linguistic service organization with an international office in Dallas, Texas. The organization studies numerous minority languages to facilitate language development, and to work with speakers of such language communities in translating portions of the Bible into their languages. Despite the Christian orientation of its publisher, \"Ethnologue\" is not ideologically or theologically biased.\n\"Ethnologue\" includes alternative names and autonyms, the number of L1 and L2 speakers, language prestige, domains of use, literacy rates, locations, dialects, language classification, linguistic affiliations, typology, language maps, country maps, publication and use in media, availability of the Bible in each language and dialect described, religious affiliations of speakers, a cursory description of revitalization efforts where reported, intelligibility and lexical similarity with other dialects and languages, writing scripts, an estimate of language viability using the Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale (EGIDS), and bibliographic resources. Coverage varies depending on languages. For instance, as of 2008, information on word order was present for 15% of entries while religious affiliations were mentioned for 38% of languages. According to Lyle Campbell \"language maps are highly valuable\" and most country maps are of high quality and user-friendly.\n\"Ethnologue\" gathers information from SIL's thousands of field linguists, surveys done by linguists and literacy specialists, observations of Bible translators, and crowdsourced contributions. SIL's field linguists use an online collaborative research system to review current data, update it, or request its removal. SIL has a team of editors by geographical area who prepare reports to Ethnologue's general editor. These reports combine opinions from SIL area experts and feedback solicited from non-SIL linguists. Editors have to find compromises when opinions differ. Most of SIL's linguists have taken three to four semesters of graduate linguistics courses, and half of them have a master's degree. They're trained by 300 PhD linguists in SIL.\nThe determination of what characteristics define a single language depends upon sociolinguistic evaluation by various scholars; as the preface to \"Ethnologue\" states, \"Not all scholars share the same set of criteria for what constitutes a 'language' and what features define a 'dialect'.\" The criteria used by \"Ethnologue\" are mutual intelligibility and the existence or absence of a common literature or ethnolinguistic identity. The number of languages identified has been steadily increasing, from 5,445 in the 10th edition (in 1984) to 6,909 in the 16th (in 2009), partly due to governments according designation as languages to mutually intelligible varieties and partly due to SIL establishing new Bible translation teams. \"Ethnologue\" codes were used as the base to create the new ISO 639-3 international standard. Since 2007, \"Ethnologue\" relies only on this standard, administered by SIL International, to determine what is listed as a language.\nIn addition to choosing a primary name for a language, \"Ethnologue\" provides listings of other name(s) for the language and any dialects that are used by its speakers, government, foreigners and neighbors. Also included are any names that have been commonly referenced historically, regardless of whether a name is considered official, politically correct or offensive; this allows more complete historic research to be done. These lists of names are not necessarily complete.\nHistory.\n\"Ethnologue\" was founded in 1951 by Richard S. Pittman and was initially focused on minority languages, to share information on Bible translation needs. The first edition included information on 46 languages. Hand-drawn maps were introduced in the fourth edition (1953). The seventh edition (1969) listed 4,493 languages. In 1971, \"Ethnologue\" expanded its coverage to all known languages of the world.\n\"Ethnologue\" database was created in 1971 at the University of Oklahoma under a grant from the National Science Foundation. In 1974 the database was moved to Cornell University. Since 2000, the database has been maintained by SIL International in their Dallas headquarters. In 1997 (13th edition), the website became the primary means of access.\nIn 1984, \"Ethnologue\" released a three-letter coding system, called an 'SIL code', to identify each language that it described. This set of codes significantly exceeded the scope of other existing standards, e.g. ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-2.\nThe 14th edition, published in 2000, included 7,148 language codes. In 2002, \"Ethnologue\" was asked to work with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) to integrate its codes into a draft international standard. \"Ethnologue\" codes have then been adopted by ISO as the international standard, ISO 639-3. The 15th edition of \"Ethnologue\" was the first edition to use this standard. This standard is now administered separately from Ethnologue. SIL International is the registration authority for languages names and codes, according to rules established by ISO. Since then \"Ethnologue\" relies on the standard to determine what is listed as a language. In only one case, \"Ethnologue\" and the ISO standards treat languages slightly differently. ISO 639-3 considers Akan to be a macrolanguage consisting of two distinct languages, Twi and Fante, whereas \"Ethnologue\" considers Twi and Fante to be dialects of a single language (Akan), since they are mutually intelligible. This anomaly resulted because the ISO 639-2 standard has separate codes for Twi and Fante, which have separate literary traditions, and all 639-2 codes for individual languages are automatically part of 639-3, even though 639-3 would not normally assign them separate codes.\nIn 2014, with the 17th edition, \"Ethnologue\" introduced a numerical code for language status using a framework called EGIDS (Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale), an elaboration of Fishman's GIDS (Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale). It ranks a language from 0 for an international language to 10 for an extinct language, i.e. a language with which no-one retains a sense of ethnic identity.\nIn 2015, SIL's funds decreased and in December 2015, \"Ethnologue\" launched a metered paywall to cover its cost, as it is financially self-sustaining. Users in high-income countries who wanted to refer to more than seven pages of data per month had to buy a paid subscription. The 18th edition released that year included a new section on language policy country by country.\nIn 2016, \"Ethnologue\" added date about language planning agencies to the 19th edition.\nAs of 2017, \"Ethnologue\"'s 20th edition described 237 language families including 86 language isolates and six typological categories, namely sign languages, creoles, pidgins, mixed languages, constructed languages, and as yet unclassified languages.\nThe early focus of the Ethnologue was on native use (L1) but was gradually expanded to cover L2 use as well.\nIn 2019, \"Ethnologue\" disabled trial views and introduced a hard paywall to cover its nearly $1 million in annual operating costs (website maintenance, security, researchers, and SIL's 5,000 field linguists). Subscriptions start at $480 per person per year, while full access costs $2,400 per person per year. Users in low and middle-income countries as defined by the World Bank are eligible for free access and there are discounts for libraries and independent researchers. Subscribers are mostly institutions: 40% of the world's top 50 universities subscribe to \"Ethnologue\", and it is also sold to business intelligence firms and Fortune 500 companies. The introduction of the paywall was harshly criticized by the community of linguists who rely on \"Ethnologue\" to do their work and cannot afford the subscription The same year, \"Ethnologue\" launched its contributor program to fill gaps and improve accuracy, allowing contributors to submit corrections and additions and to get a complimentary access to the website. \"Ethnologue\"'s editors gradually review crowdsourced contributions before publication. As 2019 was the International Year of Indigenous Languages, this edition focused on language loss: it added the date when last fluent speaker of the language died, standardized the age range of language users, and improved the EGIDS estimates.\nIn 2020, the 23rd edition listed 7,117 living languages, an increase of 6 living languages from the 22nd edition. In this edition, \"Ethnologue\" expanded its coverage of immigrant languages: previous editions only had full entries for languages considered to be \"established\" within a country. From this edition, \"Ethnologue\" includes data about first and second languages of refugees, temporary foreign workers and immigrants.\nIn 2021, the 24th edition had 7,139 modern languages, an increase of 22 living languages from the 23rd edition. Editors especially improved data about language shift in this edition.\nIn 2022, the 25th edition listed a total of 7,151 living languages, an increase of 12 living languages from the 24th edition. This edition specifically improved the use of languages in education.\nIn 2023, the 26th edition listed a total of 7,168 living languages, an increase of 17 living languages from the 25th edition.\nIn 2024, the 27th edition listed a total of 7,164 living languages, a decrease of 4 living languages from the 26th edition.\nReception, reliability, and use.\nIn 1986, William Bright, then editor of the journal \"Language\", wrote of \"Ethnologue\" that it \"is indispensable for any reference shelf on the languages of the world\". The 2003 \"International Encyclopedia of Linguistics\" described \"Ethnologue\" as \"a comprehensive listing of the world's languages, with genetic classification\", and follows Ethnologue's classification. In 2005, linguists Lindsay J. Whaley and Lenore Grenoble considered that \"Ethnologue\" \"continues to provide the most comprehensive and reliable count of numbers of speakers of the world's languages\", still they recognize that \"individual language surveys may have far more accurate counts for a specific language, but \"The Ethnologue\" is unique in bringing together speaker statistics on a global scale\". In 2006, computational linguists John C. Paolillo and Anupam Das conducted a systematic evaluation of available information on language populations for the UNESCO Institute for Statistics. They reported that \"Ethnologue\" and Linguasphere were the only comprehensive sources of information about language populations and that \"Ethnologue\" had more specific information. They concluded that: \"the language statistics available today in the form of the \"Ethnologue\" population counts are already good enough to be useful\" According to linguist William Poser, \"Ethnologue\" was, as of 2006, the \"best single source of information\" on language classification. In 2008 linguists Lyle Campbell and Ver\u00f3nica Grondona highly commended \"Ethnologue\" in \"Language\". They described it as a highly valuable catalogue of the world's languages that \"has become the standard reference\" and whose \"usefulness is hard to overestimate\". They concluded that \"Ethnologue\" was \"truly excellent, highly valuable, and the very best book of its sort available.\"\nIn a review of \"Ethnologue\"'s 2009 edition in \"Ethnopolitics\", Richard O. Collin, professor of politics, noted that \"\"Ethnologue\" has become a standard resource for scholars in the other social sciences: anthropologists, economists, sociologists and, obviously, sociolinguists\". According to Collin, \"Ethnologue\" is \"stronger in languages spoken by indigenous peoples in economically less-developed portions of the world\" and \"when recent in-depth country-studies have been conducted, information can be very good; unfortunately [...] data are sometimes old\".\nIn 2012, linguist Asya Pereltsvaig described \"Ethnologue\" as \"a reasonably good source of thorough and reliable geographical and demographic information about the world's languages\". She added in 2021 that its maps \"are generally fairly accurate although they often depict the linguistic situation as it once was or as someone might imagine it to be but not as it actually is\". Linguist George Tucker Childs wrote in 2012 that: \"\"Ethnologue\" is the most widely referenced source for information on languages of the world\", but he added that regarding African languages, \"when evaluated against recent field experience [Ethnologue] seems at least out of date\". In 2014, \"Ethnologue\" admitted that some of its data was out-of-date and switched from a four-year publication cycle (in print and online) to yearly online updates.\nIn 2017, Robert Phillipson and Tove Skutnabb-Kangas described \"Ethnologue\" as \"the most comprehensive global source list for (mostly oral) languages\". According to the 2018 \"Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics\", \"Ethnologue\" is a \"comprehensive, frequently updated [database] on languages and language families'. According to quantitative linguists Simon Greenhill, \"Ethnologue\" offers, as of 2018, \"sufficiently accurate reflections of speaker population size\". Linguists Lyle Campbell and Kenneth Lee Rehg wrote in 2018 that \"Ethnologue\" was \"the best source that list the non-endangered languages of the world\". Lyle Campbell and Russell Barlow also noted that the 2017 edition of \"Ethnologue\" \"improved [its] classification markedly\". They note that \"Ethnologue\"'s genealogy is similar to that of the World Atlas of Language Structures (WALS) but different from that of the Catalogue of Endangered Languages (ELCat) and Glottolog. Linguist Lisa Matthewson commented in 2020 that \"Ethnologue\" offers \"accurate information about speaker numbers\". In a 2021 review of \"Ethnologue\" and Glottolog, linguist Shobhana Chelliah noted that \"For better or worse, the impact of the site is indeed considerable. [...] Clearly, the site has influence on the field of linguistics and beyond.\" She added that she, among other linguists, integrated \"Ethnologue\" in her linguistics classes.\"\nThe \"Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics\" uses \"Ethnologue\" as its primary source for the list of languages and language maps. According to linguist Suzanne Romaine, \"Ethnologue\" is also the leading source for research on language diversity. According to \"The Oxford Handbook of Language and Society\", \"Ethnologue\" is \"the standard reference source for the listing and enumeration of Endangered Languages, and for all known and \"living\" languages of the world\".\" Similarly, linguist David Bradley describes \"Ethnologue\" as \"the most comprehensive effort to document the level of endangerment in languages around the world.\" The US National Science Foundation uses \"Ethnologue\" to determine which languages are endangered. According to Hammarstr\u00f6m et al., \"Ethnologue\" is, as of 2022, one of the three global databases documenting language endangerment with the \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\" and the Catalogue of Endangered Languages (ELCat). The University of Hawaii Kaipuleohone language archive uses \"Ethnologue\"'s metadata as well. The \"World Atlas of Language Structures\" uses \"Ethnologue\"'s genealogical classification. The Rosetta Project uses \"Ethnologue\"'s language metadata.\nIn 2005, linguist Harald Hammarstr\u00f6m wrote that \"Ethnologue\" was consistent with specialist views most of the time and was a catalog \"of very high absolute value and by far the best of its kind\". In 2011, Hammarstr\u00f6m created Glottolog in response to the lack of a comprehensive language bibliography, especially in \"Ethnologue\". In 2015, Hammarstr\u00f6m reviewed the 16th, 17th, and 18th editions of \"Ethnologue\" and described the frequent lack of citations as its only \"serious fault\" from a scientific perspective. He concluded: \"\"Ethnologue\" is at present still better than any other nonderivative work of the same scope. [It] is an impressively comprehensive catalogue of world languages, and it is far superior to anything else produced prior to 2009. In particular, it is superior by virtue of being explicit.\" According to Hammarstr\u00f6m, as of 2016, \"Ethnologue\" and Glottolog are the only global-scale continually maintained inventories of the world's languages. The main difference is that \"Ethnologue\" includes additional information (such as speaker numbers or vitality) but lacks systematic sources for the information given. In contrast, Glottolog provides no language context information but points to primary sources for further data. Contrary to \"Ethnologue\", Glottolog does not run its own surveys, but it uses \"Ethnologue\" as one of its primary sources. As of 2019, Hammarstr\u00f6m uses \"Ethnologue\" in his articles, noting that it \"has (unsourced, but) detailed information associated with each speech variety, such as speaker numbers and map location\". In response to feedback about the lack of references, \"Ethnologue\" added in 2013 a link on each language to language resources from the Open Language Archives Community (OLAC) \"Ethnologue\" acknowledges that it rarely quotes any source verbatim but cites sources wherever specific statements are directly attributed to them, and corrects missing attributions upon notification. The website provides a list of all of the references cited. In her 2021 review, Shobhana Chelliah noted that Glottolog aims to be better than \"Ethnologue\" in language classification and genetic and areal relationships by using linguists' original sources.\nEditions.\nStarting with the 17th edition, \"Ethnologue\" has been published every year, on February 21, which is International Mother Language Day."}
{"id": "10303", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10303", "title": "Evaporation", "text": "Evaporation is a type of vaporization that occurs on the surface of a liquid as it changes into the gas phase. A high concentration of the evaporating substance in the surrounding gas significantly slows down evaporation, such as when humidity affects rate of evaporation of water. When the molecules of the liquid collide, they transfer energy to each other based on how they collide. When a molecule near the surface absorbs enough energy to overcome the vapor pressure, it will escape and enter the surrounding air as a gas. When evaporation occurs, the energy removed from the vaporized liquid will reduce the temperature of the liquid, resulting in evaporative cooling.\nOn average, only a fraction of the molecules in a liquid have enough heat energy to escape from the liquid. The evaporation will continue until an equilibrium is reached when the evaporation of the liquid is equal to its condensation. In an enclosed environment, a liquid will evaporate until the surrounding air is saturated.\nEvaporation is an essential part of the water cycle. The sun (solar energy) drives evaporation of water from oceans, lakes, moisture in the soil, and other sources of water. In hydrology, evaporation and transpiration (which involves evaporation within plant stomata) are collectively termed evapotranspiration. Evaporation of water occurs when the surface of the liquid is exposed, allowing molecules to escape and form water vapor; this vapor can then rise up and form clouds. With sufficient energy, the liquid will turn into vapor.\nTheory.\nFor molecules of a liquid to evaporate, they must be located near the surface, they have to be moving in the proper direction, and have sufficient kinetic energy to overcome liquid-phase intermolecular forces. When only a small proportion of the molecules meet these criteria, the rate of evaporation is low. Since the kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporation proceeds more quickly at higher temperatures. As the faster-moving molecules escape, the remaining molecules have lower average kinetic energy, and the temperature of the liquid decreases. This phenomenon is also called evaporative cooling. This is why evaporating sweat cools the human body.\nEvaporation also tends to proceed more quickly with higher flow rates between the gaseous and liquid phase and in liquids with higher vapor pressure. For example, laundry on a clothes line will dry (by evaporation) more rapidly on a windy day than on a still day. Three key parts to evaporation are heat, atmospheric pressure (determines the percent humidity), and air movement.\nOn a molecular level, there is no strict boundary between the liquid state and the vapor state. Instead, there is a Knudsen layer, where the phase is undetermined. Because this layer is only a few molecules thick, at a macroscopic scale a clear phase transition interface cannot be seen.\nLiquids that do not evaporate visibly at a given temperature in a given gas (e.g., cooking oil at room temperature) have molecules that do not tend to transfer energy to each other in a pattern sufficient to frequently give a molecule the heat energy necessary to turn into vapor. However, these liquids \"are\" evaporating. It is just that the process is much slower and thus significantly less visible.\nEvaporative equilibrium.\nIf evaporation takes place in an enclosed area, the escaping molecules accumulate as a vapor above the liquid. Many of the molecules return to the liquid, with returning molecules becoming more frequent as the density and pressure of the vapor increases. When the process of escape and return reaches an equilibrium, the vapor is said to be \"saturated\", and no further change in either vapor pressure and density or liquid temperature will occur. For a system consisting of vapor and liquid of a pure substance, this equilibrium state is directly related to the vapor pressure of the substance, as given by the Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation:\nwhere \"P\"1, \"P\"2 are the vapor pressures at temperatures \"T\"1, \"T\"2 respectively, \u0394\"H\"vap is the enthalpy of vaporization, and \"R\" is the universal gas constant. The rate of evaporation in an open system is related to the vapor pressure found in a closed system. If a liquid is heated, when the vapor pressure reaches the ambient pressure the liquid will boil.\nThe ability for a molecule of a liquid to evaporate is based largely on the amount of kinetic energy an individual particle may possess. Even at lower temperatures, individual molecules of a liquid can evaporate if they have more than the minimum amount of kinetic energy required for vaporization.\nFactors influencing the rate of evaporation.\nNote: Air is used here as a common example of the surrounding gas; however, other gases may hold that role.\nIn the US, the National Weather Service measures, at various outdoor locations nationwide, the actual rate of evaporation from a standardized \"pan\" open water surface. Others do likewise around the world. The US data is collected and compiled into an annual evaporation map. The measurements range from under 30 to over per year.\nBecause it typically takes place in a complex environment, where 'evaporation is an extremely rare event', the mechanism for the evaporation of water is not completely understood. Theoretical calculations require prohibitively long and large computer simulations. 'The rate of evaporation of liquid water is one of the principal uncertainties in modern climate modeling.'\nThermodynamics.\nEvaporation is an endothermic process, since heat is absorbed during evaporation.\nApplications.\nCombustion vaporization.\nFuel droplets vaporize as they receive heat by mixing with the hot gases in the combustion chamber. Heat (energy) can also be received by radiation from any hot refractory wall of the combustion chamber.\nPre-combustion vaporization.\nInternal combustion engines rely upon the vaporization of the fuel in the cylinders to form a fuel/air mixture in order to burn well.\nThe chemically correct air/fuel mixture for total burning of gasoline has been determined to be about 15 parts air to one part gasoline or 15/1 by weight. Changing this to a volume ratio yields 8000 parts air to one part gasoline or 8,000/1 by volume.\nFilm deposition.\nThin films may be deposited by evaporating a substance and condensing it onto a substrate, or by dissolving the substance in a solvent, spreading the resulting solution thinly over a substrate, and evaporating the solvent. The Hertz\u2013Knudsen equation is often used to estimate the rate of evaporation in these instances."}
{"id": "10304", "revid": "1226991057", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10304", "title": "Esbat", "text": "An esbat is a coven meeting or ritual at a time other than one of the Sabbats within Wicca and other Wiccan-influenced forms of contemporary Paganism.\nEsbats can span a wide range of purposes from coven business meetings and initiation ceremonies to social gatherings, times of merriment, and opportunities to commune with the divine. Janet and Stewart Farrar describe esbats as an opportunity for a \"love feast, healing work, psychic training and all.\"\nEsbats are typically held once per month on or near the night of a full moon or new moon. Due to the connection between the Moon and femininity in Wicca, esbats are associated with goddesses.\nEsbats are a time set aside for formal worship and have been described as similar to Sundays for Christians or Friday nights for Jewish people. They can be solitary affairs but tend to be conducted in groups. Sources vary on whether these rituals are open to the public or only to initiated members.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"esbat\" is derived from Old French \"s'esbattre\" (Modern French \"\u00e9bat\"), meaning \"to frolic and amuse oneself\", \"diversion\". It was a borrowing by 20th century anthropologist Margaret Murray's use of French witch trial sources on supposed Witches' Sabbaths in her attempts to \"reconstruct\" a \"Witch Cult in Western Europe\".\nObservance.\nAn esbat is commonly understood to be a ritual observance on the night of a full moon. However, the late high priestess Doreen Valiente distinguished between \"full moon Esbat[s]\" and other esbatic occasions.\nThe term \"esbat\" in this sense was described by Margaret Murray.\nEsbats vary greatly and can be simple or elaborate. Rituals use symbolism to enhance the properties of a particular moon, of which there are 13 per solar year. \nThey are typically held at coven members' homes or outdoors. Tools such as candles, athames, incense, pentacles, items from nature, bowls of water, mirrors, and crystals are commonly placed on an altar. The ceremony begins with participants establishing a sacred space by casting a circle or purifying the area by smudging. Then, they commune with the divine, pray, and meditate. Central elements are reflection on changes that have occurred in the past moon cycle, things you wish to change by the next moon, and gratitude. Once the ceremony is completed, a ritual closing is performed. Participants describe esbats as \"spiritually fulfilling\" and \"immensely beneficial to our personal spiritual growth.\"\nNew Moon.\nWhen esbat rituals occur during a new moon (also known as a dark moon), it is an occasion to worship the darker aspects of witchcraft. This represents elements that are hidden or in shadow, and is not necessarily associated with evil. New moon esbats may be used to worship a dark or maiden goddess, to banish something unwanted, or to end a phase in life. Because esbats typically occur when the moon is at its highest point, covens may choose for new moon esbats to take place in the mid-afternoon.\nFull Moon.\nThe full moon esbat tends to be a frenetic celebration. Spells for wholeness, children, mothers, families, clairvoyance, and love are performed. Most full moon esbats are held at midnight because the moon is most visible which allows participants to feel closer to it. \nOne major component of full moon esbats is drawing down the moon. The idea is to draw the essence of the lunar goddess into the body of a coven member, usually a priestess or leader. This is done by another member who channels lunar energy down through a receptacle such as a chalice or knife. The two stand facing each other in the center of the circle and the group asks the goddess to come down. Once the divine energy enters the tool, it is touched to the head, chest, or abdomen of the priestess. Through her body, the goddess speaks to the group by answering questions, giving instructions, offering blessings, or simply \"[pouring] her loving energy into the circle and [leading] you in a merry spiral dance.\" After returning the energy to the goddess, the sign of a pentagram may be used as a dismissal.\nThe ceremony of cakes and ale is the other main component which typically concludes the full moon esbat. This ritual uses cookies or a loaf of bread and a chalice of wine or other drink which are placed on a central altar. The bread and wine symbolize the body and blood of the mother goddess, who gives life to all things. Each participant takes turns blessing the bread, breaking off a piece, eating it, then passing it clockwise. The same process happens with the chalice. This allows everyone to honor the body and blood of the goddess as they wish."}
{"id": "10305", "revid": "59002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10305", "title": "Evolution of societies", "text": ""}
{"id": "10307", "revid": "48744300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10307", "title": "Equal temperament", "text": "An equal temperament is a musical temperament or tuning system that approximates just intervals by dividing an octave (or other interval) into steps such that the ratio of the frequencies of any adjacent pair of notes is the same. This system yields pitch steps perceived as equal in size, due to the logarithmic changes in pitch frequency.\nIn classical music and Western music in general, the most common tuning system since the 18th\u00a0century has been 12 equal temperament (also known as \"12\u00a0tone equal temperament\", ' or ', informally abbreviated as \"12\u00a0equal\"), which divides the octave into 12\u00a0parts, all of which are equal on a logarithmic scale, with a ratio equal to the 12th root of 2, (formula_1 \u2248 1.05946). That resulting smallest interval, the width of an octave, is called a semitone or half step. In Western countries the term \"equal temperament\", without qualification, generally means \"\".\nIn modern times, is usually tuned relative to a standard pitch of 440\u00a0Hz, called A 440, meaning one note, , is tuned to 440\u00a0hertz and all other notes are defined as some multiple of semitones away from it, either higher or lower in frequency. The standard pitch has not always been 440\u00a0Hz; it has varied considerably and generally risen over the past few hundred years.\nOther equal temperaments divide the octave differently. For example, some music has been written in and , while the Arab tone system uses \nInstead of dividing an octave, an equal temperament can also divide a different interval, like the equal-tempered version of the Bohlen\u2013Pierce scale, which divides the just interval of an octave and a fifth (ratio\u00a03:1), called a \"tritave\" or a \"pseudo-octave\" in that system, into 13\u00a0equal parts.\nFor tuning systems that divide the octave equally, but are not approximations of just intervals, the term equal division of the octave, or \"\" can be used.\nUnfretted string ensembles, which can adjust the tuning of all notes except for open strings, and vocal groups, who have no mechanical tuning limitations, sometimes use a tuning much closer to just intonation for acoustic reasons. Other instruments, such as some wind, keyboard, and fretted instruments, often only approximate equal temperament, where technical limitations prevent exact tunings.\nSome wind instruments that can easily and spontaneously bend their tone, most notably trombones, use tuning similar to string ensembles and vocal groups.\nGeneral properties.\nIn an equal temperament, the distance between two adjacent steps of the scale is the same interval. Because the perceived identity of an interval depends on its ratio, this scale in even steps is a geometric sequence of multiplications. (An arithmetic sequence of intervals would not sound evenly spaced and would not permit transposition to different keys.) Specifically, the smallest interval in an equal-tempered scale is the ratio:\nwhere the ratio divides the ratio (typically the octave, which is 2:1) into equal parts. (\"See Twelve-tone equal temperament below.\")\nScales are often measured in cents, which divide the octave into 1200\u00a0equal intervals (each called a cent). This logarithmic scale makes comparison of different tuning systems easier than comparing ratios, and has considerable use in ethnomusicology. The basic step in cents for any equal temperament can be found by taking the width of above in cents (usually the octave, which is 1200\u00a0cents wide), called below , and dividing it into parts:\nIn musical analysis, material belonging to an equal temperament is often given an integer notation, meaning a single integer is used to represent each pitch. This simplifies and generalizes discussion of pitch material within the temperament in the same way that taking the logarithm of a multiplication reduces it to addition. Furthermore, by applying the modular arithmetic where the modulus is the number of divisions of the octave (usually 12), these integers can be reduced to pitch classes, which removes the distinction (or acknowledges the similarity) between pitches of the same name, e.g., is 0 regardless of octave register. The MIDI encoding standard uses integer note designations.\nTwelve-tone equal temperament.\n12\u00a0tone equal temperament, which divides the octave into 12\u00a0intervals of equal size, is the musical system most widely used today, especially in Western music.\nHistory.\nThe two figures frequently credited with the achievement of exact calculation of equal temperament are Zhu Zaiyu (also romanized as Chu-Tsaiyu. Chinese: ) in 1584 and Simon Stevin in 1585. According to F.A. Kuttner, a critic of giving credit to Zhu, it is known that Zhu \"presented a highly precise, simple and ingenious method for arithmetic calculation of equal temperament mono-chords in 1584\" and that Stevin \"offered a mathematical definition of equal temperament plus a somewhat less precise computation of the corresponding numerical values in 1585 or later.\"\nThe developments occurred independently.\nKenneth Robinson credits the invention of equal temperament to Zhu\nand provides textual quotations as evidence. In 1584 Zhu wrote:\nKuttner disagrees and remarks that his claim \"cannot be considered correct without major qualifications\". Kuttner proposes that neither Zhu nor Stevin achieved equal temperament and that neither should be considered its inventor.\nChina.\nChinese theorists had previously come up with approximations for , but Zhu was the first person to mathematically solve 12\u00a0tone equal temperament, which he described in two books, published in 1580 and 1584. Needham also gives an extended account.\nZhu obtained his result by dividing the length of string and pipe successively by , and for pipe length by , such that after 12\u00a0divisions (an octave), the length was halved.\nZhu created several instruments tuned to his system, including bamboo pipes.\nEurope.\nSome of the first Europeans to advocate equal temperament were lutenists Vincenzo Galilei, Giacomo Gorzanis, and Francesco Spinacino, all of whom wrote music in it.\nSimon Stevin was the first to develop 12\u00a0 based on the twelfth root of two, which he described in \"van de Spiegheling der singconst\" (), published posthumously in 1884.\nPlucked instrument players (lutenists and guitarists) generally favored equal temperament, while others were more divided. In the end, 12-tone equal temperament won out. This allowed enharmonic modulation, new styles of symmetrical tonality and polytonality, atonal music such as that written with the 12-tone technique or serialism, and jazz (at least its piano component) to develop and flourish.\nMathematics.\nIn 12\u00a0tone equal temperament, which divides the octave into 12\u00a0equal parts, the width of a semitone, i.e. the frequency ratio of the interval between two adjacent notes, is the twelfth root of two:\nThis interval is divided into 100\u00a0cents.\nCalculating absolute frequencies.\nTo find the frequency, , of a note in 12\u00a0, the following formula may be used:\nIn this formula represents the pitch, or frequency (usually in hertz), you are trying to find. is the frequency of a reference pitch. The indes numbers and are the labels assigned to the desired pitch () and the reference pitch (). These two numbers are from a list of consecutive integers assigned to consecutive semitones. For example, A (the reference pitch) is the 49th\u00a0key from the left end of a piano (tuned to 440\u00a0Hz), and C (middle C), and F are the 40th and 46th\u00a0keys, respectively. These numbers can be used to find the frequency of C and F:\nConverting frequencies to their equal temperament counterparts.\nTo convert a frequency (in Hz) to its equal 12\u00a0 counterpart, the following formula can be used:\n is the frequency of a pitch in equal temperament, and is the frequency of a reference pitch. For example, if we let the reference pitch equal 440\u00a0Hz, we can see that and have the following frequencies, respectively:\nComparison with just intonation.\nThe intervals of 12\u00a0 closely approximate some intervals in just intonation.\nThe fifths and fourths are almost indistinguishably close to just intervals, while thirds and sixths are further away.\nIn the following table, the sizes of various just intervals are compared to their equal-tempered counterparts, given as a ratio as well as cents.\nSeven-tone equal division of the fifth.\nViolins, violas, and cellos are tuned in perfect fifths ( for violins and for violas and cellos), which suggests that their semitone ratio is slightly higher than in conventional 12\u00a0tone equal temperament. Because a perfect fifth is in 3:2\u00a0relation with its base tone, and this interval comprises seven steps, each tone is in the ratio of formula_15 to the next (100.28\u00a0cents), which provides for a perfect fifth with ratio of 3:2, but a slightly widened octave with a rather than the usual 2:1, because 12\u00a0perfect fifths do not equal seven octaves. During actual play, however, violinists choose pitches by ear, and only the four unstopped pitches of the strings are guaranteed to exhibit this 3:2\u00a0ratio.\nOther equal temperaments.\nFive-, seven-, and nine-tone temperaments in ethnomusicology.\nFive- and seven-tone equal temperament (' and ' ), with 240\u00a0cent and 171\u00a0cent steps, respectively, are fairly common.\n and mark the endpoints of the syntonic temperament's valid tuning range, as shown in Figure\u00a01.\n5\u00a0tone and 9\u00a0tone equal temperament.\nAccording to Kunst (1949), Indonesian gamelans are tuned to but according to Hood (1966) and McPhee (1966) their tuning varies widely, and according to Tenzer (2000) they contain stretched octaves. It is now accepted that of the two primary tuning systems in gamelan music, slendro and pelog, only slendro somewhat resembles five-tone equal temperament, while pelog is highly unequal; however, in 1972 Surjodiningrat, Sudarjana and Susanto analyze pelog as equivalent to (133-cent steps ).\n7-tone equal temperament.\nA Thai xylophone measured by Morton in 1974 \"varied only plus or minus 5\u00a0cents\" from . According to Morton,\nA South American Indian scale from a pre-instrumental culture measured by Boiles in 1969 featured 175\u00a0cent seven-tone equal temperament, which stretches the octave slightly, as with instrumental gamelan music.\nChinese music has traditionally used .\nVarious equal temperaments.\nOther equal divisions of the octave that have found occasional use include 13\u00a0EDO, 15\u00a0EDO, 17\u00a0EDO, and 55\u00a0EDO.\n2, 5, 12, 41, 53, 306, 665 and 15601 are denominators of first convergents of log(3), so 2, 5, 12, 41, 53, 306, 665 and 15601 twelfths (and fifths), being in correspondent equal temperaments equal to an integer number of octaves, are better approximations of 2, 5, 12, 41, 53, 306, 665 and 15601 just twelfths/fifths than in any equal temperament with fewer tones.\n1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 12, 29, 41, 53, 200,\u00a0... is the sequence of divisions of octave that provides better and better approximations of the perfect fifth. Related sequences containing divisions approximating other just intervals are listed in a footnote.\nEqual temperaments of non-octave intervals.\nThe equal-tempered version of the Bohlen\u2013Pierce scale consists of the ratio 3:1 (1902\u00a0cents) conventionally a perfect fifth plus an octave (that is, a perfect twelfth), called in this theory a tritave (), and split into 13\u00a0equal parts. This provides a very close match to justly tuned ratios consisting only of odd numbers. Each step is 146.3 cents (), or formula_16.\nWendy Carlos created three unusual equal temperaments after a thorough study of the properties of possible temperaments with step size between 30 and 120\u00a0cents. These were called \"alpha\", \"beta\", and \"gamma\". They can be considered equal divisions of the perfect fifth. Each of them provides a very good approximation of several just intervals. Their step sizes:\nAlpha and beta may be heard on the title track of Carlos's 1986 album \"Beauty in the Beast\".\nProportions between semitone and whole tone.\nIn this section, \"semitone\" and \"whole tone\" may not have their usual 12\u00a0EDO meanings, as it discusses how they may be tempered in different ways from their just versions to produce desired relationships. Let the number of steps in a semitone be , and the number of steps in a tone be .\nThere is exactly one family of equal temperaments that fixes the semitone to any proper fraction of a whole tone, while keeping the notes in the right order (meaning that, for example, , , , , and are in ascending order if they preserve their usual relationships to ). That is, fixing to a proper fraction in the relationship also defines a unique family of one equal temperament and its multiples that fulfil this relationship.\nFor example, where is an integer, sets sets and sets The smallest multiples in these families (e.g. 12, 19 and 31 above) has the additional property of having no notes outside the circle of fifths. (This is not true in general; in 24\u00a0, the half-sharps and half-flats are not in the circle of fifths generated starting from .) The extreme cases are where and the semitone becomes a unison, and , where and the semitone and tone are the same interval.\nOnce one knows how many steps a semitone and a tone are in this equal temperament, one can find the number of steps it has in the octave. An equal temperament with the above properties (including having no notes outside the circle of fifths) divides the octave into and the perfect fifth into If there are notes outside the circle of fifths, one must then multiply these results by , the number of nonoverlapping circles of fifths required to generate all the notes (e.g., two in 24\u00a0, six in 72\u00a0). (One must take the small semitone for this purpose: 19\u00a0 has two semitones, one being tone and the other being . Similarly, 31\u00a0 has two semitones, one being tone and the other being ).\nThe smallest of these families is and in particular, 12\u00a0 is the smallest equal temperament with the above properties. Additionally, it makes the semitone exactly half a whole tone, the simplest possible relationship. These are some of the reasons 12\u00a0 has become the most commonly used equal temperament. (Another reason is that 12\u00a0EDO is the smallest equal temperament to closely approximate 5\u00a0limit harmony, the next-smallest being 19\u00a0EDO.)\nEach choice of fraction for the relationship results in exactly one equal temperament family, but the converse is not true: 47\u00a0 has two different semitones, where one is tone and the other is , which are not complements of each other like in 19\u00a0 ( and ). Taking each semitone results in a different choice of perfect fifth.\nRelated tuning systems.\nEqual temperament systems can be thought of in terms of the spacing of three intervals found in just intonation, \"most\" of whose chords are harmonically perfectly in tune\u2014a good property not quite achieved between almost all pitches in almost all equal temperaments. Most just chords sound amazingly consonant, and most equal-tempered chords sound at least slightly dissonant. In C\u00a0major those three intervals are:\nAnalyzing an equal temperament in terms of how it modifies or adapts these three intervals provides a quick way to evaluate how consonant various chords can possibly be in that temperament, based on how distorted these intervals are.\nRegular diatonic tunings.\nThe diatonic tuning in \"12\u00a0tone equal temperament\" can be generalized to any regular diatonic tuning dividing the octave as a sequence of steps (or some circular shift or \"rotation\" of it). To be called a \"regular\" diatonic tuning, each of the two semitones () must be smaller than either of the tones (greater tone, , and lesser tone, ). The comma is implicit as the size ratio between the greater and lesser tones: Expressed as frequencies or as cents .\nThe notes in a regular diatonic tuning are connected in a \"spiral of fifths\" that does \"not\" close (unlike the circle of fifths in Starting on the subdominant (in the key of C) there are three perfect fifths in a row\u2014\u2013, \u2013, and \u2013\u2014each a composite of some permutation of the smaller intervals The three in-tune fifths are interrupted by the grave fifth \u2013 (\"grave\" means \"flat by a comma\"), followed by another perfect fifth, \u2013, and another grave fifth, \u2013, and then restarting in the sharps with \u2013; the same pattern repeats through the sharp notes, then the double-sharps, and so on, indefinitely. But each octave of all-natural or all-sharp or all-double-sharp notes flattens by two commas with every transition from naturals to sharps, or single sharps to double sharps, etc. The pattern is also reverse-symmetric in the flats: Descending by fourths the pattern reciprocally sharpens notes by two commas with every transition from natural notes to flattened notes, or flats to double flats, etc. If left unmodified, the two grave fifths in each block of all-natural notes, or all-sharps, or all-flat notes, are \"wolf\" intervals: Each of the grave fifths out of tune by a diatonic comma.\nSince the comma, , expands the lesser tone into the greater tone, a just octave can be broken up into a sequence (or a circular shift of it) of 7\u00a0diatonic semitones , 5\u00a0chromatic semitones , and 3\u00a0commas Various equal temperaments alter the interval sizes, usually breaking apart the three commas and then redistributing their parts into the seven diatonic semitones , or into the five chromatic semitones , or into both and , with some fixed proportion for each type of semitone.\nThe sequence of intervals , , and can be repeatedly appended to itself into a greater spiral of 12\u00a0fifths, and made to connect at its far ends by slight adjustments to the size of one or several of the intervals, or left unmodified with occasional less-than-perfect fifths, flat by a comma.\nMorphing diatonic tunings into EDO.\nVarious equal temperaments can be understood and analyzed as having made adjustments to the sizes of and subdividing the three intervals\u2014, , and , or at finer resolution, their constituents , , and . An equal temperament can be created by making the sizes of the major and minor tones (, ) the same (say, by setting , with the others expanded to still fill out the octave), and both semitones ( and ) the same, then 12 equal semitones, two per tone, result. In , the semitone, , is exactly half the size of the same-size whole tones = .\nSome of the intermediate sizes of tones and semitones can also be generated in equal temperament systems, by modifying the sizes of the comma and semitones. One obtains in the limit as the size of and tend to zero, with the octave kept fixed, and in the limit as and tend to zero; is of course, the case and For instance:"}
{"id": "10310", "revid": "5432856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10310", "title": "Edward Gibbon", "text": "Edward Gibbon (; 8 May 173716 January 1794) was an English essayist, historian, and politician. His most important work, \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", published in six volumes between 1776 and 1789, is known for the quality and irony of its prose, its use of primary sources, and its polemical criticism of organized religion.\nEarly life: 1737\u20131752.\nEdward Gibbon was born in 1737, the son of Edward and Judith Gibbon, at Lime Grove in the town of Putney, Surrey. He had five brothers and one sister, all of whom died in infancy. His grandfather, also named Edward, had lost his assets as a result of the South Sea bubble stock-market collapse in 1720 but eventually regained much of his wealth. Gibbon's father thus inherited a substantial estate. His paternal grandmother, Catherine Acton, was granddaughter of Sir Walter Acton, 2nd Baronet.\nAs a youth, Gibbon's health was under constant threat. He described himself as \"a puny child, neglected by my Mother, starved by my nurse\". At age nine, he was sent to Dr. Woddeson's school at Kingston upon Thames (now Kingston Grammar School), shortly after which his mother died. He then took up residence in the Westminster School boarding house, owned by his adored \"Aunt Kitty\", Catherine Porten. Soon after she died in 1786, he remembered her as rescuing him from his mother's disdain, and imparting \"the first rudiments of knowledge, the first exercise of reason, and a taste for books which is still the pleasure and glory of my life\". From 1747 Gibbon spent time at the family home in Buriton. By 1751, Gibbon's reading was already extensive and pointed toward his future pursuits: Laurence Echard's \"Roman History\" (1713), William Howel(l)'s \"An Institution of General History\" (1680\u201385), and several of the 65 volumes of the acclaimed \"Universal History from the Earliest Account of Time\" (1747\u20131768).\nCareer.\nOxford, Lausanne, and a religious journey: 1752\u20131758.\nFollowing a stay at Bath in 1752 to improve his health at the age of 15, Gibbon was sent by his father to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was enrolled as a gentleman-commoner. He was ill-suited, however, to the college atmosphere, and later rued his 14 months there as the \"most idle and unprofitable\" of his life. Because he says so in his autobiography, it used to be thought that a penchant from his aunt for \"theological controversy\" bloomed under the influence of the deist or rationalist theologian Conyers Middleton (1683\u20131750), the author of \"Free Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers\" (1749). In that tract, Middleton denied the validity of such powers; Gibbon promptly objected, or so the argument used to run. The product of that disagreement, with some assistance from the work of Catholic Bishop Jacques-B\u00e9nigne Bossuet (1627\u20131704), and that of the Elizabethan Jesuit Robert Parsons (1546\u20131610), yielded the most memorable event of his time at Oxford: his conversion to Roman Catholicism on 8 June 1753. He was further \"corrupted\" by the 'free thinking' deism of the playwright and poet David Mallet; and finally Gibbon's father, already \"in despair,\" had had enough. David Womersley has shown, however, that Gibbon's claim to having been converted by a reading of Middleton is very unlikely, and was introduced only into the final draft of the \"Memoirs\" in 1792\u201393.\nWithin weeks of his conversion, he was removed from Oxford and sent to live under the care and tutelage of Daniel Pavillard, Reformed pastor of Lausanne, Switzerland. There, he made one of his life's two great friendships, that of Jacques Georges Deyverdun (the French-language translator of Goethe's \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\"), and that of John Baker Holroyd (later Lord Sheffield). Just a year and a half later, after his father threatened to disinherit him, on Christmas Day, 1754, he reconverted to Protestantism. \"The various articles of the Romish creed,\" he wrote, \"disappeared like a dream\".\nThwarted romance.\nHe also met the one romance in his life: the daughter of the pastor of Crassy, a young woman named Suzanne Curchod, who was later to become the wife of Louis XVI's finance minister Jacques Necker, and the mother of Madame de Sta\u00ebl. The two developed a warm affinity; Gibbon proceeded to propose marriage, but ultimately this was out of the question, blocked both by his father's staunch disapproval and Curchod's equally staunch reluctance to leave Switzerland. Gibbon returned to England in August 1758 to face his father. No refusal of the elder's wishes could be allowed. Gibbon put it this way: \"I sighed as a lover, I obeyed as a son.\" He proceeded to cut off all contact with Curchod, even as she vowed to wait for him. Their final emotional break apparently came at Ferney, France, in early 1764, though they did see each other at least one more time a year later.\nFirst fame and the Grand tour: 1758\u20131765.\nUpon his return to England, Gibbon published his first book, \"Essai sur l'\u00c9tude de la Litt\u00e9rature\" in 1761, which produced an initial taste of celebrity and distinguished him, in Paris at least, as a man of letters. \nOn 12 June 1759 Gibbon was commissioned as a Captain in the South Hampshire Militia when that regiment was embodied during the Seven Years' War (his father served as the regiment's Major). For the next three years he commanded the regiment's Grenadier Company in home defence. The militia was disembodied in December 1762 but he remained an officer in the regiment, resigning as a Lieutenant-Colonel in 1770. Gibbon later credited his militia service with providing him \"a larger introduction into the English world.\" There was further, the matter of a vast utility: \"The discipline and evolutions of a modern battalion gave me a clearer notion of the phalanx and the legion; and the captain of the Hampshire grenadiers (the reader may smile) has not been useless to the historian of the Roman empire.\" \nIn 1763 he returned, via Paris, to Lausanne, where he made the acquaintance of a \"prudent worthy young man\" William Guise. On 18 April 1764, he and Guise set off for Italy, crossed the Alps, and after spending the summer in Florence arrived in Rome, via Lucca, Pisa, Livorno and Siena, in early October. In his autobiography, Gibbon vividly records his rapture when he finally neared \"the great object of [my] pilgrimage\":\n...at the distance of twenty-five years I can neither forget nor express the strong emotions which agitated my mind as I first approached and entered the \"eternal City\". After a sleepless night, I trod, with a lofty step the ruins of the Forum; each memorable spot where Romulus \"stood\", or Tully spoke, or Caesar fell, was at once present to my eye; and several days of intoxication were lost or enjoyed before I could descend to a cool and minute investigation.\nHere, Gibbon first conceived the idea of composing a history of the city, later extended to the entire empire, a moment he described later as his \"Capitoline vision\":\nIt was at Rome, on the fifteenth of October 1764, as I sat musing amidst the ruins of the Capitol, while the barefooted fryars were singing vespers in the temple of Jupiter, that the idea of writing the decline and fall of the City first started to my mind.\nWomersley notes the existence of \"good reasons\" to doubt the statement's accuracy. Elaborating, Pocock (\"Classical History,\" \u00b6 #2) refers to it as a likely \"creation of memory\" or a \"literary invention\", given that Gibbon, in his autobiography, claimed that his journal dated the reminiscence to 15 October, when in fact the journal gives no date.\nLate career: 1765\u20131776.\nWork.\nIn June 1765, Gibbon returned to his father's house, remaining there until the latter's death in 1770. These five years were considered by Gibbon as the worst of his life, but he tried to remain busy by making early attempts at full histories. His first historical narrative, known as the \"History of Switzerland\", representing Gibbon's love for Switzerland, was never finished nor published. Even under the guidance of Deyverdun, his German translator, Gibbon became too self-critical and completely abandoned the project after writing only 60 pages of text.\nSoon after abandoning his \"History of Switzerland\", Gibbon made another attempt towards completing a full history. His second work, \"Memoires Litteraires de la Grande Bretagne\", was a two-volume set describing the literary and social conditions of England at the time, such as Lord Lyttelton's history of Henry II and Nathaniel Lardner's \"The Credibility of the Gospel History\". Gibbon's \"Memoires Litteraires\" failed to gain any notoriety and was considered a flop by fellow historians and literary scholars.\nAfter he tended to his father's estate\u2014which was in poor condition\u2014enough remained for Gibbon to settle fashionably in London at 7 Bentinck Street free of financial concern. By February 1773, he was writing in earnest, but not without the occasional self-imposed distraction. He took to London society quite easily, joined the better social clubs (including Dr. Johnson's Literary Club), and looked in from time to time on his friend Holroyd in Sussex. He succeeded Oliver Goldsmith at the Royal Academy as 'professor in ancient history', an honorary but prestigious position. In late 1774, he was initiated as a Freemason of the Premier Grand Lodge of England.\nHe was also, perhaps least productively in that same year, returned to the House of Commons for Liskeard, Cornwall through the intervention of his relative and patron, Edward Eliot. He became the archetypal back-bencher, benignly \"mute\" and \"indifferent,\" his support of the Whig ministry invariably automatic. Gibbon lost the Liskeard seat in 1780 when Eliot joined the opposition, taking with him \"the Electors of Leskeard [who] are commonly of the same opinion as Mr. El[l]iot.\" (Murray, p.\u00a0322.) The following year, owing to the good grace of Prime Minister Lord North, he was again returned to Parliament, this time for Lymington on a by-election.\n\"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\": 1776\u20131788.\nAfter several rewrites, with Gibbon \"often tempted to throw away the labours of seven years,\" the first volume of what was to become his life's major achievement, \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\", was published on 17 February 1776. Through 1777, the reading public eagerly consumed three editions, for which Gibbon was rewarded handsomely: two-thirds of the profits, amounting to approximately \u00a31,000.\nVolumes II and III appeared on 1 March 1781, eventually rising \"to a level with the previous volume in general esteem.\" Volume IV was finished in June 1784; the final two were completed during a second Lausanne sojourn (September 1783 to August 1787) where Gibbon reunited with his friend Deyverdun in leisurely comfort. By early 1787, he was \"straining for the goal\" and with great relief the project was finished in June. Gibbon later wrote:\nVolumes IV, V, and VI finally reached the press in May 1788, their publication having been delayed since March so it could coincide with a dinner party celebrating Gibbon's 51st birthday (the 8th). Mounting a bandwagon of praise for the later volumes were such contemporary luminaries as Adam Smith, William Robertson, Adam Ferguson, Lord Camden, and Horace Walpole. Adam Smith told Gibbon that \"by the universal assent of every man of taste and learning, whom I either know or correspond with, it sets you at the very head of the whole literary tribe at present existing in Europe.\"\nIn November 1788, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, the main proposer being his good friend Lord Sheffield.\nIn 1783 Gibbon had been intrigued by the cleverness of Sheffield's 12-year-old eldest daughter, Maria, and he proposed to teach her himself. Over the following years he continued, creating a girl of sixteen who was both well educated, confident and determined to choose her own husband. Gibbon described her as a \"mixture of just observation and lively imagery, the strong sense of a man expressed with the easy elegance of a female\".\nLater life: 1789\u20131794.\nThe years following Gibbon's completion of \"The History\" were filled largely with sorrow and increasing physical discomfort. He had returned to London in late 1787 to oversee the publication process alongside Lord Sheffield. With that accomplished, in 1789 it was back to Lausanne only to learn of and be \"deeply affected\" by the death of Deyverdun, who had willed Gibbon his home, La Grotte. He resided there with little commotion, took in the local society, received a visit from Sheffield in 1791, and \"shared the common abhorrence\" of the French Revolution. In 1793, word came of Lady Sheffield's death; Gibbon immediately left Lausanne and set sail to comfort a grieving but composed Sheffield. His health began to fail critically in December, and at the turn of the new year, he was on his last legs.\nAmong Edward Gibbon's maladies was gout. Gibbon is also believed to have suffered from an extreme case of scrotal swelling, probably a hydrocele testis, a condition that causes the scrotum to swell with fluid in a compartment overlying either testicle. In an age when close-fitting clothes were fashionable, his condition led to a chronic and disfiguring inflammation that left Gibbon a lonely figure. As his condition worsened, he underwent numerous procedures to alleviate the condition, but with no enduring success. In early January, the last of a series of three operations caused an unremitting peritonitis to set in and spread, from which he died.\nThe \"English giant of the Enlightenment\" finally succumbed at 12:45 pm, 16 January 1794 at age 56. He was buried in the Sheffield Mausoleum attached to the north transept of the Church of St Mary and St Andrew, Fletching, East Sussex, having died in Fletching while staying with his great friend, Lord Sheffield. Gibbon's estate was valued at approximately \u00a326,000. He left most of his property to cousins. As stipulated in his will, Sheffield oversaw the sale of his library at auction to William Beckford for \u00a3950. What happened next suggests that Beckford may have known of Gibbon's moralistic, 'impertinent animadversion' at his expense in the presence of the Duchess of Devonshire at Lausanne. Gibbon's wish that his 6,000-book library would not be locked up 'under the key of a jealous master' was effectively denied by Beckford who retained it in Lausanne until 1801 before inspecting it, then locking it up again until at least as late as 1818 before giving most of the books back to Gibbon's physician Dr Scholl who had helped negotiate the sale in the first place. Beckford's annotated copy of the \"Decline and Fall\" turned up in Christie's in 1953, complete with his critique of what he considered the author's 'ludicrous self-complacency ... your frequent distortion of historical Truth to provoke a gibe, or excite a sneer ... your ignorance of oriental languages [etc.]'.\nLegacy.\nA view frequently attributed to Gibbon, that the Roman Empire fell due to its embrace of Christianity, is not widely accepted by scholars today. Gibbon argued that with the empire's new Christian character, large sums of wealth that would have otherwise been used in the secular affairs in promoting the state were transferred to promoting the activities of the Church. However, the pre-Christian empire also spent large financial sums on religious affairs and it is unclear whether or not the change of religion increased the amount of resources the empire spent on religion. Gibbon further argued that new attitudes in Christianity caused many Christians of wealth to renounce their lifestyles and enter a monastic lifestyle, and so stop participating in the support of the empire. However, while many Christians of wealth did become monastics, this paled in comparison to the participants in the imperial bureaucracy. Although Gibbon further pointed out that the importance Christianity placed on peace caused a decline in the number of people serving the military, the decline was so small as to be negligible for the army's effectiveness.\nMany scholars argue that Gibbon did not in fact blame Christianity for the empire's fall, rather attributing its decline to the effects of luxury and the consequent erosion of its martial character. Such a view echoes the outlook of the Greek historian Polybius, who similarly explained the decadent Greek world's eclipse by the ascendant Roman Republic in Mediterranean affairs. In this understanding of Gibbon, the process of Rome's decay was well underway before Christian adherents numbered a large proportion of the empire. Hence, although Gibbon might have seen Christianity as hastening Rome's fall, he did not consider it as the root cause.\nGibbon's work has been criticised for its scathing view of the Christian church as laid down in chapters XV and XVI, a situation that resulted in the banning of the book in several countries. Gibbon was accused of disrespecting, and none too lightly, the character of Christian doctrine, by \"treat[ing] the Christian church as a phenomenon of general history, not a special case admitting supernatural explanations and disallowing criticism of its adherents\". More specifically, the chapters excoriated the church for \"supplanting in an unnecessarily destructive way the great culture that preceded it\" and for \"the outrage of [practising] religious intolerance and warfare\".\nGibbon, in letters to Holroyd and others, expected some type of church-inspired backlash, but the harshness of the ensuing torrents exceeded anything he or his friends had anticipated. Contemporary detractors such as Joseph Priestley and Richard Watson stoked the nascent fire, but the most severe of these attacks was an \"acrimonious\" piece by the young cleric, Henry Edwards Davis.\nGibbon's apparent antagonism to Christian doctrine spilled over into the Jewish faith, leading to charges of anti-Semitism. For example, he wrote:\nFrom the reign of Nero to that of Antoninus Pius, the Jews discovered a fierce impatience of the dominion of Rome, which repeatedly broke out in the most furious massacres and insurrections. Humanity is shocked at the recital of the horrid cruelties which they committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus, and of Cyrene, where they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the unsuspecting natives; and we are tempted to applaud the severe retaliation which was exercised by the arms of legions against a race of fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed to render them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman government, but also of mankind.\nInfluence.\nGibbon is considered to be a son of the Enlightenment and this is reflected in his famous verdict on the history of the Middle Ages: \"I have described the triumph of barbarism and religion.\" Politically, he rejected the radical egalitarian movements of the time, notably the American and French Revolutions, and dismissed overly rationalistic applications of the rights of man.\nGibbon's work has been praised for its style, his piquant epigrams and its effective irony. Winston Churchill memorably noted in \"My Early Life\", \"I set out upon...Gibbon's \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" [and] was immediately dominated both by the story and the style. ...I devoured Gibbon. I rode triumphantly through it from end to end and enjoyed it all.\" Churchill modelled much of his own literary style on Gibbon's. Like Gibbon, he dedicated himself to producing a \"vivid historical narrative, ranging widely over period and place and enriched by analysis and reflection.\"\nUnusually for the 18th century, Gibbon was never content with secondhand accounts when the primary sources were accessible (though most of these were drawn from well-known printed editions). \"I have always endeavoured,\" he says, \"to draw from the fountain-head; that my curiosity, as well as a sense of duty, has always urged me to study the originals; and that, if they have sometimes eluded my search, I have carefully marked the secondary evidence, on whose faith a passage or a fact were reduced to depend.\" In this insistence upon the importance of primary sources, Gibbon is considered by many to be one of the first modern historians:\nIn accuracy, thoroughness, lucidity, and comprehensive grasp of a vast subject, the 'History' is unsurpassable. It is the one English history which may be regarded as definitive...Whatever its shortcomings the book is artistically imposing as well as historically unimpeachable as a vast panorama of a great period.\nThe subject of Gibbon's writing, as well as his ideas and style, have influenced other writers. Besides his influence on Churchill, Gibbon was also a model for Isaac Asimov in his writing of \"The Foundation Trilogy\", which he said involved \"a little bit of cribbin' from the works of Edward Gibbon\".\nEvelyn Waugh admired Gibbon's style, but not his secular viewpoint. In Waugh's 1950 novel \"Helena\", the early Christian author Lactantius worries about the possibility of \"'a false historian, with the mind of Cicero or Tacitus and the soul of an animal,' and he nodded towards the gibbon who fretted his golden chain and chattered for fruit.\"\nNotes.\nMost of this article, including quotations unless otherwise noted, has been adapted from Stephen's entry on Edward Gibbon in the \"Dictionary of National Biography\"."}
{"id": "10311", "revid": "43125735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10311", "title": "Egyptian languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "10312", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10312", "title": "East Pakistan", "text": "East Pakistan was the eastern province of Pakistan between 1955 and 1971, restructured and renamed from the province of East Bengal and covering the territory of the modern country of Bangladesh. Its land borders were with India and Burma, with a coastline on the Bay of Bengal. East Pakistanis were popularly known as \"Pakistani Bengalis\"; to distinguish this region from India's state West Bengal (which is also known as \"Indian Bengal\"), East Pakistan was known as \"Pakistani Bengal\". In 1971, East Pakistan became the newly independent state Bangladesh, which means \"country of Bengal\" or \"country of Bengalis\" in Bengali language.\nEast Pakistan was renamed from East Bengal by the One Unit Scheme of Pakistani Prime Minister Mohammad Ali of Bogra. The Constitution of Pakistan of 1956 replaced the Pakistani monarchy with an Islamic republic. Bengali politician H.S. Suhrawardy served as the Prime Minister of Pakistan between 1956 and 1957 and a Bengali bureaucrat Iskander Mirza became the first President of Pakistan. The 1958 Pakistani coup d'\u00e9tat brought general Ayub Khan to power. Khan replaced Mirza as president and launched a crackdown against pro-democracy leaders. Khan enacted the Constitution of Pakistan of 1962 which ended universal suffrage. By 1966, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman emerged as the preeminent opposition leader in Pakistan and launched the six-point movement for autonomy and democracy. The 1969 uprising in East Pakistan contributed to Ayub Khan's overthrow. Another general, Yahya Khan, usurped the presidency and enacted martial law. In 1970, Yahya Khan organised Pakistan's first federal general election. The Awami League emerged as the single largest party, followed by the Pakistan Peoples Party. The military junta stalled in accepting the results, leading to civil disobedience, the Bangladesh Liberation War, 1971 Bangladesh genocide and persecution of Biharis.\nThe East Pakistan Provincial Assembly was the legislative body of the territory, it was the largest provincial legislature in Pakistan and elections were held only twice in 1954 and 1970. During the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, most Bengali members elected to the Pakistani National Assembly and the East Pakistani provincial assembly became members of the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh.\nDue to the strategic importance of East Pakistan, the Pakistani union was a member of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. The economy of East Pakistan grew at an average of 2.6% between 1960 and 1965. The federal government invested more funds and foreign aid in West Pakistan, even though East Pakistan generated a major share of exports. However, President Ayub Khan did implement significant industrialisation in East Pakistan. The Kaptai Dam was built in 1965. The Eastern Refinery was established in Chittagong. Dacca was declared as the \"second capital\" of Pakistan and planned as the home of the national parliament. The government recruited American architect Louis Kahn to design the national assembly complex in Dacca.\nHistory.\nOne Unit and Islamic Republic.\nIn 1955, Prime Minister Mohammad Ali Bogra implemented the One Unit scheme which merged the four western provinces into a single unit called West Pakistan while East Bengal was renamed as East Pakistan.\nPakistan ended its dominion status and adopted a republican constitution in 1956, which proclaimed an Islamic republic. The populist leader H. S. Suhrawardy of East Pakistan was appointed prime minister of Pakistan. As soon as he became the prime minister, Suhrawardy initiated legal work reviving the joint electorate system. There was strong opposition and resentment to the joint electorate system in West Pakistan. The Muslim League had taken the cause to the public and began calling for the implementation of a separate electorate system. In contrast to West Pakistan, the joint electorate was highly popular in East Pakistan. The tug of war with the Muslim League to establish the appropriate electorate caused problems for his government.\nThe constitutionally obliged National Finance Commission Program (NFC Program) was immediately suspended by Prime Minister Suhrawardy despite the reserves of the four provinces of West Pakistan in 1956. Suhrawardy advocated for the USSR-based Five-Year Plans to centralise the national economy. In this view, East Pakistan's economy would be quickly centralised and all major economic planning would be shifted to West Pakistan.\nEfforts leading to centralising the economy were met with great resistance in West Pakistan when the elite monopolist and the business community angrily refused to adhere to his policies. The business community in Karachi began its political struggle to undermine any attempts of financial distribution of the US$10\u00a0million ICA aid to the better part of East Pakistan and to set up a consolidated national shipping corporation. In the financial cities of West Pakistan, such as Karachi, Lahore, Quetta, and Peshawar, a series of major labour strikes against the economic policies of Suhrawardy were supported by the elite business community and the private sector.\nFurthermore, in order to divert attention from the controversial One Unit Program, Prime Minister Suhrawardy tried to end the crisis by calling a small group of investors to set up small businesses in the country. Despite many initiatives and holding off the NFC Award Program, Suhrawardy's political position and image deteriorated in the four provinces in West Pakistan. Many nationalist leaders and activists of the Muslim League were dismayed by the suspension of the constitutionally obliged NFC Program. His critics and Muslim League leaders observed that with the suspension of the NFC Award Program, Suhrawardy tried to give more financial allocations, aids, grants, and opportunities to East Pakistan than West Pakistan, including West Pakistan's four provinces. During the last days of his Prime ministerial years, Suhrawardy tried to remove the economic disparity between the Eastern and Western wings of the country but to no avail. He also tried unsuccessfully to alleviate the food shortage in the country.\nSuhrawardy strengthened relations with the United States by reinforcing Pakistani membership in the Central Treaty Organization and the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization. Suhrawardy also promoted relations with the People's Republic of China.\nHis contribution in formulating the 1956 constitution of Pakistan was substantial as he played a vital role in incorporating provisions for civil liberties and universal adult franchise in line with his adherence to the parliamentary form of liberal democracy.\nEra of Ayub Khan.\nIn 1958, President Iskandar Mirza enacted martial law as part of a military coup by the Pakistan Army's chief Ayub Khan. Roughly after two weeks, President Mirza's relations with Pakistan Armed Forces deteriorated leading Army Commander General Ayub Khan relieving the president from his presidency and forcefully exiling President Mirza to the United Kingdom. General Ayub Khan justified his actions after appearing on national radio declaring that: \"the armed forces and the people demanded a clean break with the past...\". Until 1962, the martial law continued while Field Marshal Ayub Khan purged a number of politicians and civil servants from the government and replaced them with military officers. Ayub called his regime a \"revolution to clean up the mess of black marketing and corruption\". Khan replaced Mirza as president and became the country's strongman for eleven years. Martial law continued until 1962 when the government of Field Marshal Ayub Khan commissioned a constitutional bench under Chief Justice of Pakistan Muhammad Shahabuddin, composed of ten senior justices, each five from East Pakistan and five from West Pakistan. On 6 May 1961, the commission sent its draft to President Ayub Khan. He thoroughly examined the draft while consulting with his cabinet.\nIn January 1962, the cabinet finally approved the text of the new constitution, promulgated by President Ayub Khan on 1 March 1962, which came into effect on 8 June 1962. Under the 1962 constitution, Pakistan became a presidential republic. Universal suffrage was abolished in favour of a system dubbed 'Basic Democracy'. Under the system, an electoral college would be responsible for electing the president and national assembly. The 1962 constitution created a gubernatorial system in West and East Pakistan. Each province ran its own separate provincial gubernatorial governments. The constitution defined a division of powers between the central government and the provinces. Fatima Jinnah received strong support in East Pakistan during her failed bid to unseat Ayub Khan in the 1965 presidential election.\nDacca was declared as the \"second capital\" of Pakistan in 1962. It was designated as the legislative capital and Louis Kahn was tasked with designing a national assembly complex. Dacca's population increased in the 1960s. Seven natural gas fields were tapped in the province. The petroleum industry developed as the Eastern Refinery was established in the port city of Chittagong.\nSix Points.\nIn 1966, Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman announced the six-point movement in Lahore. The movement demanded greater provincial autonomy and the restoration of democracy in Pakistan. Rahman was indicted for treason during the Agartala Conspiracy Case after launching the six-point movement. He was later released in the 1969 uprising in East Pakistan. Ayub Khan resigned in March 1969. Below includes the historical six points:\nFinal years.\nMuhammad Ayub Khan was replaced by general Yahya Khan who became the Chief Martial Law Administrator. Khan organised the 1970 Pakistani general election. The 1970 Bhola cyclone was one of the deadliest natural disasters of the 20th century. The cyclone claimed half a million lives. The disastrous effects of the cyclone caused huge resentment against the federal government. After a decade of military rule, East Pakistan was a hotbed of Bengali nationalism. There were open calls for self-determination.\nWhen the federal general election was held, the Awami League emerged as the single largest party in the Pakistani parliament. The League won 167 out of 169 seats in East Pakistan, thereby crossing the half way mark of 150 in the 300-seat National Assembly of Pakistan. In theory, this gave the League the right to form a government under the Westminster tradition. But the League failed to win a single seat in West Pakistan, where the Pakistan Peoples Party emerged as the single largest party with 81 seats. The military junta stalled the transfer of power and conducted prolonged negotiations with the League. A civil disobedience movement erupted across East Pakistan demanding the convening of parliament. Rahman announced a struggle for independence from Pakistan during a speech on 7 March 1971 and called for a non-cooperation movement from the Bengali populace. Between 7\u201326 March, East Pakistan was virtually under the popular control of the Awami League. On Pakistan's Republic Day on 23 March 1971, the first flag of Bangladesh was hoisted in many East Pakistani households. Pakistan Army was ordered to immediately launch a crackdown on 26 March whose purpose was to curb the resistance, some of these operations include Operation Searchlight and the 1971 Dhaka University massacre. This led to the Bangladeshi Declaration of Independence.\nAs the Bangladesh Liberation War and the 1971 Bangladesh genocide continued for nine months, East Pakistani military units like the East Bengal Regiment and the East Pakistan Rifles defected and formed the Bangladesh Forces. The Provisional Government of Bangladesh allied with neighbouring India which intervened in the final two weeks of the war and secured the surrender of Pakistan's eastern command.\nRole of the Pakistani military.\nWith Ayub Khan ousted from office in 1969, Commander of the Pakistani Army, General Yahya Khan became the country's second ruling chief martial law administrator. Both Bhutto and Mujib strongly disliked General Khan, but patiently endured him and his government as he had promised to hold an election in 1970. During this time, strong nationalistic sentiments in East Pakistan were perceived by the Pakistani Armed Forces and the central military government. Therefore, Khan and his military government wanted to divert the nationalistic threats and violence against non-East Pakistanis. The Eastern Command was under constant pressure from the Awami League and requested an active-duty officer to control the command under such extreme pressure. The high flag rank officers, junior officers, and many high command officers from Pakistan's Armed Forces were highly cautious about their appointment in East-Pakistan, and the assignment of governing East Pakistan and appointment of an officer was considered highly difficult for the Pakistan High Military Command.\nEast Pakistan's Armed Forces, under the military administrations of Major-General Muzaffaruddin and Lieutenant-General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, used an excessive amount of show of military force to curb the uprising in the province. With such action, the situation became highly critical and civil control over the province slipped away from the government. On 24 March, dissatisfied with the performance of his generals, Yahya Khan removed General Muzaffaruddin and General Yaqub Khan from office on 1 September 1969. The appointment of a military administrator was considered quite difficult and challenging with the crisis continually deteriorating. Vice-Admiral Syed Mohammad Ahsan, Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Navy, had previously served as political and military adviser of East Pakistan to former President Ayub Khan. Having such a strong background in administration, and being an expert on East Pakistan affairs, General Yahya Khan appointed Vice-Admiral Syed Mohammad Ahsan as Martial Law Administrator, with absolute authority in his command. He was relieved as naval chief and received an extension from the government.\nThe tense relations between East and West Pakistan reached a climax in 1970 when the Awami League, the largest East Pakistani political party, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, (Mujib), won a landslide victory in the national elections in East Pakistan. The party won 160 of the 162 seats allotted to East Pakistan, and thus a majority of the 300 seats in the Parliament. This gave the Awami League the constitutional right to form a government without forming a coalition with any other party. Khan invited Mujib to Rawalpindi to take the charge of the office, and negotiations took place between the military government and the Awami Party. Bhutto was shocked with the results and threatened his fellow Peoples Party members if they attended the inaugural session at the National Assembly, famously saying he would \"break the legs\" of any member of his party who dared enter and attend the session. However, fearing East Pakistani separatism, Bhutto demanded Mujib to form a coalition government. After a secret meeting held in Larkana, Mujib agreed to give Bhutto the office of the presidency with Mujib as prime minister. General Yahya Khan and his military government were kept unaware of these developments and under pressure from his own military government, refused to allow Rahman to become the prime minister of Pakistan. This increased agitation for greater autonomy in East Pakistan. The military police arrested Mujib and Bhutto and placed them in Adiala Jail in Rawalpindi. The news spread like a fire in both East and West Pakistan, and the struggle for independence began in East Pakistan.\nThe senior high command officers in Pakistan Armed Forces, and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, began to pressure General Yahya Khan to take armed action against Mujib and his party. Bhutto later distanced himself from Yahya Khan after he was arrested by Military Police along with Mujib. Soon after the arrests, a high-level meeting was chaired by Yahya Khan. During the meeting, high commanders of the Pakistan Armed Forces unanimously recommended an armed and violent military action. East Pakistan's Martial Law Administrator Admiral Ahsan, Governor of East Pakistan, and Air Commodore Zafar Masud, Air Officer Commanding of Dacca's only airbase, were the only officers to object to the plans. When it became obvious that military action in East Pakistan was inevitable, Admiral Ahsan resigned from his position as martial law administrator in protest, and immediately flew back to Karachi, West Pakistan. Disheartened and isolated, Admiral Ahsan took early retirement from the Navy and quietly settled in Karachi. Once Operation Searchlight and Operation Barisal commenced, Air Marshal Masud flew to West Pakistan, and unlike Admiral Ahsan, tried to stop the violence in East Pakistan. When he failed in his attempts to meet General Yahya Khan, Masud too resigned from his position as AOC of Dacca airbase and took retirement from Air Force.\nLieutenant-General Sahibzada Yaqub Khan was sent into East Pakistan in an emergency, following a major blow of the resignation of Vice Admiral Ahsan. General Yaqub temporarily assumed the control of the province, he was also made the corps-commander of Eastern Corps. General Yaqub mobilised the entire major forces in East Pakistan.\nSheikh Mujibur Rahman made a declaration of independence at Dacca on 26 March 1971. All major Awami League leaders including elected leaders of the National Assembly and Provincial Assembly fled to neighbouring India and an exile government was formed headed by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. While he was in a Pakistan prison, Syed Nazrul Islam was the acting president with Tajuddin Ahmed as the prime minister. The exile government took oath on 17 April 1971 at Mujib Nagar, within East Pakistan territory of Kushtia district, and formally formed the government. Colonel MOG Osmani was appointed the Commander in Chief of Liberation Forces and whole East Pakistan was divided into eleven sectors headed by eleven sector commanders. All sector commanders were Bengali officers who had defected from the Pakistan Army. This started the nine-month long Bangladesh Liberation War in which the freedom fighters, joined in December 1971 by 400,000 Indian soldiers, faced the Pakistani Armed Forces of 365,000 plus paramilitary and collaborationist forces. An additional approximately 25,000 ill-equipped civilian volunteers and police forces also sided with the Pakistan Armed Forces. Bloody guerrilla warfare ensued in East Pakistan.\nThe Pakistan Armed Forces were unable to counter such threats. With no intel and low morale, they performed poorly and were inexperienced in guerrilla tactics, Pakistan Armed Forces and their assets were defeated by the Bangladesh Liberation Forces. In April 1971, Lieutenant-General Tikka Khan succeeded General Yaqub Khan as the Corps Commander. General Tikka Khan led the massive violent and massacre campaigns in the region. He is held responsible for killing hundreds of thousands of Bengali people in East Pakistan, mostly civilians and unarmed peoples. For his role, General Tikka Khan gained the title of \"Butcher of Bengal\". General Khan faced an international reaction against Pakistan, and therefore, General Tikka was removed as Commander of the Eastern front. He installed a civilian administration under Abdul Motaleb Malik on 31 August 1971, which proved to be ineffective. However, during the meeting, with no high officers willing to assume the command of East Pakistan, Lieutenant-General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi volunteered for the command of East Pakistan. Inexperienced and the large magnitude of this assignment, the government sent Rear-Admiral Mohammad Shariff as Flag Officer Commanding of Eastern Naval Command (Pakistan). Admiral Shariff served as the deputy of General Niazi when doing joint military operations. However, General Niazi proved to be a failure and ineffective ruler. Therefore, General Niazi and Air Commodore Inamul Haque Khan, AOC, PAF Base Dacca, failed to launch any operation in East Pakistan against Indian or its allies. Except for Admiral Shariff who continued to keep pressure on the Indian Navy until the end of the conflict. Admiral Shariff's effective plans made it nearly impossible for the Indian Navy to land its naval forces on the shores of East Pakistan. The Indian Navy was unable to land forces in East Pakistan and the Pakistan Navy was still offering resistance. The Indian Army, entered East Pakistan from all three directions of the province. The Indian Navy then decided to wait near the Bay of Bengal until the Army reached the shore.\nThe Indian Air Force dismantled the capability of the Pakistan Air Force in East Pakistan. Air Commodore Inamul Haque Khan, Dacca airbase's AOC, failed to offer any serious resistance to the actions of the Indian Air Force. For the most part of the war, the IAF enjoyed complete dominance in the skies over East Pakistan.\nOn 16 December 1971, the Pakistan Armed Forces surrendered to the joint liberation forces of Mukti Bahini and the Indian Army, headed by Lieutenant-General Jagjit Singh Arora, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C) of the Eastern Command of the Indian Army. Lieutenant General AAK Niazi, the last corps commander of Eastern Corps, signed the Instrument of Surrender at about 4:31 pm. Over 93,000 personnel, including Lt. General Niazi and Admiral Shariff, were taken as prisoners of war.\nOn 16 December 1971, the territory of East Pakistan was handed over to the Indian Army under the surrender agreement from West Pakistan and in the Simla Agreement became the newly independent state of Bangladesh. The Eastern Command, civilian institutions, and paramilitary forces were disbanded in the following months.\nGeography.\nIn contrast to the desert and rugged mountainous terrain of West Pakistan, East Pakistan featured the world's largest delta, 700 rivers, and tropical hilly jungles. The Chittagong Division of East Pakistan was home to hill ranges and forests (mainly in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and Sylhet). The Khulna Division and parts of the Dacca and Chittagong Divisions were largely Deltaic. East Pakistan was almost entirely an alluvial plain which consists of lower course of the Padma and Jamuna. Climatically, East Pakistan was essentially humid, hot climate with heavy to very heavy rainfall. The implication of East Pakistan's heavy rainfall was that the main crops that were grown in East Pakistan were rice, tea, and jute.\nAdministrative geography.\nEast Pakistan inherited 17 districts from British Bengal.\nIn 1960, Lower Tippera was renamed Comilla.\nIn 1969, two new districts were created with Tangail separated from Mymensingh and Patuakhali from Bakerganj.\nEast Pakistan's districts are listed in the following.\nEconomy.\nAt the time of the Partition of British India, East Bengal had a plantation economy. The Chittagong Tea Auction was established in 1949 as the region was home to the world's largest tea plantations. The East Pakistan Stock Exchange Association was established in 1954. Many wealthy Muslim immigrants from India, Burma, and former British colonies settled in East Pakistan. The Ispahani family, Africawala brothers, and the Adamjee family were pioneers of industrialisation in the region. Many of modern Bangladesh's leading companies were born in the East Pakistan period.\nAn airline founded in British Bengal, Orient Airways, launched the vital air link between East and West Pakistan with DC-3 aircraft on the Dacca-Calcutta-Delhi-Karachi route. Orient Airways later evolved into Pakistan International Airlines, whose first chairman was the East Pakistan-based industrialist Mirza Ahmad Ispahani.\nBy the 1950s, East Bengal surpassed West Bengal in having the largest jute industries in the world. The Adamjee Jute Mills was the largest jute processing plant in history and its location in Narayanganj was nicknamed the \"Dundee of the East\". The Adamjees were descendants of Sir Haji Adamjee Dawood, who made his fortune in British Burma.\nNatural gas was discovered in the northeastern part of East Pakistan in 1955 by the Burmah Oil Company. Industrial use of natural gas began in 1959. The Shell Oil Company and Pakistan Petroleum tapped 7 gas fields in the 1960s. The industrial seaport city of Chittagong hosted the headquarters of Burmah Eastern and Pakistan National Oil. Iran, an erstwhile leading oil producer, assisted in establishing the Eastern Refinery in Chittagong.\nThe Comilla Model of the Pakistan Academy for Rural Development (present-day Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development) was conceived by Akhtar Hameed Khan and replicated in many developing countries.\nIn 1965, Pakistan implemented the Kaptai Dam hydroelectric project in the southeastern part of East Pakistan with American assistance. It was the sole hydroelectric dam in East Pakistan. The project was controversial for displacing over 40,000 indigenous people from the area.\nThe centrally located metropolis Dacca witnessed significant urban growth.\nEconomic discrimination and disparity.\nAlthough, East Pakistan had a larger population, West Pakistan dominated the divided country politically and received more money from the common budget. According to the World Bank, there was much economic discrimination against East Pakistan, including higher government spending on West Pakistan, financial transfers from East to West, and the use of the East's foreign exchange surpluses to finance the West's imports.\nThe discrimination occurred despite the fact that East Pakistan generated a major share of Pakistan's exports.\nThe annual rate of growth of the gross domestic product per capita was 4.4% in West Pakistan versus 2.6% in East Pakistan from 1960 to 1965. Bengali politicians pushed for more autonomy, arguing that much of Pakistan's export earnings were generated in East Pakistan from the exportation of Bengali jute and tea. As late as 1960, approximately 70% of Pakistan's export earnings originated in East Pakistan, although this percentage declined as international demand for jute dwindled. By the mid-1960s, East Pakistan was accounting for less than 60% of the nation's export earnings, and by the time Bangladesh gained its independence in 1971, this percentage had dipped below 50%. In 1966, Mujib demanded that separate foreign exchange accounts be kept and that separate trade offices be opened overseas. By the mid-1960s, West Pakistan was benefiting from Ayub's \"Decade of Progress\" with its successful Green Revolution in wheat and from the expansion of markets for West Pakistani textiles, while East Pakistan's standard of living remained at an abysmally low level. Bengalis were also upset that West Pakistan, the seat of the national government, received more foreign aid. However, East Pakistan did nonetheless benefit from industrialisation and development, which was discerned by the Kaptai Dam in the Chittagong Hill Tracts for instance.\nEconomists in East Pakistan argued a \"Two Economies Theory\" within Pakistan itself, which was founded on the Two-Nation Theory with India. The so-called Two Economies Theory suggested that East and West Pakistan had different economic features which should not be regulated by a federal government in Islamabad.\nDemographics and culture.\nEast Pakistan was home to 55% of Pakistan's population. The largest ethnic group of the province were Bengalis, who in turn were the largest ethnic group in Pakistan. Bengali Muslims formed the predominant majority, followed by Bengali Hindus, Bengali Buddhists and Bengali Christians. East Pakistan also had many tribal groups, including the Chakmas, Marmas, Tangchangyas, Garos, Manipuris, Tripuris, Santhals and Bawms. They largely followed the religions of Buddhism, Christianity and Hinduism. East Pakistan was home to immigrant Muslims from across the Indian subcontinent, including West Bengal, Bihar, Sindh, Gujarat, the Northwest Frontier Province, Assam, Orissa, the Punjab and Kerala. A small Armenian and Jewish minority resided in East Pakistan.\nThe Asiatic Society of Pakistan was founded in Old Dacca by Ahmad Hasan Dani in 1948. The Varendra Research Museum in Rajshahi was an important center of research on the Indus Valley civilization. The Bangla Academy was established in 1954.\nAmong East Pakistan's newspapers, \"The Daily Ittefaq\" was the leading Bengali language title; while \"Holiday\" was a leading English title.\nAt the time of partition, East Bengal had 80 cinemas. The first movie produced in East Pakistan was The Face and the Mask in 1955. Pakistan Television established its second studio in Dacca after Lahore in 1965. Runa Laila was Pakistan's first pop star and became popular in India as well. Shabnam was a leading actress from East Pakistan. Feroza Begum was a leading exponent of Bengali classical Nazrul geeti. Jasimuddin and Abbasuddin Ahmed promoted Bengali folk music. Munier Chowdhury, Syed Mujtaba Ali, Nurul Momen, Sufia Kamal and Shamsur Rahman were among the leading literary figures in East Pakistan. Several East Pakistanis were awarded the Sitara-e-Imtiaz and the Pride of Performance.\nReligion.\nAs per the 1951 census, East Pakistan had a population of 44,251,826 people, of which 34,029,654 followed Islam, 9,757,527 people followed Hinduism and 464,644 people followed other religions: Buddhism, Christianity and Animism. According to the 1961 census, Muslims made up 80.4% of the population, Hindus were 18.4%, and the remaining 1.2% belonged to other religions, mainly Christianity and Buddhism.\nEthnic and linguistic discrimination.\nBengalis, Pashtuns, Baloch, Gilgit were hugely under-represented in Pakistan's bureaucracy and military. In the federal government, only 15% of offices were occupied by East Pakistanis. Only 10% of the military were from East Pakistan. Cultural discrimination also prevailed, causing the eastern wing to forge a distinct political identity. The Bengal Buddhist influenced culture was different from the west Pakistani Hindu influenced culture.\nMilitary.\nSince its unification with Pakistan, the East Pakistan Army had consisted of only one infantry brigade made up of two battalions, the 1st East Bengal Regiment and the 1/14 or 3/8 Punjab Regiment in 1948. These two battalions boasted only five rifle companies between them (an infantry battalion normally had 5 companies). This weak brigade was under the command of Brigadier Ayub Khan (acting Major-General \u2013 GOC of 14th Army Division), together with the East Pakistan Rifles, which was tasked with defending East Pakistan during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1947. The PAF, Marines, and the Navy had little presence in the region. Only one PAF combatant squadron, No. 14 Squadron \"Tail Choppers\", was active in East Pakistan. This combatant squadron was commanded by Squadron Leader Parvaiz Mehdi Qureshi, who later became a four-star general. The East Pakistan military personnel were trained in combat diving, demolitions, and guerrilla/anti-guerrilla tactics by the advisers from the Special Service Group (Navy) who were also charged with intelligence data collection and management cycle.\nThe East Pakistan Navy had only one active-duty combatant destroyer, the PNS \"Sylhet\"; one submarine \"Ghazi\" (which was repeatedly deployed in the West); four gunboats, inadequate to function in deep water. The joint special operations were managed and undertaken by the Naval Special Service Group (SSG(N)) who was assisted by the army, air force, and marines unit. The entire service, the Marines were deployed in East Pakistan, initially tasked with conducting exercises and combat operations in riverine areas and at the near shoreline. The small directorate of Naval Intelligence (while the headquarters and personnel, facilities, and directions were coordinated by West) had a vital role in directing special and reconnaissance missions, and intelligence gathering also was charged with taking reasonable actions to slow down the Indian threat. The armed forces of East Pakistan also consisted of the paramilitary organisation, the \"Razakars\" from the intelligence unit of the ISI's Covert Action Division (CAD).\nLegacy in Pakistan.\nThe trauma was extremely severe in Pakistan when the news of secession of East Pakistan as Bangladesh arrived\u2014a psychological setback, complete and humiliating defeat that shattered the prestige of the Pakistan Armed Forces. The governor and martial law administrator, Lieutenant-General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi, was defamed, his image was maligned and he was stripped of his honours. The people of Pakistan could not come to terms with the magnitude of the defeat, and spontaneous demonstrations and mass protests erupted on the streets of major cities in (West) Pakistan. General Yahya Khan surrendered powers to Nurul Amin of the Pakistan Muslim League, the first and last vice-president and prime minister of Pakistan.\nPrime Minister Amin invited then-President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and the Pakistan Peoples Party to take control of Pakistan in a colourful ceremony where Bhutto gave a daring speech to the nation on national television. At the ceremony, Bhutto waved his fist in the air and pledged to his nation to never again allow the surrender of his country like what happened with East Pakistan. He launched and orchestrated the large-scale atomic bomb project in 1972. In memorial of East Pakistan, the East-Pakistan diaspora in Pakistan established the East-Pakistan colony in Karachi, Sindh. In accordance, the East-Pakistani diaspora also composed patriotic tributes to Pakistan after the war; songs such as \"Sohni Dharti\" (lit. \"Beautiful Land\") and \"Jeevay, Jeevay Pakistan\" (lit. \"long-live, long-live Pakistan\"), were composed by Bengali singer Shahnaz Rahmatullah in the 1970s and 1980s.\nAccording to William Langewiesche, writing for \"The Atlantic\", \"it may seem obvious that the loss of Bangladesh was a blessing\"\u2014but it has never been seen that way in Pakistan. In the book \"Scoop! Inside Stories from the Partition to the Present\", Indian politician Kuldip Nayar opined, \"Losing East Pakistan and Bhutto's releasing of Mujib did not mean anything to Pakistan's policy\u2014as if there was no liberation war\". Bhutto's policy, and even today the policy of Pakistan, is that \"she will continue to fight for the honour and integrity of Pakistan\"."}
{"id": "10313", "revid": "14581124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10313", "title": "E. O. Wilson", "text": "Edward Osborne Wilson (June 10, 1929 \u2013 December 26, 2021) was an American biologist, naturalist, ecologist, and entomologist known for developing the field of sociobiology.\nBorn in Alabama, Wilson found an early interest in nature and frequented the outdoors. At age seven, he was partially blinded in a fishing accident; due to his reduced sight, Wilson resolved to study entomology. After graduating from the University of Alabama, Wilson transferred to complete his dissertation at Harvard University, where he distinguished himself in multiple fields. In 1956, he co-authored a paper defining the theory of character displacement. In 1967, he developed the theory of island biogeography with Robert MacArthur.\nWilson was the Pellegrino University Research Professor Emeritus in Entomology for the Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University, a lecturer at Duke University, and a fellow of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. The Royal Swedish Academy awarded Wilson the Crafoord Prize. He was a humanist laureate of the International Academy of Humanism. He was a two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction (for \"On Human Nature\" in 1979, and \"The Ants\" in 1991) and a \"New York Times\" bestselling author for \"The Social Conquest of Earth\", \"Letters to a Young Scientist\", and \"The Meaning of Human Existence\".\nWilson's work received both praise and criticism during his lifetime. His 1975 book \"\" was a particular flashpoint for controversy, and drew criticism from the Sociobiology Study Group. Wilson's interpretation of the theory of evolution resulted in a widely reported dispute with Richard Dawkins about multilevel selection theory. Examinations of his letters after his death revealed that he had supported the psychologist J. Philippe Rushton, whose work on race and intelligence is widely regarded by the scientific community as deeply flawed and racist.\nEarly life.\nEdward Osborne Wilson was born on June 10, 1929, in Birmingham, Alabama. He was the only child of Inez Linnette Freeman and Edward Osborne Wilson Sr. According to his autobiography, \"Naturalist\", he grew up in various towns in the Southern United States which included Mobile, Decatur, and Pensacola. From an early age, he was interested in natural history. His father was an alcoholic who eventually committed suicide. His parents allowed him to bring home black widow spiders and keep them on the porch. They divorced when he was seven years old.\nIn the same year that his parents divorced, Wilson blinded himself in his right eye in a fishing accident. Despite the prolonged pain, he did not stop fishing. He did not complain because he was anxious to stay outdoors, and never sought medical treatment. Several months later, his right pupil clouded over with a cataract. He was admitted to Pensacola Hospital to have the lens removed. Wilson writes, in his autobiography, that the \"surgery was a terrifying [19th] century ordeal\". Wilson retained full sight in his left eye, with a vision of 20/10. The 20/10 vision prompted him to focus on \"little things\": \"I noticed butterflies and ants more than other kids did, and took an interest in them automatically.\" Although he had lost his stereoscopic vision, he could still see fine print and the hairs on the bodies of small insects. His reduced ability to observe mammals and birds led him to concentrate on insects.\nAt the age of nine, Wilson undertook his first expeditions at Rock Creek Park in Washington, D.C. He began to collect insects and he gained a passion for butterflies. He would capture them using nets made with brooms, coat hangers, and cheesecloth bags. Going on these expeditions led to Wilson's fascination with ants. He describes in his autobiography how one day he pulled the bark of a rotting tree away and discovered citronella ants underneath. The worker ants he found were \"short, fat, brilliant yellow, and emitted a strong lemony odor\". Wilson said the event left a \"vivid and lasting impression\". He also earned the Eagle Scout award and served as Nature Director of his Boy Scouts summer camp. At age\u00a018, intent on becoming an entomologist, he began by collecting flies, but the shortage of insect pins during World War\u00a0II caused him to switch to ants, which could be stored in vials. With the encouragement of Marion R. Smith, a myrmecologist from the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, Wilson began a survey of all the ants of Alabama. This study led him to report the first colony of fire ants in the U.S., near the port of Mobile.\nEducation.\nWilson said he went to 15 or 16 schools during 11 years of schooling. He was concerned that he might not be able to afford to go to a university, and he tried to enlist in the United States Army, intending to earn U.S. government financial support for his education. He failed the Army medical examination due to his impaired eyesight, but was able to afford to enroll in the University of Alabama, where he earned his Bachelor of Science in 1949 and Master of Science in biology in 1950. The next year, Wilson transferred to Harvard University. \nAppointed to the Harvard Society of Fellows, he traveled on overseas expeditions, collecting ant species from Cuba and Mexico and traveling the South Pacific, including Australia, New Guinea, Fiji, and New Caledonia, as well as to Sri Lanka. In 1955, he received his Ph.D. and married Irene Kelley.\nIn \"Letters to a Young Scientist\", Wilson stated his IQ was measured as 123.\nCareer.\nFrom 1956 until 1996, Wilson was part of the faculty of Harvard. He began as an ant taxonomist and worked on understanding their microevolution, specifically how they developed into new species by escaping environmental disadvantages and moving into new habitats. He developed a theory of the \"taxon cycle\".\nIn collaboration with mathematician William H. Bossert, Wilson developed a classification of pheromones based on insect communication patterns. In the 1960s, he collaborated with mathematician and ecologist Robert MacArthur in developing the theory of species equilibrium. In the 1970s he and biologist Daniel S. Simberloff tested this theory on tiny mangrove islets in the Florida Keys. They eradicated all insect species and observed the repopulation by new species. Wilson and MacArthur's book \"The Theory of Island Biogeography\" became a standard ecology text.\nIn 1971, he published \"The Insect Societies\", which argued that insect behavior and the behavior of other animals are influenced by similar evolutionary pressures. In 1973, Wilson was appointed the curator of entomology at the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology. In 1975, he published the book \"\" applying his theories of insect behavior to vertebrates, and in the last chapter, to humans. He speculated that evolved and inherited tendencies were responsible for hierarchical social organization among humans. In 1978 he published \"On Human Nature\", which dealt with the role of biology in the evolution of human culture and won a Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction.\nWilson was named the Frank B. Baird Jr., Professor of Science in 1976 and, after he retired from Harvard in 1996, he became the Pellegrino University Professor Emeritus.\nIn 1981 after collaborating with biologist Charles Lumsden, he published \"Genes, Mind and Culture\", a theory of gene-culture coevolution. In 1990 he published \"The Ants\", co-written with zoologist Bert H\u00f6lldobler, winning his second Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction.\nIn the 1990s, he published \"The Diversity of Life\" (1992); an autobiography, \"Naturalist\" (1994); and \"Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge\" (1998) about the unity of the natural and social sciences. Wilson was praised for his environmental advocacy, and his secular-humanist and deist ideas pertaining to religious and ethical matters.\nWilson was characterized by several titles during his career, including the \"father of biodiversity,\" \"ant man,\" and \"Darwin's heir.\" In a PBS interview, David Attenborough described Wilson as \"a magic name to many of us working in the natural world, for two reasons. First, he is a towering example of a specialist, a world authority. Nobody in the world has ever known as much as Ed Wilson about ants. But, in addition to that intense knowledge and understanding, he has the widest of pictures. He sees the planet and the natural world that it contains in amazing detail but extraordinary coherence\".\nDisagreement with Richard Dawkins.\nAlthough evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins defended Wilson during the so-called \"sociobiology debate\", a disagreement between them arose over the theory of evolution. The disagreement began in 2012 when Dawkins wrote a critical review of Wilson's book \"The Social Conquest of Earth\" in \"Prospect Magazine\". In the review, Dawkins criticized Wilson for rejecting kin selection and for supporting group selection, labeling it \"bland\" and \"unfocused,\" and he wrote that the book's theoretical errors were \"important, pervasive, and integral to its thesis in a way that renders it impossible to recommend\". Wilson responded in the same magazine and wrote that Dawkins made \"little connection to the part he criticizes\" and accused him of engaging in rhetoric.\nIn 2014, Wilson said in an interview, \"There is no dispute between me and Richard Dawkins and there never has been, because he's a journalist, and journalists are people that report what the scientists have found and the arguments I\u2019ve had have actually been with scientists doing research\". Dawkins responded in a tweet: \"I greatly admire EO Wilson &amp; his huge contributions to entomology, ecology, biogeography, conservation, etc. He's just wrong on kin selection\" and later added, \"Anybody who thinks I'm a journalist who reports what other scientists think is invited to read \"The Extended Phenotype\"\". Biologist Jerry Coyne wrote that Wilson's remarks were \"unfair, inaccurate, and uncharitable\". In 2021, in an obituary to Wilson, Dawkins stated that their dispute was \"purely scientific\". Dawkins wrote that he stands by his critical review and doesn't regret \"its outspoken tone\", but noted that he also stood by his \"profound admiration for Professor Wilson and his life work\".\nSupport of J. Philippe Rushton.\nPrior to Wilson's death, his personal correspondences were donated to the Library of Congress at the library's request. Following his death, several articles were published discussing the discrepancy between Wilson's legacy as a champion of biogeography and conservation biology and his support of scientific racist pseudoscientist J. Philippe Rushton over several years. Rushton was a controversial psychologist at the University of Western Ontario, who later headed the Pioneer Fund.\nFrom the late 1980s to the early 1990s, Wilson wrote several emails to Rushton's colleagues defending Rushton's work in the face of widespread criticism for scholarly misconduct, misrepresentation of data, and confirmation bias, all of which were allegedly used by Rushton to support his personal ideas on race. Wilson also sponsored an article written by Rushton in \"PNAS\", and during the review process, Wilson intentionally sought out reviewers for the article who he believed would likely already agree with its premise. Wilson kept his support of Rushton's racist ideologies behind-the-scenes so as to not draw too much attention to himself or tarnish his own reputation. Wilson responded to another request from Rushton to sponsor a second PNAS article with the following: \"You have my support in many ways, but for me to sponsor an article on racial differences in the PNAS would be counterproductive for both of us.\" Wilson also remarked that the reason Rushton's ideologies were not more widely supported is because of the \"... fear of being called racist, which is virtually a death sentence in American academia if taken seriously. I admit that I myself have tended to avoid the subject of Rushton's work, out of fear.\"\nIn 2022, the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation issued a statement rejecting Wilson's support of Rushton and racism, on behalf of the board of directors and staff.\nWork.\n\"Sociobiology: The New Synthesis\", 1975.\nWilson used sociobiology and evolutionary principles to explain the behavior of social insects and then to understand the social behavior of other animals, including humans, thus establishing sociobiology as a new scientific field. He argued that all animal behavior, including that of humans, is the product of heredity, environmental stimuli, and past experiences, and that free will is an illusion. He referred to the biological basis of behavior as the \"genetic leash\". The sociobiological view is that all animal social behavior is governed by epigenetic rules worked out by the laws of evolution. This theory and research proved to be seminal, controversial, and influential.\nWilson argued that the unit of selection is a gene, the basic element of heredity. The \"target\" of selection is normally the individual who carries an ensemble of genes of certain kinds. With regard to the use of kin selection in explaining the behavior of eusocial insects, the \"new view that I'm proposing is that it was group selection all along, an idea first roughly formulated by Darwin.\"\nSociobiological research was at the time particularly controversial with regard to its application to humans. The theory established a scientific argument for rejecting the common doctrine of tabula rasa, which holds that human beings are born without any innate mental content and that culture functions to increase human knowledge and aid in survival and success.\nReception and controversy.\n\"Sociobiology: The New Synthesis\" was initially met with praise by most biologists. After substantial criticism of the book was launched by the Sociobiology Study Group, associated with the organization Science for the People, a major controversy known as the \"sociobiology debate\" ensued, and Wilson was accused of racism, misogyny, and support for eugenics. Several of Wilson's colleagues at Harvard, such as Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould, both members of the Group, were strongly opposed. Both focused their criticism mostly on Wilson's sociobiological writings. Gould, Lewontin, and other members, wrote \"Against 'Sociobiology'\" in an open letter criticizing Wilson's \"deterministic view of human society and human action\". Other public lectures, reading groups, and press releases were organized criticizing Wilson's work. In response, Wilson produced a discussion article entitled \"Academic Vigilantism and the Political Significance of Sociobiology\" in \"BioScience\".\nIn February 1978, while participating in a discussion on sociobiology at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Wilson was surrounded, chanted at and doused with water by members of the International Committee Against Racism, who accused Wilson of advocating racism and genetic determinism. Steven Jay Gould, who was present at the event, and Science for the People, which had previously protested Wilson, condemned the attack.\nPhilosopher Mary Midgley encountered \"Sociobiology\" in the process of writing \"Beast and Man\" (1979) and significantly rewrote the book to offer a critique of Wilson's views. Midgley praised the book for the study of animal behavior, clarity, scholarship, and encyclopedic scope, but extensively critiqued Wilson for conceptual confusion, scientism, and anthropomorphism of genetics.\n\"On Human Nature\", 1978.\nWilson wrote in his 1978 book \"On Human Nature\", \"The evolutionary epic is probably the best myth we will ever have.\" Wilson's fame prompted use of the morphed phrase epic of evolution. The book won the Pulitzer Prize in 1979.\n\"The Ants\", 1990.\nWilson, along with Bert H\u00f6lldobler, carried out a systematic study of ants and ant behavior, culminating in the 1990 encyclopedic work \"The Ants\". Because much self-sacrificing behavior on the part of individual ants can be explained on the basis of their genetic interests in the survival of the sisters, with whom they share 75% of their genes (though the actual case is some species' queens mate with multiple males and therefore some workers in a colony would only be 25% related), Wilson argued for a sociobiological explanation for all social behavior on the model of the behavior of the social insects.\nWilson said in reference to ants that \"Karl Marx was right, socialism works, it is just that he had the wrong species\". He asserted that individual ants and other eusocial species were able to reach higher Darwinian fitness putting the needs of the colony above their own needs as individuals because they lack reproductive independence: individual ants cannot reproduce without a queen, so they can only increase their fitness by working to enhance the fitness of the colony as a whole. Humans, however, do possess reproductive independence, and so individual humans enjoy their maximum level of Darwinian fitness by looking after their own survival and having their own offspring.\n\"Consilience\", 1998.\nIn his 1998 book \"Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge\", Wilson discussed methods that have been used to unite the sciences and might be able to unite the sciences with the humanities. He argued that knowledge is a single, unified thing, not divided between science and humanistic inquiry. Wilson used the term \"consilience\" to describe the synthesis of knowledge from different specialized fields of human endeavor. He defined human nature as a collection of epigenetic rules, the genetic patterns of mental development. He argued that culture and rituals are products, not parts, of human nature. He said art is not part of human nature, but our appreciation of art is. He suggested that concepts such as art appreciation, fear of snakes, or the incest taboo (Westermarck effect) could be studied by scientific methods of the natural sciences and be part of interdisciplinary research.\nSpiritual and political beliefs.\nScientific humanism.\nWilson coined the phrase \"scientific humanism\" as \"the only worldview compatible with science's growing knowledge of the real world and the laws of nature\". Wilson argued that it is best suited to improve the human condition. In 2003, he was one of the signers of the \"Humanist Manifesto\".\nGod and religion.\nOn the question of God, Wilson described his position as \"provisional deism\" and explicitly denied the label of \"atheist\", preferring \"agnostic\". He explained his faith as a trajectory away from traditional beliefs: \"I drifted away from the church, not definitively agnostic or atheistic, just Baptist &amp; Christian no more.\" Wilson argued that belief in God and the rituals of religion are products of evolution. He argued that they should not be rejected or dismissed, but further investigated by science to better understand their significance to human nature. In his book \"The Creation\", Wilson wrote that scientists ought to \"offer the hand of friendship\" to religious leaders and build an alliance with them, stating that \"Science and religion are two of the most potent forces on Earth and they should come together to save the creation.\"\nWilson made an appeal to the religious community on the lecture circuit at Midland College, Texas, for example, and that \"the appeal received a 'massive reply'\", that a covenant had been written and that a \"partnership will work to a substantial degree as time goes on\".\nIn a \"New Scientist\" interview published on January 21, 2015, however, Wilson said that religious faith is \"dragging us down\", and:\nEcology.\nWilson said that, if he could start his life over he would work in microbial ecology, when discussing the reinvigoration of his original fields of study since the 1960s. He studied the mass extinctions of the 20th century and their relationship to modern society, and identifying mass extinction as the greatest threat to Earth's future. In 1998 argued for an ecological approach at the Capitol:\nFrom the late 1970s Wilson was actively involved in the global conservation of biodiversity, contributing and promoting research. In 1984 he published \"Biophilia\", a work that explored the evolutionary and psychological basis of humanity's attraction to the natural environment. This work introduced the word biophilia which influenced the shaping of modern conservation ethics. In 1988 Wilson edited the \"BioDiversity\" volume, based on the proceedings of the first US national conference on the subject, which also introduced the term biodiversity into the language. This work was very influential in creating the modern field of biodiversity studies. In 2011, Wilson led scientific expeditions to the Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique and the archipelagos of Vanuatu and New Caledonia in the southwest Pacific. Wilson was part of the international conservation movement, as a consultant to Columbia University's Earth Institute, as a director of the American Museum of Natural History, Conservation International, The Nature Conservancy and the World Wildlife Fund.\nUnderstanding the scale of the extinction crisis led him to advocate for forest protection, including the \"Act to Save America's Forests\", first introduced in 1998 and reintroduced in 2008, but never passed. The Forests Now Declaration called for new markets-based mechanisms to protect tropical forests. Wilson once said destroying a rainforest for economic gain was like burning a Renaissance painting to cook a meal. In 2014, Wilson called for setting aside 50% of Earth's surface for other species to thrive in as the only possible strategy to solve the extinction crisis. The idea became the basis for his book \"Half-Earth\" (2016) and for the Half-Earth Project of the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation. Wilson's influence regarding ecology through popular science was discussed by Alan G. Gross in \"The Scientific Sublime\" (2018).\nWilson was instrumental in launching the Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) initiative with the goal of creating a global database to include information on the 1.9 million species recognized by science. Currently, it includes information on practically all known species. This open and searchable digital repository for organism traits, measurements, interactions and other data has more than 300 international partners and countless scientists providing global users' access to knowledge of life on Earth. For his part, Wilson discovered and described more than 400 species of ants.\nRetirement and death.\nIn 1996, Wilson officially retired from Harvard University, where he continued to hold the positions of Professor Emeritus and Honorary Curator in Entomology. \nHe fully retired from Harvard in 2002 at age 73. After stepping down, he published more than a dozen books, including a digital biology textbook for the iPad.\nHe founded the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation, which finances the PEN/E. O. Wilson Literary Science Writing Award and is an \"independent foundation\" at the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University. Wilson became a special lecturer at Duke University as part of the agreement.\nWilson and his wife, Irene, resided in Lexington, Massachusetts. He had a daughter, Catherine. He was preceded in death by his wife (on August 7, 2021) and died in nearby Burlington on December 26, 2021, at the age of 92.\nAwards and honors.\nWilson's scientific and conservation honors include:"}
