{"id": "5760", "revid": "36759873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5760", "title": "History of China", "text": "The history of China spans several millennia across a wide geographical area. Each region now considered part of the Chinese world has experienced periods of unity, fracture, prosperity, and strife. Chinese civilization first emerged in the Yellow River valley, which along with the Yangtze basin constitutes the geographic core of the Chinese cultural sphere. China maintains a rich diversity of ethnic and linguistic people groups. The traditional lens for viewing Chinese history is the dynastic cycle: imperial dynasties rise and fall, and are ascribed certain achievements. Throughout pervades the narrative that Chinese civilization can be traced as an unbroken thread many thousands of years into the past, making it one of the cradles of civilization. At various times, states representative of a dominant Chinese culture have directly controlled areas stretching as far west as the Tian Shan, the Tarim Basin, and the Himalayas, as far north as the Sayan Mountains, and as far south as the delta of the Red River.\nThe Neolithic period saw increasingly complex polities begin to emerge along the Yellow and Yangtze rivers. The Erlitou culture in the central plains of China is sometimes identified with the Xia dynasty (3rd millennium\u00a0BC) of traditional Chinese historiography. The earliest surviving written Chinese dates to roughly 1250\u00a0BC, consisting of divinations inscribed on oracle bones. Chinese bronze inscriptions, ritual texts dedicated to ancestors, form another large corpus of early Chinese writing. The earliest strata of received literature in Chinese include poetry, divination, and records of official speeches. China is believed to be one of a very few loci of independent invention of writing, and the earliest surviving records display an already-mature written language. The culture remembered by the earliest extant literature is that of the Zhou dynasty (256\u00a0BC), China's Axial Age, during which the Mandate of Heaven was introduced, and foundations laid for philosophies such as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism, and \"Wuxing\".\nChina was first united under a single imperial state by Qin Shi Huang in 221\u00a0BC. Orthography, weights, measures, and law were all standardized. Shortly thereafter, China entered its classical era with the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC220\u00a0AD), marking a critical period. A term for the Chinese language is still \"Han language\", and the dominant Chinese ethnic group is known as Han Chinese. The Chinese empire reached some of its farthest geographical extents during this period. Confucianism was officially sanctioned and its core texts were edited into their received forms. Wealthy landholding families independent of the ancient aristocracy began to wield significant power. Han technology can be considered on par with that of the contemporaneous Roman Empire: mass production of paper aided the proliferation of written documents, and the written language of this period was employed for millennia afterwards. China became known internationally for its sericulture. When the Han imperial order finally collapsed after four centuries, China entered an equally lengthy period of disunity, during which Buddhism began to have a significant impact on Chinese culture, while Calligraphy, art, historiography, and storytelling flourished. Wealthy families in some cases became more powerful than the central government. The Yangtze River valley was incorporated into the dominant cultural sphere.\nA period of unity began in 581 with the Sui dynasty, which soon gave way to the long-lived Tang dynasty (608\u2013907), regarded as another Chinese golden age. The Tang dynasty saw flourishing developments in science, technology, poetry, economics, and geographical influence. China's only officially recognized empress, Wu Zetian, reigned during the dynasty's first century. Buddhism was adopted by Tang emperors. \"Tang people\" is the other common demonym for the Han ethnic group. After the Tang fractured, the Song dynasty (960\u20131279) saw the maximal extent of imperial Chinese cosmopolitan development. Mechanical printing was introduced, and many of the earliest surviving witnesses of certain texts are wood-block prints from this era. Song scientific advancement led the world, and the imperial examination system gave ideological structure to the political bureaucracy. Confucianism and Taoism were fully knit together in Neo-Confucianism.\nEventually, the Mongol Empire conquered all of China, establishing the Yuan dynasty in 1271. Contact with Europe began to increase during this time. Achievements under the subsequent Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) include global exploration, fine porcelain, and many extant public works projects, such as those restoring the Grand Canal and Great Wall. Three of the four Classic Chinese Novels were written during the Ming. The Qing dynasty that succeeded the Ming was ruled by ethnic Manchu people. The Qianlong emperor ( 1735\u20131796) commissioned a complete encyclopaedia of imperial libraries, totaling nearly a billion words. Imperial China reached its greatest territorial extent of during the Qing, but China came into increasing conflict with European powers, culminating in the Opium Wars and subsequent unequal treaties.\nThe 1911 Xinhai Revolution, led by Sun Yat-sen and others, created the Republic of China. From 1927 to 1949, a costly civil war roiled between the Republican government under Chiang Kai-shek and the Communist-aligned Chinese Red Army, interrupted by the industrialized Empire of Japan invading the divided country until its defeat in the Second World War.\nAfter the Communist victory, Mao Zedong proclaimed the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949, with the ROC retreating to Taiwan. Both governments still claim sole legitimacy of the entire mainland area. The PRC has slowly accumulated the majority of diplomatic recognition, and Taiwan's status remains disputed to this day. From 1966 to 1976, the Cultural Revolution in mainland China helped consolidate Mao's power towards the end of his life. After his death, the government began economic reforms under Deng Xiaoping, and became the world's fastest-growing major economy. China had been the most populous nation in the world for decades since its unification, until it was surpassed by India in 2023.\nPrehistory.\nPaleolithic (1.7 Ma \u2013 12 ka).\nThe archaic human species of \"Homo erectus\" arrived in Eurasia sometime between 1.3 and 1.8 million years ago (Ma) and numerous remains of its subspecies have been found in what is now China. The oldest of these is the southwestern Yuanmou Man (; in Yunnan), dated to 1.7 Ma, which lived in a mixed bushland-forest environment alongside chalicotheres, deer, the elephant \"Stegodon\", rhinos, cattle, pigs, and the giant short-faced hyena. The better-known Peking Man (; near Beijing) of 700,000\u2013400,000 BP, was discovered in the Zhoukoudian cave alongside scrapers, choppers, and, dated slightly later, points, burins, and awls. Other \"Homo erectus\" fossils have been found widely throughout the region, including the northwestern Lantian Man in Shaanxi, as well minor specimens in northeastern Liaoning and southern Guangdong. The dates of most Paleolithic sites were long debated but have been more reliably established based on modern magnetostratigraphy: Majuangou at 1.66\u20131.55 Ma, Lanpo at 1.6 Ma, Xiaochangliang at 1.36 Ma, Xiantai at 1.36 Ma, Banshan at 1.32 Ma, Feiliang at 1.2 Ma and Donggutuo at 1.1 Ma. Evidence of fire use by \"Homo erectus\" occurred between 1\u20131.8\u00a0million years BP at the archaeological site of Xihoudu, Shanxi Province.\nThe circumstances surrounding the evolution of \"Homo erectus\" to contemporary \"H. sapiens\" is debated; the three main theories include the dominant \"Out of Africa\" theory (OOA), the regional continuity model and the admixture variant of the OOA hypothesis. Regardless, the earliest modern humans have been dated to China at 120,000\u201380,000 BP based on fossilized teeth discovered in Fuyan Cave of Dao County, Hunan. The larger animals which lived alongside these humans include the extinct \"Ailuropoda baconi\" panda, the \"Crocuta ultima\" hyena, the \"Stegodon\", and the giant tapir. Evidence of Middle Palaeolithic Levallois technology has been found in the lithic assemblage of Guanyindong Cave site in southwest China, dated to approximately 170,000\u201380,000 years ago.\nNeolithic.\nThe Neolithic Age in China is considered to have begun about 10,000 years ago. Because the Neolithic is conventionally defined by the presence of agriculture, it follows that the Neolithic began at different times in the various regions of what is now China. Agriculture in China developed gradually, with initial domestication of a few grains and animals gradually expanding with the addition of many others over subsequent millennia. The earliest evidence of cultivated rice, found by the Yangtze River, was carbon-dated to 8,000 years ago. Early evidence for millet agriculture in the Yellow River valley was radiocarbon-dated to about 7000 BC. The Jiahu site is one of the best preserved early agricultural villages (7000 to 5800 BC). At Damaidi in Ningxia, 3,172 cliff carvings dating to 6000\u20135000 BC have been discovered, \"featuring 8,453 individual characters such as the sun, moon, stars, gods and scenes of hunting or grazing\", according to researcher Li Xiangshi. Written symbols, sometimes called proto-writing, were found at the site of Jiahu, which is dated around 7000 BC, Damaidi around 6000 BC, Dadiwan from 5800 BC to 5400 BC, and Banpo dating from the 5th millennium BC. With agriculture came increased population, the ability to store and redistribute crops, and the potential to support specialist craftsmen and administrators, which may have existed at late Neolithic sites like Taosi and the Liangzhu culture in the Yangtze delta. The cultures of the middle and late Neolithic in the central Yellow River valley are known, respectively, as the Yangshao culture (5000 BC to 3000 BC) and the Longshan culture (3000 BC to 2000 BC). Pigs and dogs were the earliest-domesticated animals in the region, and after about 3000 BC domesticated cattle and sheep arrived from Western Asia. Wheat also arrived at this time but remained a minor crop. Fruit such as peaches, cherries and oranges, as well as chickens and various vegetables, were also domesticated in Neolithic China.\nBronze Age.\nBronze artifacts have been found at the Majiayao culture site (between 3100 and 2700\u00a0BC). The Bronze Age is also represented at the Lower Xiajiadian culture (2200\u20131600\u00a0BC) site in northeast China. Sanxingdui located in what is now Sichuan is believed to be the site of a major ancient city, of a previously unknown Bronze Age culture (between 2000 and 1200\u00a0BC). The site was first discovered in 1929 and then re-discovered in 1986. Chinese archaeologists have identified the Sanxingdui culture to be part of the state of Shu, linking the artifacts found at the site to its early legendary kings.\nFerrous metallurgy begins to appear in the late 6th century in the Yangtze valley. A bronze hatchet with a blade of meteoric iron excavated near the city of Gaocheng in Shijiazhuang (now Hebei) has been dated to the 14th century\u00a0BC. An Iron Age culture of the Tibetan Plateau has tentatively been associated with the Zhang Zhung culture described in early Tibetan writings.\nAncient China.\nChinese historians in later periods were accustomed to the notion of one dynasty succeeding another, but the political situation in early China was much more complicated. Hence, as some scholars of China suggest, the Xia and the Shang can refer to political entities that existed concurrently, just as the early Zhou existed at the same time as the Shang. This bears similarities to how China, both contemporaneously and later, has been divided into states that were not one region, legally or culturally.\nThe earliest period once considered historical was the legendary era of the sage-emperors Yao, Shun, and Yu. Traditionally, the abdication system was prominent in this period, with Yao yielding his throne to Shun, who abdicated to Yu, who founded the Xia dynasty.\nXia dynasty (c. 2070 \u2013 c. 1600 BC).\nThe Xia dynasty () is the earliest of the three dynasties described in much later traditional historiography, which includes the \"Bamboo Annals\" and Sima Qian's \"Shiji\" (). The Xia is generally considered mythical by Western scholars, but in China it is usually associated with the early Bronze Age site at Erlitou (1900\u20131500\u00a0BC) in Henan that was excavated in 1959. Since no writing was excavated at Erlitou or any other contemporaneous site, there is not enough evidence to prove whether the Xia dynasty ever existed. Some archaeologists claim that the Erlitou site was the capital of the Xia. In any case, the site of Erlitou had a level of political organization that would not be incompatible with the legends of Xia recorded in later texts. More importantly, the Erlitou site has the earliest evidence for an elite who conducted rituals using cast bronze vessels, which would later be adopted by the Shang and Zhou.\nShang dynasty (c. 1600 \u2013 c. 1046 BC).\nBoth archaeological evidence like oracle bones and bronzes, as well as transmitted texts attest the historical existence of the Shang dynasty (). Findings from the earlier Shang period come from excavations at Erligang (modern Zhengzhou). Findings have been found at Yinxu (near modern Anyang, Henan), the site of the final Shang capital during the Late Shang period (). The findings at Anyang include the earliest written record of the Chinese so far discovered: inscriptions of divination records in ancient Chinese writing on the bones or shells of animals\u2014the oracle bones, dating from .\nA series of at least twenty-nine kings reigned over the Shang dynasty. Throughout their reigns, according to the \"Shiji\", the capital city was moved six times. The final and most important move was to Yin during the reign of Wu Ding . The term Yin dynasty has been synonymous with the Shang dynasty in history, although it has lately been used to refer specifically to the latter half of the Shang dynasty.\nAlthough written records found at Anyang confirm the existence of the Shang dynasty, Western scholars are often hesitant to associate settlements that are contemporaneous with the Anyang settlement with the Shang dynasty. For example, archaeological findings at Sanxingdui suggest a technologically advanced civilization culturally unlike Anyang. The evidence is inconclusive in proving how far the Shang realm extended from Anyang. The leading hypothesis is that Anyang, ruled by the same Shang in the official history, coexisted and traded with numerous other culturally diverse settlements in the area that is now referred to as China proper.\nZhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BC).\nThe Zhou dynasty (1046 BC to about 256 BC) is the longest-lasting dynasty in Chinese history, though its power declined steadily over the almost eight centuries of its existence. In the late 2nd millennium BC, the Zhou dynasty arose in the Wei River valley of modern western Shaanxi Province, where they were appointed Western Protectors by the Shang. A coalition led by the ruler of the Zhou, King Wu, defeated the Shang at the Battle of Muye. They took over most of the central and lower Yellow River valley and enfeoffed their relatives and allies in semi-independent states across the region. Several of these states eventually became more powerful than the Zhou kings.\nThe kings of Zhou invoked the concept of the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize their rule, a concept that was influential for almost every succeeding dynasty. Like Shangdi, Heaven (\"tian\") ruled over all the other gods, and it decided who would rule China. It was believed that a ruler lost the Mandate of Heaven when natural disasters occurred in great number, and when, more realistically, the sovereign had apparently lost his concern for the people. In response, the royal house would be overthrown, and a new house would rule, having been granted the Mandate of Heaven.\nThe Zhou established two capitals Zongzhou (near modern Xi'an) and Chengzhou (Luoyang), with the king's court moving between them regularly. The Zhou alliance gradually expanded eastward into Shandong, southeastward into the Huai River valley, and southward into the Yangtze River valley.\nSpring and Autumn period (722\u2013476 BC).\nIn 771 BC, King You and his forces were defeated in the Battle of Mount Li by rebel states and Quanrong barbarians. The rebel aristocrats established a new ruler, King Ping, in Luoyang, beginning the second major phase of the Zhou dynasty: the Eastern Zhou period, which is divided into the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods. The former period is named after the famous \"Spring and Autumn Annals\". The sharply reduced political authority of the royal house left a power vacuum at the center of the Zhou culture sphere. The Zhou kings had delegated local political authority to hundreds of settlement states, some of them only as large as a walled town and surrounding land. These states began to fight against one another and vie for hegemony. The more powerful states tended to conquer and incorporate the weaker ones, so the number of states declined over time. By the 6th century BC most small states had disappeared by being annexed and just a few large and powerful principalities remained. Some southern states, such as Chu and Wu, claimed independence from the Zhou, who undertook wars against some of them (Wu and Yue). Many new cities were established in this period and society gradually became more urbanized and commercialized. Many famous individuals such as Laozi, Confucius and Sun Tzu lived during this chaotic period.\nConflict in this period occurred both between and within states. Warfare between states forced the surviving states to develop better administrations to mobilize more soldiers and resources. Within states there was constant jockeying between elite families. For example, the three most powerful families in the Jin state\u2014Zhao, Wei and Han\u2014eventually overthrew the ruling family and partitioned the state between them.\nThe Hundred Schools of Thought of classical Chinese philosophy began blossoming during this period and the subsequent Warring States period. Such influential intellectual movements as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism and Mohism were founded, partly in response to the changing political world. The first two philosophical thoughts would have an enormous influence on Chinese culture.\nWarring States period (476\u2013221 BC).\nAfter further political consolidations, seven prominent states remained during the 5th centuryBC. The years in which these states battled each other is known as the Warring States period. Though the Zhou king nominally remained as such until 256BC, he was largely a figurehead that held little real power.\nNumerous developments were made during this period in the areas of culture and mathematics\u2014including the \"Zuo Zhuan\" within the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\" (a literary work summarizing the preceding Spring and Autumn period), and the bundle of 21 bamboo slips from the Tsinghua collection, dated to 305BC\u2014being the world's earliest known example of a two-digit, base-10 multiplication table. The Tsinghua collection indicates that sophisticated commercial arithmetic was already established during this period.\nAs neighboring territories of the seven states were annexed (including areas of modern Sichuan and Liaoning), they were now to be governed under an administrative system of commanderies and prefectures. This system had been in use elsewhere since the Spring and Autumn period, and its influence on administration would prove resilient\u2014its terminology can still be seen in the contemporaneous \"sheng\" and \"xian\" (\"provinces\" and \"counties\") of contemporary China.\nThe state of Qin became dominant in the waning decades of the Warring States period, conquering the Shu capital of Jinsha on the Chengdu Plain; and then eventually driving Chu from its place in the Han River valley. Qin imitated the administrative reforms of the other states, thereby becoming a powerhouse. Its final expansion began during the reign of Ying Zheng, ultimately unifying the other six regional powers, and enabling him to proclaim himself as China's first emperor\u2014known to history as Qin Shi Huang.\nImperial era.\nEarly imperial China.\nQin dynasty (221\u2013206 BC).\nYing Zheng's establishment of the Qin dynasty () in 221 BC effectively formalised the region as a true empire for the first time in Chinese history, rather than a state, and its pivotal status probably led to \"Qin\" () later evolving into the Western term \"\". To emphasise his sole rule, Zheng proclaimed himself (; \"First Emperor\"); the title, derived from Chinese mythology, became the standard for subsequent rulers. Based in Xianyang, the empire was a centralized bureaucratic monarchy, a governing scheme which dominated the future of Imperial China. In an effort to improve the Zhou's perceived failures, this system consisted of more than 36 commanderies (; ), made up of counties (; ) and progressively smaller divisions, each with a local leader.\nMany aspects of society were informed by Legalism, a state ideology promoted by the emperor and his chancellor Li Si that was introduced at an earlier time by Shang Yang. In legal matters this philosophy emphasised mutual responsibility in disputes and severe punishments for crime, while economic practices included the general encouragement of agriculture and repression of trade. Reforms occurred in weights and measures, writing styles (seal script) and metal currency (Ban Liang), all of which were standardized. Traditionally, Qin Shi Huang is regarded as ordering a mass burning of books and the live burial of scholars under the guise of Legalism, though contemporary scholars express considerable doubt on the historicity of this event. Despite its importance, Legalism was probably supplemented in non-political matters by Confucianism for social and moral beliefs and the five-element Wuxing () theories for cosmological thought.\nThe Qin administration kept exhaustive records on their population, collecting information on their sex, age, social status and residence. Commoners, who made up over 90% of the population, \"suffered harsh treatment\" according to the historian Patricia Buckley Ebrey, as they were often conscripted into forced labor for the empire's construction projects. This included a massive system of imperial highways in 220 BC, which ranged around altogether. Other major construction projects were assigned to the general Meng Tian, who concurrently led a successful campaign against the northern Xiongnu peoples (210s BC), reportedly with 300,000 troops. Under Qin Shi Huang's orders, Meng supervised the combining of numerous ancient walls into what came to be known as the Great Wall of China and oversaw the building of a straight highway between northern and southern China. The emperor also oversaw the construction of his monumental mausoleum, which includes the well known Terracotta Army.\nAfter Qin Shi Huang's death the Qin government drastically deteriorated and eventually capitulated in 207 BC after the Qin capital was captured and sacked by rebels, which would ultimately lead to the establishment of the Han Empire.\nHan dynasty (206 BC \u2013 AD 220).\nWestern Han.\nThe Han dynasty was founded by Liu Bang, who emerged victorious in the Chu\u2013Han Contention that followed the fall of the Qin dynasty. A golden age in Chinese history, the Han dynasty's long period of stability and prosperity consolidated the foundation of China as a unified state under a central imperial bureaucracy, which was to last intermittently for most of the next two millennia. During the Han dynasty, territory of China was extended to most of the China proper and to areas far west. Confucianism was officially elevated to orthodox status and was to shape the subsequent Chinese civilization. Art, culture and science all advanced to unprecedented heights. With the profound and lasting impacts of this period of Chinese history, the dynasty name \"Han\" had been taken as the name of the Chinese people, now the dominant ethnic group in modern China, and had been commonly used to refer to Chinese language and written characters.\nAfter the initial laissez-faire policies of Emperors Wen and Jing, the ambitious Emperor Wu brought the empire to its zenith. To consolidate his power, he disenfranchised the majority of imperial relatives, appointing military governors to control their former lands. As a further step, he extended patronage to Confucianism, which emphasizes stability and order in a well-structured society. Imperial Universities were established to support its study. At the urging of his Legalist advisors, however, he also strengthened the fiscal structure of the dynasty with government monopolies.\nMajor military campaigns were launched to weaken the nomadic Xiongnu Empire, limiting their influence north of the Great Wall. Along with the diplomatic efforts led by Zhang Qian, the sphere of influence of the Han Empire extended to the states in the Tarim Basin, opened up the Silk Road that connected China to the west, stimulating bilateral trade and cultural exchange. To the south, various small kingdoms far beyond the Yangtze River Valley were formally incorporated into the empire.\nEmperor Wu also dispatched a series of military campaigns against the Baiyue tribes. The Han annexed Minyue in 135 BC and 111 BC, Nanyue in 111 BC, and Dian in 109 BC. Migration and military expeditions led to the cultural assimilation of the south. It also brought the Han into contact with kingdoms in Southeast Asia, introducing diplomacy and trade.\nAfter Emperor Wu the empire slipped into gradual stagnation and decline. Economically, the state treasury was strained by excessive campaigns and projects, while land acquisitions by elite families gradually drained the tax base. Various consort clans exerted increasing control over strings of incompetent emperors and eventually the dynasty was briefly interrupted by the usurpation of Wang Mang.\nXin dynasty.\nIn AD 9 the usurper Wang Mang claimed that the Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the Han dynasty and the rise of his own, and he founded the short-lived Xin dynasty. Wang Mang started an extensive program of land and other economic reforms, including the outlawing of slavery and land nationalization and redistribution. These programs, however, were never supported by the landholding families, because they favored the peasants. The instability of power brought about chaos, uprisings, and loss of territories. This was compounded by mass flooding of the Yellow River; silt buildup caused it to split into two channels and displaced large numbers of farmers. Wang Mang was eventually killed in Weiyang Palace by an enraged peasant mob in AD 23.\nEastern Han.\nEmperor Guangwu reinstated the Han dynasty with the support of landholding and merchant families at Luoyang, \"east\" of the former capital Xi'an. Thus, this new era is termed the Eastern Han dynasty. With the capable administrations of Emperors Ming and Zhang, former glories of the dynasty were reclaimed, with brilliant military and cultural achievements. The Xiongnu Empire was decisively defeated. The diplomat and general Ban Chao further expanded the conquests across the Pamirs to the shores of the Caspian Sea, thus reopening the Silk Road, and bringing trade, foreign cultures, along with the arrival of Buddhism. With extensive connections with the west, the first of several Roman embassies to China were recorded in Chinese sources, coming from the sea route in AD 166, and a second one in AD 284.\nThe Eastern Han dynasty was one of the most prolific eras of science and technology in ancient China, notably the historic invention of papermaking by Cai Lun, and the numerous scientific and mathematical contributions by the famous polymath Zhang Heng.\nSix Dynasties.\nThree Kingdoms (AD 220\u2013280).\nBy the 2nd century, the empire declined amidst land acquisitions, invasions, and feuding between consort clans and eunuchs. The Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out in AD 184, ushering in an era of warlords. In the ensuing turmoil, three states emerged, trying to gain predominance and reunify the land, giving this historical period its name. The classic historical novel \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\" dramatizes events of this period.\nThe warlord Cao Cao reunified the north in 208, and in 220 his son accepted the abdication of Emperor Xian of Han, thus initiating the Wei dynasty. Soon, Wei's rivals Shu and Wu proclaimed their independence. This period was characterized by a gradual decentralization of the state that had existed during the Qin and Han dynasties, and an increase in the power of great families.\nIn 266, the Jin dynasty overthrew the Wei and later unified the country in 280, but this union was short-lived.\nJin dynasty (AD 266\u2013420).\nThe Jin dynasty reunited China proper for the first time since the end of the Han dynasty, ending the Three Kingdoms era. However, the Jin dynasty was severely weakened by the War of the Eight Princes and lost control of northern China after non-Han Chinese settlers rebelled and captured Luoyang and Chang'an. In 317, the Jin prince Sima Rui, based in modern-day Nanjing, became emperor and continued the dynasty, now known as the Eastern Jin, which held southern China for another century. Prior to this move, historians refer to the Jin dynasty as the Western Jin.\nSixteen Kingdoms (AD 304\u2013439).\nNorthern China fragmented into a series of independent states known as the Sixteen Kingdoms, most of which were founded by Xiongnu, Xianbei, Jie, Di and Qiang rulers. These non-Han peoples were ancestors of the Turks, Mongols, and Tibetans. Many had, to some extent, been \"sinicized\" long before their ascent to power. In fact, some of them, notably the Qiang and the Xiongnu, had already been allowed to live in the frontier regions within the Great Wall since late Han times. During this period, warfare ravaged the north and prompted large-scale Han Chinese migration south to the Yangtze River Basin and Delta.\nNorthern and Southern dynasties (AD 420\u2013589).\nIn the early 5th century China entered a period known as the Northern and Southern dynasties, in which parallel regimes ruled the northern and southern halves of the country. In the south, the Eastern Jin gave way to the Liu Song, Southern Qi, Liang and finally Chen. Each of these Southern dynasties were led by Han Chinese ruling families and used Jiankang (modern Nanjing) as the capital. They held off attacks from the north and preserved many aspects of Chinese civilization, while northern barbarian regimes began to sinify.\nIn the north the last of the Sixteen Kingdoms was extinguished in 439 by the Northern Wei, a kingdom founded by the Xianbei, a nomadic people who unified northern China. The Northern Wei eventually split into the Eastern and Western Wei, which then became the Northern Qi and Northern Zhou. These regimes were dominated by Xianbei or Han Chinese who had married into Xianbei families. During this period most Xianbei people adopted Han surnames, eventually leading to complete assimilation into the Han.\nDespite the division of the country, Buddhism spread throughout the land. In southern China, fierce debates about whether Buddhism should be allowed were held frequently by the royal court and nobles. By the end of the era, Buddhists and Taoists had become much more tolerant of each other.\nMid-imperial China.\nSui dynasty (581\u2013618).\nThe short-lived Sui dynasty was a pivotal period in Chinese history. Founded by Emperor Wen in 581 in succession of the Northern Zhou, the Sui went on to conquer the Southern Chen in 589 to reunify China, ending three centuries of political division. The Sui pioneered many new institutions, including the government system of Three Departments and Six Ministries, imperial examinations for selecting officials from commoners, while improved on the systems of fubing system of the army conscription and the equal-field system of land distributions. These policies, which were adopted by later dynasties, brought enormous population growth, and amassed excessive wealth to the state. Standardized coinage was enforced throughout the unified empire. Buddhism took root as a prominent religion and was supported officially. Sui China was known for its numerous mega-construction projects. Intended for grains shipment and transporting troops, the Grand Canal was constructed, linking the capitals Daxing (Chang'an) and Luoyang to the wealthy southeast region, and in another route, to the northeast border. The Great Wall was also expanded, while series of military conquests and diplomatic maneuvers further pacified its borders. However, the massive invasions of the Korean Peninsula during the Goguryeo\u2013Sui War failed disastrously, triggering widespread revolts that led to the fall of the dynasty.\nTang dynasty (618\u2013907).\nThe Tang dynasty was a golden age of Chinese civilization, a prosperous, stable, and creative period with significant developments in culture, art, literature, particularly poetry, and technology. Buddhism became the predominant religion for the common people. Chang'an (modern Xi'an), the national capital, was the largest city in the world during its time.\nThe first emperor, Emperor Gaozu, came to the throne on 18 June 618, placed there by his son, Li Shimin, who became the second emperor, Taizong, one of the greatest emperors in Chinese history. Combined military conquests and diplomatic maneuvers reduced threats from Central Asian tribes, extended the border, and brought neighboring states into a tributary system. Military victories in the Tarim Basin kept the Silk Road open, connecting Chang'an to Central Asia and areas far to the west. In the south, lucrative maritime trade routes from port cities such as Guangzhou connected with distant countries, and foreign merchants settled in China, encouraging a cosmopolitan culture. The Tang culture and social systems were observed and adapted by neighboring countries, most notably Japan. Internally the Grand Canal linked the political heartland in Chang'an to the agricultural and economic centers in the eastern and southern parts of the empire. Xuanzang, a Chinese Buddhist monk, scholar, traveller, and translator travelled to India on his own and returned with \"over six hundred Mahayana and Hinayana texts, seven statues of the Buddha and more than a hundred sarira relics.\"\nThe prosperity of the early Tang dynasty was abetted by a centralized bureaucracy. The government was organized as \"Three Departments and Six Ministries\" to separately draft, review, and implement policies. These departments were run by royal family members and landed aristocrats, but as the dynasty wore on, were joined or replaced by scholar officials selected by imperial examinations, setting patterns for later dynasties.\nUnder the Tang \"equal-field system\" all land was owned by the Emperor and granted to each family according to household size. Men granted land were conscripted for military service for a fixed period each year, a military policy known as the \"fubing\" system. These policies stimulated a rapid growth in productivity and a significant army without much burden on the state treasury. By the dynasty's midpoint, however, standing armies had replaced conscription, and land was continuously falling into the hands of private owners and religious institutions granted exemptions.\nThe dynasty continued to flourish under the rule of Empress Wu Zetian, the only official empress regnant in Chinese history, and reached its zenith during the long reign of Emperor Xuanzong, who oversaw an empire that stretched from the Pacific to the Aral Sea with at least people. There were vibrant artistic and cultural creations, including works of the greatest Chinese poets, Li Bai and Du Fu.\nAt the zenith of prosperity of the empire, the An Lushan Rebellion from 755 to 763 was a watershed event. War, disease, and economic disruption devastated the population and drastically weakened the central imperial government. Upon suppression of the rebellion, regional military governors, known as \"jiedushi\", gained increasingly autonomous status as the central government lost its ability to control them. With loss of revenue from land tax, the central imperial government came to rely heavily on its salt monopoly. Externally, former submissive states raided the empire and the vast border territories were lost for centuries. Nevertheless, civil society recovered and thrived amidst the weakened imperial bureaucracy.\nIn late Tang period the empire was worn out by recurring revolts of the regional military governors, while scholar-officials engaged in fierce factional strife and corrupted eunuchs amassed immense power. Catastrophically, the Huang Chao Rebellion, from 874 to 884, devastated the entire empire for a decade. The sack of the southern port Guangzhou in 879 was followed by the massacre of most of its inhabitants, especially the large foreign merchant enclaves. By 881, both capitals, Luoyang and Chang'an, fell successively. The reliance on ethnic Han and Turkic warlords in suppressing the rebellion increased their power and influence. Consequently, the fall of the dynasty following Zhu Wen's usurpation led to an era of division.\nIn 808, 30,000 Shatuo under Zhuye Jinzhong defected from the Tibetans to Tang China and the Tibetans punished them by killing Zhuye Jinzhong as they were chasing them. The Uyghurs also fought against an alliance of Shatuo and Tibetans at Beshbalik. The Shatuo Turks under Zhuye Chixin (Li Guochang) served the Tang dynasty in fighting against their fellow Turkic people in the Uyghur Khaganate. In 839, when the Uyghur khaganate (Huigu) general Jueluowu (\u6398\u7f85\u52ff) rose against the rule of then-reigning Zhangxin Khan, he elicited the help from Zhuye Chixin by giving Zhuye 300 horses, and together, they defeated Zhangxin Khan, who then committed suicide, precipitating the subsequent collapse of the Uyghur Khaganate. In the next few years, when Uyghur Khaganate remnants tried to raid Tang borders, the Shatuo participated extensively in counterattacking the Uyghur Khaganate with other tribes loyal to Tang. In 843, Zhuye Chixin, under the command of the Han Chinese officer Shi Xiong with Tuyuhun, Tangut and Han Chinese troops, participated in a raid against the Uyghur khaganate that led to the slaughter of Uyghur forces at Shahu mountain.\nFive Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (907\u2013960).\nThe period of political disunity between the Tang and the Song, known as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, lasted from 907 to 960. During this half-century, China was in all respects a multi-state system. Five regimes, namely, (Later) Liang, Tang, Jin, Han and Zhou, rapidly succeeded one another in control of the traditional Imperial heartland in northern China. Among the regimes, rulers of (Later) Tang, Jin and Han were sinicized Shatuo Turks, which ruled over an ethnic majority of Han Chinese in the north. More stable and smaller regimes of mostly ethnic Han rulers coexisted in south and western China over the period, cumulatively constituted the \"Ten Kingdoms\".\nAmidst political chaos in the north, the strategic Sixteen Prefectures (region along today's Great Wall) were ceded to the emerging Khitan Liao dynasty, which drastically weakened the defense of China proper against northern nomadic empires. To the south, Vietnam gained lasting independence after being a Chinese prefecture for many centuries. With wars dominating in Northern China, there were mass southward migrations of population, which further enhanced the southward shift of cultural and economic centers in China. The era ended with the coup of Later Zhou general Zhao Kuangyin, and the establishment of the Song dynasty in 960, which eventually annihilated the remains of the \"Ten Kingdoms\" and reunified China.\nLate imperial China.\nSong, Liao, Jin, and Western Xia dynasties (960\u20131279).\nIn 960, the Song dynasty was founded by Emperor Taizu, with its capital established in Kaifeng (then known as Bianjing). In 979, the Song dynasty reunified most of China proper, while large swaths of the outer territories were occupied by sinicized nomadic empires. The Khitan Liao dynasty, which lasted from 907 to 1125, ruled over Manchuria, Mongolia, and parts of Northern China. Meanwhile, in what are now the north-western Chinese provinces of Gansu, Shaanxi, and Ningxia, the Tangut tribes founded the Western Xia dynasty from 1032 to 1227.\nAiming to recover the strategic sixteen prefectures lost in the previous dynasty, campaigns were launched against the Liao dynasty in the early Song period, which all ended in failure. Then in 1004, the Liao cavalry swept over the exposed North China Plain and reached the outskirts of Kaifeng, forcing the Song's submission and then agreement to the Chanyuan Treaty, which imposed heavy annual tributes from the Song treasury. The treaty was a significant reversal of Chinese dominance of the traditional tributary system. Yet the annual outflow of Song's silver to the Liao was paid back through the purchase of Chinese goods and products, which expanded the Song economy, and replenished its treasury. This dampened the incentive for the Song to further campaign against the Liao. Meanwhile, this cross-border trade and contact induced further sinicization within the Liao Empire, at the expense of its military might which was derived from its nomadic lifestyle. Similar treaties and social-economical consequences occurred in Song's relations with the Jin dynasty.\nWithin the Liao Empire the Jurchen tribes revolted against their overlords to establish the Jin dynasty in 1115. In 1125, the devastating Jin cataphract annihilated the Liao dynasty, while remnants of Liao court members fled to Central Asia to found the Qara Khitai Empire (Western Liao dynasty). Jin's invasion of the Song dynasty followed swiftly. In 1127, Kaifeng was sacked, a massive catastrophe known as the Jingkang Incident, ending the Northern Song dynasty. Later the entire north of China was conquered. The survived members of Song court regrouped in the new capital city of Hangzhou, and initiated the Southern Song dynasty, which ruled territories south of the Huai River. In the ensuing years, the territory and population of China were divided between the Song dynasty, the Jin dynasty and the Western Xia dynasty. The era ended with the Mongol conquest, as Western Xia fell in 1227, the Jin dynasty in 1234, and finally the Southern Song dynasty in 1279.\nDespite its military weakness, the Song dynasty is widely considered to be the high point of classical Chinese civilization. The Song economy, facilitated by technological advancement, had reached a level of sophistication probably unseen in world history before its time. The population soared to over and the living standards of common people improved tremendously due to improvements in rice cultivation and the wide availability of coal for production. The capital cities of Kaifeng and subsequently Hangzhou were both the most populous cities in the world for their time, and encouraged vibrant civil societies unmatched by previous Chinese dynasties. Although land trading routes to the far west were blocked by nomadic empires, there was extensive maritime trade with neighbouring states, such as in South-east Asia, which facilitated the use of Song coinage as the de facto currency of exchange. Giant wooden vessels equipped with compasses traveled throughout the China Seas and northern Indian Ocean. The concept of insurance was practised by merchants to hedge the risks of such long-haul maritime shipments. With prosperous economic activities, the historically first use of paper currency emerged in the western city of Chengdu, as a cheaper supplement to the existing copper coins.\nThe Song dynasty was considered to be the golden age of great advancements in science and technology of China, thanks to innovative scholar-officials such as Su Song (1020\u20131101) and Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095). Inventions such as the hydro-mechanical astronomical clock, the first continuous and endless power-transmitting chain, woodblock printing and paper money were all invented during the Song dynasty, further cementing its status.\nThere was court intrigue between the political reformers and conservatives, led by the chancellors Wang Anshi and Sima Guang, respectively. By the mid-to-late 13th century, the Chinese had adopted the dogma of Neo-Confucian philosophy formulated by Zhu Xi. Enormous literary works were compiled during the Song dynasty, such as the innovative historical narrative \"Zizhi Tongjian\" (\"Comprehensive Mirror to Aid in Government\"). The invention of movable-type printing further facilitated the spread of knowledge. Culture and the arts flourished, with grandiose artworks such as \"Along the River During the Qingming Festival\" and \"Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute\", along with great Buddhist painters such as the prolific Lin Tinggui.\nThe Song dynasty was also a period of major innovation in the history of warfare. Gunpowder, while invented in the Tang dynasty, was first put into practical use on the battlefield by the Song army, inspiring a succession of new firearms and siege engines designs. During the Southern Song dynasty, as its survival hinged decisively on guarding the Yangtze and Huai River against the cavalry forces from the north, the first standing navy in China was assembled in 1132, with its admiral's headquarters established at Dinghai. Paddle-wheel warships equipped with trebuchets could launch incendiary bombs made of gunpowder and lime to effect, as recorded in Song's victory over the invading Jin forces at the Battle of Tangdao in the East China Sea, and the Battle of Caishi on the Yangtze River in 1161.\nThe advances in civilisation during the Song dynasty came to an abrupt end following the devastating Mongol conquest of the North and subsequently other areas of the empire, during which the population sharply dwindled, with a marked contraction in economy. Despite viciously halting Mongol advances for more than three decades, the Southern Song capital Hangzhou fell in 1276, followed by the final annihilation of the Song standing navy at the Battle of Yamen in 1279.\nYuan dynasty (1271\u20131368).\nThe Yuan dynasty was formally proclaimed in 1271, when the Great Khan of Mongol, Kublai Khan, one of the grandsons of Genghis Khan, assumed the additional title of Emperor of China, and considered his inherited part of the Mongol Empire as a Chinese dynasty. In the preceding decades, the Mongols had conquered the Jin dynasty in Northern China, and the Southern Song dynasty fell in 1279 after a protracted and bloody war. The Mongol Yuan dynasty became the first conquest dynasty in Chinese history to rule the entirety of China proper and its population as an ethnic minority. The dynasty also directly controlled the Mongol heartland and other regions, inheriting the largest share of territory of the eastern Mongol empire, which roughly coincided with the modern area of China and nearby regions in East Asia. Further expansion of the empire was halted after defeats in the invasions of Japan and Vietnam. Following the previous Jin dynasty, the capital of Yuan dynasty was established at Khanbaliq (also known as Dadu, modern-day Beijing). The Grand Canal was reconstructed to connect the remote capital city to lively economic hubs in southern part of China, setting the precedence and foundation for Beijing to largely remain as the capital of the successive regimes of the unified Chinese mainland.\nA series of Mongol civil wars in the late 13th century led to the division of the Mongol Empire. In 1304 the emperors of the Yuan dynasty were upheld as the nominal Khagan over western khanates (the Chagatai Khanate, the Golden Horde and the Ilkhanate), which nonetheless remained \"de facto\" autonomous. The era was known as \"Pax Mongolica\", when much of the Asian continent was ruled by the Mongols. For the first and only time in history, the Silk Road was controlled entirely by a single state, facilitating the flow of people, trade, and cultural exchange. A network of roads and a postal system were established to connect the vast empire. Lucrative maritime trade, developed from the previous Song dynasty, continued to flourish, with Quanzhou and Hangzhou emerging as the largest ports in the world. Adventurous travelers from the far west, most notably the Venetian, Marco Polo, would settle in China for decades. Upon his return, his detail travel record inspired generations of medieval Europeans with the splendors of the far East. The Yuan dynasty was the first ancient economy, where paper currency, known at the time as \"Jiaochao\", was used as the predominant medium of exchange. Its unrestricted issuance in the late Yuan dynasty inflicted hyperinflation, which eventually brought the downfall of the dynasty.\nWhile the Mongol rulers of the Yuan dynasty adopted substantially to Chinese culture, their sinicization was of lesser extent compared to earlier conquest dynasties in Chinese history. For preserving racial superiority as the conqueror and ruling class, traditional nomadic customs and heritage from the Mongolian Steppe were held in high regard. On the other hand, the Mongol rulers also adopted flexibly to a variety of cultures from many advanced civilizations within the vast empire. Traditional social structure and culture in China underwent immense transform during the Mongol dominance. Large groups of foreign migrants settled in China, who enjoyed elevated social status over the majority Han Chinese, while enriching Chinese culture with foreign elements. The class of scholar officials and intellectuals, traditional bearers of elite Chinese culture, lost substantial social status. This stimulated the development of culture of the common folks. There were prolific works in \"zaju\" variety shows and literary songs (\"sanqu\"), which were written in a distinctive poetry style known as \"qu\". Novels of vernacular style gained unprecedented status and popularity.\nBefore the Mongol invasion, Chinese dynasties reported approximately inhabitants; after the conquest had been completed in 1279, the 1300 census reported roughly people. This major decline is not necessarily due only to Mongol killings. Scholars such as Frederick W. Mote argue that the wide drop in numbers reflects an administrative failure to record rather than an actual decrease; others such as Timothy Brook argue that the Mongols created a system of enserfment among a huge portion of the Chinese populace, causing many to disappear from the census altogether; other historians including William McNeill and David Morgan consider that plague was the main factor behind the demographic decline during this period. In the 14th century China suffered additional depredations from epidemics of plague, estimated to have killed around a quarter of the population of China.\nThroughout the Yuan dynasty, there was some general sentiment among the populace against the Mongol dominance. Yet rather than the nationalist cause, it was mainly strings of natural disasters and incompetent, corrupt governance that triggered widespread peasant uprisings since the 1340s. After the massive naval engagement at Lake Poyang, Zhu Yuanzhang prevailed over other rebel forces in the south. He proclaimed himself emperor and founded the Ming dynasty in 1368. The same year his northern expedition army captured the capital Khanbaliq. The Yuan remnants fled back to Mongolia and sustained the regime, but the period of Yuan dominance was effectively over for good. Other Mongol Khanates in Central Asia continued to exist after the fall of Yuan dynasty in China.\nMing dynasty (1368\u20131644).\nThe Ming dynasty was founded by Zhu Yuanzhang in 1368, who proclaimed himself as the Hongwu Emperor. The capital was initially set at Nanjing, and was later moved to Beijing from Yongle Emperor's reign onward.\nUrbanization increased as the population grew and as the division of labor grew more complex. Large urban centers, such as Nanjing and Beijing, also contributed to the growth of private industry. In particular, small-scale industries grew up, often specializing in paper, silk, cotton, and porcelain goods. For the most part, however, relatively small urban centers with markets proliferated around the country. Town markets mainly traded food, with some necessary manufactures such as pins or oil.\nDespite the xenophobia and intellectual introspection characteristic of the increasingly popular new school of neo-Confucianism, China under the early Ming dynasty was not isolated. Foreign trade and other contacts with the outside world, particularly Japan, increased considerably. Chinese merchants explored all of the Indian Ocean, reaching East Africa with the voyages of Zheng He.\nThe Hongwu Emperor, being the only founder of a Chinese dynasty who was also of peasant origin, had laid the foundation of a state that relied fundamentally in agriculture. Commerce and trade, which flourished in the previous Song and Yuan dynasties, were less emphasized. Neo-feudal landholdings of the Song and Mongol periods were expropriated by the Ming rulers. Land estates were confiscated by the government, fragmented, and rented out. Private slavery was forbidden. Consequently, after the death of the Yongle Emperor, independent peasant landholders predominated in Chinese agriculture. These laws might have paved the way to removing the worst of the poverty during the previous regimes. Towards later era of the Ming dynasty, with declining government control, commerce, trade and private industries revived.\nThe dynasty had a strong and complex central government that unified and controlled the empire. The emperor's role became more autocratic, although Hongwu Emperor necessarily continued to use what he called the \"Grand Secretariat\" to assist with the immense paperwork of the bureaucracy, including memorials (petitions and recommendations to the throne), imperial edicts in reply, reports of various kinds, and tax records. It was this same bureaucracy that later prevented the Ming government from being able to adapt to changes in society, and eventually led to its decline.\nThe Yongle Emperor strenuously tried to extend China's influence beyond its borders by demanding other rulers send ambassadors to China to present tribute. A large navy was built, including four-masted ships displacing 1,500\u00a0tons. A standing army of 1\u00a0million troops was created. The Chinese armies conquered and occupied Vietnam for around 20 years, while the Chinese fleet sailed the China seas and the Indian Ocean, cruising as far as the east coast of Africa. The Chinese gained influence in eastern Moghulistan. Several maritime Asian nations sent envoys with tribute for the Chinese emperor. Domestically, the Grand Canal was expanded and became a stimulus to domestic trade. Over 100,000\u00a0tons of iron per year were produced. Many books were printed using movable type. The imperial palace in Beijing's Forbidden City reached its current splendor. It was also during these centuries that the potential of south China came to be fully exploited. New crops were widely cultivated and industries such as those producing porcelain and textiles flourished.\nIn 1449 Esen Tayisi led an Oirat Mongol invasion of northern China which culminated in the capture of the Zhengtong Emperor at Tumu. Since then, the Ming became on the defensive on the northern frontier, which led to the Ming Great Wall being built. Most of what remains of the Great Wall of China today was either built or repaired by the Ming. The brick and granite work was enlarged, the watchtowers were redesigned, and cannons were placed along its length.\nAt sea the Ming became increasingly isolationist after the death of the Yongle Emperor. The treasure voyages which sailed the Indian Ocean were discontinued, and the maritime prohibition laws were set in place banning the Chinese from sailing abroad. European traders who reached China in the midst of the Age of Discovery were repeatedly rebuked in their requests for trade, with the Portuguese being repulsed by the Ming navy at Tuen Mun in 1521 and again in 1522. Domestic and foreign demands for overseas trade, deemed illegal by the state, led to widespread \"wokou\" piracy attacking the southeastern coastline during the rule of the Jiajing Emperor (1507\u20131567), which only subsided after the opening of ports in Guangdong and Fujian and much military suppression. In addition to raids from Japan by the \"wokou\", raids from Taiwan and the Philippines by the Pisheye also ravaged the southern coasts. The Portuguese were allowed to settle in Macau in 1557 for trade, which remained in Portuguese hands until 1999. After the Spanish invasion of the Philippines, trade with the Spanish at Manila imported large quantities of Mexican and Peruvian silver from the Spanish Americas to China. The Dutch entry into the Chinese seas was also met with fierce resistance, with the Dutch being chased off the Penghu islands in the Sino-Dutch conflicts of 1622\u20131624 and were forced to settle in Taiwan instead. The Dutch in Taiwan fought with the Ming in the Battle of Liaoluo Bay in 1633 and lost, and eventually surrendered to the Ming loyalist Koxinga in 1662, after the fall of the Ming dynasty.\nIn 1556, during the rule of the Jiajing Emperor, the Shaanxi earthquake killed about 830,000 people, the deadliest earthquake of all time.\nThe Ming dynasty intervened deeply in the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592\u20131598), which ended with the withdrawal of all invading Japanese forces in Korea, and the restoration of the Joseon dynasty, its traditional ally and tributary state. The regional hegemony of the Ming dynasty was preserved at a toll on its resources. Coincidentally, with Ming's control in Manchuria in decline, the Manchu (Jurchen) tribes, under their chieftain Nurhaci, broke away from Ming's rule, and emerged as a powerful, unified state, which was later proclaimed as the Qing dynasty. It went on to subdue the much weakened Korea as its tributary, conquered Mongolia, and expanded its territory to the outskirt of the Great Wall. The most elite army of the Ming dynasty was to station at the Shanhai Pass to guard the last stronghold against the Manchus, which weakened its suppression of internal peasants uprisings.\nQing dynasty (1644\u20131912).\nThe Qing dynasty (1644\u20131912) was the last imperial dynasty in China. Founded by the Manchus, it was the second conquest dynasty to rule the entirety of China proper, and roughly doubled the territory controlled by the Ming. The Manchus were formerly known as Jurchens, residing in the northeastern part of the Ming territory outside the Great Wall. They emerged as the major threat to the late Ming dynasty after Nurhaci united all Jurchen tribes and his son, Hong Taiji, declared the founding of the Qing dynasty in 1636. The Qing dynasty set up the Eight Banners system that provided the basic framework for the Qing military conquest. Li Zicheng's peasant rebellion captured Beijing in 1644 and the Chongzhen Emperor, the last Ming emperor, committed suicide. The Manchus allied with the Ming general Wu Sangui to seize Beijing, which was made the capital of the Qing dynasty, and then proceeded to subdue the Ming remnants in the south. During the Ming-Qing transition, when the Ming dynasty and later the Southern Ming, the emerging Qing dynasty, and several other factions like the Shun dynasty and Xi dynasty founded by peasant revolt leaders fought against each another, which, along with innumerable natural disasters at that time such as those caused by the Little Ice Age and epidemics like the Great Plague during the last decade of the Ming dynasty, caused enormous loss of lives and significant harm to the economy. In total, these decades saw the loss of as many as lives, but the Qing appeared to have restored China's imperial power and inaugurate another flowering of the arts. The early Manchu emperors combined traditions of Inner Asian rule with Confucian norms of traditional Chinese government and were considered a Chinese dynasty.\nThe Manchus enforced a 'queue order', forcing Han Chinese men to adopt the Manchu queue hairstyle. Officials were required to wear Manchu-style clothing \"Changshan\" (bannermen dress and \"Tangzhuang\"), but ordinary Han civilians were allowed to wear traditional Han clothing. Bannermen could not undertake trade or manual labor; they had to petition to be removed from banner status. They were considered aristocracy and were given annual pensions, land, and allotments of cloth. The Kangxi Emperor ordered the creation of the \"Kangxi Dictionary\", the most complete dictionary of Chinese characters that had been compiled.\nOver the next half-century, all areas previously under the Ming dynasty were consolidated under the Qing. Conquests in Central Asia in the eighteenth century extended territorial control. Between 1673 and 1681, the Kangxi Emperor suppressed the Revolt of the Three Feudatories, an uprising of three generals in Southern China who had been denied hereditary rule of large fiefdoms granted by the previous emperor. In 1683, the Qing staged an amphibious assault on southern Taiwan, bringing down the rebel Kingdom of Tungning, which was founded by the Ming loyalist Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong) in 1662 after the fall of the Southern Ming, and had served as a base for continued Ming resistance in Southern China. The Qing defeated the Russians at Albazin, resulting in the Treaty of Nerchinsk.\nBy the end of Qianlong Emperor's long reign in 1796, the Qing Empire was at its zenith. The Qing ruled more than one-third of the world's population, and had the largest economy in the world. By area it was one of the largest empires ever.\nIn the 19th century the empire was internally restive and externally threatened by western powers. The defeat by the British Empire in the First Opium War (1840) led to the Treaty of Nanking (1842), under which Hong Kong was ceded to Britain and importation of opium (produced by British Empire territories) was allowed. Opium usage continued to grow in China, adversely affecting societal stability. Subsequent military defeats and unequal treaties with other western powers continued even after the fall of the Qing dynasty.\nInternally the Taiping Rebellion (1851\u20131864), a Christian religious movement led by the \"Heavenly King\" Hong Xiuquan swept from the south to establish the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and controlled roughly a third of China proper for over a decade. The court in desperation empowered Han Chinese officials such as Zeng Guofan to raise local armies. After initial defeats, Zeng crushed the rebels in the Third Battle of Nanking in 1864. This was one of the largest wars in the 19th century in troop involvement; there was massive loss of life, with a death toll of about 20 million. A string of civil disturbances followed, including the Punti\u2013Hakka Clan Wars, Nian Rebellion, Dungan Revolt, and Panthay Rebellion. All rebellions were ultimately put down, but at enormous cost and with millions dead, seriously weakening the central imperial authority. China never rebuilt a strong central army, and many local officials used their military power to effectively rule independently in their provinces.\nYet the dynasty appeared to recover in the Tongzhi Restoration (1860\u20131872), led by Manchu royal family reformers and Han Chinese officials such as Zeng Guofan and his proteges Li Hongzhang and Zuo Zongtang. Their Self-Strengthening Movement made effective institutional reforms, imported Western factories and communications technology, with prime emphasis on strengthening the military. However, the reform was undermined by official rivalries, cynicism, and quarrels within the imperial family. The defeat of Yuan Shikai's modernized \"Beiyang Fleet\" in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894\u20131895) led to the formation of the New Army. The Guangxu Emperor, advised by Kang Youwei, then launched a comprehensive reform effort, the Hundred Days' Reform (1898). Empress Dowager Cixi, however, feared that precipitous change would lead to bureaucratic opposition and foreign intervention and quickly suppressed it.\nIn the summer of 1900, the Boxer Uprising opposed foreign influence and murdered Chinese Christians and foreign missionaries. When Boxers entered Beijing, the Qing government ordered all foreigners to leave, but they and many Chinese Christians were besieged in the foreign legations quarter. An Eight-Nation Alliance sent the Seymour Expedition of Japanese, Russian, British, Italian, German, French, American, and Austrian troops to relieve the siege, but they were routed and forced to retreat by Boxer and Qing troops at the Battle of Langfang. After the Alliance's attack on the Dagu Forts, the court declared war on the Alliance and authorised the Boxers to join with imperial armies. After fierce fighting at Tianjin, the Alliance formed the second, much larger Gaselee Expedition and finally reached Beijing; the Empress Dowager evacuated to Xi'an. The Boxer Protocol ended the war, exacting a tremendous indemnity.\nThe Qing court then instituted administrative and legal reforms known as the late Qing reforms, including abolition of the examination system. But young officials, military officers, and students debated reform, perhaps a constitutional monarchy, or the overthrow of the dynasty and the creation of a republic. They were inspired by an emerging public opinion formed by intellectuals such as Liang Qichao and the revolutionary ideas of Sun Yat-sen. A localised military uprising, the Wuchang uprising, began on 10 October 1911, in Wuchang (today part of Wuhan), and soon spread. The Republic of China was proclaimed on 1 January 1912, ending 2,000 years of dynastic rule.\nModern China.\nRepublic of China (since 1912).\nThe provisional government of the Republic of China was formed in Nanjing on 12 March 1912. Sun Yat-sen became President of the Republic of China, but he turned power over to Yuan Shikai, who commanded the New Army. Over the next few years, Yuan proceeded to abolish the national and provincial assemblies, and declared himself as the emperor of Empire of China in late 1915, in the style of an absolute monarchy. Yuan's imperial ambitions were fiercely opposed by his subordinates; faced with the rapidly growing prospect of violent rebellion, he abdicated in March 1916 and died of natural causes in June.\nYuan's death in 1916 left a power vacuum; the republican government (that had been nearly brought to its knees by his policies) was all but shattered. This opened the way for the Warlord Era, during which much of China was ruled by shifting coalitions of competing provincial military leaders and the Beiyang government, ushering in a short-lived period of uncertainty. Intellectuals, disappointed in the failure of the Republic, launched the New Culture Movement.\nIn 1919, the May Fourth Movement began as a response to the pro-Japanese terms imposed on China by the Treaty of Versailles following World War I. It quickly became a nationwide protest movement. The protests were a moral success as the cabinet fell and China refused to sign the Treaty of Versailles, which had awarded German holdings of Shandong to Japan. Memory of the mistreatment at Versailles fuels resentment into the 21st century.\nPolitical and intellectual ferment waxed strong throughout the 1920s and 1930s. According to Patricia Ebrey:\nIn the 1920s Sun Yat-sen established a revolutionary base in Guangzhou and set out to unite the fragmented nation. He welcomed assistance from the Soviet Union (itself fresh from Lenin's Communist takeover) and he entered into an alliance with the fledgling Chinese Communist Party (CCP). After Sun's death from cancer in 1925, one of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s, Chiang Kai-shek, seized control of the Nationalist Party (KMT) and succeeded in bringing most of south and central China under its rule in the Northern Expedition (1926\u20131927). Having defeated the warlords in the south and central China by military force, Chiang was able to secure the nominal allegiance of the warlords in the North and establish the Nationalist government in Nanjing. In 1927, Chiang turned on the CCP and relentlessly purged the Communists elements in his NRA. In 1934, driven from their mountain bases such as the Chinese Soviet Republic, the CCP forces embarked on the Long March across China's most desolate terrain to the northwest, a feat transformed into legend, where they established a guerrilla base at Yan'an in Shaanxi. During the Long March, the communists reorganised under a new leader, Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung).\nThe bitter Chinese Civil War between the Nationalists and the Communists continued, openly or clandestinely, through the 14-year-long Japanese occupation of various parts of the country (1931\u20131945). The two Chinese parties nominally formed a United Front to oppose the Japanese in 1937, during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945), which became a part of World War II, although this alliance was tenuous at best and disagreements, sometimes violent, between the forces were still common. Japanese forces committed numerous war atrocities against the civilian population, including biological warfare (see Unit 731) and the Three Alls Policy (\"Sank\u014d Sakusen\"), namely being: \"Kill All, Burn All and Loot All\". During the war, China was recognized as one of the Allied \"Big Four\" in the Declaration by United Nations, as a tribute to its enduring struggle against the invading Japanese. China was one of the four major Allies of World War II, and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war.\nFollowing the defeat of Japan in 1945, the war between the Nationalist government forces and the CCP resumed, after failed attempts at reconciliation and a negotiated settlement. By 1949, the CCP had established control over most of the country. Odd Arne Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang, and because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonised too many interest groups in China. Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against the Japanese. Meanwhile, the Communists told different groups, such as peasants, exactly what they wanted to hear, and cloaked themselves in the cover of Chinese Nationalism. During the civil war both the Nationalists and Communists carried out mass atrocities, with millions of non-combatants killed by both sides. These included deaths from forced conscription and massacres.\nThe Nationalists were slowly routed towards the South. When the Nationalist government forces were defeated by CCP forces in mainland China in 1949, the Nationalist government fled to Taiwan with its forces, along with Chiang and a large number of their supporters; the Nationalist government had taken effective control of Taiwan at the end of WWII as part of the overall Japanese surrender, when Japanese troops in Taiwan surrendered to the Republic of China troops there.\nUntil the early 1970s the ROC was recognised as the sole legitimate government of China by the United Nations, the United States and most Western nations, refusing to recognise the PRC on account of its status as a communist nation during the Cold War. This changed in 1971 when the PRC was seated in the United Nations, replacing the ROC. The KMT ruled Taiwan under martial law until 1987, with the stated goal of being vigilant against Communist infiltration and preparing to retake mainland China. Therefore, political dissent was not tolerated during that period, and crackdowns against dissidents were common.\nIn the 1990s the ROC underwent a major democratic reform, beginning with the 1991 resignation of the members of the Legislative Yuan and National Assembly elected in 1947. These groups were originally created to represent mainland China constituencies. Also lifted were the restrictions on the use of Taiwanese languages in the broadcast media and in schools. In 1996, the ROC held its first direct presidential election, and the incumbent president, KMT candidate Lee Teng-hui, was elected. In 2000, the KMT status as the ruling party ended when the DPP took power, only to regain its status in the 2008 election by Ma Ying-jeou.\nDue to the controversial nature of Taiwan's political status, the ROC is currently recognised by merely 12 UN member states and the Holy See as the legitimate government of \"China\".\nPeople's Republic of China (since 1949).\nMajor combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with the KMT pulling out of the mainland, with the government relocating to Taipei and maintaining control only over a few islands. The CCP was left in control of mainland China. On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic of China. \"Communist China\" and \"Red China\" were two common names for the PRC.\nThe PRC was shaped by a series of campaigns and five-year plans. The Great Leap Forward, a radical campaign that encompassed numerous attempted economic and social reforms, resulted in tens of millions of deaths. Mao's government carried out mass executions of landowners, instituted collectivisation and implemented the Laogai camp system. Execution, deaths from forced labor and other atrocities resulted in millions of deaths under Mao. In 1966 Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution, which continued until Mao's death a decade later. The Cultural Revolution, motivated by power struggles within the Party and a fear of the Soviet Union, led to a major upheaval in Chinese society.\nFollowing the Sino-Soviet split and motivated by concerns of invasion by either the Soviet Union or the United States, China initiated the Third Front campaign to develop national defense and industrial infrastructure in its rugged interior. Through its distribution of infrastructure, industry, and human capital around the country, the Third Front created favorable conditions for subsequent market development and private enterprise.\nIn 1972, at the peak of the Sino-Soviet split, Mao and Zhou Enlai met U.S. president Richard Nixon in Beijing to establish relations with the US. In the same year, the PRC was admitted to the United Nations in place of the Republic of China, with permanent membership of the Security Council.\nA power struggle followed Mao's death in 1976. The Gang of Four were arrested and blamed for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, marking the end of a turbulent political era in China. Deng Xiaoping outmaneuvered Mao's anointed successor chairman Hua Guofeng, and gradually emerged as the \"de facto\" leader over the next few years.\nDeng Xiaoping was the Paramount Leader of China from 1978 to 1992, although he never became the head of the party or state, and his influence within the Party led the country to significant economic reforms. The CCP subsequently loosened governmental control over citizens' personal lives and the communes were disbanded with many peasants receiving multiple land leases, which greatly increased incentives and agricultural production. In addition, there were many free market areas opened. The most successful free market area was Shenzhen. It is located in Guangdong and the property tax free area still exists today. This turn of events marked China's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open market environment, a system termed by some as market socialism, and officially by the CCP as Socialism with Chinese characteristics. The PRC adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982.\nIn 1989 the death of former general secretary Hu Yaobang helped to spark the Tiananmen Square protests of that year, during which students and others campaigned for several months, speaking out against corruption and in favour of greater political reform, including democratic rights and freedom of speech. However, they were eventually put down on 4 June when Army troops and vehicles entered and forcibly cleared the square, resulting in considerable numbers of fatalities. This event was widely reported, and brought worldwide condemnation and sanctions against the communist government.\nCCP general secretary and PRC president Jiang Zemin and PRC premier Zhu Rongji, both former mayors of Shanghai, led post-Tiananmen PRC in the 1990s. Under Jiang and Zhu's ten years of administration, the PRC's economic performance pulled an estimated 150\u00a0million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%. The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001. By 1997 and 1999, former European colonies of British Hong Kong and Portuguese Macau became the Hong Kong and Macau special administrative regions of the People's Republic of China, respectively.\nAlthough the PRC needed economic growth to spur its development, the government began to worry that rapid economic growth was degrading the country's natural resources and environment. Another concern was that certain sectors of society were not sufficiently benefiting from the PRC's economic development; one example of this was the wide gap between urban and rural areas in terms of development and prevalence of updated infrastructure. As a result, under former CCP general secretary and President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, the PRC initiated policies to address issues of equitable distribution of resources, but the outcome was not known . More than 40\u00a0million farmers were displaced from their land, usually for economic development, contributing to 87,000 demonstrations and riots across China in 2005. For much of the PRC's population, living standards improved very substantially and freedom increased, but political controls remained tight and rural areas poor.\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Defense, as many as 3 million Uyghurs and members of other Muslim minority groups are being held in China's internment camps which are located in the Xinjiang region and which Western news reports often label as \"concentration camps\". The camps were established in late 2010s under Xi Jinping's administration. Human Rights Watch says that they have been used to indoctrinate Uyghurs and other Muslims since 2017 as part of a people's war on terror, a policy announced in 2014. The use of these centers appears to have ended in 2019 following international pressure. Academic Kerry Brown attributes their closures beginning in late 2019 to the expense required to operate them. China has repeatedly denied this, asserting that the West has never been able to produce reliably-sourced satellite footage of any such detainment or resulting detention of minority groups. Although no comprehensive independent surveys of such centres have been performed as of June 2024, spot checks by journalists have found such sites converted or abandoned. In 2022, a Washington Post reporter checked a dozen sites previously identified as reeducation centres and found \"[m]ost of them appeared to be empty or converted, with several sites labeled as coronavirus quarantine facilities, teachers' schools and vocational schools.\" In 2023, Amnesty International said that they were \"witnessing more and more arbitrary detention\", but that detained individuals were being moved from the camps into the formal prison system.\nThe novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease COVID-19, was first detected in Wuhan, Hubei in 2019 and led to a global pandemic, causing the majority of the world to enter a period of lockdown for at least a year following."}
{"id": "5762", "revid": "48329772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5762", "title": "Civil engineering", "text": "Civil engineering is a professional engineering discipline that deals with the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including public works such as roads, bridges, canals, dams, airports, sewage systems, pipelines, structural components of buildings, and railways.\nCivil engineering is traditionally broken into a number of sub-disciplines. It is considered the second-oldest engineering discipline after military engineering, and it is defined to distinguish non-military engineering from military engineering. Civil engineering can take place in the public sector from municipal public works departments through to federal government agencies, and in the private sector from locally based firms to \"Fortune\" Global 500 companies.\nHistory.\nCivil engineering as a discipline.\nCivil engineering is the application of physical and scientific principles for solving the problems of society, and its history is intricately linked to advances in the understanding of physics and mathematics throughout history. Because civil engineering is a broad profession, including several specialized sub-disciplines, its history is linked to knowledge of structures, materials science, geography, geology, soils, hydrology, environmental science, mechanics, project management, and other fields.\nThroughout ancient and medieval history most architectural design and construction was carried out by artisans, such as stonemasons and carpenters, rising to the role of master builder. Knowledge was retained in guilds and seldom supplanted by advances. Structures, roads, and infrastructure that existed were repetitive, and increases in scale were incremental.\nOne of the earliest examples of a scientific approach to physical and mathematical problems applicable to civil engineering is the work of Archimedes in the 3rd century BC, including Archimedes' principle, which underpins our understanding of buoyancy, and practical solutions such as Archimedes' screw. Brahmagupta, an Indian mathematician, used arithmetic in the 7th century AD, based on Hindu-Arabic numerals, for excavation (volume) computations.\nCivil engineering profession.\nEngineering has been an aspect of life since the beginnings of human existence. The earliest practice of civil engineering may have commenced between 4000 and 2000 BC in ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley civilization, and Mesopotamia (ancient Iraq) when humans started to abandon a nomadic existence, creating a need for the construction of shelter. During this time, transportation became increasingly important leading to the development of the wheel and sailing.\nUntil modern times there was no clear distinction between civil engineering and architecture, and the term engineer and architect were mainly geographical variations referring to the same occupation, and often used interchangeably. The constructions of pyramids in Egypt (\u20132500 BC) constitute some of the first instances of large structure constructions in history. Other ancient historic civil engineering constructions include the Qanat water management system in modern-day Iran (the oldest is older than 3000 years and longer than ), the Parthenon by Iktinos in Ancient Greece (447\u2013438 BC), the Appian Way by Roman engineers (), the Great Wall of China by General Meng T'ien under orders from Ch'in Emperor Shih Huang Ti () and the stupas constructed in ancient Sri Lanka like the Jetavanaramaya and the extensive irrigation works in Anuradhapura. The Romans developed civil structures throughout their empire, including especially aqueducts, insulae, harbors, bridges, dams and roads.\nIn the 18th century, the term civil engineering was coined to incorporate all things civilian as opposed to military engineering. In 1747, the first institution for the teaching of civil engineering, the \u00c9cole Nationale des Ponts et Chauss\u00e9es, was established in France; and more examples followed in other European countries, like Spain. The first self-proclaimed civil engineer was John Smeaton, who constructed the Eddystone Lighthouse. In 1771 Smeaton and some of his colleagues formed the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers, a group of leaders of the profession who met informally over dinner. Though there was evidence of some technical meetings, it was little more than a social society.\nIn 1818 the Institution of Civil Engineers was founded in London, and in 1820 the eminent engineer Thomas Telford became its first president. The institution received a Royal charter in 1828, formally recognising civil engineering as a profession. Its charter defined civil engineering as:\nCivil engineering education.\nThe first private college to teach civil engineering in the United States was Norwich University, founded in 1819 by Captain Alden Partridge. The first degree in civil engineering in the United States was awarded by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1835. The first such degree to be awarded to a woman was granted by Cornell University to Nora Stanton Blatch in 1905.\nIn the UK during the early 19th century, the division between civil engineering and military engineering (served by the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich), coupled with the demands of the Industrial Revolution, spawned new engineering education initiatives: the Class of Civil Engineering and Mining was founded at King's College London in 1838, mainly as a response to the growth of the railway system and the need for more qualified engineers, the private College for Civil Engineers in Putney was established in 1839, and the UK's first Chair of Engineering was established at the University of Glasgow in 1840.\nEducation.\n\"Civil engineers\" typically possess an academic degree in civil engineering. The length of study is three to five years, and the completed degree is designated as a bachelor of technology, or a bachelor of engineering. The curriculum generally includes classes in physics, mathematics, project management, design and specific topics in civil engineering. After taking basic courses in most sub-disciplines of civil engineering, they move on to specialize in one or more sub-disciplines at advanced levels. While an undergraduate degree (BEng/BSc) normally provides successful students with industry-accredited qualifications, some academic institutions offer post-graduate degrees (MEng/MSc), which allow students to further specialize in their particular area of interest.\nPracticing engineers.\nIn most countries, a bachelor's degree in engineering represents the first step towards professional certification, and a professional body certifies the degree program. After completing a certified degree program, the engineer must satisfy a range of requirements including work experience and exam requirements before being certified. Once certified, the engineer is designated as a professional engineer (in the United States, Canada and South Africa), a chartered engineer (in most Commonwealth countries), a chartered professional engineer (in Australia and New Zealand), or a European engineer (in most countries of the European Union). There are international agreements between relevant professional bodies to allow engineers to practice across national borders.\nThe benefits of certification vary depending upon location. For example, in the United States and Canada, \"only a licensed professional engineer may prepare, sign and seal, and submit engineering plans and drawings to a public authority for approval, or seal engineering work for public and private clients.\" This requirement is enforced under provincial law such as the Engineers Act in Quebec. No such legislation has been enacted in other countries including the United Kingdom. In Australia, state licensing of engineers is limited to the state of Queensland. Almost all certifying bodies maintain a code of ethics which all members must abide by.\nEngineers must obey contract law in their contractual relationships with other parties. In cases where an engineer's work fails, they may be subject to the law of tort of negligence, and in extreme cases, criminal charges. An engineer's work must also comply with numerous other rules and regulations such as building codes and environmental law.\nSub-disciplines.\nThere are a number of sub-disciplines within the broad field of civil engineering. General civil engineers work closely with surveyors and specialized civil engineers to design grading, drainage, pavement, water supply, sewer service, dams, electric and communications supply. General civil engineering is also referred to as site engineering, a branch of civil engineering that primarily focuses on converting a tract of land from one usage to another. Site engineers spend time visiting project sites, meeting with stakeholders, and preparing construction plans. Civil engineers apply the principles of geotechnical engineering, structural engineering, environmental engineering, transportation engineering and construction engineering to residential, commercial, industrial and public works projects of all sizes and levels of construction.\nCoastal engineering.\n\"Coastal engineering\" is concerned with managing coastal areas. In some jurisdictions, the terms sea defense and coastal protection mean defense against flooding and erosion, respectively. Coastal defense is the more traditional term, but coastal management has become popular as well.\nConstruction engineering.\n\"Construction engineering\" involves planning and execution, transportation of materials, and site development based on hydraulic, environmental, structural, and geotechnical engineering. As construction firms tend to have higher business risk than other types of civil engineering firms, construction engineers often engage in more business-like transactions, such as drafting and reviewing contracts, evaluating logistical operations, and monitoring supply prices.\nEarthquake engineering.\n\"Earthquake engineering\" involves designing structures to withstand hazardous earthquake exposures. Earthquake engineering is a sub-discipline of structural engineering. The main objectives of earthquake engineering are to understand interaction of structures on the shaky ground; foresee the consequences of possible earthquakes; and design, construct and maintain structures to perform at earthquake in compliance with building codes.\nEnvironmental engineering.\n\"Environmental engineering\" is the contemporary term for sanitary engineering, though sanitary engineering traditionally had not included much of the hazardous waste management and environmental remediation work covered by environmental engineering. Public health engineering and environmental health engineering are other terms being used.\nEnvironmental engineering deals with treatment of chemical, biological, or thermal wastes, purification of water and air, and remediation of contaminated sites after waste disposal or accidental contamination. Among the topics covered by environmental engineering are pollutant transport, water purification, waste water treatment, air pollution, solid waste treatment, recycling, and hazardous waste management. Environmental engineers administer pollution reduction, green engineering, and industrial ecology. Environmental engineers also compile information on environmental consequences of proposed actions.\nForensic engineering.\n\"Forensic engineering\" is the investigation of materials, products, structures or components that fail or do not operate or function as intended, causing personal injury or damage to property. The consequences of failure are dealt with by the law of product liability. The field also deals with retracing processes and procedures leading to accidents in operation of vehicles or machinery. The subject is applied most commonly in civil law cases, although it may be of use in criminal law cases. Generally the purpose of a Forensic engineering investigation is to locate cause or causes of failure with a view to improve performance or life of a component, or to assist a court in determining the facts of an accident. It can also involve investigation of intellectual property claims, especially patents.\nGeotechnical engineering.\n\"Geotechnical engineering\" studies rock and soil supporting civil engineering systems. Knowledge from the field of soil science, materials science, mechanics, and hydraulics is applied to safely and economically design foundations, retaining walls, and other structures. Environmental efforts to protect groundwater and safely maintain landfills have spawned a new area of research called geo-environmental engineering.\nIdentification of soil properties presents challenges to geotechnical engineers. Boundary conditions are often well defined in other branches of civil engineering, but unlike steel or concrete, the material properties and behavior of soil are difficult to predict due to its variability and limitation on investigation. Furthermore, soil exhibits nonlinear (stress-dependent) strength, stiffness, and dilatancy (volume change associated with application of shear stress), making studying soil mechanics all the more difficult. Geotechnical engineers frequently work with professional geologists, Geological Engineering professionals and soil scientists.\nMaterials science and engineering.\n\"Materials science\" is closely related to civil engineering. It studies fundamental characteristics of materials, and deals with ceramics such as concrete and mix asphalt concrete, strong metals such as aluminum and steel, and thermosetting polymers including polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and carbon fibers.\n\"Materials engineering\" involves protection and prevention (paints and finishes). Alloying combines two types of metals to produce another metal with desired properties. It incorporates elements of applied physics and chemistry. With recent media attention on nanoscience and nanotechnology, materials engineering has been at the forefront of academic research. It is also an important part of forensic engineering and failure analysis.\nSite development and planning.\n\"Site development\", also known as \"site planning\", is focused on the planning and development potential of a site as well as addressing possible impacts from permitting issues and environmental challenges.\nStructural engineering.\n\"Structural engineering\" is concerned with the structural design and structural analysis of buildings, bridges, towers, flyovers (overpasses), tunnels, off shore structures like oil and gas fields in the sea, aerostructure and other structures. This involves identifying the loads which act upon a structure and the forces and stresses which arise within that structure due to those loads, and then designing the structure to successfully support and resist those loads. The loads can be self weight of the structures, other dead load, live loads, moving (wheel) load, wind load, earthquake load, load from temperature change etc. The structural engineer must design structures to be safe for their users and to successfully fulfill the function they are designed for (to be \"serviceable\"). Due to the nature of some loading conditions, sub-disciplines within structural engineering have emerged, including wind engineering and earthquake engineering.\nDesign considerations will include strength, stiffness, and stability of the structure when subjected to loads which may be static, such as furniture or self-weight, or dynamic, such as wind, seismic, crowd or vehicle loads, or transitory, such as temporary construction loads or impact. Other considerations include cost, constructibility, safety, aesthetics and sustainability.\nSurveying.\n\"Surveying\" is the process by which a surveyor measures certain dimensions that occur on or near the surface of the Earth. Surveying equipment such as levels and theodolites are used for accurate measurement of angular deviation, horizontal, vertical and slope distances. With computerization, electronic distance measurement (EDM), total stations, GPS surveying and laser scanning have to a large extent supplanted traditional instruments. Data collected by survey measurement is converted into a graphical representation of the Earth's surface in the form of a map. This information is then used by civil engineers, contractors and realtors to design from, build on, and trade, respectively. Elements of a structure must be sized and positioned in relation to each other and to site boundaries and adjacent structures.\nAlthough surveying is a distinct profession with separate qualifications and licensing arrangements, civil engineers are trained in the basics of surveying and mapping, as well as geographic information systems. Surveyors also lay out the routes of railways, tramway tracks, highways, roads, pipelines and streets as well as position other infrastructure, such as harbors, before construction.\nIn the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and most Commonwealth countries land surveying is considered to be a separate and distinct profession. Land surveyors are not considered to be engineers, and have their own professional associations and licensing requirements. The services of a licensed land surveyor are generally required for boundary surveys (to establish the boundaries of a parcel using its legal description) and subdivision plans (a plot or map based on a survey of a parcel of land, with boundary lines drawn inside the larger parcel to indicate the creation of new boundary lines and roads), both of which are generally referred to as Cadastral surveying. They collect data on important geological features below and on the land.\nConstruction surveying is generally performed by specialized technicians. Unlike land surveyors, the resulting plan does not have legal status. Construction surveyors perform the following tasks:\nTransportation engineering.\n\"Transportation engineering\" is concerned with moving people and goods efficiently, safely, and in a manner conducive to a vibrant community. This involves specifying, designing, constructing, and maintaining transportation infrastructure which includes streets, canals, highways, rail systems, airports, ports, and mass transit. It includes areas such as transportation design, transportation planning, traffic engineering, some aspects of urban engineering, queueing theory, pavement engineering, Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), and infrastructure management.\nMunicipal or urban engineering.\n\"Municipal engineering\" is concerned with municipal infrastructure. This involves specifying, designing, constructing, and maintaining streets, sidewalks, water supply networks, sewers, street lighting, municipal solid waste management and disposal, storage depots for various bulk materials used for maintenance and public works (salt, sand, etc.), public parks and cycling infrastructure. In the case of underground utility networks, it may also include the civil portion (conduits and access chambers) of the local distribution networks of electrical and telecommunications services. It can also include the optimization of waste collection and bus service networks. Some of these disciplines overlap with other civil engineering specialties, however municipal engineering focuses on the coordination of these infrastructure networks and services, as they are often built simultaneously, and managed by the same municipal authority. Municipal engineers may also design the site civil works for large buildings, industrial plants or campuses (i.e. access roads, parking lots, potable water supply, treatment or pretreatment of waste water, site drainage, etc.)\nWater resources engineering.\n\"Water resources engineering\" is concerned with the collection and management of water (as a natural resource). As a discipline, it therefore combines elements of hydrology, environmental science, meteorology, conservation, and resource management. This area of civil engineering relates to the prediction and management of both the quality and the quantity of water in both underground (aquifers) and above ground (lakes, rivers, and streams) resources. Water resource engineers analyze and model very small to very large areas of the earth to predict the amount and content of water as it flows into, through, or out of a facility. However, the actual design of the facility may be left to other engineers.\n\"Hydraulic engineering\" concerns the flow and conveyance of fluids, principally water. This area of civil engineering is intimately related to the design of pipelines, water supply network, drainage facilities (including bridges, dams, channels, culverts, levees, storm sewers), and canals. Hydraulic engineers design these facilities using the concepts of fluid pressure, fluid statics, fluid dynamics, and hydraulics, among others.\nCivil engineering systems.\nCivil engineering systems is a discipline that promotes using systems thinking to manage complexity and change in civil engineering within its broader public context. It posits that the proper development of civil engineering infrastructure requires a holistic, coherent understanding of the relationships between all of the crucial factors that contribute to successful projects while at the same time emphasizing the importance of attention to technical detail. Its purpose is to help integrate the entire civil engineering project life cycle from conception, through planning, designing, making, operating to decommissioning."}
{"id": "5763", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5763", "title": "Cantonese (disambiguation)", "text": "Cantonese is a language originating in Canton, Guangdong.\nCantonese may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5764", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5764", "title": "Charles Chaplin", "text": ""}
{"id": "5765", "revid": "6417401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5765", "title": "\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck", "text": "\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck (English: Chatalhoyuk ; ; also \"\u00c7atal H\u00f6y\u00fck\" and \"\u00c7atal H\u00fcy\u00fck\"; from Turkish \"\u00e7atal\" \"fork\" + \"h\u00f6y\u00fck\" \"tumulus\") is a tell (a mounded accretion due to long-term human settlement) of a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern Anatolia, which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5600 BC and flourished around 7000 BC. In July 2012, it was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\n\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck overlooks the Konya Plain, southeast of the present-day city of Konya (ancient Iconium) in Turkey, approximately from the twin-coned volcano of Mount Hasan. The eastern settlement forms a mound that would have risen about above the plain at the time of the latest Neolithic occupation. There is also a smaller settlement mound to the west and a Byzantine settlement a few hundred meters to the east. The prehistoric mound settlements were abandoned before the Bronze Age. A channel of the \u00c7ar\u015famba River once flowed between the two mounds, and the settlement was built on alluvial clay which may have been favorable for early agriculture. Currently, the closest river is the Euphrates.\nArchaeology.\nThe site was first excavated by James Mellaart in 1958. He later led a team which further excavated there for four seasons between 1961 and 1965. These excavations revealed this section of Anatolia as a centre of advanced culture in the Neolithic period. Excavation revealed 18 successive layers of buildings signifying various stages of the settlement and eras of history. The bottom layer of buildings can be dated as early as 7100 BC while the top layer of the later West Mound is from 5600 BC.\nMellaart was banned from Turkey for his involvement in the Dorak affair, in which he published drawings of supposedly important Bronze Age artifacts that later went missing. After this scandal, the site lay idle until 1993, when excavations began under the leadership of Ian Hodder, then at the University of Cambridge. The Hodder-led excavations ended in 2018. Hodder, a former student of Mellaart, chose the site as the first \"real world\" test of his then-controversial theory of post-processual archaeology. The site has always had a strong research emphasis upon engagement with digital methodologies, driven by the project's experimental and reflexive methodological framework. According to Mickel, Hodder's \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck Research Project (\u00c7RP) established itself as a site for progressive methodologiesin terms of adaptable and democratized recording, integration of computerized technologies, sampling strategies, and community involvement.\"\nNew excavations are being directed by Ali Umut T\u00fcrkcan from Anadolu University.\nCulture.\n \n\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck was composed entirely of domestic buildings with no obvious public buildings. While some of the larger rooms have rather ornate murals, the purpose of others remains unclear.\nInitial estimates suggested an average population of between 5,000 and 7,000. However, more recent work using revised ideas of the distribution of residential buildings, and employing archaeological and ethnographic data exploring building use, suggests that between 600 and 800 people would have lived at \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck East during an average year during the Middle phase (6700\u20136500 BC).\nThe sites were set up as large numbers of buildings clustered together. Households looked to their neighbors for help, trade, and possible marriage for their children. The inhabitants lived in mudbrick houses that were crammed together in an aggregate structure. No footpaths or streets were used between the dwellings, which were clustered in a honeycomb-like maze. Most were accessed by holes in the ceiling and doors on the side of the houses, with doors reached by ladders and stairs. The rooftops were effectively streets. The ceiling openings also served as the only source of ventilation, allowing smoke from the houses' open hearths and ovens to escape. \nHouses had plaster interiors accessed by squared-off timber ladders or steep stairs. These were usually on the south wall of the room, as were cooking hearths and ovens. The main rooms contained raised platforms that may have been used for a range of domestic activities. Typical houses contained two rooms for everyday activity, such as cooking and crafting. All interior walls and platforms were plastered to a smooth finish. Ancillary rooms were used as storage, and were accessed through low openings from main rooms.\nAll rooms were kept scrupulously clean. Archaeologists identified very little rubbish in the buildings, finding middens outside the ruins, with sewage and food waste, as well as significant amounts of ash from burning wood, reeds, and animal dung. In good weather, many daily activities may also have taken place on the rooftops, which may have formed a plaza. In later periods, large communal ovens appear to have been built on these rooftops. Over time, houses were renewed by partial demolition and rebuilding on a foundation of rubble, which was how the mound was gradually built up. As many as eighteen levels of settlement have been uncovered.\nAs a part of ritual life, the people of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck buried their dead within the village. Human remains have been found in pits beneath the floors and especially beneath hearths, the platforms within the main rooms, and beds. Bodies were tightly flexed before burial and were often placed in baskets or wound and wrapped in reed mats. Disarticulated bones in some graves suggest that bodies may have been exposed in the open air for a time before the bones were gathered and buried. In some cases, graves were disturbed, and the individual's head removed from the skeleton. These heads may have been used in rituals, as some were found in other areas of the community. In a woman's grave, spinning whorls were recovered and in a man's grave, stone axes. Some skulls were plastered and painted with ochre to recreate faces, a custom more characteristic of Neolithic sites in Syria and Neolithic Jericho than at sites closer by.\nVivid murals and figurines are found throughout the settlement on interior and exterior walls. Distinctive clay figurines of women, notably the Seated Woman of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck, have been found in the upper levels of the site. Although no identifiable temples have been found, the graves, murals, and figurines suggest that the people of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck had a religion rich in symbols. Rooms with concentrations of these items may have been shrines or public meeting areas. Predominant images include men with erect phalluses, hunting scenes, red images of the now extinct aurochs (wild cattle) and stags, and vultures swooping down on headless figures. Relief figures are carved on walls, such as of lionesses facing one another.\nHeads of animals, especially of cattle, were mounted on walls. A painting of the village, with the twin mountain peaks of Hasan Da\u011f in the background, is frequently cited as the world's oldest map, and the first landscape painting. However, some archaeologists question this interpretation. Stephanie Meece, for example, argues that it is more likely a painting of a leopard skin instead of a volcano, and a decorative geometric design instead of a map.\nReligion.\nA feature of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck are its female figurines. Mellaart, the original excavator, argued that these carefully made figurines, carved and molded from marble, blue and brown limestone, schist, calcite, basalt, alabaster, and clay, represented a female deity. Although a male deity existed as well, \"statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after Level\u00a0VI\". To date, eighteen levels have been identified. These figurines were found primarily in areas Mellaart believed to be shrines. The stately goddess seated on a throne flanked by two lionesses was found in a grain bin, which Mellaart suggests might have been a means of ensuring the harvest or protecting the food supply.\nWhereas Mellaart excavated nearly two hundred buildings in four seasons, the current excavator, Ian Hodder, spent an entire season excavating one building alone. Hodder and his team, in 2004 and 2005, began to believe that the patterns suggested by Mellaart were false. They found one similar figurine, but the vast majority did not imitate the Mother Goddess style that Mellaart suggested. Instead of a Mother Goddess culture, Hodder points out that the site gives little indication of a matriarchy or patriarchy.\nIn an article in the \"Turkish Daily News\", Hodder is reported as denying that \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck was a matriarchal society and quoted as saying \"When we look at what they eat and drink and at their social statues, we see that men and women had the same social status. There was a balance of power. Another example is the skulls found. If one's social status was of high importance in \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck, the body and head were separated after death. The number of female and male skulls found during the excavations is almost equal.\" In another article in the \"Hurriyet Daily News\" Hodder is reported to say \"We have learned that men and women were equally approached\".\nIn a report in September 2009 on the discovery of around 2000 figurines Hodder is quoted as saying:\nProfessor Lynn Meskell explained that while the original excavations had found only 200 figures, the new excavations had uncovered 2,000 figures, most of which depicted animals, and fewer than 5% of the figurines depicted women.\nEstonian folklorist Uku Masing has suggested as early as in 1976, that \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck was probably a hunting and gathering religion and the Mother Goddess figurine did not represent a female deity. He implied that perhaps a longer period of time was needed to develop symbols for agricultural rites. His theory was developed in the paper \"Some remarks on the mythology of the people of Catal H\u00fcy\u00fck\".\nEconomy.\n\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck has strong evidence of an egalitarian society, as no houses with distinctive features (belonging to royalty or religious hierarchy for example) have been found so far. The most recent investigations also reveal little social distinction based on gender, with men and women receiving equivalent nutrition and seeming to have equal social status, as typically found in Paleolithic cultures. Children observed domestic areas. They learned how to perform rituals and how to build or repair houses by watching the adults make statues, beads, and other objects.\n\u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck's spatial layout may be due to the close kin relations exhibited amongst the people. It can be seen, in the layout, that the people were \"divided into two groups who lived on opposite sides of the town, separated by a gully.\" Furthermore, because no nearby towns were found from which marriage partners could be drawn, \"this spatial separation must have marked two intermarrying kinship groups.\" This would help explain how a settlement so early on would become so large.\nIn the upper levels of the site, it becomes apparent that the people of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck were honing skills in agriculture and the domestication of animals. Female figurines have been found within bins used for storage of cereals, such as wheat and barley, and the figurines are presumed to be of a deity protecting the grain. Peas were also grown, and almonds, pistachios, and fruit were harvested from trees in the surrounding hills. Sheep were domesticated and evidence suggests the beginning of cattle domestication as well. However, hunting continued to be a major source of food for the community. Pottery and obsidian tools appear to have been major industries; obsidian tools were probably both used and also traded for items such as Mediterranean sea shells and flint from Syria. Noting the lack of hierarchy and economic inequality, historian and anti-capitalist author Murray Bookchin has argued that \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck was an early example of anarcho-communism.\nConversely, a 2014 paper argues that the picture of \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck is more complex and that while there seemed to have been an egalitarian distribution of cooking tools and some stone tools, unbroken quern-stones and storage units were more unevenly distributed. Private property existed but shared tools also existed. It was also suggested that \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck was becoming less egalitarian, with greater inter-generational wealth transmission.\nMuseum.\nIn 2023 a new state-of-the-art museum has opened on the site, constructed by the Konya municipality. In October 2024 a bookshop and cafe was added to the site. Non-Turkish visitors are charged five euros per person for entry. There are numerous visitor-activated information kiosks, some of which provide information in English as well as Turkish. Full information on all aspects of the various discoveries is available in eight rooms, including an underground reconstruction of a typical dwelling used by people of 90 centuries ago."}
{"id": "5766", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5766", "title": "Clement Attlee", "text": "Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee (3 January 18838 October 1967) was a British statesman who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1945 to 1951 and Leader of the Labour Party from 1935 to 1955. Attlee was Deputy Prime Minister during the wartime coalition government under Winston Churchill, and Leader of the Opposition on three occasions: from 1935 to 1940, briefly in 1945 and from 1951 to 1955. He remains the longest serving Labour leader.\nAttlee was born into an upper middle class family, the son of a wealthy London solicitor. After attending Haileybury College and the University of Oxford, he practised as a barrister. The volunteer work he carried out in London's East End exposed him to poverty, and his political views shifted leftwards thereafter. He joined the Independent Labour Party, gave up his legal career, and began lecturing at the London School of Economics; with his work briefly interrupted by service as an officer in the First World War. In 1919, he became mayor of Stepney and in 1922 was elected to Parliament as the Member for Limehouse. Attlee served in the first Labour minority government led by Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, and then joined the Cabinet during MacDonald's second minority (1929\u20131931). After retaining his seat in Labour's landslide defeat of 1931, he became the party's Deputy Leader. Elected Leader of the Labour Party in 1935, and at first advocating pacificism and opposing re-armament, he became a critic of Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement in the lead-up to the Second World War. Attlee took Labour into the wartime coalition government in 1940 and served under Winston Churchill, initially as Lord Privy Seal and then as Deputy Prime Minister from 1942.\nThe Labour Party, led by Attlee, won a landslide victory in the 1945 general election, on their post-war recovery platform. They inherited a country close to bankruptcy following the Second World War and beset by food, housing and resource shortages. Attlee led the construction of the first Labour majority government, which aimed to maintain full employment, a mixed economy and a greatly enlarged system of social services provided by the state. To this end, it undertook the nationalisation of public utilities and major industries, and implemented wide-ranging social reforms, including the passing of the National Insurance Act 1946 and National Assistance Act 1948, the formation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948, and the enlargement of public subsidies for council house building. His government also reformed trade union legislation, working practices and children's services; it created the National Parks system, passed the New Towns Act 1946 and established the town and country planning system. Attlee's foreign policy focused on decolonisation efforts, including the partition of India (1947), the independence of Burma and Ceylon, and the dissolution of the British mandates of Palestine and Transjordan. Attlee and Bevin encouraged the United States to take a vigorous role in the Cold War. He supported the Marshall Plan to rebuild Western Europe with American money and, in 1949, promoted the NATO military alliance against the Soviet bloc. After leading Labour to a narrow victory at the 1950 general election, he sent British troops to fight alongside South Korea in the Korean War.\nDespite his social reforms and economic programme food, housing and resource shortages persisted throughout his premiership, alongside recurrent currency crises and dependence on US aid. His party was narrowly defeated by the Conservatives in the 1951 general election, despite winning the most votes. He continued as Labour leader but retired after losing the 1955 general election and was elevated to the House of Lords, where he served until his death in 1967. In public, he was modest and unassuming, but behind the scenes his depth of knowledge, quiet demeanour, objectivity and pragmatism proved decisive. He is often ranked as one of the greatest British prime ministers, receiving particular praise for his government's welfare state reforms, creation of the NHS, continuation of the \"Special Relationship\" with the US, and involvement in NATO.\nEarly life.\nAttlee was born on 3 January 1883 in Putney, Surrey (now part of London), into an upper middle class family, the seventh of eight children. His father was Henry Attlee, a solicitor, and his mother was Ellen Bravery Watson, daughter of Thomas Simons Watson, secretary for the Art Union of London. His parents were \"committed Anglicans\" who read prayers and psalms each morning at breakfast.\nAttlee grew up in a two-storey villa with a large garden and tennis court, staffed by three servants and a gardener. His father, a political Liberal, had inherited family interests in milling and brewing, and became a senior partner in the law firm of Druces, also serving a term as president of the Law Society of England and Wales. In 1898 he purchased a estate, Comarques in Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex. At the age of nine, Attlee was sent to board at Northaw Place, a boys' preparatory school in Hertfordshire. In 1896 he followed his brothers to Haileybury College, where he was a middling student. He was influenced by the Darwinist views of his housemaster Frederick Webb Headley, and in 1899 he published an attack on striking London cab-drivers in the school magazine, predicting they would soon have to \"beg for their fares\".\nIn 1901, Attlee went up to University College, Oxford, reading modern history. He and his brother Tom \"were given a generous stipend by their father and embraced the university lifestyle\u2014rowing, reading and socializing\". He was later described by a tutor as \"level-headed, industrious, dependable man with no brilliance of style\u00a0... but with excellent sound judgement\". At university he had little interest in politics or economics, later describing his views at this time as \"good old fashioned imperialist conservative\". He graduated Bachelor of Arts in 1904 with second-class honours.\nAttlee then trained as a barrister at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in March 1906. He worked for a time at his father's law firm Druces and Attlee but did not enjoy the work, and had no particular ambition to succeed in the legal profession. He also played football for non-League club Fleet. Attlee's father died in 1908, leaving an estate valued for probate at \u00a375,394 (equivalent to \u00a3 in ).\nEarly career.\nIn 1906, Attlee became a volunteer at Haileybury House, a charitable club for working-class boys in Stepney in the East End of London run by his old school, and from 1907 to 1909 he served as the club's manager. Until then, his political views had been more conservative. However, after his shock at the poverty and deprivation he saw while working with the slum children, he came to the view that private charity would never be sufficient to alleviate poverty and that only direct action and income redistribution by the state would have any serious effect. This sparked a process that caused him to convert to socialism. He joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1908 and became active in local politics. In 1909, he stood unsuccessfully at his first election, as an ILP candidate for Stepney Borough Council.\nHe also worked briefly as a secretary for Beatrice Webb in 1909, before becoming a secretary for Toynbee Hall. He worked for Webb's campaign of popularisation of the Minority Report as he was very active in Fabian Society circles, in which he would go round visiting many political societies\u2014Liberal, Conservative and socialist\u2014to explain and popularise the ideas, as well as recruiting lecturers deemed suitable to work on the campaign. In 1911, he was employed by the Government as an \"official explainer\"\u2014touring the country to explain Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George's National Insurance Act. He spent the summer of that year touring Essex and Somerset on a bicycle, explaining the Act at public meetings. A year later, he became a lecturer at the London School of Economics, teaching social science and public administration. \nMilitary service.\nFollowing the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, Attlee applied to join the British Army. Initially his application was turned down, as his age of 31 was seen as being too old; however, he was eventually commissioned as a temporary lieutenant in the 6th (Service) Battalion, South Lancashire Regiment, on 30 September 1914. On 9 February 1915 he was promoted to captain, and on 14 March was appointed battalion adjutant. The 6th South Lancashires were part of the 38th Brigade of the 13th (Western) Division, which served in the Gallipoli campaign in Turkey. Attlee's decision to fight caused a rift between him and his older brother Tom, who, as a conscientious objector, spent much of the war in prison.\nAfter a period spent fighting in Gallipoli, Attlee collapsed after falling ill with dysentery and was put on a ship bound for England to recover. When he woke up he wanted to get back to action as soon as possible, and asked to be let off the ship in Malta, where he stayed in hospital in order to recover. His hospitalisation coincided with the Battle of Sari Bair, which saw a large number of his comrades killed. Upon returning to action, he was informed that his company had been chosen to hold the final lines during the evacuation of Suvla. As such, he was the penultimate man to be evacuated from Suvla Bay, the last being General Stanley Maude.\nThe Gallipoli Campaign had been engineered by the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Although it was unsuccessful, Attlee believed that it was a bold strategy which could have been successful if it had been better implemented on the ground. This led to an admiration for Churchill as a military strategist, something which would make their working relationship in later years productive.\nHe later served in the Mesopotamian campaign in what is now Iraq, where in April 1916 he was badly wounded, being hit in the leg by shrapnel from friendly fire while storming an enemy trench during the Battle of Hanna. The battle was an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the Siege of Kut, and many of Attlee's fellow soldiers were also wounded or killed. He was sent firstly to India, and then back to the UK to recover. On 18 December 1916 he was transferred to the Heavy Section of the Machine Gun Corps, and 1 March 1917 he was promoted to the temporary rank of major, leading him to be known as \"Major Attlee\" for much of the inter-war period. He would spend most of 1917 training soldiers at various locations in England. From 2 to 9 July 1917, he was the temporary commanding officer (CO) of the newly formed L (later 10th) Battalion, the Tank Corps at Bovington Camp, Dorset. From 9 July, he assumed command of the 30th Company of the same battalion; however, he did not deploy to France with it in December 1917, as he was transferred back to the South Lancashire Regiment on 28 November.\nAfter fully recovering from his injuries, he was sent to France in June 1918 to serve on the Western Front for the final months of the war. After being discharged from the Army in January 1919, he returned to Stepney, and returned to his old job lecturing part-time at the London School of Economics.\nEarly political career.\nLocal politics.\nAttlee returned to local politics in the immediate post-war period, becoming mayor of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, one of London's most deprived inner-city boroughs, in 1919. During his time as mayor, the council undertook action to tackle slum landlords who charged high rents but refused to spend money on keeping their property in habitable condition. The council served and enforced legal orders on homeowners to repair their property. It also appointed health visitors and sanitary inspectors, reducing the infant mortality rate, and took action to find work for returning unemployed ex-servicemen.\nIn 1920, while mayor, he wrote his first book, \"The Social Worker\", which set out many of the principles that informed his political philosophy and that were to underpin the actions of his government in later years. The book attacked the idea that looking after the poor could be left to voluntary action. He wrote that:In a civilised community, although it may be composed of self-reliant individuals, there will be some persons who will be unable at some period of their lives to look after themselves, and the question of what is to happen to them may be solved in three ways \u2013 they may be neglected, they may be cared for by the organised community as of right, or they may be left to the goodwill of individuals in the community. [...] Charity is only possible without loss of dignity between equals. A right established by law, such as that to an old age pension, is less galling than an allowance made by a rich man to a poor one, dependent on his view of the recipient's character, and terminable at his caprice. In 1921, George Lansbury, the Labour mayor of the neighbouring borough of Poplar, and future Labour Party leader, launched the Poplar Rates Rebellion; a campaign of disobedience seeking to equalise the poor relief burden across all the London boroughs. Attlee, who was a personal friend of Lansbury, strongly supported this. However, Herbert Morrison, the Labour mayor of nearby Hackney, and one of the main figures in the London Labour Party, strongly denounced Lansbury and the rebellion. During this period, Attlee developed a lifelong dislike of Morrison.\nMember of Parliament.\nAt the 1922 general election, Attlee became the Member of Parliament (MP) for the constituency of Limehouse in Stepney. At the time, he admired Ramsay MacDonald and helped him get elected as Labour Party leader at the 1922 leadership election. He served as MacDonald's Parliamentary Private Secretary for the brief 1922 parliament. His first taste of ministerial office came in 1924, when he served as Under-Secretary of State for War in the short-lived first Labour government, led by MacDonald.\nAttlee opposed the 1926 General Strike, believing that strike action should not be used as a political weapon. However, when it happened, he did not attempt to undermine it. At the time of the strike, he was chairman of the Stepney Borough Electricity Committee. He negotiated a deal with the Electrical Trade Union so that they would continue to supply power to hospitals, but would end supplies to factories. One firm, Scammell and Nephew Ltd, took a civil action against Attlee and the other Labour members of the committee (although not against the Conservative members who had also supported this). The court found against Attlee and his fellow councillors and they were ordered to pay \u00a3300 damages. The decision was later reversed on appeal, but the financial problems caused by the episode almost forced Attlee out of politics.\nIn 1927, he was appointed a member of the multi-party Simon Commission, a royal commission set up to examine the possibility of granting self-rule to India. Due to the time he needed to devote to the commission, and contrary to a promise MacDonald made to Attlee to induce him to serve on the commission, he was not initially offered a ministerial post in the second Labour government, which entered office after the 1929 general election. Attlee's service on the Commission equipped him with a thorough exposure to India and many of its political leaders. By 1933 he argued that British rule was alien to India and was unable to make the social and economic reforms necessary for India's progress. He became the British leader most sympathetic to Indian independence (as a dominion), preparing him for his role in deciding on independence in 1947.\nIn May 1930, Labour MP Oswald Mosley left the party after its rejection of his proposals for solving the unemployment problem, and Attlee was given Mosley's post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. In March 1931, he became Postmaster General, a post he held for five months until August, when the Labour government fell, after failing to agree on how to tackle the financial crisis of the Great Depression. That month MacDonald and a few of his allies formed a National Government with the Conservatives and Liberals, leading them to be expelled from Labour. MacDonald offered Attlee a job in the National Government, but he turned down the offer and opted to stay loyal to the main Labour party.\nAfter Ramsay MacDonald formed the National Government, Labour was deeply divided. Attlee had long been close to MacDonald and now felt betrayed\u2014as did most Labour politicians. During the course of the second Labour government, Attlee had become increasingly disillusioned with MacDonald, whom he came to regard as vain and incompetent, and of whom he later wrote scathingly in his autobiography. He would write:\nIn the old days I had looked up to MacDonald as a great leader. He had a fine presence and great oratorical power. The unpopular line which he took during the First World War seemed to mark him as a man of character. Despite his mishandling of the Red Letter episode, I had not appreciated his defects until he took office a second time. I then realised his reluctance to take positive action and noted with dismay his increasing vanity and snobbery, while his habit of telling me, a junior Minister, the poor opinion he had of all his Cabinet colleagues made an unpleasant impression. I had not, however, expected that he would perpetrate the greatest betrayal in the political history of this country\u00a0... The shock to the Party was very great, especially to the loyal workers of the rank-and-file who had made great sacrifices for these men.\nDeputy Labour Leader.\nThe general election held in October 1931 proved disastrous for the Labour Party, which lost over 200 seats, returning only 52 MPs to Parliament. The vast majority of the party's senior figures, including the Leader Arthur Henderson, lost their seats. Attlee, however, narrowly retained his Limehouse seat, with his majority being slashed from 7,288 to just 551. He was one of only three Labour MPs who had experience of government to retain their seats, along with George Lansbury and Stafford Cripps. Accordingly, Lansbury was elected Leader unopposed, with Attlee as his deputy.\nMost of the remaining Labour MPs after 1931 were elderly trade-union officials who could not contribute much to debates; Lansbury was in his 70s, and Stafford Cripps \u2013 another main figure of the Labour front-bench who had entered Parliament in January 1931 \u2013 lacked parliamentary experience. As one of the most capable and experienced of the remaining Labour MPs, Attlee therefore shouldered a lot of the burden of providing an opposition to the National Government in the years 1931 to 1935; during this time he had to extend his knowledge of subjects which he had not studied in any depth before (such as finance and foreign affairs) in order to provide an effective opposition to the government.\nAttlee effectively served as Labour's acting-leader for nine months from December 1933, after Lansbury fractured his thigh in an accident; this raised Attlee's public profile considerably. It was during this period, however, that personal financial problems almost forced Attlee to quit politics altogether. His wife had become ill, and at that time there was no separate salary for the Leader of the Opposition. On the verge of resigning from Parliament, he was persuaded to stay by Stafford Cripps, a wealthy socialist, who agreed to make a donation to party funds to pay him an additional salary until Lansbury could take over again.\nDuring 1932\u201333 Attlee flirted with, and then drew back from radicalism \u2013 influenced by Stafford Cripps, who was then on the radical wing of the party. He was briefly a member of the Socialist League, which had been formed by former Independent Labour Party (ILP) members who opposed the ILP's disaffiliation from the main Labour Party in 1932. At one point he agreed with the proposition put forward by Cripps that gradual reform was inadequate and that a socialist government would have to pass an emergency powers act, allowing it to rule by decree to overcome any opposition by vested interests until it was safe to restore democracy. He admired Oliver Cromwell's strong-armed rule and use of major generals to control England. After looking more closely at Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin, and even his former colleague Oswald Mosley (leader of the new blackshirt fascist movement in Britain), Attlee retreated from radicalism, distanced himself from the League, and argued instead that the Labour Party must adhere to constitutional methods and stand forthright for democracy and against totalitarianism either of the left or of the right. He always supported the crown, and as Prime Minister was close to King George\u00a0VI.\nLeader of the Opposition.\nGeorge Lansbury, a committed pacifist, resigned as the Leader of the Labour Party at the 1935 Party Conference on 8 October, after delegates voted in favour of sanctions against Italy for its aggression against Abyssinia. Lansbury had strongly opposed the policy, and felt unable to continue leading the party. Taking advantage of the disarray in the Labour Party, the Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin announced on 19 October that a general election would be held on 14 November. With no time for a leadership contest, the party agreed that Attlee should serve as interim leader, on the understanding that a leadership election would be held after the general election. Attlee therefore led Labour through the 1935 election, which saw the party stage a partial comeback from its disastrous 1931 performance, winning 38 per cent of the vote, the highest share Labour had won up to that point, and gaining over one hundred seats.\nAttlee stood in the subsequent leadership election, held soon afterward, where he was opposed by Herbert Morrison, who had just re-entered parliament in the recent election, and Arthur Greenwood: Morrison was seen as the favourite, but was distrusted by many sections of the party, especially the left wing. Arthur Greenwood meanwhile was a popular figure in the party; however, his leadership bid was severely hampered by his alcohol problem. Attlee was able to come across as a competent and unifying figure, particularly having already led the party through a general election. He went on to come first in both the first and second ballots, formally being elected Leader of the Labour Party on 3 December 1935.\nThroughout the 1920s and most of the 1930s, the Labour Party's official policy had been to oppose rearmament, instead supporting internationalism and collective security under the League of Nations. At the 1934 Labour Party Conference, Attlee declared that, \"We have absolutely abandoned any idea of nationalist loyalty. We are deliberately putting a world order before our loyalty to our own country. We say we want to see put on the statute book something which will make our people citizens of the world before they are citizens of this country\". During a debate on defence in Commons a year later, Attlee said \"We are told (in the White Paper) that there is danger against which we have to guard ourselves. We do not think you can do it by national defence. We think you can only do it by moving forward to a new world. A world of law, the abolition of national armaments with a world force and a world economic system. I shall be told that that is quite impossible\". Shortly after those comments, Adolf Hitler proclaimed that German rearmament offered no threat to world peace. Attlee responded the next day noting that Hitler's speech, although containing unfavourable references to the Soviet Union, created \"A chance to call a halt in the armaments race\u00a0... We do not think that our answer to Herr Hitler should be just rearmament. We are in an age of rearmaments, but we on this side cannot accept that position\".\nAttlee played little part in the events that would lead up to the abdication of Edward\u00a0VIII, for despite Baldwin's threat to step down if Edward attempted to remain on the throne after marrying Wallis Simpson, Labour was widely accepted not to be a viable alternative government, owing to the National Government's overwhelming majority in the Commons. Attlee, along with Liberal leader Archibald Sinclair, was eventually consulted with by Baldwin on 24 November 1936, and Attlee agreed with both Baldwin and Sinclair that Edward could not remain on the throne, firmly eliminating any prospect of any alternative government forming were Baldwin to resign.\nIn April 1936, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, introduced a Budget which increased the amount spent on the armed forces. Attlee made a radio broadcast in opposition to it, saying:\nIn June 1936, the Conservative MP Duff Cooper called for an Anglo-French alliance against possible German aggression and called for all parties to support one. Attlee condemned this: \"We say that any suggestion of an alliance of this kind\u2014an alliance in which one country is bound to another, right or wrong, by some overwhelming necessity\u2014is contrary to the spirit of the League of Nations, is contrary to the Covenant, is contrary to Locarno is contrary to the obligations which this country has undertaken, and is contrary to the professed policy of this Government\". At the Labour Party conference at Edinburgh in October Attlee reiterated that \"There can be no question of our supporting the Government in its rearmament policy\".\nHowever, with the rising threat from Nazi Germany, and the ineffectiveness of the League of Nations, this policy eventually lost credibility. By 1937, Labour had jettisoned its pacifist position and came to support rearmament and oppose Neville Chamberlain's policy of appeasement. However Attlee and the Labour Party strongly opposed conscription when it was passed in April 1939.\nAt the end of 1937, Attlee and a party of three Labour MPs visited Spain and visited the British Battalion of the International Brigades fighting in the Spanish Civil War. One of the companies was named the \"Major Attlee Company\" in his honour. Attlee was supportive of the Republican government in Spain, and at the 1937 Labour conference moved the wider Labour Party towards opposing what he considered the \"farce\" of the Non-Intervention Committee organised by the British and French governments. In the House of Commons, Attlee stated, \"I cannot understand the delusion that if Franco wins with Italian and German aid, he will immediately become independent. I think it is a ridiculous proposition.\" Dalton, the Labour Party's spokesman on foreign policy, also thought that Franco would ally with Germany and Italy. However, Franco's subsequent behaviour proved it was not such a ridiculous proposition. As Dalton later acknowledged, Franco skilfully maintained Spanish neutrality, whereas Hitler would likely have occupied Spain if Franco had lost the Civil War.\nIn 1938, Attlee opposed the Munich Agreement, in which Chamberlain negotiated with Hitler to give Germany the German-speaking parts of Czechoslovakia, the Sudetenland: We all feel relief that war has not come this time... we cannot, however, feel that peace has been established, but that we have nothing but an armistice in a state of war. We have been unable to go in for care-free rejoicing. We have felt that we are in the midst of a tragedy... [and] humiliation. This has not been a victory for reason and humanity. It has been a victory for brute force. At every stage of the proceedings there have been time limits laid down... [the] terms laid down as ultimata. We have seen to-day a gallant, civilised and democratic people betrayed and handed over to a ruthless despotism... The events of these last few days constitute one of the greatest diplomatic defeats that this country and France have ever sustained. There can be no doubt that it is a tremendous victory for Herr Hitler. Without firing a shot, by the mere display of military force, he has achieved a dominating position in Europe which Germany failed to win after four years of war. He has overturned the balance of power in Europe... [and] destroyed the last fortress of democracy in Eastern Europe which stood in the way of his ambition. He has opened his way to the food, the oil and the resources which he requires in order to consolidate his military power, and he has successfully defeated and reduced to impotence the forces that might have stood against the rule of violence. [...] The cause [of the crisis which we have undergone] was not the existence of minorities in Czechoslovakia; it was not that the position of the Sudeten Germans had become intolerable. It was not the wonderful principle of self-determination. It was because Herr Hitler had decided that the time was ripe for another step forward in his design to dominate Europe... The minorities question is no new one. [...] [And] short of a drastic and entire reshuffling of these populations there is no possible solution to the problem of minorities in Europe except toleration.\nHowever, the new Czechoslovakian state did not provide equal rights to the Slovaks and Sudeten Germans, with the historian Arnold J. Toynbee already having noted that \"for the Germans, Magyars and Poles, who account between them for more than one quarter of the whole population, the present regime in Czechoslovakia is not essentially different from the regimes in the surrounding countries\". Anthony Eden in the Munich debate acknowledged that there had been \"discrimination, even severe discrimination\" against the Sudeten Germans.\nIn 1937, Attlee wrote a book entitled \"The Labour Party in Perspective\" that sold fairly well in which he set out some of his views. He argued that there was no point in Labour compromising on its socialist principles in the belief that this would achieve electoral success. He wrote: \"I find that the proposition often reduces itself to this \u2013 that if the Labour Party would drop its socialism and adopt a Liberal platform, many Liberals would be pleased to support it. I have heard it said more than once that if Labour would only drop its policy of nationalisation everyone would be pleased, and it would soon obtain a majority. I am convinced it would be fatal for the Labour Party.\" He also wrote that there was no point in \"watering down Labour's socialist creed in order to attract new adherents who cannot accept the full socialist faith. On the contrary, I believe that it is only a clear and bold policy that will attract this support\".\nIn the late 1930s, Attlee sponsored a Jewish mother and her two children, enabling them to leave Germany in 1939 and move to the UK. On arriving in Britain, Attlee invited one of the children into his home in Stanmore, north-west London, where he stayed for several months.\nDeputy Prime Minister.\nAttlee remained as Leader of the Opposition when the Second World War broke out in September 1939. The ensuing disastrous Norwegian campaign would result in a motion of no confidence in Neville Chamberlain. Although Chamberlain survived this, the reputation of his administration was so badly and publicly damaged that it became clear a coalition government would be necessary. Even if Attlee had personally been prepared to serve under Chamberlain in an emergency coalition government, he would never have been able to carry Labour with him. Consequently, Chamberlain tendered his resignation, and Labour and the Conservatives entered a coalition government led by Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940, with Attlee joining the Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal on 12 May.\nAttlee and Churchill quickly agreed that the War Cabinet would consist of three Conservatives (initially Churchill, Chamberlain and Lord Halifax) and two Labour members (initially himself and Arthur Greenwood) and that Labour should have slightly more than one third of the posts in the coalition government. Attlee and Greenwood played a vital role in supporting Churchill during a series of War Cabinet debates over whether or not to negotiate peace terms with Hitler following the Fall of France in May 1940; both supported Churchill and gave him the majority he needed in the War Cabinet to continue Britain's resistance.\nOnly Attlee and Churchill remained in the War Cabinet from the formation of the Government of National Unity in May 1940 through to the election in May 1945. Attlee was initially the Lord Privy Seal, before becoming Britain's first ever Deputy Prime Minister in 1942, as well as becoming the Dominions Secretary and Lord President of the Council on 28 September 1943.\nAttlee himself played a generally low key but vital role in the wartime government, working behind the scenes and in committees to ensure the smooth operation of government. In the coalition government, three inter-connected committees effectively ran the country. Churchill chaired the first two, the War cabinet and the Defence Committee, with Attlee deputising for him in these, and answering for the government in Parliament when Churchill was absent. Attlee himself instituted, and later chaired the third body, the Lord President's Committee, which was responsible for overseeing domestic affairs. As Churchill was most concerned with overseeing the war effort, this arrangement suited both men. Attlee himself had largely been responsible for creating these arrangements with Churchill's backing, streamlining the machinery of government and abolishing many committees. He also acted as a conciliator in the government, smoothing over tensions which frequently arose between Labour and Conservative Ministers.\nMany Labour activists were baffled by the top leadership role for a man they regarded as having little charisma; Beatrice Webb wrote in her diary in early 1940:\n1945 election.\nFollowing the defeat of Nazi Germany and the end of the War in Europe in May 1945, Attlee and Churchill favoured the coalition government remaining in place until Japan had been defeated. However, Herbert Morrison made it clear that the Labour Party would not be willing to accept this, and Churchill was forced to tender his resignation as Prime Minister and call an immediate election.\nThe war had set in motion profound social changes within Britain and had ultimately led to a widespread popular desire for social reform. This mood was epitomised in the Beveridge Report of 1942, by the Liberal economist William Beveridge. The \"Report\" assumed that the maintenance of full employment would be the aim of post-war governments, and that this would provide the basis for the welfare state. Immediately upon its release, it sold hundreds of thousands of copies. All major parties committed themselves to fulfilling this aim, but most historians say that Attlee's Labour Party was seen by the electorate as the party most likely to follow it through.\nLabour campaigned on the theme of \"Let Us Face the Future\", positioning themselves as the party best placed to rebuild Britain following the war, and were widely viewed as having run a strong and positive campaign, while the Conservative campaign centred entirely on Churchill. Despite opinion polls indicating a strong Labour lead, opinion polls were then viewed as a novelty which had not proven their worth, and most commentators expected that Churchill's prestige and status as a \"war hero\" would ensure a comfortable Conservative victory. Before polling day, \"The Manchester Guardian\" surmised that \"the chances of Labour sweeping the country and obtaining a clear majority\u00a0... are pretty remote\". The \"News of the World\" predicted a working Conservative majority, while in Glasgow a pundit forecast the result as Conservatives 360, Labour 220, Others 60. Churchill, however, made some costly errors during the campaign. In particular, his suggestion during one radio broadcast that a future Labour Government would require \"some form of a gestapo\" to implement their policies was widely regarded as being in very bad taste and massively backfired.\nWhen the results of the election were announced on 26 July, they came as a surprise to most, including Attlee himself. Labour had won power by a huge landslide, winning 47.7 per cent of the vote to the Conservatives' 36 per cent. This gave them 393 seats in the House of Commons, a working majority of 146. This was the first time in history that the Labour Party had won a majority in Parliament. When Attlee went to see King George\u00a0VI at Buckingham Palace to be appointed Prime Minister, the notoriously laconic Attlee and the famously tongue-tied King stood in silence; Attlee finally volunteered the remark, \"I've won the election\". The King replied \"I know. I heard it on the Six O'Clock News\".\nPrime Minister.\nDomestic policy.\nFrancis (1995) argues there was consensus both in the Labour's national executive committee and at party conferences on a definition of socialism that stressed moral improvement as well as material improvement. The Attlee government was committed to rebuilding British society as an ethical commonwealth, using public ownership and controls to abolish extremes of wealth and poverty. Labour's ideology contrasted sharply with the contemporary Conservative Party's defence of individualism, inherited privileges, and income inequality. On 5 July 1948, Clement Attlee replied to a letter dated 22 June from James Murray and ten other MPs who raised concerns about West Indians who arrived on board the . As for the prime minister himself, he was not much focused on economic policy, letting others handle the issues.\nNationalisation.\nAttlee's government also carried out their manifesto commitment for nationalisation of basic industries and public utilities. The Bank of England and civil aviation were nationalised in 1946. Coal mining, the railways, road haulage, canals and Cable and Wireless were nationalised in 1947, and electricity and gas followed in 1948. The steel industry was nationalised in 1951. By 1951 about 20 per cent of the British economy had been taken into public ownership.\nNationalisation failed to provide workers with a greater say in the running of the industries in which they worked. It did, however, bring about significant material gains for workers in the form of higher wages, reduced working hours, and improvements in working conditions, especially in regards to safety. As historian Eric Shaw noted of the years following nationalisation, the electricity and gas supply companies became \"impressive models of public enterprise\" in terms of efficiency, and the National Coal Board was not only profitable, but working conditions for miners had significantly improved as well.\nWithin a few years of nationalisation, a number of progressive measures had been carried out which did much to improve conditions in the mines, including better pay, a five-day working week, a national safety scheme (with proper standards at all the collieries), a ban on boys under the age of 16 going underground, the introduction of training for newcomers before going down to the coalface, and the making of pithead baths into a standard facility.\nThe newly established National Coal Board offered sick pay and holiday pay to miners. As noted by Martin Francis:\nUnion leaders saw nationalisation as a means to pursue a more advantageous position within a framework of continued conflict, rather than as an opportunity to replace the old adversarial form of industrial relations. Moreover, most workers in nationalised industries exhibited an essentially instrumentalist attitude, favouring public ownership because it secured job security and improved wages rather than because it promised the creation of a new set of socialist relationships in the workplace.\nHealth.\nAttlee's Health Minister, Aneurin Bevan, fought hard against the general disapproval of the medical establishment, including the British Medical Association, by creating the National Health Service in 1948. This was a publicly funded healthcare system, which offered treatment for all, regardless of income, free of charge at the point of use. Reflecting pent-up demand that had long existed for medical services, the NHS treated some 8.5 million dental patients and dispensed more than 5 million pairs of spectacles during its first year of operation.\nConsultants benefited from the new system by being paid salaries that provided an acceptable standard of living without the need for them to resort to private practice. The NHS brought major improvements in the health of working-class people, with deaths from diphtheria, pneumonia, and tuberculosis significantly reduced. Although there were often disputes about its organisation and funding, British political parties continued to voice their general support for the NHS in order to remain electable.\nIn the field of health care, funds were allocated to modernisation and extension schemes aimed at improving administrative efficiency. Improvements were made in nursing accommodation in order to recruit more nurses and reduce labour shortages which were keeping 60,000 beds out of use, and efforts were made to reduce the imbalance \"between an excess of fever and tuberculosis (TB) beds and a shortage of maternity beds\".\nBCG vaccinations were introduced for the protection of medical students, midwives, nurses, and contacts of patients with tuberculosis, a pension scheme was set up for employees of the newly established NHS, The National Health Service (Superannuation) Regulations 1947 laid down a number of provisions for beneficiaries including an officer's pension and retiring allowance, an injury allowance, a short service gratuity, a death gratuity, a widow's pension, and supplementary payments in the case of special classes of officers. Provision was also made for the allocation of part of pension or injury allowance to spouse of dependent.\nThe Radioactive Substances Act 1948 set out general provisions to control radioactive substances. Numerous lesser reforms were also introduced, some of which were of great benefit to certain segments of British society, such as the mentally deficient and the blind. Between 1948 and 1951, Attlee's government increased spending on health from \u00a36 billion to \u00a311 billion: an increase of over 80%, and from 2.1% to 3.6% of GDP.\nWelfare.\nThe government set about implementing the Wartime plans of William Beveridge's plans for the creation of a 'cradle to grave' welfare state, and set in place an entirely new system of social security. Among the most important pieces of legislation was the National Insurance Act 1946, in which people in work paid a flat rate of national insurance. In return, they (and the wives of male contributors) were eligible for flat-rate pensions, sickness benefit, unemployment benefit, and funeral benefit. Various provisions were included in the National Insurance Act 1946 including unemployment and sickness benefit, maternity grant and attendance allowance, maternity allowance, widow's benefit, widow's pensions in special cases, guardian's allowance, retirement pension, and death grant.\nVarious other pieces of legislation provided for child benefit and support for people with no other source of income. In 1949, unemployment, sickness and maternity benefits were exempted from taxation.\nA block grant introduced in 1948 helped the social services provided by local authorities. Personal Social Services or welfare services were developed in 1948 for individual and families in general, particularly special groups such as the mentally disordered, deprived children, the elderly, and the handicapped.\nThe Attlee Government increased pensions and other benefits, with pensions raised to become more of a living income than they had ever been. War pensions and allowances (for both World Wars) were increased by an act of 1946 which gave the wounded man with an allowance for his wife and children if he married after he had been wounded, thereby removing a grievance of more than twenty years standing. Other improvements were made in war pensions during Attlee's tenure as prime minister. A Constant Attendance Allowance was tripled, an Unemployability Allowance was tripled from 10s to 30s a week, and a special hardship allowance of up to \u00a31 a week was introduced. In addition, the 1951 Budget made further improvements in the supplementary allowances for many war pensioners. From 1945 onwards, three out of every four pension claims had been successful, whilst after the First World War only one pension claim in three was allowed. Under the Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, employees of a body representative of local authorities or of the officers of local authorities could be admitted \"on suitable terms to the superannuation fund of a local authority\". In 1951, a comforts allowance was introduced that was automatically paid to war pensioners \"receiving unemployability supplement and constant attendance allowance\".\nThe Personal injuries (Civilians) Scheme of 1947 included various benefits such as an exceptional maximum rate of constant attendance allowance of 40s a week, and an allowance for wear and tear of clothing caused by the use of artificial limbs and appliances. In addition, allowances payable while a pensioner underwent inpatient treatment \"are normally no longer subject to a deduction in respect of decreased home expenditure.\" Various changes were also made in respect of gainfully employed persons who sustained war injuries and civil defence volunteers who war service injuries. These included the provision of allowances for the wife and children for injured persons receiving injury allowance or disablement pension, amendments to the provisions for an allowance to a pensioner deemed unemployable by reason of his pensioned disablement \"to secure that he receives in the aggregate by way of unemployability allowance and any social service benefits for which he is eligible at least 20s. a week in addition to his pension,\" increases in the allowance payable for a wife of a person receiving treatment allowance, unemployability allowance or injury allowance under certain conditions and \"if no allowance is payable for a wife, an allowance may be granted for a dependant adult,\" and a social hardship allowance for partially disabled men \"who, , though not unemployable, is prevented by his pensioned disablement from resuming his former occupation or taking up one of equivalent standard.\" Also, \"Where a man dies as the direct result of a qualifying injury his widow may be awarded a pension (with allowances for his children) without regard to the date of marriage.\"\nA more extensive system of social welfare benefits had been established by the Attlee Government, which did much to reduce acute social deprivation. The cumulative impact of the Attlee's Government's health and welfare policies was such that all the indices of health (such as statistics of school medical or dental officers, or of medical officers of health) showed signs of improvement, with continual improvements in survival rates for infants and increased life expectancy for the elderly. The success of the Attlee Government's welfare legislation in reducing poverty was such that, in the general election of 1950, according to one study, \"Labour propaganda could make much of the claim that social security had eradicated the most abject destitution of the 1930s\".\nEducation.\nThe Attlee government ensured provisions of the Education Act 1944 were fully implemented, with free secondary education becoming a right for the first time. Fees in state grammar schools were eliminated, while new, modern secondary schools were constructed.\nThe school leaving age was raised to 15 in 1947, an accomplishment helped brought into fruition by initiatives such as the HORSA (\"Huts Operation for Raising the School-leaving Age\") scheme and the S.F.O.R.S.A. (furniture) scheme. University scholarships were introduced to ensure that no one who was qualified \"should be deprived of a university education for financial reasons\", while a large school building programme was organised. A rapid increase in the number of trained teachers took place, and the number of new school places was increased. Under the Education Act of 1946 and the Education (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, local authorities were empowered to provide clothing to pupils.\nIncreased Treasury funds were made available for education, particularly for upgrading school buildings suffering from years of neglect and war damage. Prefabricated classrooms were built, and 928 new primary schools were constructed between 1945 and 1950. The provision of free school meals was expanded, and opportunities for university entrants were increased. State scholarships to universities were increased, and the government adopted a policy of supplementing university scholarships awards to a level sufficient to cover fees plus maintenance.\nMany thousands of ex-servicemen were assisted to go through college who could never have contemplated it before the war. Free milk was also made available to all schoolchildren for the first time. In addition, spending on technical education rose, and the number of nursery schools was increased. Salaries for teachers were also improved, and funds were allocated towards improving existing schools.\nIn 1947 the Arts Council of Great Britain was set up to encourage the arts.\nThe Ministry of Education was established under the 1944 Act, and free County Colleges were set up for the compulsory part-time instruction of teenagers between the ages of 15 and 18 who were not in full-time education. An Emergency Training Scheme was also introduced which turned out an extra 25,000 teachers in 1945\u20131951. In 1947, Regional Advisory Councils were set up to bring together industry and education to find out the needs of young workers \"and advise on the provision required, and to secure reasonable economy of provision\". That same year, thirteen Area Training Organisations were set up in England and one in Wales to coordinate teacher training.\nAttlee's government, however, failed to introduce the comprehensive education for which many socialists had hoped. This reform was eventually carried out by Harold Wilson's government. During its time in office, the Attlee government increased spending on education by over 50 per cent, from \u00a36.5\u00a0billion to \u00a310\u00a0billion.\nEconomy.\nThe most significant problem facing Attlee and his ministers remained the economy, as the war effort had left Britain nearly bankrupt. Overseas investments had been used up to pay for the war. The transition to a peacetime economy, and the maintaining of strategic military commitments abroad led to continuous and severe problems with the balance of trade. This resulted in strict rationing of food and other essential goods continuing in the post war period to force a reduction in consumption in an effort to limit imports, boost exports, and stabilise the Pound Sterling so that Britain could trade its way out of its financial state.\nThe abrupt end of the American Lend-Lease programme in August 1945 almost caused a crisis. Some relief was provided by the Anglo-American loan, negotiated in December 1945. The conditions attached to the loan included making the pound fully convertible to the US dollar. When this was introduced in July 1947, it led to a currency crisis and convertibility had to be suspended after just five weeks. The UK benefited from the American Marshall Aid program in 1948, and the economic situation improved significantly. Another balance of payments crisis in 1949 forced Chancellor of the Exchequer, Stafford Cripps, into devaluation of the pound.\nDespite these problems, one of the main achievements of Attlee's government was the maintenance of near full employment. The government maintained most of the wartime controls over the economy, including control over the allocation of materials and manpower, and unemployment rarely rose above 500,000, or 3 per cent of the total workforce. Labour shortages proved a more frequent problem. The inflation rate was also kept low during his term. The rate of unemployment rarely rose above 2 per cent during Attlee's time in office, whilst there was no hard-core of long-term unemployed. Both production and productivity rose as a result of new equipment, while the average working week was shortened.\nThe government was less successful in housing, which was the responsibility of Aneurin Bevan. The government had a target to build 400,000 new houses a year to replace those which had been destroyed in the war, but shortages of materials and manpower meant that less than half this number were built. Nevertheless, millions of people were rehoused as a result of the Attlee government's housing policies. Between August 1945 and December 1951, 1,016,349 new homes were completed in England, Scotland, and Wales.\nWhen the Attlee government was voted out of office in 1951, the economy had been improved compared to 1945. The period from 1946 to 1951 saw continuous full employment and steadily rising living standards, which increased by about 10 per cent each year. During that same period, the economy grew by 3 per cent a year, and by 1951 the UK had \"the best economic performance in Europe, while output per person was increasing faster than in the United States\". Careful planning after 1945 also ensured that demobilisation was carried out without having a negative impact upon economic recovery, and that unemployment stayed at very low levels. In addition, the number of motor cars on the roads rose from 3\u00a0million to 5\u00a0million from 1945 to 1951, and seaside holidays were taken by far more people than ever before. A Monopolies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act was passed in 1948, which allowed for investigations of restrictive practices and monopolies. However, some economic historians have argued that the UK failed to develop economically after the war, with failure to support industry leaving the economy not recovering as effectively as Germany.\nEnergy.\n1947 proved a particularly difficult year for the government; an exceptionally cold winter that year caused coal mines to freeze and cease production, creating widespread power cuts and food shortages. The Minister of Fuel and Power, Emanuel Shinwell was widely blamed for failing to ensure adequate coal stocks, and soon resigned from his post. The Conservatives capitalised on the crisis with the slogan 'Starve with Strachey and shiver with Shinwell' (referring to the Minister of Food John Strachey).\nThe crisis led to an unsuccessful plot by Hugh Dalton to replace Attlee as Prime Minister with Ernest Bevin. Later that year Stafford Cripps tried to persuade Attlee to stand aside for Bevin. These plots petered out after Bevin refused to cooperate. Later that year, Dalton resigned as Chancellor after inadvertently leaking details of the budget to a journalist. He was replaced by Cripps.\nForeign policy.\nIn foreign affairs, the Attlee government was concerned with four main issues: post-war Europe, the onset of the Cold War, the establishment of the United Nations, and decolonisation. The first two were closely related, and Attlee was assisted by Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin. Attlee also attended the later stages of the Potsdam Conference, where he negotiated with President Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin.In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Government faced the challenge of managing relations with Britain's former war-time ally, Stalin and the Soviet Union. Ernest Bevin was a passionate anti-communist, based largely on his experience of fighting communist influence in the trade union movement. Bevin's initial approach to the USSR as Foreign Secretary was \"wary and suspicious, but not automatically hostile\". Attlee himself sought warm relations with Stalin. He put his trust in the United Nations, rejected notions that the Soviet Union was bent on world conquest, and warned that treating Moscow as an enemy would turn it into one. This put Attlee at sword's point with his foreign minister, the Foreign Office, and the military who all saw the Soviets as a growing threat to Britain's role in the Middle East. Suddenly in January 1947, Attlee reversed his position and agreed with Bevin on a hardline anti-Soviet policy.\nIn an early \"good-will\" gesture that was later heavily criticised, the Attlee government allowed the Soviets to purchase, under the terms of a 1946 UK-USSR Trade agreement, a total of 25 Rolls-Royce Nene jet engines in September 1947 and March 1948. The agreement included an agreement not to use them for military purposes. The price was fixed under a commercial contract; a total of 55 jet engines were sold to the USSR in 1947. However, the Cold War intensified during this period and the Soviets, who at the time were well behind the West in jet technology, reverse-engineered the Nene and installed their own version in the MiG-15 interceptor. This was used to good effect against US-UK forces in the subsequent Korean War, as well as in several later MiG models.\nAfter Stalin took political control of most of Eastern Europe, and began to subvert other governments in the Balkans, Attlee's and Bevin's worst fears of Soviet intentions were realised. The Attlee government then became instrumental in the creation of the successful NATO defence alliance to protect Western Europe against any Soviet expansion. In a crucial contribution to the economic stability of post-war Europe, Attlee's Cabinet was instrumental in promoting the American Marshall Plan for the economic recovery of Europe. He called it one of the \"most bold, enlightened and good-natured acts in the history of nations\".\nA group of Labour MPs, organised under the banner of \"Keep Left\", urged the government to steer a middle way between the two emerging superpowers, and advocated the creation of a \"third force\" of European powers to stand between the US and USSR. However, deteriorating relations between Britain and the USSR, as well as Britain's economic reliance on America following the Marshall Plan, steered policy towards supporting the US. In January 1947, fear of both Soviet and American nuclear intentions led to a secret meeting of the Cabinet, where the decision was made to press ahead with the development of Britain's independent nuclear deterrent, an issue which later caused a split in the Labour Party. Britain's first successful nuclear test, however, did not occur until 1952, one year after Attlee had left office.\nThe London dock strike of July 1949, led by Communists, was suppressed when the Attlee government sent in 13,000 Army troops and passed special legislation to promptly end the strike. His response reveals Attlee's growing concern that Soviet expansionism, supported by the British Communist Party, was a genuine threat to national security, and that the docks were highly vulnerable to sabotage ordered by Moscow. He noted that the strike was caused not by local grievances, but to help communist unions who were on strike in Canada. Attlee agreed with MI5 that he faced \"a very present menace\".\nDecolonisation.\nDecolonisation was never a major election issue, but Attlee gave the matter a great deal of attention and was the chief leader in beginning the process of decolonisation of the British Empire.\nEast Asia.\nIn August 1948, the Chinese Communists' victories caused Attlee to begin preparing for a Communist takeover of China. It kept open consulates in Communist-controlled areas and rejected the Chinese Nationalists' requests that British citizens assist in the defence of Shanghai. By December, the government concluded that although British property in China would likely be nationalised, British traders would benefit in the long run from a stable, industrialising Communist China. Retaining Hong Kong was especially important to him; although the Chinese Communists promised to not interfere with its rule, Britain reinforced the Hong Kong Garrison during 1949. When the victorious Chinese Communists government declared on 1 October 1949 that it would exchange diplomats with any country that ended relations with the Chinese Nationalists, Britain became the first western country to formally recognise the People's Republic of China in January 1950. In 1954, a Labour Party delegation including Attlee visited China at the invitation of then Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai. Attlee became the first high-ranking western politician to meet Mao Zedong.\nSouth Asia.\nAttlee orchestrated the granting of independence to India and Pakistan in 1947. Attlee in 1928\u20131934 had been a member of the Indian Statutory Commission (otherwise known as the Simon Commission). He became the Labour Party expert on India and by 1934 was committed to granting India the same independent dominion status that Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa had recently been given. He faced strong resistance from the die-hard Conservative imperialists, led by Churchill, who opposed both independence and efforts led by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin to set up a system of limited local control by Indians themselves. Attlee and the Labour leadership were sympathetic to both the Congress led by Jawaharlal Nehru and the Pakistan movement led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah. During the Second World War, Attlee was in charge of Indian affairs. He set up the Cripps Mission in 1942, which tried and failed to bring the factions together. When Congress called for passive resistance in the Quit India movement of 1942\u20131945, it was the British regime ordered the widespread arrest and internment for the duration of tens of thousands of Congress leaders as part of its efforts to crush the revolt.\nLabour's election Manifesto in 1945 called for \"the advancement of India to responsible self-government\". In 1942 the British Raj tried to enlist all major political parties in support of the war effort. Congress, led by Nehru and Gandhi, demanded immediate independence and full control by Congress of all of India. That demand was rejected by the British, and Congress opposed the war effort with its \"Quit India\" campaign. The Raj immediately responded in 1942 by imprisoning the major national, regional and local Congress leaders for the duration. Attlee did not object. By contrast, the Muslim League, led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, strongly supported the war effort. They greatly enlarged their membership and won favour from London for their decision. Attlee retained a fondness for Congress and until 1946, accepted their thesis that they were a non-religious party that accepted Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, and everyone else. Nevertheless, this difference in opinion between the Congress and the Muslim League towards the British war effort encouraged Attlee and his government to consider further negotiations with the Muslim League.\nThe Muslim League insisted that it was the only true representative of all of the Muslims of India. With violence escalating in India after the war, but with British financial power at a low ebb, large-scale military involvement was impossible. Viceroy Wavell said he needed a further seven army divisions to prevent communal violence if independence negotiations failed. No divisions were available; independence was the only option. Given the increasing demands of the Muslim League, independence implied a partition that set off heavily Muslim Pakistan from the main portion of India. After becoming Prime Minister in 1945 Attlee originally planned to give India Dominion status in 1948.\nAttlee suggested in his memoirs that \"traditional\" colonial rule in Asia was no longer viable. He said that he expected it to meet renewed opposition after the war both by local national movements as well as by the United States. The prime minister's biographer John Bew says that Attlee hoped for a transition to a multilateral world order and a Commonwealth, and that the old British empire \"should not be supported beyond its natural lifespan\" and instead be ended \"on the right note.\" His exchequer Hugh Dalton meanwhile feared that post-war Britain could no longer afford to garrison its empire.\nUltimately the Labour government gave full independence to India and Pakistan in 1947 through the Indian Independence Act. This involved creating a demarcation between the two regions which was known as the Radcliffe Line. The boundary between the newly created states of Pakistan and India involved the widespread resettlement of millions of Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims. Almost immediately, extreme anti-Hindu and anti-Sikh violence ensued in Lahore, Multan and Dacca when the Punjab province and the Bengal province were split in the Partition of India. This was followed by a rapid increase in widespread anti-Muslim violence in several areas including Amritsar, Rajkot, Jaipur, Calcutta and Delhi. Historian Yasmin Khan estimates that over a million people were killed of which several were women and children. Gandhi himself was assassinated in January 1948. Attlee remarked Gandhi as the \"greatest citizen\" of India and added, \"this one man has been the major factor in every consideration of the Indian problem. He had become the expression of the aspirations of the Indian people for independence\".\nHistorian Andrew Roberts says the independence of India was a \"national humiliation\" but it was necessitated by urgent financial, administrative, strategic and political needs. Churchill in 1940\u20131945 had tightened the hold on India and imprisoned the Congress leadership, with Attlee's approval. Labour had looked forward to making it a fully independent dominion like Canada or Australia. Many of the Congress leaders in the India had studied in England, and were highly regarded as fellow idealistic socialists by Labour leaders. Attlee was the Labour expert on India and took special charge of decolonisation. Attlee found that Churchill's viceroy, Field Marshal Wavell, was too imperialistic, too keen on military solutions, and too neglectful of Indian political alignments. The eventual appointee for new Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, the dashing war hero and a cousin of the King, was put forward by V. K. Krishna Menon as a candidate acceptable to all, in a series of clandestine meetings with Sir Stafford Scripps, and with Attlee.\nAttlee also sponsored the peaceful transition to independence in 1948 of Burma (Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka).\nPalestine.\nOne of the most urgent problems facing Attlee concerned the future of the British mandate in Palestine, which had become too troublesome and expensive to handle. British policies in Palestine were perceived by the Zionist movement and the Truman administration to be pro-Arab and anti-Jewish, and Britain soon found itself unable to maintain public order in the face of a Jewish insurgency and a civil war.\nDuring this period, 70,000 Holocaust survivors attempted to reach Palestine as part of the Aliyah Bet refugee movement. Attlee's government tried several tactics to prevent the migration. Five ships were bombed by the Secret Intelligence Service (though with no casualties) with a fake Palestinian group created to take responsibility. The navy apprehended over 50,000 refugees en route, interning them in detention camps in Cyprus. Conditions in the camps were harsh and faced global criticism. Later, the refugee ship Exodus 1947 would be sent back to mainland Europe, instead of being taken to Cyprus.\nIn response to the increasingly unpopular mandate, Attlee ordered the evacuation of all British military personnel and handed over the issue to the United Nations, a decision which was widely supported by the general public in Britain. With the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, the camps in Cyprus were eventually closed, with their former occupants finally completing their journey to the new country.\nAttlee remained hostile to Israel years after its establishment. In 1958, describing the Israelis as extremely aggressive against the neighbouring Arab states and describing the Balfour Declaration as a mistake.\nAfrica.\nThe government's policies with regard to the other colonies, particularly those in Africa, focused on keeping them as strategic Cold War assets while modernising their economies. The Labour Party had long attracted aspiring leaders from Africa and had developed elaborate plans before the war. Implementing them overnight with an empty treasury proved too challenging. A major military base was built in Kenya, and the African colonies came under an unprecedented degree of direct control from London. Development schemes were implemented to help solve Britain's post-war balance of payments crisis and raise African living standards. This \"new colonialism\" worked slowly, and had failures such as the Tanganyika groundnut scheme.\nElections.\nThe 1950 election gave Labour a massively reduced majority of five seats compared to the triple-digit majority of 1945. Although re-elected, the result was seen by Attlee as very disappointing, and was widely attributed to the effects of post-war austerity denting Labour's appeal to middle-class voters. With such a small majority leaving him dependent on a small number of MPs to govern, Attlee's second term was much tamer than his first. Some major reforms were nevertheless passed, particularly regarding industry in urban areas and regulations to limit air and water pollution.\nBy 1951, the Attlee government was exhausted, with several of its most senior ministers ailing or ageing, and with a lack of new ideas. Attlee's record for settling internal differences in the Labour Party fell in April 1951, when there was a damaging split over an austerity Budget brought in by the Chancellor, Hugh Gaitskell, to pay for the cost of Britain's participation in the Korean War. Aneurin Bevan resigned to protest against the new charges for \"teeth and spectacles\" in the National Health Service introduced by that Budget, and was joined in this action by several senior ministers, including the future Prime Minister Harold Wilson, then the President of the Board of Trade. Thus escalated a battle between the left and right wings of the Party that continues today. Finding it increasingly impossible to govern, Attlee's only chance was to call a snap election in October 1951, in the hope of achieving a more workable majority and to regain authority. The gamble failed: Labour narrowly lost to the Conservative Party, despite winning considerably more votes (achieving the largest Labour vote in electoral history). Attlee tendered his resignation as Prime Minister the following day, after six years and three months in office.\nReturn to opposition.\nFollowing the defeat in 1951, Attlee continued to lead the party as Leader of the Opposition. His last four years as leader were, however, widely seen as one of the Labour Party's weaker periods.\nThe period was dominated by infighting between the Labour Party's right wing, led by Hugh Gaitskell, and its left, led by Aneurin Bevan. Many Labour MPs felt that Attlee should have retired following 1951 election and allowed a younger man to lead the party. Bevan openly called for him to stand down in the summer of 1954. One of his main reasons for staying on as leader was to frustrate the leadership ambitions of Herbert Morrison, whom Attlee disliked for both political and personal reasons. At one time, Attlee had favoured Aneurin Bevan to succeed him as leader, but this became problematic after Bevan almost irrevocably split the party.\nAttlee, now aged 72, contested the 1955 general election against Anthony Eden, which saw Labour lose 18 seats, and the Conservatives increase their majority.\nIn an interview with the \"News Chronicle\" columnist Percy Cudlipp in mid-September 1955, Attlee made clear his own thinking together with his preference for the leadership succession, stating:\nHe retired as Leader of the Labour Party on 7 December 1955, having led the party for twenty years, and on 14 December Hugh Gaitskell was elected as his successor.\nGlobal policy.\nHe was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth.\nAttlee was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954 for his support of the League of Nations and the United Nations, and received further nominations in 1955 and 1964, but was unsuccessful on each occasion.\nRetirement.\nHe subsequently retired from the House of Commons and was elevated to the peerage as Earl Attlee and Viscount Prestwood on 16 December 1955, taking his seat in the House of Lords on 25 January. He believed Eden had been forced into taking a strong stand on the Suez Crisis by his backbenchers. In 1958, Attlee, along with numerous notables, established the Homosexual Law Reform Society: this campaigned for the decriminalisation of homosexual acts in private by consenting adults, a reform that was voted through Parliament nine years later. In May 1961, he travelled to Washington, D.C., to meet with President Kennedy.\nIn 1962, he spoke twice in the House of Lords against the British government's application for the UK to join the European Communities (\"Common Market\"). In his second speech delivered in November, Attlee claimed that Britain had a separate parliamentary tradition from the Continental European countries that comprised the EC. He also claimed that if Britain became a member, EC rules would prevent the British government from planning the economy and that Britain's traditional policy had been outward-looking rather than Continental.\nHe attended Winston Churchill's funeral in January 1965. He was frail by that time, and had to remain seated in the freezing cold as the coffin was carried, having tired himself out by standing at the rehearsal the previous day. He lived to see the Labour Party return to power under Harold Wilson in 1964, and also to see his old constituency of Walthamstow West fall to the Conservatives in a by-election in September 1967.\nDeath.\nAttlee died peacefully in his sleep of pneumonia, at the age of 84 at Westminster Hospital on 8 October 1967. Two thousand people attended his funeral in November, including the then-Prime Minister Harold Wilson and the Duke of Kent, representing the Queen. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at Westminster Abbey.\nUpon his death, the title passed to his son Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee (1927\u20131991), who defected from Labour to the SDP in 1981. It is now held by Clement Attlee's grandson John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee. The third earl (a member of the Conservative Party) retained his seat in the Lords as one of the hereditary peers to remain under an amendment to Labour's House of Lords Act 1999.\nAttlee's estate was sworn for probate purposes at a value of \u00a37,295, (equivalent to \u00a3 in ) a relatively modest sum for so prominent a figure, and only a fraction of the \u00a375,394 in his father's estate when he died in 1908.\nLegacy.\nThe quotation about Attlee, \"A modest man, but then he has so much to be modest about\", is commonly ascribed to Churchill\u2014though Churchill denied saying it, and respected Attlee's service in the War cabinet. Attlee's modesty and quiet manner hid a great deal that has only come to light with historical reappraisal. Attlee himself is said to have responded to critics with a limerick: \"There were few who thought him a starter, Many who thought themselves smarter. But he ended PM, CH and OM, an Earl and a Knight of the Garter\".\nHis leadership style of consensual government, acting as a chairman rather than a president, won him much praise from historians and politicians alike. Christopher Soames, the British Ambassador to France during the Conservative government of Edward Heath and cabinet minister under Margaret Thatcher, remarked that \"Mrs Thatcher was not really running a team. Every time you have a Prime Minister who wants to make all the decisions, it mainly leads to bad results. Attlee didn't. That's why he was so damn good\". The journalist and broadcaster Anthony Howard called him \"the greatest Prime Minister of the 20th century\".\nThatcher herself wrote in her 1995 memoirs, which charted her life from her beginnings in Grantham to her victory at the 1979 general election, that she admired Attlee, writing: \"Of Clement Attlee, however, I was an admirer. He was a serious man and a patriot. Quite contrary to the general tendency of politicians in the 1990s, he was all substance and no show\".\nAttlee's government presided over the successful transition from a wartime economy to peacetime, tackling problems of demobilisation, shortages of foreign currency, and adverse deficits in trade balances and government expenditure. Further domestic policies that he brought about included the creation of the National Health Service and the post-war welfare state, which became key to the reconstruction of post-war Britain. Attlee and his ministers did much to transform the UK into a more prosperous and egalitarian society during their time in office with reductions in poverty and a rise in the general economic security of the population.\nIn foreign affairs, he did much to assist with the post-war economic recovery of Europe. He proved a loyal ally of the US at the onset of the Cold War. Due to his style of leadership, it was not he, but Ernest Bevin who masterminded foreign policy. It was Attlee's government that decided Britain should have an independent nuclear weapons programme, and work on it began in 1947.\nBevin, Attlee's Foreign Secretary, famously stated that \"We've got to have it [nuclear weapons] and it's got to have a bloody Union Jack on it\". The first operational British nuclear bomb was not detonated until October 1952, about one year after Attlee had left office. Independent British atomic research was prompted partly by the US McMahon Act, which nullified wartime expectations of postwar US\u2013UK collaboration in nuclear research, and prohibited Americans from communicating nuclear technology even to allied countries. British atomic bomb research was kept secret even from some members of Attlee's own cabinet, whose loyalty or discretion seemed uncertain.\nAlthough a socialist, Attlee still believed in the British Empire of his youth. He thought of it as an institution that was a power for good in the world. Nevertheless, he saw that a large part of it needed to be self-governing. Using the Dominions of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand as a model, he continued the transformation of the empire into the modern-day British Commonwealth.\nHis greatest achievement, surpassing many of these, was perhaps the establishment of a political and economic consensus about the governance of Britain that all three major parties subscribed to for three decades, fixing the arena of political discourse until the late-1970s. In 2004, he was voted the most successful British Prime Minister of the 20th century by a poll of 139 academics organised by Ipsos MORI.\nA blue plaque unveiled in 1979 commemorates Attlee at 17 Monkhams Avenue, in Woodford Green in the London Borough of Redbridge.\nAttlee was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947. Attlee was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of Queen Mary College on 15 December 1948.\nIn the 1960s a new suburb near Curepipe in British Mauritius was given the name \"Cit\u00e9 Atlee\" in his honour.\nStatues.\nOn 30 November 1988, a bronze statue of Clement Attlee was unveiled by Harold Wilson (the next Labour Prime Minister after Attlee) outside Limehouse Library in Attlee's former constituency. By then Wilson was the last surviving member of Attlee's cabinet, and the unveiling of the statue would be one of the last public appearances by Wilson, who was by that point in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease; he died at the age of 79 in May 1995.\nLimehouse Library was closed in 2003, after which the statue was vandalised. The council surrounded it with protective hoarding for four years, before eventually removing it for repair and recasting in 2009. The restored statue was unveiled by Peter Mandelson in April 2011, in its new position less than a mile away at the Queen Mary University of London's Mile End campus.\nThere is also a statue of Clement Attlee in the Houses of Parliament that was erected, instead of a bust, by parliamentary vote in 1979. The sculptor was Ivor Roberts-Jones.\nPersonal life.\nAttlee met Violet Millar while on a long trip with friends to Italy in 1921. They fell in love and were soon engaged, marrying at Christ Church, Hampstead, on 10 January 1922. It would come to be a devoted marriage, with Attlee providing protection and Violet providing a home that was an escape for Attlee from political turmoil. She died in 1964. They had four children:\nReligious views.\nAlthough his parents were devout Anglicans, with one of his brothers becoming a clergyman and one of his sisters a missionary, Attlee himself is usually regarded as an agnostic. In an interview he described himself as \"incapable of religious feeling\", saying that he believed in \"the ethics of Christianity\" but not \"the mumbo-jumbo\". When asked whether he was an agnostic, Attlee replied \"I don't know\".\nFurther reading.\nBiographical\nBiographies of his cabinet and associates\nScholarly studies"}
{"id": "5768", "revid": "1269028911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5768", "title": "Catullus", "text": "Gaius Valerius Catullus (; 84 \u2013 54 BC), known as Catullus (), was a Latin neoteric poet of the late Roman Republic. His surviving works remain widely read due to their popularity as teaching tools and because of their personal or sexual themes.\nLife.\nG\u0101ius Valerius Catullus was born to a leading equestrian family of Verona, in Cisalpine Gaul. The social prominence of the Catullus family allowed the father of Gaius Valerius to entertain Julius Caesar when he was the Promagistrate (proconsul) of both Gallic provinces. In a poem, Catullus describes his happy homecoming to the family villa at Sirmio, on Lake Garda, near Verona; he also owned a villa near the resort of Tibur (modern Tivoli).\nCatullus appears to have spent most of his young adult years in Rome. His friends there included the poets Licinius Calvus and Helvius Cinna, Quintus Hortensius (son of the orator and rival of Cicero), and the biographer Cornelius Nepos, to whom Catullus dedicated a \"libellus\" of poems, the relation of which to the extant collection remains a matter of debate. He appears to have been acquainted with the poet Marcus Furius Bibaculus. A number of prominent contemporaries appear in his poetry, including Cicero, Caesar and Pompey. According to an anecdote preserved by Suetonius, Caesar did not deny that Catullus's lampoons left an indelible stain on his reputation, but when Catullus apologized, he invited the poet for dinner the very same day.\nThe \"Lesbia\" of his poems is usually identified with Clodia Metelli, a sophisticated woman from the aristocratic house of patrician family Claudii Pulchri, sister of the infamous Publius Clodius Pulcher, and wife to Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer (consul of 60 BC). In his poems Catullus describes several stages of their relationship: initial euphoria, doubts, separation, and his wrenching feelings of loss. Clodia had several other partners; \"From the poems one can adduce no fewer than five lovers in addition to Catullus: Egnatius (poem 37), Gellius (poem 91), Quintius (poem 82), Rufus (poem 77), and Lesbius (poem 79).\" There is also some question surrounding her husband's mysterious death in 59 BC: in his speech \"Pro Caelio\" Cicero hints that he may have been poisoned. However, a sensitive and passionate Catullus could not relinquish his flame for Clodia, regardless of her obvious indifference to his desire for a deep and permanent relationship. In his poems, Catullus wavers between devout, sweltering love and bitter, scornful insults that he directs at her blatant infidelity (as demonstrated in poems 11 and 58). His passion for her is unrelenting\u2014yet it is unclear when exactly the couple split up for good. Catullus's poems about the relationship display striking depth and psychological insight.\nHe spent the year from summer 57 to summer 56 BC in Bithynia on the staff of the commander Gaius Memmius. While in the East, he traveled to the Troad to perform rites at his brother's tomb, an event recorded in a moving poem (101).\nNo ancient biography of Catullus has survived. His life has to be pieced together from scattered references to him in other ancient authors and from his poems. Thus it is uncertain when he was born and when he died. Jerome stated that he was born in 87 BC and died in Rome in his 30th year. However, Catullus' poems include references to events of 55 BC. Since the Roman consular fasti make it somewhat easy to confuse 87\u201357 BC with 84\u201354 BC, many scholars accept the dates 84 BC\u201354 BC, supposing that his latest poems and the publication of his \"libellus\" coincided with the year of his death. Other authors suggest 52 or 51 BC as the year of the poet's death. Though upon his elder brother's death Catullus lamented that their \"whole house was buried along\" with the deceased, the existence (and prominence) of \"Valerii Catulli\" is attested in the following centuries. T. P. Wiseman argues that after the brother's death Catullus could have married, and that, in this case, the later \"Valerii Catulli\" may have been his descendants.\nPoetry.\nSources and organization.\nCatullus's poems have been preserved in an anthology of 116 \"carmina\" (the actual number of poems may slightly vary in various editions), which can be divided into three parts according to their form: approximately sixty short poems in varying meters, called \"polymetra\", nine longer poems, and forty-eight epigrams in elegiac couplets. Each of these three parts \u2013 approximately 860 (or more), 1136, and 330 lines respectively \u2013 would fit onto a single scroll.\nThere is no scholarly consensus on whether Catullus himself arranged the order of the poems. The longer poems differ from the \"polymetra\" and the epigrams not only in length but also in their subjects: several of them are based on the theme of marriage. The longest (64) of 408 lines, contains two myths (the abandonment of Ariadne and the marriage of Peleus and Thetis), one story included inside the other.\nThe \"polymetra\" and the epigrams can be divided into four major thematic groups (ignoring a rather large number of poems that elude such categorization):\nAbove all other qualities, Catullus seems to have valued , or charm, in his acquaintances, a theme which he explores in a number of his poems.\nIntellectual influences.\nCatullus's poetry was influenced by the innovative poetry of the Hellenistic Age, and especially by Callimachus and the Alexandrian school, which had propagated a new style of poetry that deliberately turned away from the classical epic poetry in the tradition of Homer. Cicero called these local innovators \"neoteroi\" () or \"moderns\" (in Latin \"poetae novi\" or 'new poets'), in that they cast off the heroic model handed down from Ennius in order to strike new ground and ring a contemporary note. Catullus and Callimachus did not describe the feats of ancient heroes and gods (except perhaps in re-evaluating and predominantly artistic circumstances, e.g. poem 64), focusing instead on small-scale personal themes. Although these poems sometimes seem quite superficial and their subjects often are mere everyday concerns, they are accomplished works of art. Catullus described his work as \"expolitum\", or polished, to show that the language he used was very carefully and artistically composed.\nCatullus was also an admirer of Sappho, a female poet of the seventh century BC. Catullus 51 partly translates, partly imitates, and transforms Sappho 31. Some hypothesize that 61 and 62 were perhaps inspired by lost works of Sappho but this is purely speculative. Both of the latter are \"epithalamia\", a form of laudatory or erotic wedding-poetry that Sappho was famous for. Catullus twice used a meter that Sappho was known for, called the Sapphic stanza, in poems 11 and 51, perhaps prompting his successor Horace's interest in the form.\nCatullus, as was common to his era, was greatly influenced by stories from Greek and Roman myth. His longer poems\u2014such as 63, 64, 65, 66, and 68\u2014allude to mythology in various ways. Some stories he refers to are the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, the departure of the Argonauts, Theseus and the Minotaur, Ariadne's abandonment, Tereus and Procne, as well as Protesilaus and Laodamia.\nStyle.\nCatullus wrote in many different meters including hendecasyllabic verse and elegiac couplets (common in love poetry). A great part of his poetry shows strong and occasionally wild emotions, especially in regard to Lesbia (e.g., poems 5 and 7). His love poems are very emotional and ardent, and are relatable to this day. Catullus describes his Lesbia as having multiple suitors and often showing little affection towards him. He also demonstrates a great sense of humour such as in Catullus 13.\nMusical settings.\nThe Hungarian-born British composer Matyas Seiber set poem 31 for unaccompanied mixed chorus Sirmio in 1957. The American composer Ned Rorem set Catullus 101 to music for voice and piano; the song, \"Catullus: On the Burial of His Brother\", was originally published in 1969.\n\"Catullus Dreams\" (2011) is a song cycle by David Glaser set to texts of Catullus, scored for soprano and eight instruments; it premiered at Symphony Space in New York by soprano Linda Larson and Sequitur Ensemble. is a song cycle arranged from 17 of Catullus's poems by American composer Michael Linton. The cycle was recorded in December 2013 and premiered at Carnegie Hall's Weill Recital Hall in March 2014 by French baritone Edwin Crossley-Mercer and pianist Jason Paul Peterson.\nThomas Campion also wrote a lute-song entitled \"My Sweetest Lesbia\" dating from 1601 using his own translation of the first six lines of Catullus 5 followed by two verses of his own; the translation by Richard Crashaw was set to music in a four-part glee by Samuel Webbe Jr. It was also set to music, in a three-part glee by John Stafford Smith.\nCatullus 5, the love poem , in the translation by Ben Jonson, was set to music in 1606, (lute accompanied song) by Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger. Dutch composer Bertha Tideman-Wijers used Catullus's text for her composition \"Variations on Valerius \"Where that one already turns or turns.\"\" The Icelandic composer J\u00f3hann J\u00f3hannsson set Catullus 85 to music; entitled , the song is found on J\u00f3hannsson's album \"Englab\u00f6rn\", and is sung through a vocoder, and the music is played by a string quartet and piano. \"Catulli Carmina\" is a cantata by Carl Orff dating from 1943 that sets texts from Catullus to music. Finnish jazz singer Reine Rim\u00f3n has recorded poems of Catullus set to standard jazz tunes."}
{"id": "5769", "revid": "999717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5769", "title": "C. S. Forester", "text": "Cecil Louis Troughton Smith (27 August 1899 \u2013 2 April 1966), known by his pen name Cecil Scott \"C. S.\" Forester, was an English novelist known for writing tales of naval warfare, such as the 12-book Horatio Hornblower series depicting a Royal Navy officer during the Napoleonic Wars. \nThe Hornblower novels \"A Ship of the Line\" and \"Flying Colours\" were jointly awarded the 1938 James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction. Other works include \"The African Queen\" and \"The Good Shepherd\", both of which were later adapted as movies. \nDuring World War II, he moved to Washington, D.C. where he worked for the British Ministry of Information, writing propaganda for the Allied cause. He subsequently settled in Fullerton, California, where he died in 1966 of complications arising from a stroke.\nEarly years.\nForester was born in Cairo on 27 August 1899, fifth and youngest child of George Foster Smith and his wife Sarah. His father was an English teacher in a local school set up to give upper-class Egyptian boys an English education. His parents separated when he was young, and his mother took him to London, where he was educated at Alleyn's School and Dulwich College. He began to study medicine at Guy's Hospital, but left without completing his degree. He was somewhat athletic, wore glasses, and had a slender physique. He failed his Army physical and was told that there was no chance that he would be accepted. He began writing seriously, using his pen name, in around 1921.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, Forester moved to the United States, where he worked for the British Ministry of Information and wrote propaganda to encourage the U.S. to join the Allies. He eventually settled in Berkeley, California.\nIn 1942, while he was living in Washington, D.C., he met the young British diplomat Roald Dahl and encouraged him to write about his experiences in the Royal Air Force. According to Dahl's autobiography, \"Lucky Break\", Forester asked him about his experiences as a fighter pilot, and this prompted Dahl to write his first story, \"A Piece of Cake\".\nLiterary career.\nForester wrote many novels, but he is best known for the 12-book Horatio Hornblower series about an officer in the Royal Navy during the Napoleonic Wars. He began the series with Hornblower a captain in the first novel, \"The Happy Return\", which was published in 1937, but demand for more stories led him to fill in Hornblower's life story, and he wrote novels detailing his rise from the rank of midshipman. The last completed novel was published in 1962. Hornblower's fictional adventures were based on real events, but Forester wrote the body of the works carefully to avoid entanglements with real world history, so that Hornblower is always off on another mission when a great naval battle occurs during the Napoleonic Wars.\nForester's other novels include \"The African Queen\" (1935) and \"The General\" (1936); two novels about the Peninsular War, \"Death to the French\" (published in the United States as \"Rifleman Dodd\") and \"The Gun\" (filmed as \"The Pride and the Passion\" in 1957); and seafaring stories that do not involve Hornblower, such as \"Brown on Resolution\" (1929), \"The Captain from Connecticut\" (1941), \"The Ship\" (1943), and \"Hunting the Bismarck\" (1959), which was used as the basis of the screenplay for the film \"Sink the Bismarck!\" (1960). Several of his novels have been filmed, including \"The African Queen\" (1951), directed by John Huston. Forester is also credited as story writer on several films not based on his published novels, including \"Commandos Strike at Dawn\" (1942).\nForester also wrote several volumes of short stories set during the Second World War. Those in \"The Nightmare\" (1954) were based on events in Nazi Germany, ending at the Nuremberg trials. The linked stories in \"The Man in the Yellow Raft\" (1969) follow the career of the destroyer USS \"Boon\", while many of the stories in \"Gold from Crete\" (1971) follow the destroyer HMS \"Apache\". The last of the stories in \"Gold from Crete\" is \"If Hitler Had Invaded England\", which offers an imagined sequence of events starting with Hitler's attempt to implement Operation Sea Lion and culminating in the early military defeat of Nazi Germany in the summer of 1941.\nHis non-fiction works about seafaring include \"The Age of Fighting Sail\" (1956), an account of the sea battles between Great Britain and the United States in the War of 1812.\nForester also published the crime novels \"Payment Deferred\" (1926) and \"Plain Murder\" (1930), as well as two children's books. \"Poo-Poo and the Dragons\" (1942) was created as a series of stories told to his son George to encourage him to finish his meals. George had mild food allergies and needed encouragement to eat. \"The Barbary Pirates\" (1953) is a children's history of early 19th-century pirates.\nForester appeared as a contestant on the television quiz programme \"You Bet Your Life\", hosted by Groucho Marx, in an episode broadcast on 1 November 1956.\nA previously unknown novel of Forester's, \"The Pursued\", was discovered in 2003 and published by Penguin Classics on 3 November 2011.\nPersonal life.\nForester married Kathleen Belcher in 1926. They had two sons, John, born in 1929, and George, born in 1933. The couple divorced in 1945. In 1947 he married Dorothy Foster. Kathleen Belcher's greatuncle was Capt. Edward Belcher, RN, who achieved renown as a hydrographer and explorer. After his retirement, Belcher devoted much of his time to writing. After penning biographical material, he turned his hand to naval fiction, inventing a character called \"Horatio Howard Brenton\", and attributing great feats and adventures to him. It is possible that Forester found some inspiration in these stories for his own \"Horatio Hornblower\".\nForester died in Fullerton, California on 2 April 1966.\nJohn Forester wrote a two-volume biography of his father, including many elements of Forester's life which became clear to his son only after his father's death.\nFilm adaptations.\nIn addition to providing the source material for numerous adaptations (not all of which are listed below), Forester was also credited as \"adapted for the screen by\" for \"Captain Horatio Hornblower\"."}
{"id": "5770", "revid": "3938795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5770", "title": "List of telephone country codes", "text": "Telephone country codes, but also sometimes referred to as country dial-in codes, or historically international subscriber dialing (ISD) codes in the U.K., are telephone number dialing prefixes for reaching subscribers in foreign countries or areas via international telecommunication networks. Country codes are defined by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in ITU-T standards E.123 and E.164. The prefixes enable international direct dialing (IDD).\nCountry codes constitute the international telephone numbering plan. They are used only when dialing a telephone number in a country or world region other than the caller's. Country codes are dialed before the national telephone number, but require at least one additional prefix, the international call prefix which is an exit code from the national numbering plan to the international one. In most countries, this prefix is \"00\", an ITU recommendation; it is \"011\" in the countries of the North American Numbering Plan while a minority of countries use other prefixes.\nOverview.\nThis table lists in its first column the initial digits of the country code shared by each country in each row, which is arranged in columns for the last digit (x). When three-digit codes share a common leading pair, the shared prefix is marked by an arrow, ( \u2199 ) pointing down and left to the three-digit codes. Unassigned codes are denoted by a dash (\u2014). Countries are identified by ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country codes; codes for non-geographic services are denoted by two asterisks (**).\nWorld zones.\nThe nine world zones are generally defined geographically, with exceptions for political and historical alignment.\nZone 1: North American Numbering Plan (NANP).\nNANP members are assigned three-digit numbering plan area (NPA) codes under the common country code \"1\", shown in the format \"1 (NPA)\".\nZones 3\u20134: Europe.\nSome of the larger countries were assigned two-digit codes to compensate for their usually longer domestic numbers. Small countries were assigned three-digit codes, which also has been the practice since the 1980s.\nZone 7: Russia and neighboring regions.\nFormerly assigned to the Soviet Union until its dissolution in 1991.\nLocations without country code.\nIn Antarctica, telecommunication services are provided by the parent country of each base:\nOther places with no country codes in use, although a code may be reserved:"}
{"id": "5771", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5771", "title": "Christopher Marlowe", "text": "Christopher Marlowe ( ; baptised 26 February 156430 May 1593), also known as Kit Marlowe, was an English playwright, poet, and translator of the Elizabethan era. Marlowe is among the most famous of the Elizabethan playwrights. Based upon the \"many imitations\" of his play \"Tamburlaine\", modern scholars consider him to have been the foremost dramatist in London in the years just before his mysterious early death. Some scholars also believe that he greatly influenced William Shakespeare, who was baptised in the same year as Marlowe and later succeeded him as the preeminent Elizabethan playwright. Marlowe was the first to achieve critical reputation for his use of blank verse, which became the standard for the era. His plays are distinguished by their overreaching protagonists. Themes found within Marlowe's literary works have been noted as humanistic with realistic emotions, which some scholars find difficult to reconcile with Marlowe's \"anti-intellectualism\" and his catering to the prurient tastes of his Elizabethan audiences for generous displays of extreme physical violence, cruelty, and bloodshed.\nEvents in Marlowe's life were sometimes as extreme as those found in his plays. Differing sensational reports of Marlowe's death in 1593 abounded after the event and are contested by scholars today owing to a lack of good documentation. There have been many conjectures as to the nature and reason for his death, including a vicious bar-room fight, blasphemous libel against the church, homosexual intrigue, betrayal by another playwright, and espionage from the highest level: the Privy Council of Elizabeth I. An official coroner's account of Marlowe's death was discovered only in 1925, and it did little to persuade all scholars that it told the whole story, nor did it eliminate the uncertainties present in his biography.\nEarly life.\nChristopher Marlowe, the second of nine children, and oldest child after the death of his sister Mary in 1568, was born to Canterbury shoemaker John Marlowe and his wife Katherine, daughter of William Arthur of Dover. He was baptised at St George's Church, Canterbury, on 26 February 1564 (1563 in the old style dates in use at the time, which placed the new year on 25 March). Marlowe's birth was likely to have been a few days before, making him about two months older than William Shakespeare, who was baptised on 26 April 1564 in Stratford-upon-Avon.\nBy age 14, Marlowe was a pupil at The King's School, Canterbury on a scholarship and two years later a student at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he also studied through a scholarship with expectation that he would become an Anglican clergyman. Instead, he received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1584. Marlowe mastered Latin during his schooling, reading and translating the works of Ovid. In 1587, the university hesitated to award his Master of Arts degree because of a rumour that he intended to go to the English seminary at Rheims in northern France, presumably to prepare for ordination as a Roman Catholic priest. If true, such an action on his part would have been a direct violation of royal edict issued by Queen Elizabeth I in 1585 criminalising any attempt by an English citizen to be ordained in the Roman Catholic Church.\nLarge-scale violence between Protestants and Catholics on the European continent has been cited by scholars as the impetus for the Protestant English Queen's defensive anti-Catholic laws issued from 1581 until her death in 1603. Despite the dire implications for Marlowe, his degree was awarded on schedule when the Privy Council intervened on his behalf, commending him for his \"faithful dealing\" and \"good service\" to the Queen. The nature of Marlowe's service was not specified by the council, but its letter to the Cambridge authorities has provoked much speculation by modern scholars, notably the theory that Marlowe was operating as a secret agent for Privy Council member Sir Francis Walsingham. The only surviving evidence of the Privy Council's correspondence is found in their minutes, the letter being lost. There is no mention of espionage in the minutes, but its summation of the lost Privy Council letter is vague in meaning, stating that \"it was not Her Majesties pleasure\" that persons employed as Marlowe had been \"in matters touching the benefit of his country should be defamed by those who are ignorant in th'affaires he went about.\" Scholars agree the vague wording was typically used to protect government agents, but they continue to debate what the \"matters touching the benefit of his country\" actually were in Marlowe's case and how they affected the 23-year-old writer as he began his literary career in 1587.\nAdult life and legend.\nLittle is known about Marlowe's adult life. All available evidence, other than what can be deduced from his literary works, is found in legal records and other official documents. Writers of fiction and non-fiction have speculated about his professional activities, private life, and character. Marlowe has been described as a spy, a brawler, and a heretic, as well as a \"magician\", \"duellist\", \"tobacco-user\", \"counterfeiter\" and \"rakehell\". While J. A. Downie and Constance Kuriyama have argued against the more lurid speculations, J. B. Steane remarked, \"it seems absurd to dismiss all of these Elizabethan rumours and accusations as 'the Marlowe myth. Much has been written on his brief adult life, including speculation of: his involvement in royally sanctioned espionage; his vocal declaration of atheism; his (possibly same-sex) sexual interests; and the puzzling circumstances surrounding his death.\nSpying.\nMarlowe is alleged to have been a government spy. Park Honan and Charles Nicholl speculate that this was the case and suggest that Marlowe's recruitment took place when he was at Cambridge. In 1587, when the Privy Council ordered the University of Cambridge to award Marlowe his degree as Master of Arts, it denied rumours that he intended to go to the English Catholic college in Rheims, saying instead that he had been engaged in unspecified \"affaires\" on \"matters touching the benefit of his country\". Surviving college records from the period also indicate that, in the academic year 1584\u20131585, Marlowe had had a series of unusually lengthy absences from the university which violated university regulations. Surviving college buttery accounts, which record student purchases for personal provisions, show that Marlowe began spending lavishly on food and drink during the periods he was in attendance; the amount was more than he could have afforded on his known scholarship income.\nIt has been speculated that Marlowe was the \"Morley\" who was tutor to Arbella Stuart in 1589. This possibility was first raised in a \"Times Literary Supplement\" letter by E. St John Brooks in 1937; in a letter to \"Notes and Queries\", John Baker has added that only Marlowe could have been Arbella's tutor owing to the absence of any other known \"Morley\" from the period with an MA and not otherwise occupied. If Marlowe was Arbella's tutor, it might indicate that he was there as a spy, since Arbella, niece of Mary, Queen of Scots, and cousin of James VI of Scotland, later James I of England, was at the time a strong candidate for the succession to Elizabeth's throne. Frederick S. Boas dismisses the possibility of this identification, based on surviving legal records which document Marlowe's \"residence in London between September and December 1589\". Marlowe had been party to a fatal quarrel involving his neighbours and the poet Thomas Watson in Norton Folgate and was held in Newgate Prison for a fortnight. In fact, the quarrel and his arrest occurred on 18 September, he was released on bail on 1 October and he had to attend court, where he was acquitted on 3 December, but there is no record of where he was for the intervening two months.\nIn 1592 Marlowe was arrested in the English garrison town of Flushing (Vlissingen) in the Netherlands, for alleged involvement in the counterfeiting of coins, presumably related to the activities of seditious Catholics. He was sent to the Lord Treasurer (Burghley), but no charge or imprisonment resulted. This arrest may have disrupted another of Marlowe's spying missions, perhaps by giving the resulting coinage to the Catholic cause. He was to infiltrate the followers of the active Catholic plotter William Stanley and report back to Burghley.\nPhilosophy.\nMarlowe was reputed to be an atheist, which held the dangerous implication of being an enemy of God and, by association, the state. With the rise of public fears concerning The School of Night, or \"School of Atheism\" in the late 16th century, accusations of atheism were closely associated with disloyalty to the Protestant monarchy of England.\nSome modern historians consider that Marlowe's professed atheism, as with his supposed Catholicism, may have been no more than a sham to further his work as a government spy. Contemporary evidence comes from Marlowe's accuser in Flushing, an informer called Richard Baines. The governor of Flushing had reported that each of the men had \"of malice\" accused the other of instigating the counterfeiting and of intending to go over to the Catholic \"enemy\"; such an action was considered atheistic by the Church of England. Following Marlowe's arrest in 1593, Baines submitted to the authorities a \"note containing the opinion of one Christopher Marly concerning his damnable judgment of religion, and scorn of God's word\". Baines attributes to Marlowe a total of eighteen items which \"scoff at the pretensions of the Old and New Testament\" such as, \"Christ was a bastard and his mother dishonest [unchaste]\", \"the woman of Samaria and her sister were whores and that Christ knew them dishonestly\", \"St John the Evangelist was bedfellow to Christ and leaned always in his bosom\" (cf. John 13:23\u201325) and \"that he used him as the sinners of Sodom\". He also implied that Marlowe had Catholic sympathies. Other passages are merely sceptical in tone: \"he persuades men to atheism, willing them not to be afraid of bugbears and hobgoblins\". The final paragraph of Baines's document reads:\nSimilar examples of Marlowe's statements were given by Thomas Kyd after his imprisonment and possible torture (see above); Kyd and Baines connect Marlowe with mathematician Thomas Harriot's and Sir Walter Raleigh's circle. Another document claimed about that time that \"one Marlowe is able to show more sound reasons for Atheism than any divine in England is able to give to prove divinity, and that ... he hath read the Atheist lecture to Sir Walter Raleigh and others\".\nSome critics believe that Marlowe sought to disseminate these views in his work and that he identified with his rebellious and iconoclastic protagonists. Plays had to be approved by the Master of the Revels before they could be performed and the censorship of publications was under the control of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Presumably these authorities did not consider any of Marlowe's works to be unacceptable other than the \"Amores\".\nSexuality.\nIt has been claimed that Marlowe was homosexual. Some scholars argue that the identification of an Elizabethan as gay or homosexual in the modern sense is \"anachronistic,\" saying that for the Elizabethans the terms were more likely to have been applied to homoerotic affections or sexual acts rather than to what we currently understand as a settled sexual orientation or personal role identity. Other scholars argue that the evidence is inconclusive and that the reports of Marlowe's homosexuality may be rumours produced after his death. Richard Baines reported Marlowe as saying: \"all they that love not Tobacco &amp; Boies were fools\". David Bevington and Eric C. Rasmussen describe Baines's evidence as \"unreliable testimony\" and \"[t]hese and other testimonials need to be discounted for their exaggeration and for their having been produced under legal circumstances we would now regard as a witch-hunt\".\nLiterary scholar J. B. Steane considered there to be \"no evidence for Marlowe's homosexuality at all\". Other scholars point to the frequency with which Marlowe explores homosexual themes in his writing: in \"Hero and Leander\", Marlowe writes of the male youth Leander: \"in his looks were all that men desire...\" \"Edward the Second\" contains the following passage enumerating homosexual relationships:\nMarlowe wrote the only play about the life of Edward II up to his time, taking the humanist literary discussion of male sexuality much further than his contemporaries. The play was extremely bold, dealing with a star-crossed love story between Edward II and Piers Gaveston. Though it was a common practice at the time to reveal characters as homosexual to give audiences reason to suspect them as culprits in a crime, Christopher Marlowe's Edward II is portrayed as a sympathetic character. The decision to start the play \"Dido, Queen of Carthage\" with a homoerotic scene between Jupiter and Ganymede that bears no connection to the subsequent plot has long puzzled scholars.\nArrest and death.\nIn early May 1593, several bills were posted about London threatening the Protestant refugees from France and the Netherlands who had settled in the city. One of these, the \"Dutch church libel\", written in rhymed iambic pentameter, contained allusions to several of Marlowe's plays and was signed, \"Tamburlaine\". On 11 May 1593 the Privy Council ordered the arrest of those responsible for the libels. The next day, Marlowe's colleague Thomas Kyd was arrested, his lodgings were searched and a three-page fragment of a heretical tract was found. In a letter to Sir John Puckering, Kyd asserted that it had belonged to Marlowe, with whom he had been writing \"in one chamber\" some two years earlier. In a second letter, Kyd described Marlowe as blasphemous, disorderly, holding treasonous opinions, being an irreligious reprobate and \"intemperate &amp; of a cruel hart\". They had both been working for an aristocratic patron, probably Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange. A warrant for Marlowe's arrest was issued on 18 May 1593, when the Privy Council apparently knew that he might be found staying with Thomas Walsingham, whose father was a first cousin of the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Elizabeth's principal secretary in the 1580s and a man more deeply involved in state espionage than any other member of the Privy Council. Marlowe duly presented himself on 20 May 1593 but there apparently being no Privy Council meeting on that day, was instructed to \"give his daily attendance on their Lordships, until he shall be licensed to the contrary\". On Wednesday, 30 May 1593, Marlowe was killed.\nVarious accounts of Marlowe's death were current over the next few years. In his \"Palladis Tamia\", published in 1598, Francis Meres says Marlowe was \"stabbed to death by a bawdy serving-man, a rival of his in his lewd love\" as punishment for his \"epicurism and atheism\". In 1917, in the \"Dictionary of National Biography\", Sir Sidney Lee wrote, on slender evidence, that Marlowe was killed in a drunken fight. His claim was not much at variance with the official account, which came to light only in 1925, when the scholar Leslie Hotson discovered the coroner's report of the inquest on Marlowe's death, held two days later on Friday 1 June 1593, by the Coroner of the Queen's Household, William Danby. Marlowe had spent all day in a house in Deptford, owned by the widow Eleanor Bull, with three men: Ingram Frizer, Nicholas Skeres and Robert Poley. All three had been employed by one or other of the Walsinghams. Skeres and Poley had helped snare the conspirators in the Babington plot, and Frizer was a servant to Thomas Walsingham, probably acting as a financial or business agent, as he was for Walsingham's wife Audrey a few years later. These witnesses testified that Frizer and Marlowe had argued over payment of the bill (now famously known as the \"Reckoning\"), exchanging \"divers malicious words\", while Frizer was sitting at a table between the other two and Marlowe was lying behind him on a couch. Marlowe snatched Frizer's dagger and wounded him on the head. According to the coroner's report, in the ensuing struggle Marlowe was stabbed above the right eye, killing him instantly. The jury concluded that Frizer acted in self-defence and within a month he was pardoned. Marlowe was buried in an unmarked grave in the churchyard of St. Nicholas, Deptford, immediately after the inquest, on 1 June 1593.\nThe complete text of the inquest report was published by Leslie Hotson in his book, \"The Death of Christopher Marlowe\", in the introduction to which Professor George Lyman Kittredge wrote: \"The mystery of Marlowe's death, heretofore involved in a cloud of contradictory gossip and irresponsible guess-work, is now cleared up for good and all on the authority of public records of complete authenticity and gratifying fullness\". However, this confidence proved to be fairly short-lived. Hotson had considered the possibility that the witnesses had \"concocted a lying account of Marlowe's behaviour, to which they swore at the inquest, and with which they deceived the jury\", but decided against that scenario. Others began to suspect that this theory was indeed the case. Writing to the \"Times Literary Supplement\" shortly after the book's publication, Eug\u00e9nie de Kalb disputed that the struggle and outcome as described were even possible, and Samuel A. Tannenbaum insisted the following year that such a wound could not have possibly resulted in instant death, as had been claimed. Even Marlowe's biographer John Bakeless acknowledged that \"some scholars have been inclined to question the truthfulness of the coroner's report. There is something queer about the whole episode\", and said that Hotson's discovery \"raises almost as many questions as it answers\". It has also been discovered more recently that the apparent absence of a local county coroner to accompany the Coroner of the Queen's Household would, if noticed, have made the inquest null and void.\nOne of the main reasons for doubting the truth of the inquest concerns the reliability of Marlowe's companions as witnesses. As an \"agent provocateur\" for the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Robert Poley was a consummate liar, the \"very genius of the Elizabethan underworld\", and was on record as saying \"I will swear and forswear myself, rather than I will accuse myself to do me any harm\". The other witness, Nicholas Skeres, had for many years acted as a confidence trickster, drawing young men into the clutches of people involved in the money-lending racket, including Marlowe's apparent killer, Ingram Frizer, with whom he was engaged in such a swindle. Despite their being referred to as \"generosi\" (gentlemen) in the inquest report, the witnesses were professional liars. Some biographers, such as Kuriyama and Downie, take the inquest to be a true account of what occurred, but in trying to explain what really happened if the account was not true, others have come up with a variety of murder theories:\nSince there are only written documents on which to base any conclusions, and since it is probable that the most crucial information about his death was never committed to paper, it is unlikely that the full circumstances of Marlowe's death will ever be known.\nReputation among contemporary writers.\nFor his contemporaries in the literary world, Marlowe was above all an admired and influential artist. Within weeks of his death, George Peele remembered him as \"Marley, the Muses' darling\"; Michael Drayton noted that he \"Had in him those brave translunary things / That the first poets had\" and Ben Jonson even wrote of \"Marlowe's mighty line\". Thomas Nashe wrote warmly of his friend, \"poor deceased Kit Marlowe,\" as did the publisher Edward Blount in his dedication of \"Hero and Leander\" to Sir Thomas Walsingham. Among the few contemporary dramatists to say anything negative about Marlowe was the anonymous author of the Cambridge University play \"The Return from Parnassus\" (1598) who wrote, \"Pity it is that wit so ill should dwell, / Wit lent from heaven, but vices sent from hell\".\nThe most famous tribute to Marlowe was paid by Shakespeare in \"As You Like It\", where he not only quotes a line from \"Hero and Leander\" (\"Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might, 'Who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight?) but also gives to the clown Touchstone the words \"When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room.\" This appears to be a reference to Marlowe's murder which involved a fight over the \"reckoning,\" the bill, as well as to a line in Marlowe's \"Jew of Malta\", \"Infinite riches in a little room.\"\nShakespeare was much influenced by Marlowe in his work, as can be seen in the use of Marlovian themes in \"Antony and Cleopatra\", \"The Merchant of Venice\", \"Richard II\" and \"Macbeth\" (\"Dido\", \"Jew of Malta\", \"Edward II\" and \"Doctor Faustus\", respectively). In \"Hamlet\", after meeting with the travelling actors, Hamlet requests the Player perform a speech about the Trojan War, which at 2.2.429\u2013432 has an echo of Marlowe's \"Dido, Queen of Carthage\". In \"Love's Labour's Lost\" Shakespeare brings on a character \"Marcade\" (three syllables) in conscious acknowledgement of Marlowe's character \"Mercury\", also attending the King of Navarre, in \"Massacre at Paris\". The significance, to those of Shakespeare's audience who were familiar with \"Hero and Leander\", was Marlowe's identification of himself with the god Mercury.\nShakespeare authorship theory.\nAn argument has arisen about the notion that Marlowe faked his death and then continued to write under the assumed name of William Shakespeare. Academic consensus rejects alternative candidates for authorship of Shakespeare's plays and sonnets, including Marlowe.\nLiterary career.\nPlays.\nSix dramas have been attributed to the authorship of Christopher Marlowe either alone or in collaboration with other writers, with varying degrees of evidence. The writing sequence or chronology of these plays is mostly unknown and is offered here with any dates and evidence known. Among the little available information we have, \"Dido\" is believed to be the first Marlowe play performed, while it was \"Tamburlaine\" that was first to be performed on a regular commercial stage in London in 1587. Believed by many scholars to be Marlowe's greatest success, \"Tamburlaine\" was the first English play written in blank verse and, with Thomas Kyd's \"The Spanish Tragedy\", is generally considered the beginning of the mature phase of the Elizabethan theatre.\nThe play \"Lust's Dominion\" was attributed to Marlowe upon its initial publication in 1657, though scholars and critics have almost unanimously rejected the attribution. He may also have written or co-written \"Arden of Faversham\".\nPoetry and translations.\nPublication and responses to the poetry and translations credited to Marlowe primarily occurred posthumously, including:\nCollaborations.\nModern scholars still look for evidence of collaborations between Marlowe and other writers. In 2016, one publisher was the first to endorse the scholarly claim of a collaboration between Marlowe and the playwright William Shakespeare:\nContemporary reception.\nMarlowe's plays were enormously successful, possibly because of the imposing stage presence of his lead actor, Edward Alleyn. Alleyn was unusually tall for the time and the haughty roles of Tamburlaine, Faustus and Barabas were probably written for him. Marlowe's plays were the foundation of the repertoire of Alleyn's company, the Admiral's Men, throughout the 1590s. One of Marlowe's poetry translations did not fare as well. In 1599, Marlowe's translation of Ovid was banned and copies were publicly burned as part of Archbishop Whitgift's crackdown on offensive material.\nChronology of dramatic works.\n\"Dido, Queen of Carthage\" (\u20131587).\nFirst official record 1594\nFirst published 1594; posthumously\nFirst recorded performance between 1587 and 1593 by the Children of the Chapel, a company of boy actors in London.\nSignificance This play is believed by many scholars to be the first play by Christopher Marlowe to be performed.\nAttribution The title page attributes the play to Marlowe and Thomas Nashe, yet some scholars question how much of a contribution Nashe made to the play.\nEvidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play.\n\"Tamburlaine, Part I\" (); \"Part II\" (\u20131588).\nFirst official record 1587, Part I\nFirst published 1590, Parts I and II in one octavo, London. No author named.\nFirst recorded performance 1587, Part I, by the Admiral's Men, London.\nSignificance \"Tamburlaine\" is the first example of blank verse used in the dramatic literature of the Early Modern English theatre.\nAttribution Author name is missing from first printing in 1590. Attribution of this work by scholars to Marlowe is based upon comparison to his other verified works. Passages and character development in \"Tamburlane\" are similar to many other Marlowe works.\nEvidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. Parts I and II were entered into the Stationers' Register on 14 August 1590. The two parts were published together by the London printer, Richard Jones, in 1590; a second edition in 1592, and a third in 1597. The 1597 edition of the two parts were published separately in quarto by Edward White; part I in 1605, and part II in 1606.\n\"The Jew of Malta\" (\u20131590).\nFirst official record 1592\nFirst published 1592; earliest extant edition, 1633\nFirst recorded performance 26 February 1592, by Lord Strange's acting company.\nSignificance The performances of the play were a success and it remained popular for the next fifty years. This play helps to establish the strong theme of \"anti-authoritarianism\" that is found throughout Marlowe's works.\nEvidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. The play was entered in the Stationers' Register on 17 May 1594 but the earliest surviving printed edition is from 1633.\n\"Doctor Faustus\" (\u20131592).\nFirst official record 1594\u20131597\nFirst published 1601, no extant copy; first extant copy, 1604 (A text) quarto; 1616 (B text) quarto.\nFirst recorded performance 1594\u20131597; 24 revival performances occurred between these years by the Lord Admiral's Company, Rose Theatre, London; earlier performances probably occurred around 1589 by the same company.\nSignificance This is the first dramatised version of the Faust legend of a scholar's dealing with the devil. Marlowe deviates from earlier versions of \"The Devil's Pact\" significantly: Marlowe's protagonist is unable to \"burn his books\" or repent to a merciful God to have his contract annulled at the end of the play; he is carried off by demons; and, in the 1616 quarto, his mangled corpse is found by the scholar characters.\nAttribution The 'B text' was highly edited and censored, owing in part to the shifting theatre laws regarding religious words onstage during the seventeenth-century. Because it contains several additional scenes believed to be the additions of other playwrights, particularly Samuel Rowley and William Bird (\"alias\" Borne), a recent edition attributes the authorship of both versions to \"Christopher Marlowe and his collaborator and revisers.\" This recent edition has tried to establish that the 'A text' was assembled from Marlowe's work and another writer, with the 'B text' as a later revision.\nEvidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. The two earliest-printed extant versions of the play, A and B, form a textual problem for scholars. Both were published after Marlowe's death and scholars disagree which text is more representative of Marlowe's original. Some editions are based on a combination of the two texts. Late-twentieth-century scholarly consensus identifies 'A text' as more representative because it contains irregular character names and idiosyncratic spelling, which are believed to reflect the author's handwritten manuscript or \"foul papers\". In comparison, 'B text' is highly edited with several additional scenes possibly written by other playwrights.\n\"Edward the Second\" ().\nFirst official record 1593\nFirst published 1590; earliest extant edition 1594 octavo\nFirst recorded performance 1592, performed by the Earl of Pembroke's Men.\nSignificance Considered by recent scholars as Marlowe's \"most modern play\" because of its probing treatment of the private life of a king and unflattering depiction of the power politics of the time. The 1594 editions of \"Edward II\" and of \"Dido\" are the first published plays with Marlowe's name appearing as the author.\nAttribution Earliest extant edition of 1594.\nEvidence The play was entered into the Stationers' Register on 6 July 1593, five weeks after Marlowe's death.\n\"The Massacre at Paris\" (\u20131593).\nFirst official record , alleged foul sheet by Marlowe of \"Scene 19\"; although authorship by Marlowe is contested by recent scholars, the manuscript is believed written while the play was first performed and with an unknown purpose.\nFirst published undated, or later, octavo, London; while this is the most complete surviving text, it is near half the length of Marlowe's other works and possibly a reconstruction. The printer and publisher credit, \"E.A. for Edward White,\" also appears on the 1605/06 printing of Marlowe's \"Tamburlaine\".\nFirst recorded performance 26 Jan 1593, by Lord Strange's Men, at Henslowe's Rose Theatre, London, under the title \"The Tragedy of the Guise\"; 1594, in the repertory of the Admiral's Men.\nSignificance \"The Massacre at Paris\" is considered Marlowe's most dangerous play, as agitators in London seized on its theme to advocate the murders of refugees from the low countries of the Spanish Netherlands, and it warns Elizabeth I of this possibility in its last scene. It features the silent \"English Agent\", whom tradition has identified with Marlowe and his connexions to the secret service. Highest grossing play for Lord Strange's Men in 1593.\nAttribution A 1593 loose manuscript sheet of the play, called a foul sheet, is alleged to be by Marlowe and has been claimed by some scholars as the only extant play manuscript by the author. It could also provide an approximate date of composition for the play. When compared with the extant printed text and his other work, other scholars reject the attribution to Marlowe. The only surviving printed text of this play is possibly a reconstruction from memory of Marlowe's original performance text. Current scholarship notes that there are only 1147 lines in the play, half the amount of a typical play of the 1590s. Other evidence that the extant published text may not be Marlowe's original is the uneven style throughout, with two-dimensional characterisations, deteriorating verbal quality and repetitions of content.\nEvidence Never appeared in the Stationer's Register.\nMemorials.\n\"The Muse of Poetry\", a bronze sculpture by Edward Onslow Ford references Marlowe and his work. It was erected on Buttermarket, Canterbury in 1891, and now stands outside the Marlowe Theatre in the city.\nIn July 2002, a memorial window to Marlowe was unveiled by the Marlowe Society at Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. Controversially, a question mark was added to his generally accepted date of death. On 25 October 2011 a letter from Paul Edmondson and Stanley Wells was published by \"The Times\" newspaper, in which they called on the Dean and Chapter to remove the question mark on the grounds that it \"flew in the face of a mass of unimpugnable evidence\". In 2012, they renewed this call in their e-book \"Shakespeare Bites Back\", adding that it \"denies history\" and again the following year in their book \"Shakespeare Beyond Doubt\".\nThe Marlowe Theatre in Canterbury, Kent, UK, was named for Marlowe in 1949.\nMarlowe in fiction.\nMarlowe has been used as a character in books, theatre, film, television, games and radio.\nModern compendia.\nModern scholarly collected works of Marlowe include:\nWorks of Marlowe in performance.\nRoyal Shakespeare Company.\nRoyal Shakespeare Company\nRoyal National Theatre.\nRoyal National Theatre\nShakespeare's Globe.\nShakespeare's Globe\nMalthouse Theatre.\nThe Marlowe Sessions\nReferences.\nSources"}
{"id": "5772", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5772", "title": "Cricket (disambiguation)", "text": "Cricket is a bat-and-ball sport contested by two teams.\nCricket also commonly refers to:\nCricket(s) or The Cricket(s) may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5773", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5773", "title": "Carroll OConnor", "text": ""}
{"id": "5776", "revid": "152145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5776", "title": "Caving", "text": "Caving, also known as spelunking (United States and Canada) and potholing (United Kingdom and Ireland), is the recreational pastime of exploring wild cave systems (as distinguished from show caves). In contrast, speleology is the scientific study of caves and the cave environment.\nThe challenges involved in caving vary according to the cave being visited; in addition to the total absence of light beyond the entrance, negotiating pitches, squeezes, and water hazards can be difficult. Cave diving is a distinct, and more hazardous, sub-speciality undertaken by a small minority of technically proficient cavers. In an area of overlap between recreational pursuit and scientific study, the most devoted and serious-minded cavers become accomplished at the surveying and mapping of caves and the formal publication of their efforts. These are usually published freely and publicly, especially in the UK and other European countries, although in the US they are generally more private. \nAlthough caving is sometimes categorized as an \"extreme sport,\" cavers do not commonly use this terminology and typically dislike the term being used in reference to caving, as it implies a disregard for safety.\nMany caving skills overlap with those involved in canyoning and mine and urban exploration.\nMotivation.\nCaving is often undertaken for the enjoyment of the outdoor activity or for physical exercise, as well as original exploration, similar to mountaineering or diving. Physical or biological science is also an important goal for some cavers, while others are engaged in cave photography. Virgin cave systems comprise some of the last unexplored regions on Earth and much effort is put into trying to locate, enter and survey them. In well-explored regions (such as most developed nations), the most accessible caves have already been explored, and gaining access to new caves often requires cave digging or cave diving.\nCaving, in certain areas, has also been utilized as a form of eco and adventure tourism, for example in New Zealand. Tour companies have established an industry leading and guiding tours into and through caves. Depending on the type of cave and the type of tour, the experience could be adventure-based or ecological-based. There are tours led through lava tubes by a guiding service (e.g. Lava River Cave, the oceanic islands of Tenerife, Iceland and Hawaii).\nCaving has also been described as an \"individualist's team sport\" by some, as cavers can often make a trip without direct physical assistance from others but will generally go in a group for companionship or to provide emergency help if needed. Some however consider the assistance cavers give each other as a typical team sport activity.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"potholing\" refers to the act of exploring \"potholes\", a word originating in the north of England for predominantly vertical caves.\nClay Perry, an American caver of the 1940s, wrote about a group of men and boys who explored and studied caves throughout New England. This group referred to themselves as \"spelunkers\", a term derived from the Latin \"\" (\"cave, cavern, den\"). This is regarded as the first use of the word in the Americas. Throughout the 1950s, \"spelunking\" was the general term used for exploring caves in US English. It was used freely, without any positive or negative connotations, although only rarely outside the US.\nIn the 1960s, the terms \"spelunking\" and \"spelunker\" began to be considered d\u00e9class\u00e9 among experienced enthusiasts. In 1985, Steve Knutson\u00a0\u2013 editor of the National Speleological Society (NSS) publication \"American Caving Accidents\"\u00a0\u2013 made the following distinction:\nThis sentiment is exemplified by bumper stickers and T-shirts displayed by some cavers: \"Cavers rescue spelunkers\". Nevertheless, outside the caving community, \"spelunking\" and \"spelunkers\" predominately remain neutral terms referring to the practice and practitioners, without any respect to skill level.\nHistory.\nIn the mid-19th century, John Birkbeck explored potholes in England, notably Gaping Gill in 1842 and Alum Pot in 1847\u20138, returning there in the 1870s. In the mid-1880s, Herbert E. Balch began exploring Wookey Hole Caves and in the 1890s, Balch was introduced to the caves of the Mendip Hills. One of the oldest established caving clubs, Yorkshire Ramblers' Club, was founded in 1892.\nCaving as a specialized pursuit was pioneered by \u00c9douard-Alfred Martel (1859\u20131938), who first achieved the descent and exploration of the Gouffre de Padirac, in France, as early as 1889 and the first complete descent of a 110-metre wet vertical shaft at Gaping Gill in 1895. He developed his own techniques based on ropes and metallic ladders. Martel visited Kentucky and notably Mammoth Cave National Park in October 1912. In the 1920s famous US caver Floyd Collins made important explorations in the area and in the 1930s, as caving became increasingly popular, small exploration teams both in the Alps and in the karstic high plateaus of southwest France (Causses and Pyrenees) transformed cave exploration into both a scientific and recreational activity. Robert de Joly, Guy de Lavaur and Norbert Casteret were prominent figures of that time, surveying mostly caves in Southwest France.\nDuring World War II, an alpine team composed of Pierre Chevalier, Fernand Petzl, Charles Petit-Didier and others explored the Dent de Crolles cave system near Grenoble, which became the deepest explored system in the world (-658m) at that time. The lack of available equipment during the war forced Pierre Chevalier and the rest of the team to develop their own equipment, leading to technical innovation. The scaling-pole (1940), nylon ropes (1942), use of explosives in caves (1947) and mechanical rope-ascenders (Henri Brenot's \"monkeys\", first used by Chevalier and Brenot in a cave in 1934) can be directly associated to the exploration of the Dent de Crolles cave system.\nIn 1941, American cavers organized themselves into the National Speleological Society (NSS) to advance the exploration, conservation, study and understanding of caves in the United States. American caver Bill Cuddington, known as \"Vertical Bill\", further developed the single-rope technique (SRT) in the late 1950s. In 1958, two Swiss alpinists, Juesi and Marti teamed together, creating the first rope ascender known as the Jumar. In 1968 Bruno Dressler asked Fernand Petzl, who worked as a metals machinist, to build a rope-ascending tool, today known as the Petzl Croll, that he had developed by adapting the Jumar to vertical caving. Pursuing these developments, Petzl started in the 1970s a caving equipment manufacturing company named Petzl. The development of the rappel rack and the evolution of mechanical ascension systems extended the practice and safety of vertical exploration to a wider range of cavers.\nPractice and equipment.\nHard hats are worn to protect the head from bumps and falling rocks. The caver's primary light source is usually mounted on the helmet in order to keep the hands free. Electric LED lights are most common. Many cavers carry two or more sources of light \u2013 one as primary and the others as backup in case the first fails. More often than not, a second light will be mounted to the helmet for quick transition if the primary fails. Carbide lamp systems are an older form of illumination, inspired by miner's equipment, and are still used by some cavers, particularly on remote expeditions where electric charging facilities are not available.\nThe type of clothes worn underground varies according to the environment of the cave being explored, and the local culture. In cold caves, the caver may wear a warm base layer that retains its insulating properties when wet, such as a fleece (\"furry\") suit or polypropylene underwear, and an oversuit of hard-wearing (e.g., cordura) or waterproof (e.g., PVC) material. Lighter clothing may be worn in warm caves, particularly if the cave is dry, and in tropical caves thin polypropylene clothing is used, to provide some abrasion protection while remaining as cool as possible. Wetsuits may be worn if the cave is particularly wet or involves stream passages. On the feet boots are worn\u00a0\u2013 hiking-style boots in drier caves, or rubber boots (such as wellies) often with neoprene socks (\"wetsocks\") in wetter caves. Knee-pads (and sometimes elbow-pads) are popular for protecting joints during crawls. Depending on the nature of the cave, gloves are sometimes worn to protect the hands against abrasion or cold. In pristine areas and for restoration, clean oversuits and powder-free, non-latex surgical gloves are used to protect the cave itself from contaminants.\nRopes are used for descending or ascending pitches (single rope technique or SRT) or for protection. Knots commonly used in caving are the figure-of-eight- (or figure-of-nine-) loop, bowline, alpine butterfly, and Italian hitch. Ropes are usually rigged using bolts, slings, and carabiners. In some cases cavers may choose to bring and use a flexible metal ladder.\nIn addition to the equipment already described, cavers frequently carry packs containing first-aid kits, emergency equipment, and food. Containers for securely transporting urine are also commonly carried. On longer trips, containers for securely transporting feces out of the cave are carried.\nDuring very long trips, it may be necessary to camp in the cave\u00a0\u2013 some cavers have stayed underground for many days, or in particularly extreme cases, for weeks at a time. This is particularly the case when exploring or mapping extensive cave systems, where it would be impractical to retrace the route back to the surface regularly. Such long trips necessitate the cavers carrying provisions, sleeping, and cooking equipment.\nSafety.\nCaves can be dangerous places; hypothermia, falling, flooding, falling rocks and physical exhaustion are the main risks. Rescuing people from underground is difficult and time-consuming, and requires special skills, training, and equipment. Full-scale cave rescues often involve the efforts of dozens of rescue workers (often other long-time cavers who have participated in specialized courses, as normal rescue staff are not sufficiently experienced in cave environments), who may themselves be put in jeopardy in effecting the rescue. This said, caving is not necessarily a high-risk sport (especially if it does not involve difficult climbs or diving). As in all physical sports, knowing one's limitations is key.\nCaving in warmer climates carries the risk of contracting histoplasmosis, a fungal infection that is contracted from bird or bat droppings. It can cause pneumonia and can disseminate in the body to cause continued infections.\nIn many parts of the world, leptospirosis (\"a type of bacterial infection spread by animals\" including rats) is a distinct threat, owing to the presence of rat urine in rainwater or precipitation that enters the caves water system. Complications are uncommon, but can be serious.\nSafety risks while caving can be minimized by using a number of techniques:\nCave conservation.\nMany cave environments are very fragile. Many speleothems can be damaged by even the slightest touch and some by impacts as slight as a breath. Research suggests that increased carbon dioxide levels can lead to \"a higher equilibrium concentration of calcium within the drip waters feeding the speleothems, and hence causes dissolution of existing features.\" In 2008, researchers found evidence that respiration from cave visitors may generate elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in caves, leading to increased temperatures of up to 3\u00a0\u00b0C and a dissolution of existing features.\nPollution is also of concern. Since water that flows through a cave eventually comes out in streams and rivers, any pollution may ultimately end up in someone's drinking water, and can even seriously affect the surface environment, as well. Even minor pollution such as dropping organic material can have a dramatic effect on the cave biota.\nCave-dwelling species are also very fragile. Often, a particular species found in a cave may live within that cave alone, and be found nowhere else in the world; an example is the Alabama cave shrimp. Cave-dwelling species are accustomed to a near-constant climate of temperature and humidity, and any disturbance can be disruptive to the species' life cycles. Though cave wildlife may not always be immediately visible, it is typically nonetheless present in most caves.\nBats are one such fragile species of cave-dwelling animal. Bats which hibernate are most vulnerable during the winter season, when no food supply exists on the surface to replenish the bat's store of energy should it be awakened from hibernation. Bats which migrate are most sensitive during the summer months when they are raising their young. For these reasons, visiting caves inhabited by hibernating bats is discouraged during cold months; and visiting caves inhabited by migratory bats is discouraged during the warmer months when they are most sensitive and vulnerable. Due to an affliction affecting bats in the northeastern US known as white nose syndrome (WNS), the US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service has called for a moratorium effective March 26, 2009, on caving activity in states known to have hibernacula (MD, NY, VT, NH, MA, CT, NJ, PA, VA, and WV) affected by WNS, as well as adjoining states.\nSome cave passages may be marked with flagging tape or other indicators to show biologically, aesthetically, or archaeologically sensitive areas. Marked paths may show ways around notably fragile areas such as a pristine floor of sand or silt which may be thousands of years old, dating from the last time water flowed through the cave. Such deposits may easily be spoiled forever by a single misplaced step. Active formations such as flowstone can be similarly marred with a muddy footprint or handprint, and ancient human artifacts, such as fiber products, may even crumble to dust under all but the most gentle touch.\nIn 1988, concerned that cave resources were becoming increasingly damaged through unregulated use, Congress enacted the Federal Cave Resources Protection Act, giving land management agencies in the United States expanded authority to manage cave conservation on public land.\nCaving organizations.\nCavers in many countries have created organizations for the administration and oversight of caving activities within their nations. The oldest of these is the French Federation of Speleology (originally Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de sp\u00e9l\u00e9ologie) founded by \u00c9douard-Alfred Martel in 1895, which produced the first periodical journal in speleology, \"Spelunca\". The first University-based speleological institute in the world was founded in 1920 in Cluj-Napoca, Romania, by Emil Racovita, a Romanian biologist, zoologist, speleologist and explorer of Antarctica.\nThe British Speleological Association was established in 1935. In the United States, the National Speleological Society in the US was founded in 1941; however, it was originally formed as the Speleological Society of the District of Columbia on May 6, 1939.\nAn international speleological congress was proposed at a meeting in Valence-sur-Rhone, France in 1949 and first held in 1953 in Paris. The International Union of Speleology (UIS) was founded in 1965."}
{"id": "5778", "revid": "45211471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5778", "title": "Cave", "text": "Caves or caverns are natural voids under the Earth's surface. Caves often form by the weathering of rock and often extend deep underground. Exogene caves are smaller openings that extend a relatively short distance underground (such as rock shelters). Caves which extend further underground than the opening is wide are called endogene caves.\nSpeleology is the science of exploration and study of all aspects of caves and the cave environment. Visiting or exploring caves for recreation may be called \"caving\", \"potholing\", or \"spelunking\".\nFormation types.\nThe formation and development of caves is known as \"speleogenesis\"; it can occur over the course of millions of years. Caves can range widely in size, and are formed by various geological processes. These may involve a combination of chemical processes, erosion by water, tectonic forces, microorganisms, pressure, and atmospheric influences. Isotopic dating techniques can be applied to cave sediments, to determine the timescale of the geological events which formed and shaped present-day caves.\nIt is estimated that a cave cannot be more than vertically beneath the surface due to the pressure of overlying rocks. This does not, however, impose a maximum depth for a cave which is measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point, as the amount of rock above the lowest point is dependent on the topography of the landscape above it. For karst caves the maximum depth is determined on the basis of the lower limit of karst forming processes, coinciding with the base of the soluble carbonate rocks. Most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution.\nCaves can be classified in various other ways as well, including a contrast between active and relict: active caves have water flowing through them; relict caves do not, though water may be retained in them. Types of active caves include inflow caves (\"into which a stream sinks\"), outflow caves (\"from which a stream emerges\"), and through caves (\"traversed by a stream\").\nSolutional.\nSolutional caves or karst caves are the most frequently occurring caves. Such caves form in rock that is soluble; most occur in limestone, but they can also form in other rocks including chalk, dolomite, marble, salt, and gypsum. Except for salt caves, solutional caves result when rock is dissolved by natural acid in groundwater that seeps through bedding planes, faults, joints, and comparable features. Over time cracks enlarge to become caves and cave systems.\nThe largest and most abundant solutional caves are located in limestone. Limestone dissolves under the action of rainwater and groundwater charged with H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and naturally occurring organic acids. The dissolution process produces a distinctive landform known as \"karst\", characterized by sinkholes and underground drainage. Limestone caves are often adorned with calcium carbonate formations produced through slow precipitation. These include flowstones, stalactites, stalagmites, helictites, soda straws and columns. These secondary mineral deposits in caves are called \"speleothems\".\nThe portions of a solutional cave that are below the water table or the local level of the groundwater will be flooded.\nLechuguilla Cave in New Mexico and nearby Carlsbad Cavern are now believed to be examples of another type of solutional cave. They were formed by H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas rising from below, where reservoirs of oil give off sulfurous fumes. This gas mixes with groundwater and forms H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The acid then dissolves the limestone from below, rather than from above, by acidic water percolating from the surface.\nPrimary.\nCaves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called primary caves.\nLava tubes are formed through volcanic activity and are the most common primary caves. As lava flows downhill, its surface cools and solidifies. Hot liquid lava continues to flow under that crust, and if most of it flows out, a hollow tube remains. Such caves can be found in the Canary Islands, Jeju-do, the basaltic plains of Eastern Idaho, and in other places. Kazumura Cave near Hilo, Hawaii is a remarkably long and deep lava tube; it is .\nLava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes. Other caves formed through volcanic activity include rifts, lava molds, open vertical conduits, inflationary, blisters, among others.\nSea or littoral.\nSea caves are found along coasts around the world. A special case is littoral caves, which are formed by wave action in zones of weakness in sea cliffs. Often these weaknesses are faults, but they may also be dykes or bedding-plane contacts. Some wave-cut caves are now above sea level because of later uplift. Elsewhere, in places such as Thailand's Phang Nga Bay, solutional caves have been flooded by the sea and are now subject to littoral erosion. Sea caves are generally around in length, but may exceed .\nCorrasional or erosional.\nCorrasional or erosional caves are those that form entirely by erosion by flowing streams carrying rocks and other sediments. These can form in any type of rock, including hard rocks such as granite. Generally there must be some zone of weakness to guide the water, such as a fault or joint. A subtype of the erosional cave is the wind or aeolian cave, carved by wind-born sediments. Many caves formed initially by solutional processes often undergo a subsequent phase of erosional or vadose enlargement where active streams or rivers pass through them.\nGlacier.\nGlacier caves are formed by melting ice and flowing water within and under glaciers. The cavities are influenced by the very slow flow of the ice, which tends to collapse the caves again. Glacier caves are sometimes misidentified as \"ice caves\", though this latter term is properly reserved for bedrock caves that contain year-round ice formations.\nFracture.\nFracture caves are formed when layers of more soluble minerals, such as gypsum, dissolve out from between layers of less soluble rock. These rocks fracture and collapse in blocks of stone.\nTalus.\nTalus caves are formed by the openings among large boulders that have fallen down into a random heap, often at the bases of cliffs. These unstable deposits are called talus or scree, and may be subject to frequent rockfalls and landslides.\nAnchialine.\nAnchialine caves are caves, usually coastal, containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water). They occur in many parts of the world, and often contain highly specialized and endemic fauna.\nGeographic distribution.\nCaves are found throughout the world, although the distribution of documented cave system is heavily skewed towards those countries where caving has been popular for many years (such as France, Italy, Australia, the UK, the United States, etc.). As a result, explored caves are found widely in Europe, Asia, North America and Oceania, but are sparse in South America, Africa, and Antarctica.\nThis is a rough generalization, as large expanses of North America and Asia contain no documented caves, whereas areas such as the Madagascar dry deciduous forests and parts of Brazil contain many documented caves. As the world's expanses of soluble bedrock are researched by cavers, the distribution of documented caves is likely to shift. For example, China, despite containing around half the world's exposed limestone\u2014more than \u2014has relatively few documented caves.\nEcology.\nCave-inhabiting animals are often categorized as troglobites (cave-limited species), troglophiles (species that can live their entire lives in caves, but also occur in other environments), trogloxenes (species that use caves, but cannot complete their life cycle fully in caves) and accidentals (animals not in one of the previous categories). Some authors use separate terminology for aquatic forms (for example, stygobites, stygophiles, and stygoxenes).\nOf these animals, the troglobites are perhaps the most unusual organisms. Troglobitic species often show a number of characteristics, termed troglomorphic, associated with their adaptation to subterranean life. These characteristics may include a loss of pigment (often resulting in a pale or white coloration), a loss of eyes (or at least of optical functionality), an elongation of appendages, and an enhancement of other senses (such as the ability to sense vibrations in water). Aquatic troglobites (or stygobites), such as the endangered Alabama cave shrimp, live in bodies of water found in caves and get nutrients from detritus washed into their caves and from the feces of bats and other cave inhabitants. Other aquatic troglobites include cave fish, and cave salamanders such as the olm and the Texas blind salamander.\nCave insects such as Oligaphorura (formerly Archaphorura) schoetti are troglophiles, reaching in length. They have extensive distribution and have been studied fairly widely. Most specimens are female, but a male specimen was collected from St Cuthberts Swallet in 1969.\nBats, such as the gray bat and Mexican free-tailed bat, are trogloxenes and are often found in caves; they forage outside of the caves. Some species of cave crickets are classified as trogloxenes, because they roost in caves by day and forage above ground at night.\nBecause of the fragility of cave ecosystems, and the fact that cave regions tend to be isolated from one another, caves harbor a number of endangered species, such as the Tooth cave spider, liphistius trapdoor spider, and the gray bat.\nCaves are visited by many surface-living animals, including humans. These are usually relatively short-lived incursions, due to the lack of light and sustenance.\nCave entrances often have typical florae. For instance, in the eastern temperate United States, cave entrances are most frequently (and often densely) populated by the bulblet fern, \"Cystopteris bulbifera\".\nArchaeological and cultural importance.\nPeople have made use of caves throughout history. The earliest human fossils found in caves come from a series of caves near Krugersdorp and Mokopane in South Africa. The cave sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai B, Drimolen, Malapa, Cooper's D, Gladysvale, Gondolin and Makapansgat have yielded a range of early human species dating back to between three and one million years ago, including \"Australopithecus africanus\", \"Australopithecus sediba\" and \"Paranthropus robustus\". However, it is not generally thought that these early humans were living in the caves, but that they were brought into the caves by carnivores that had killed them.\nThe first early hominid ever found in Africa, the Taung Child in 1924, was also thought for many years to come from a cave, where it had been deposited after being predated on by an eagle. However, this is now debated (Hopley et al., 2013; Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.). Caves do form in the dolomite of the Ghaap Plateau, including the Early, Middle and Later Stone Age site of Wonderwerk Cave; however, the caves that form along the escarpment's edge, like that hypothesised for the Taung Child, are formed within a secondary limestone deposit called tufa. There is numerous evidence for other early human species inhabiting caves from at least one million years ago in different parts of the world, including \"Homo erectus\" in China at Zhoukoudian, \"Homo rhodesiensis\" in South Africa at the Cave of Hearths (Makapansgat), \"Homo neanderthalensis\" and \"Homo heidelbergensis\" in Europe at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, \"Homo floresiensis\" in Indonesia, and the Denisovans in southern Siberia.\nIn southern Africa, early modern humans regularly used sea caves as shelter starting about 180,000 years ago when they learned to exploit the sea for the first time. The oldest known site is PP13B at Pinnacle Point. This may have allowed rapid expansion of humans out of Africa and colonization of areas of the world such as Australia by 60\u201350,000 years ago. Throughout southern Africa, Australia, and Europe, early modern humans used caves and rock shelters as sites for rock art, such as those at Giant's Castle. Caves such as the yaodong in China were used for shelter; other caves were used for burials (such as rock-cut tombs), or as religious sites (such as ). Among the known sacred caves are China's Cave of a Thousand Buddhas and the sacred caves of Crete.\nPaleolithic cave paintings have been found throughout the world dating from 64,800 years old for non-figurative art and 43,900 years old for figurative art.\nCaves and acoustics.\nThe importance of sound in caves predates a modern understanding of acoustics. Archaeologists have uncovered relationships between paintings of dots and lines, in specific areas of resonance, within the caves of Spain and France, as well as instruments depicting paleolithic motifs, indicators of musical events and rituals. Clusters of paintings were often found in areas with notable acoustics, sometimes even replicating the sounds of the animals depicted on the walls. The human voice was also theorized to be used as an echolocation device to navigate darker areas of the caves where torches were less useful. Dots of red ochre are often found in spaces with the highest resonance, where the production of paintings was too difficult.\nCaves continue to provide usage for modern-day explorers of acoustics. Today Cumberland Caverns provides one of the best examples for modern musical usages of caves. Not only are the caves utilized for reverberation, but for the dampening qualities of their abnormal faces as well. The irregularities in the walls of the Cumberland Caverns diffuse sounds bouncing off the walls and give the space an almost recording studio-like quality. During the 20th century musicians began to explore the possibility of using caves as locations as clubs and concert halls, including the likes of Dinah Shore, Roy Acuff, and Benny Goodman. Unlike today, these early performances were typically held in the mouths of the caves, as the lack of technology made depths of the interior inaccessible with musical equipment. In Luray Caverns, Virginia, a functioning organ has been developed that generates sound by mallets striking stalactites, each with a different pitch."}
{"id": "5780", "revid": "4938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5780", "title": "Chaco Canyon", "text": ""}
{"id": "5781", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5781", "title": "Chinese numerals", "text": "Chinese numerals are words and characters used to denote numbers in written Chinese.\nToday, speakers of Chinese languages use three written numeral systems: the system of Arabic numerals used worldwide, and two indigenous systems. The more familiar indigenous system is based on Chinese characters that correspond to numerals in the spoken language. These may be shared with other languages of the Chinese cultural sphere such as Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese. Most people and institutions in China primarily use the Arabic or mixed Arabic-Chinese systems for convenience, with traditional Chinese numerals used in finance, mainly for writing amounts on cheques, banknotes, some ceremonial occasions, some boxes, and on commercials.\nThe other indigenous system consists of the Suzhou numerals, or \"huama\", a positional system, the only surviving form of the rod numerals. These were once used by Chinese mathematicians, and later by merchants in Chinese markets, such as those in Hong Kong until the 1990s, but were gradually supplanted by Arabic numerals.\nBasic counting in Chinese.\nThe Chinese character numeral system consists of the Chinese characters used by the Chinese written language to write spoken numerals. Similar to spelling-out numbers in English (e.g., \"one thousand nine hundred forty-five\"), it is not an independent system \"per se\". Since it reflects spoken language, it does not use the positional system as in Arabic numerals, in the same way that spelling out numbers in English does not.\nOrdinary numerals.\nThere are characters representing the numbers zero through nine, and other characters representing larger numbers such as tens, hundreds, thousands, ten thousands and hundred millions. There are two sets of characters for Chinese numerals: one for everyday writing, known as (), and one for use in commercial, accounting or financial contexts, known as ( or 'capital numbers'). The latter were developed by Wu Zetian () and were further refined by the Hongwu Emperor (). They arose because the characters used for writing numerals are geometrically simple, so simply using those numerals cannot prevent forgeries in the same way spelling numbers out in English would. A forger could easily change the everyday characters (30) to (5000) just by adding a few strokes. That would not be possible when writing using the financial characters (30) and (5000). They are also referred to as \"banker's numerals\" of \"anti-fraud numerals\". For the same reason, rod numerals were never used in commercial records.\nPowers of 10.\nLarge numbers.\nFor numbers larger than 10,000, similarly to the long and short scales in the West, there have been four systems in ancient and modern usage. The original one, with unique names for all powers of ten up to the 14th, is ascribed to the Yellow Emperor in the 6th century book by Zhen Luan, . In modern Chinese, only the second system is used, in which the same ancient names are used, but each represents a myriad, times the previous:\nIn practice, this situation does not lead to ambiguity, with the exception of , which means 1012 according to the system in common usage throughout the Chinese communities as well as in Japan and Korea, but has also been used for 106 in recent years (especially in mainland China for megabyte). To avoid problems arising from the ambiguity, the PRC government never uses this character in official documents, but uses ) or instead. Partly due to this, combinations of and are often used instead of the larger units of the traditional system as well, for example instead of . The ROC government in Taiwan uses to mean 1012 in official documents.\nLarge numbers from Buddhism.\nNumerals beyond z\u01cei come from Buddhist texts in Sanskrit, but are mostly found in ancient texts. Some of the following words are still being used today, but may have transferred meanings.\nSmall numbers.\nThe following are characters used to denote small order of magnitude in Chinese historically. With the introduction of SI units, some of them have been incorporated as SI prefixes, while the rest have fallen into disuse.\nSI prefixes.\nIn the People's Republic of China, the early translation for the SI prefixes in 1981 was different from those used today. The larger (, , , , ) and smaller Chinese numerals (, , , , ) were defined as translation for the SI prefixes as \"mega\", \"giga\", \"tera\", \"peta\", \"exa\", \"micro\", \"nano\", \"pico\", \"femto\", \"atto\", resulting in the creation of yet more values for each numeral.\nThe Republic of China (Taiwan) defined as the translation for \"mega\" and as the translation for \"tera\". This translation is widely used in official documents, academic communities, informational industries, etc. However, the civil broadcasting industries sometimes use to represent \"megahertz\".\nToday, the governments of both China and Taiwan use phonetic transliterations for the SI prefixes. However, the governments have each chosen different Chinese characters for certain prefixes. The following table lists the two different standards together with the early translation.\nReading and transcribing numbers.\nWhole numbers.\nMultiple-digit numbers are constructed using a multiplicative principle; first the digit itself (from 1 to 9), then the place (such as 10 or 100); then the next digit.\nIn Mandarin, the multiplier (\"li\u01ceng\") is often used rather than for all numbers 200 and greater with the \"2\" numeral (although as noted earlier this varies from dialect to dialect and person to person). Use of both or are acceptable for the number 200. When writing in the Cantonese dialect, is used to represent the \"2\" numeral for all numbers. In the southern Min dialect of Chaozhou (Teochew), (\"no6\") is used to represent the \"2\" numeral in all numbers from 200 onwards. Thus:\nFor the numbers 11 through 19, the leading 'one' () is usually omitted. In some dialects, like Shanghainese, when there are only two significant digits in the number, the leading 'one' and the trailing zeroes are omitted. Sometimes, the one before \"ten\" in the middle of a number, such as 213, is omitted. Thus:\nNotes:\nIn certain older texts like the Protestant Bible, or in poetic usage, numbers such as 114 may be \"written\" as [100] [10] [4] ().\nOutside of Taiwan, digits are sometimes grouped by myriads instead of thousands. Hence it is more convenient to think of numbers here as in groups of four, thus 1,234,567,890 is regrouped here as 12,3456,7890. Larger than a myriad, each number is therefore four zeroes longer than the one before it, thus 10000 \u00d7 = . If one of the numbers is between 10 and 19, the leading 'one' is omitted as per the above point. Hence (numbers in parentheses indicate that the number has been written as one number rather than expanded):\nIn Taiwan, pure Arabic numerals are officially always and only grouped by thousands. Unofficially, they are often not grouped, particularly for numbers below 100,000. Mixed Arabic-Chinese numerals are often used in order to denote myriads. This is used both officially and unofficially, and come in a variety of styles:\nInterior zeroes before the unit position (as in 1002) must be spelt explicitly. The reason for this is that trailing zeroes (as in 1200) are often omitted as shorthand, so ambiguity occurs. One zero is sufficient to resolve the ambiguity. Where the zero is before a digit other than the units digit, the explicit zero is not ambiguous and is therefore optional, but preferred. Thus:\nFractional values.\nTo construct a fraction, the denominator is written first, followed by , then the literary possessive particle , and lastly the numerator. This is the opposite of how fractions are read in English, which is numerator first. Each half of the fraction is written the same as a whole number. For example, to express \"two thirds\", the structure \"three parts of-this two\" is used. Mixed numbers are written with the whole-number part first, followed by , then the fractional part.\nPercentages are constructed similarly, using as the denominator. (The number 100 is typically expressed as , like the English 'one hundred'. However, for percentages, is used on its own.)\nBecause percentages and other fractions are formulated the same, Chinese are more likely than not to express 10%, 20% etc. as 'parts of 10' (or 1/10, 2/10, etc. i.e. ; , ; , etc.) rather than \"parts of 100\" (or 10/100, 20/100, etc. i.e. ; , ; , etc.)\nIn Taiwan, the most common formation of percentages in the spoken language is the number per hundred followed by the word , a contraction of the Japanese ; , itself taken from 'percent'. Thus 25% is ; .\nDecimal numbers are constructed by first writing the whole number part, then inserting a point (), and finally the fractional part. The fractional part is expressed using only the numbers for 0 to 9, similarly to English.\n functions as a number and therefore requires a measure word. For example: .\nOrdinal numbers.\nOrdinal numbers are formed by adding before the number.\nThe Heavenly Stems are a traditional Chinese ordinal system.\nNegative numbers.\nNegative numbers are formed by adding before the number.\nUsage.\nChinese grammar requires the use of classifiers (measure words) when a numeral is used together with a noun to express a quantity. For example, \"three people\" is expressed as , \"three ( particle) person\", where / \"\" is a classifier. There exist many different classifiers, for use with different sets of nouns, although / is the most common, and may be used informally in place of other classifiers.\nChinese uses cardinal numbers in certain situations in which English would use ordinals. For example, (literally \"three story/storey\") means \"third floor\" (\"second floor\" in British ). Likewise, (literally \"twenty-one century\") is used for \"21st century\".\nNumbers of years are commonly spoken as a sequence of digits, as in (\"two zero zero one\") for the year 2001. Names of months and days (in the Western system) are also expressed using numbers: (\"one month\") for January, etc.; and (\"week one\") for Monday, etc. There is only one exception: Sunday is , or informally , both literally \"week day\". When meaning \"week\", \" and \" are interchangeable. \" or \" means \"day of worship\". Chinese Catholics call Sunday \" \", \"Lord's day\".\nFull dates are usually written in the format 2001\u5e741\u670820\u65e5 for January 20, 2001 (using \"year\", \"month\", and \"day\") \u2013 all the numbers are read as cardinals, not ordinals, with no leading zeroes, and the year is read as a sequence of digits. For brevity the , and may be dropped to give a date composed of just numbers. For example \"6-4\" in Chinese is \"six-four\", short for \"month six, day four\" i.e. June Fourth, a common Chinese shorthand for the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests (because of the violence that occurred on June 4). For another example 67, in Chinese is sixty seven, short for year nineteen sixty seven, a common Chinese shorthand for the Hong Kong 1967 leftist riots.\nCounting rod and Suzhou numerals.\nIn the same way that Roman numerals were standard in ancient and medieval Europe for mathematics and commerce, the Chinese formerly used the rod numerals, which is a positional system. The Suzhou numerals () system is a variation of the Southern Song rod numerals. Nowadays, the \"hu\u0101m\u01ce\" system is only used for displaying prices in Chinese markets or on traditional handwritten invoices.\nHand gestures.\nThere is a common method of using of one hand to signify the numbers one to ten. While the five digits on one hand can easily express the numbers one to five, six to ten have special signs that can be used in commerce or day-to-day communication.\nHistorical use of numerals in China.\nMost Chinese numerals of later periods were descendants of the Shang dynasty oracle numerals of the 14th century BC. The oracle bone script numerals were found on tortoise shell and animal bones. In early civilizations, the Shang were able to express any numbers, however large, with only nine symbols and a counting board though it was still not positional.\nSome of the bronze script numerals such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, and 13 became part of the system of rod numerals.\nIn this system, horizontal rod numbers are used for the tens, thousands, hundred thousands etc. It is written in \"Sunzi Suanjing\" that \"one is vertical, ten is horizontal\".\nThe counting rod numerals system has place value and decimal numerals for computation, and was used widely by Chinese merchants, mathematicians and astronomers from the Han dynasty to the 16th century.\nIn 690 AD, Wu Zetian promulgated Zetian characters, one of which was . The word is now used as a synonym for the number zero.\nAlexander Wylie, Christian missionary to China, in 1853 already refuted the notion that \"the Chinese numbers were written in words at length\", and stated that in ancient China, calculation was carried out by means of counting rods, and \"the written character is evidently a rude presentation of these\". After being introduced to the rod numerals, he said \"Having thus obtained a simple but effective system of figures, we find the Chinese in actual use of a method of notation depending on the theory of local value [i.e. place-value], several centuries before such theory was understood in Europe, and while yet the science of numbers had scarcely dawned among the Arabs.\"\nDuring the Ming and Qing dynasties (after Arabic numerals were introduced into China), some Chinese mathematicians used Chinese numeral characters as positional system digits. After the Qing period, both the Chinese numeral characters and the Suzhou numerals were replaced by Arabic numerals in mathematical writings.\nCultural influences.\nTraditional Chinese numeric characters are also used in Japan and Korea and were used in Vietnam before the 20th century. In vertical text (that is, read top to bottom), using characters for numbers is the norm, while in horizontal text, Arabic numerals are most common. Chinese numeric characters are also used in much the same formal or decorative fashion that Roman numerals are in Western cultures. Chinese numerals may appear together with Arabic numbers on the same sign or document."}
{"id": "5783", "revid": "25895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5783", "title": "Computer program", "text": "A computer program is a sequence or set of instructions in a programming language for a computer to execute. It is one component of software, which also includes documentation and other intangible components.\nA \"computer program\" in its human-readable form is called source code. Source code needs another computer program to execute because computers can only execute their native machine instructions. Therefore, source code may be translated to machine instructions using a compiler written for the language. (Assembly language programs are translated using an assembler.) The resulting file is called an executable. Alternatively, source code may execute within an interpreter written for the language.\nIf the executable is requested for execution, then the operating system loads it into memory and starts a process. The central processing unit will soon switch to this process so it can fetch, decode, and then execute each machine instruction.\nIf the source code is requested for execution, then the operating system loads the corresponding interpreter into memory and starts a process. The interpreter then loads the source code into memory to translate and execute each statement. Running the source code is slower than running an executable. Moreover, the interpreter must be installed on the computer.\nExample computer program.\nThe \"Hello, World!\" program is used to illustrate a language's basic syntax. The syntax of the language BASIC (1964) was intentionally limited to make the language easy to learn. For example, variables are not declared before being used. Also, variables are automatically initialized to zero. Here is an example computer program, in Basic, to average a list of numbers:\n10 INPUT \"How many numbers to average?\", A\n20 FOR I = 1 TO A\n30 INPUT \"Enter number:\", B\n40 LET C = C + B\n50 NEXT I\n60 LET D = C/A\n70 PRINT \"The average is\", D\n80 END\nOnce the mechanics of basic computer programming are learned, more sophisticated and powerful languages are available to build large computer systems.\nHistory.\nImprovements in software development are the result of improvements in computer hardware. At each stage in hardware's history, the task of computer programming changed dramatically.\nAnalytical Engine.\nIn 1837, Jacquard's loom inspired Charles Babbage to attempt to build the Analytical Engine.\nThe names of the components of the calculating device were borrowed from the textile industry. In the textile industry, yarn was brought from the store to be milled. The device had a \"store\" which consisted of memory to hold 1,000 numbers of 50 decimal digits each. Numbers from the \"store\" were transferred to the \"mill\" for processing. The engine was programmed using two sets of perforated cards. One set directed the operation and the other set inputted the variables. However, the thousands of cogged wheels and gears never fully worked together.\nAda Lovelace worked for Charles Babbage to create a description of the Analytical Engine (1843). The description contained Note G which completely detailed a method for calculating Bernoulli numbers using the Analytical Engine. This note is recognized by some historians as the world's first \"computer program\".\nUniversal Turing machine.\nIn 1936, Alan Turing introduced the Universal Turing machine, a theoretical device that can model every computation.\nIt is a finite-state machine that has an infinitely long read/write tape. The machine can move the tape back and forth, changing its contents as it performs an algorithm. The machine starts in the initial state, goes through a sequence of steps, and halts when it encounters the halt state. All present-day computers are Turing complete.\nENIAC.\nThe Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer (ENIAC) was built between July 1943 and Fall 1945. It was a Turing complete, general-purpose computer that used 17,468 vacuum tubes to create the circuits. At its core, it was a series of Pascalines wired together. Its 40 units weighed 30 tons, occupied , and consumed $650 per hour (in 1940s currency) in electricity when idle. It had 20 base-10 accumulators. Programming the ENIAC took up to two months. Three function tables were on wheels and needed to be rolled to fixed function panels. Function tables were connected to function panels by plugging heavy black cables into plugboards. Each function table had 728 rotating knobs. Programming the ENIAC also involved setting some of the 3,000 switches. Debugging a program took a week. It ran from 1947 until 1955 at Aberdeen Proving Ground, calculating hydrogen bomb parameters, predicting weather patterns, and producing firing tables to aim artillery guns.\nStored-program computers.\nInstead of plugging in cords and turning switches, a stored-program computer loads its instructions into memory just like it loads its data into memory. As a result, the computer could be programmed quickly and perform calculations at very fast speeds. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly built the ENIAC. The two engineers introduced the \"stored-program concept\" in a three-page memo dated February 1944. Later, in September 1944, John von Neumann began working on the ENIAC project. On June 30, 1945, von Neumann published the \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\", which equated the structures of the computer with the structures of the human brain. The design became known as the von Neumann architecture. The architecture was simultaneously deployed in the constructions of the EDVAC and EDSAC computers in 1949.\nThe IBM System/360 (1964) was a family of computers, each having the same instruction set architecture. The Model 20 was the smallest and least expensive. Customers could upgrade and retain the same application software. The Model 195 was the most premium. Each System/360 model featured multiprogramming\u2014having multiple processes in memory at once. When one process was waiting for input/output, another could compute.\nIBM planned for each model to be programmed using PL/1. A committee was formed that included COBOL, Fortran and ALGOL programmers. The purpose was to develop a language that was comprehensive, easy to use, extendible, and would replace Cobol and Fortran. The result was a large and complex language that took a long time to compile.\nComputers manufactured until the 1970s had front-panel switches for manual programming. The computer program was written on paper for reference. An instruction was represented by a configuration of on/off settings. After setting the configuration, an execute button was pressed. This process was then repeated. Computer programs also were automatically inputted via paper tape, punched cards or magnetic-tape. After the medium was loaded, the starting address was set via switches, and the execute button was pressed.\nVery Large Scale Integration.\nA major milestone in software development was the invention of the Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) circuit (1964). Following World War II, tube-based technology was replaced with point-contact transistors (1947) and bipolar junction transistors (late 1950s) mounted on a circuit board. During the 1960s, the aerospace industry replaced the circuit board with an integrated circuit chip.\nRobert Noyce, co-founder of Fairchild Semiconductor (1957) and Intel (1968), achieved a technological improvement to refine the production of field-effect transistors (1963). The goal is to alter the electrical resistivity and conductivity of a semiconductor junction. First, naturally occurring silicate minerals are converted into polysilicon rods using the Siemens process. The Czochralski process then converts the rods into a monocrystalline silicon, boule crystal. The crystal is then thinly sliced to form a wafer substrate. The planar process of photolithography then \"integrates\" unipolar transistors, capacitors, diodes, and resistors onto the wafer to build a matrix of metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor (MOS) transistors. The MOS transistor is the primary component in \"integrated circuit chips\".\nOriginally, integrated circuit chips had their function set during manufacturing. During the 1960s, controlling the electrical flow migrated to programming a matrix of read-only memory (ROM). The matrix resembled a two-dimensional array of fuses. The process to embed instructions onto the matrix was to burn out the unneeded connections. There were so many connections, firmware programmers wrote a \"computer program\" on another chip to oversee the burning. The technology became known as Programmable ROM. In 1971, Intel installed the computer program onto the chip and named it the Intel 4004 microprocessor.\nThe terms \"microprocessor\" and central processing unit (CPU) are now used interchangeably. However, CPUs predate microprocessors. For example, the IBM System/360 (1964) had a CPU made from circuit boards containing discrete components on ceramic substrates.\nSac State 8008.\nThe Intel 4004 (1971) was a 4-bit microprocessor designed to run the Busicom calculator. Five months after its release, Intel released the Intel 8008, an 8-bit microprocessor. Bill Pentz led a team at Sacramento State to build the first microcomputer using the Intel 8008: the \"Sac State 8008\" (1972). Its purpose was to store patient medical records. The computer supported a disk operating system to run a Memorex, 3-megabyte, hard disk drive. It had a color display and keyboard that was packaged in a single console. The disk operating system was programmed using IBM's Basic Assembly Language (BAL). The medical records application was programmed using a BASIC interpreter. However, the computer was an evolutionary dead-end because it was extremely expensive. Also, it was built at a public university lab for a specific purpose. Nonetheless, the project contributed to the development of the Intel 8080 (1974) instruction set.\nx86 series.\nIn 1978, the modern software development environment began when Intel upgraded the Intel 8080 to the Intel 8086. Intel simplified the Intel 8086 to manufacture the cheaper Intel 8088. IBM embraced the Intel 8088 when they entered the personal computer market (1981). As consumer demand for personal computers increased, so did Intel's microprocessor development. The succession of development is known as the x86 series. The x86 assembly language is a family of backward-compatible machine instructions. Machine instructions created in earlier microprocessors were retained throughout microprocessor upgrades. This enabled consumers to purchase new computers without having to purchase new application software. The major categories of instructions are:\nChanging programming environment.\nVLSI circuits enabled the programming environment to advance from a computer terminal (until the 1990s) to a graphical user interface (GUI) computer. Computer terminals limited programmers to a single shell running in a command-line environment. During the 1970s, full-screen source code editing became possible through a text-based user interface. Regardless of the technology available, the goal is to program in a programming language.\nProgramming paradigms and languages.\nProgramming language features exist to provide building blocks to be combined to express programming ideals. Ideally, a programming language should:\nThe programming style of a programming language to provide these building blocks may be categorized into programming paradigms. For example, different paradigms may differentiate:\nEach of these programming styles has contributed to the synthesis of different \"programming languages\".\nA \"programming language\" is a set of keywords, symbols, identifiers, and rules by which programmers can communicate instructions to the computer. They follow a set of rules called a syntax.\n\"Programming languages\" get their basis from formal languages. The purpose of defining a solution in terms of its \"formal language\" is to generate an algorithm to solve the underlining problem. An \"algorithm\" is a sequence of simple instructions that solve a problem.\nGenerations of programming language.\nThe evolution of programming languages began when the EDSAC (1949) used the first stored computer program in its von Neumann architecture. Programming the EDSAC was in the first generation of programming language.\nImperative languages.\n\"Imperative languages\" specify a sequential algorithm using declarations, expressions, and statements:\nFortran.\nFORTRAN (1958) was unveiled as \"The IBM Mathematical FORmula TRANslating system\". It was designed for scientific calculations, without string handling facilities. Along with declarations, expressions, and statements, it supported:\nIt succeeded because:\nHowever, non-IBM vendors also wrote Fortran compilers, but with a syntax that would likely fail IBM's compiler. The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) developed the first Fortran standard in 1966. In 1978, Fortran 77 became the standard until 1991. Fortran 90 supports:\nCOBOL.\nCOBOL (1959) stands for \"COmmon Business Oriented Language\". Fortran manipulated symbols. It was soon realized that symbols did not need to be numbers, so strings were introduced. The US Department of Defense influenced COBOL's development, with Grace Hopper being a major contributor. The statements were English-like and verbose. The goal was to design a language so managers could read the programs. However, the lack of structured statements hindered this goal.\nCOBOL's development was tightly controlled, so dialects did not emerge to require ANSI standards. As a consequence, it was not changed for 15 years until 1974. The 1990s version did make consequential changes, like object-oriented programming.\nAlgol.\nALGOL (1960) stands for \"ALGOrithmic Language\". It had a profound influence on programming language design. Emerging from a committee of European and American programming language experts, it used standard mathematical notation and had a readable, structured design. Algol was first to define its syntax using the Backus\u2013Naur form. This led to syntax-directed compilers. It added features like:\nAlgol's direct descendants include Pascal, Modula-2, Ada, Delphi and Oberon on one branch. On another branch the descendants include C, C++ and Java.\nBasic.\nBASIC (1964) stands for \"Beginner's All-Purpose Symbolic Instruction Code\". It was developed at Dartmouth College for all of their students to learn. If a student did not go on to a more powerful language, the student would still remember Basic. A Basic interpreter was installed in the microcomputers manufactured in the late 1970s. As the microcomputer industry grew, so did the language.\nBasic pioneered the interactive session. It offered operating system commands within its environment:\nHowever, the Basic syntax was too simple for large programs. Recent dialects added structure and object-oriented extensions. Microsoft's Visual Basic is still widely used and produces a graphical user interface.\nC.\nC programming language (1973) got its name because the language BCPL was replaced with B, and AT&amp;T Bell Labs called the next version \"C\". Its purpose was to write the UNIX operating system. C is a relatively small language, making it easy to write compilers. Its growth mirrored the hardware growth in the 1980s. Its growth also was because it has the facilities of assembly language, but uses a high-level syntax. It added advanced features like:\n\"C\" allows the programmer to control which region of memory data is to be stored. Global variables and static variables require the fewest clock cycles to store. The stack is automatically used for the standard variable declarations. Heap memory is returned to a pointer variable from the codice_4 function.\nC++.\nIn the 1970s, software engineers needed language support to break large projects down into modules. One obvious feature was to decompose large projects \"physically\" into separate files. A less obvious feature was to decompose large projects \"logically\" into abstract data types. At the time, languages supported concrete (scalar) datatypes like integer numbers, floating-point numbers, and strings of characters. Abstract datatypes are structures of concrete datatypes, with a new name assigned. For example, a list of integers could be called codice_14.\nIn object-oriented jargon, abstract datatypes are called classes. However, a \"class\" is only a definition; no memory is allocated. When memory is allocated to a class and bound to an identifier, it is called an object.\nObject-oriented imperative languages developed by combining the need for classes and the need for safe functional programming. A function, in an object-oriented language, is assigned to a class. An assigned function is then referred to as a method, member function, or operation. \"Object-oriented programming\" is executing \"operations\" on \"objects\".\n\"Object-oriented languages\" support a syntax to model subset/superset relationships. In set theory, an element of a subset inherits all the attributes contained in the superset. For example, a student is a person. Therefore, the set of students is a subset of the set of persons. As a result, students inherit all the attributes common to all persons. Additionally, students have unique attributes that other people do not have. \"Object-oriented languages\" model \"subset/superset\" relationships using inheritance. \"Object-oriented programming\" became the dominant language paradigm by the late 1990s.\nC++ (1985) was originally called \"C with Classes\". It was designed to expand C's capabilities by adding the object-oriented facilities of the language Simula.\nAn object-oriented module is composed of two files. The definitions file is called the header file. Here is a C++ \"header file\" for the \"GRADE class\" in a simple school application:\n// grade.h\n// Used to allow multiple source files to include\n// this header file without duplication errors.\nclass GRADE {\npublic:\n // This is the constructor operation.\n GRADE ( const char letter );\n // This is a class variable.\n char letter;\n // This is a member operation.\n int grade_numeric( const char letter );\n // This is a class variable.\n int numeric;\nA constructor operation is a function with the same name as the class name. It is executed when the calling operation executes the codice_15 statement.\nA module's other file is the \"source file\". Here is a C++ source file for the \"GRADE class\" in a simple school application:\n// grade.cpp\nGRADE::GRADE( const char letter )\n // Reference the object using the keyword 'this'.\n this-&gt;letter = letter;\n // This is Temporal Cohesion\n this-&gt;numeric = grade_numeric( letter );\nint GRADE::grade_numeric( const char letter )\n if ( ( letter == 'A' || letter == 'a' ) )\n return 4;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'B' || letter == 'b' ) )\n return 3;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'C' || letter == 'c' ) )\n return 2;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'D' || letter == 'd' ) )\n return 1;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'F' || letter == 'f' ) )\n return 0;\n else\n return -1;\nHere is a C++ \"header file\" for the \"PERSON class\" in a simple school application:\n// person.h\nclass PERSON {\npublic:\n PERSON ( const char *name );\n const char *name;\nHere is a C++ \"source file\" for the \"PERSON class\" in a simple school application:\n// person.cpp\nPERSON::PERSON ( const char *name )\n this-&gt;name = name;\nHere is a C++ \"header file\" for the \"STUDENT class\" in a simple school application:\n// student.h\n// A STUDENT is a subset of PERSON.\nclass STUDENT : public PERSON{\npublic:\n STUDENT ( const char *name );\n GRADE *grade;\nHere is a C++ \"source file\" for the \"STUDENT class\" in a simple school application:\n// student.cpp\nSTUDENT::STUDENT ( const char *name ):\n // Execute the constructor of the PERSON superclass.\n PERSON( name )\n // Nothing else to do.\nHere is a driver program for demonstration:\n// student_dvr.cpp\nint main( void )\n STUDENT *student = new STUDENT( \"The Student\" );\n student-&gt;grade = new GRADE( 'a' );\n std::cout\n // Notice student inherits PERSON's name\n \u00ab student-&gt;name\n \u00ab \": Numeric grade = \"\n \u00ab student-&gt;grade-&gt;numeric\n \u00ab \"\\n\";\n return 0;\nHere is a makefile to compile everything:\nall: student_dvr\nclean:\n rm student_dvr *.o\nstudent_dvr: student_dvr.cpp grade.o student.o person.o\n c++ student_dvr.cpp grade.o student.o person.o -o student_dvr\ngrade.o: grade.cpp grade.h\n c++ -c grade.cpp\nstudent.o: student.cpp student.h\n c++ -c student.cpp\nperson.o: person.cpp person.h\n c++ -c person.cpp\nDeclarative languages.\n\"Imperative languages\" have one major criticism: assigning an expression to a \"non-local\" variable may produce an unintended side effect. Declarative languages generally omit the assignment statement and the control flow. They describe \"what\" computation should be performed and not \"how\" to compute it. Two broad categories of declarative languages are functional languages and logical languages.\nThe principle behind a \"functional language\" is to use lambda calculus as a guide for a well defined semantic. In mathematics, a function is a rule that maps elements from an \"expression\" to a range of \"values\". Consider the function:\ncodice_16\nThe \"expression\" codice_17 is mapped by the function codice_18 to a range of \"values\". One \"value\" happens to be 20. This occurs when x is 2. So, the application of the function is mathematically written as:\ncodice_19\nA \"functional language\" compiler will not store this value in a variable. Instead, it will \"push\" the value onto the computer's stack before setting the program counter back to the calling function. The calling function will then \"pop\" the value from the stack.\n\"Imperative languages\" do support functions. Therefore, \"functional programming\" can be achieved in an imperative language, if the programmer uses discipline. However, a \"functional language\" will force this discipline onto the programmer through its syntax. Functional languages have a syntax tailored to emphasize the \"what\".\nA functional program is developed with a set of primitive functions followed by a single driver function. Consider the snippet:\ncodice_20\ncodice_21\ncodice_22\ncodice_9\nThe primitives are codice_25 and codice_26. The driver function is codice_27. Executing:\ncodice_28 will output 6.\n\"Functional languages\" are used in computer science research to explore new language features. Moreover, their lack of side-effects have made them popular in parallel programming and concurrent programming. However, application developers prefer the object-oriented features of \"imperative languages\".\nLisp.\nLisp (1958) stands for \"LISt Processor\". It is tailored to process lists. A full structure of the data is formed by building lists of lists. In memory, a tree data structure is built. Internally, the tree structure lends nicely for recursive functions. The syntax to build a tree is to enclose the space-separated elements within parenthesis. The following is a list of three elements. The first two elements are themselves lists of two elements:\ncodice_29\nLisp has functions to extract and reconstruct elements. The function codice_30 returns a list containing the first element in the list. The function codice_31 returns a list containing everything but the first element. The function codice_32 returns a list that is the concatenation of other lists. Therefore, the following expression will return the list codice_33:\ncodice_34\nOne drawback of Lisp is when many functions are nested, the parentheses may look confusing. Modern Lisp environments help ensure parenthesis match. As an aside, Lisp does support the \"imperative language\" operations of the assignment statement and goto loops. Also, \"Lisp\" is not concerned with the datatype of the elements at compile time. Instead, it assigns (and may reassign) the datatypes at runtime. Assigning the datatype at runtime is called dynamic binding. Whereas dynamic binding increases the language's flexibility, programming errors may linger until late in the software development process.\nWriting large, reliable, and readable Lisp programs requires forethought. If properly planned, the program may be much shorter than an equivalent \"imperative language\" program. \"Lisp\" is widely used in artificial intelligence. However, its usage has been accepted only because it has \"imperative language\" operations, making unintended side-effects possible.\nML.\nML (1973) stands for \"Meta Language\". ML checks to make sure only data of the same type are compared with one another. For example, this function has one input parameter (an integer) and returns an integer:\n\"ML\" is not parenthesis-eccentric like \"Lisp\". The following is an application of codice_18:\n times_10 2\nIt returns \"20 : int\". (Both the results and the datatype are returned.)\nLike \"Lisp\", \"ML\" is tailored to process lists. Unlike \"Lisp\", each element is the same datatype. Moreover, \"ML\" assigns the datatype of an element at compile-time. Assigning the datatype at compile-time is called static binding. Static binding increases reliability because the compiler checks the context of variables before they are used.\nProlog.\nProlog (1972) stands for \"PROgramming in LOGic\". It is a logic programming language, based on formal logic. The language was developed by Alain Colmerauer and Philippe Roussel in Marseille, France. It is an implementation of Selective Linear Definite clause resolution, pioneered by Robert Kowalski and others at the University of Edinburgh.\nThe building blocks of a Prolog program are \"facts\" and \"rules\". Here is a simple example:\ncat(tom). % tom is a cat\nmouse(jerry). % jerry is a mouse\nanimal(X) :- cat(X). % each cat is an animal\nanimal(X) :- mouse(X). % each mouse is an animal\nbig(X) :- cat(X). % each cat is big\nsmall(X) :- mouse(X). % each mouse is small\neat(X,Y) :- mouse(X), cheese(Y). % each mouse eats each cheese\neat(X,Y) :- big(X), small(Y). % each big animal eats each small animal\nAfter all the facts and rules are entered, then a question can be asked:\n?- eat(tom,jerry).\ntrue\nThe following example shows how Prolog will convert a letter grade to its numeric value:\nnumeric_grade('A', 4).\nnumeric_grade('B', 3).\nnumeric_grade('C', 2).\nnumeric_grade('D', 1).\nnumeric_grade('F', 0).\nnumeric_grade(X, -1) :- not X = 'A', not X = 'B', not X = 'C', not X = 'D', not X = 'F'.\ngrade('The Student', 'A').\n?- grade('The Student', X), numeric_grade(X, Y).\nX = 'A',\nY = 4\nHere is a comprehensive example:\n1) All dragons billow fire, or equivalently, a thing billows fire if the thing is a dragon:\nbillows_fire(X) :-\n is_a_dragon(X).\n2) A creature billows fire if one of its parents billows fire:\nbillows_fire(X) :-\n is_a_creature(X),\n is_a_parent_of(Y,X),\n billows_fire(Y).\n3) A thing X is a parent of a thing Y if X is the mother of Y or X is the father of Y:\nis_a_parent_of(X, Y):- is_the_mother_of(X, Y).\nis_a_parent_of(X, Y):- is_the_father_of(X, Y).\n4) A thing is a creature if the thing is a dragon:\nis_a_creature(X) :-\n is_a_dragon(X).\n5) Norberta is a dragon, and Puff is a creature. Norberta is the mother of Puff.\nis_a_dragon(norberta).\nis_a_creature(puff).\nis_the_mother_of(norberta, puff).\nRule (2) is a recursive (inductive) definition. It can be understood declaratively, without the need to understand how it is executed.\nRule (3) shows how functions are represented by using relations. Here, the mother and father functions ensure that every individual has only one mother and only one father.\nProlog is an untyped language. Nonetheless, inheritance can be represented by using predicates. Rule (4) asserts that a creature is a superclass of a dragon.\nQuestions are answered using backward reasoning. Given the question:\n ?- billows_fire(X).\nProlog generates two answers :\nX = norberta\nX = puff\nPractical applications for Prolog are knowledge representation and problem solving in artificial intelligence.\nObject-oriented programming.\nObject-oriented programming is a programming method to execute operations (functions) on objects. The basic idea is to group the characteristics of a phenomenon into an object container and give the container a name. The \"operations\" on the phenomenon are also grouped into the container. \"Object-oriented programming\" developed by combining the need for containers and the need for safe functional programming. This programming method need not be confined to an \"object-oriented language\". In an object-oriented language, an object container is called a class. In a non-object-oriented language, a data structure (which is also known as a record) may become an object container. To turn a data structure into an object container, operations need to be written specifically for the structure. The resulting structure is called an abstract datatype. However, inheritance will be missing. Nonetheless, this shortcoming can be overcome.\nHere is a C programming language \"header file\" for the \"GRADE abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* grade.h */\n/* Used to allow multiple source files to include */\n/* this header file without duplication errors. */\ntypedef struct\n char letter;\n} GRADE;\n/* Constructor */\nGRADE *grade_new( char letter );\nint grade_numeric( char letter );\nThe codice_36 function performs the same algorithm as the C++ constructor operation.\nHere is a C programming language \"source file\" for the \"GRADE abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* grade.c */\nGRADE *grade_new( char letter )\n GRADE *grade;\n /* Allocate heap memory */\n if ( ! ( grade = calloc( 1, sizeof ( GRADE ) ) ) )\n fprintf(stderr,\n \"ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\\n\",\n __FILE__,\n __FUNCTION__,\n __LINE__ );\n exit( 1 );\n grade-&gt;letter = letter;\n return grade;\nint grade_numeric( char letter )\n if ( ( letter == 'A' || letter == 'a' ) )\n return 4;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'B' || letter == 'b' ) )\n return 3;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'C' || letter == 'c' ) )\n return 2;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'D' || letter == 'd' ) )\n return 1;\n else\n if ( ( letter == 'F' || letter == 'f' ) )\n return 0;\n else\n return -1;\nIn the constructor, the function codice_37 is used instead of codice_4 because each memory cell will be set to zero.\nHere is a C programming language \"header file\" for the \"PERSON abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* person.h */\ntypedef struct\n char *name;\n} PERSON;\n/* Constructor */\nPERSON *person_new( char *name );\nHere is a C programming language \"source file\" for the \"PERSON abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* person.c */\nPERSON *person_new( char *name )\n PERSON *person;\n if ( ! ( person = calloc( 1, sizeof ( PERSON ) ) ) )\n fprintf(stderr,\n \"ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\\n\",\n __FILE__,\n __FUNCTION__,\n __LINE__ );\n exit( 1 );\n person-&gt;name = name;\n return person;\nHere is a C programming language \"header file\" for the \"STUDENT abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* student.h */\ntypedef struct\n /* A STUDENT is a subset of PERSON. */\n PERSON *person;\n GRADE *grade;\n} STUDENT;\n/* Constructor */\nSTUDENT *student_new( char *name );\nHere is a C programming language \"source file\" for the \"STUDENT abstract datatype\" in a simple school application:\n/* student.c */\nSTUDENT *student_new( char *name )\n STUDENT *student;\n if ( ! ( student = calloc( 1, sizeof ( STUDENT ) ) ) )\n fprintf(stderr,\n \"ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\\n\",\n __FILE__,\n __FUNCTION__,\n __LINE__ );\n exit( 1 );\n /* Execute the constructor of the PERSON superclass. */\n student-&gt;person = person_new( name );\n return student;\nHere is a driver program for demonstration:\n/* student_dvr.c */\nint main( void )\n STUDENT *student = student_new( \"The Student\" );\n student-&gt;grade = grade_new( 'a' );\n printf( \"%s: Numeric grade = %d\\n\",\n /* Whereas a subset exists, inheritance does not. */\n student-&gt;person-&gt;name,\n /* Functional programming is executing functions just-in-time (JIT) */\n grade_numeric( student-&gt;grade-&gt;letter ) );\n return 0;\nHere is a makefile to compile everything:\nall: student_dvr\nclean:\n rm student_dvr *.o\nstudent_dvr: student_dvr.c grade.o student.o person.o\n gcc student_dvr.c grade.o student.o person.o -o student_dvr\ngrade.o: grade.c grade.h\n gcc -c grade.c\nstudent.o: student.c student.h\n gcc -c student.c\nperson.o: person.c person.h\n gcc -c person.c\nThe formal strategy to build object-oriented objects is to:\nFor example:\nSyntax and semantics.\nThe syntax of a \"computer program\" is a list of production rules which form its grammar. A programming language's grammar correctly places its declarations, expressions, and statements. Complementing the \"syntax\" of a language are its semantics. The \"semantics\" describe the meanings attached to various syntactic constructs. A syntactic construct may need a semantic description because a production rule may have an invalid interpretation. Also, different languages might have the same syntax; however, their behaviors may be different.\nThe syntax of a language is formally described by listing the production rules. Whereas the syntax of a natural language is extremely complicated, a subset of the English language can have this production rule listing:\nThe words in bold-face are known as \"non-terminals\". The words in 'single quotes' are known as \"terminals\".\nFrom this production rule listing, complete sentences may be formed using a series of replacements. The process is to replace \"non-terminals\" with either a valid \"non-terminal\" or a valid \"terminal\". The replacement process repeats until only \"terminals\" remain. One valid sentence is:\nHowever, another combination results in an invalid sentence:\nTherefore, a \"semantic\" is necessary to correctly describe the meaning of an \"eat\" activity.\nOne \"production rule\" listing method is called the Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF). BNF describes the syntax of a language and itself has a \"syntax\". This recursive definition is an example of a meta-language. The \"syntax\" of BNF includes:\nUsing BNF, a subset of the English language can have this \"production rule\" listing:\n&lt;sentence&gt; ::= &lt;noun-phrase&gt;&lt;verb-phrase&gt;\n&lt;noun-phrase&gt; ::= &lt;article&gt;&lt;adjective&gt;&lt;noun&gt;\n&lt;verb-phrase&gt; ::= &lt;verb&gt;&lt;noun-phrase&gt;\n&lt;article&gt; ::= the\n&lt;adjective&gt; ::= big | small\n&lt;noun&gt; ::= cat | mouse\n&lt;verb&gt; ::= eats\nUsing BNF, a signed-integer has the \"production rule\" listing:\n&lt;signed-integer&gt; ::= &lt;sign&gt;&lt;integer&gt;\n&lt;sign&gt; ::= + | -\n&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;\n&lt;digit&gt; ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9\nNotice the recursive production rule:\n&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;\nThis allows for an infinite number of possibilities. Therefore, a \"semantic\" is necessary to describe a limitation of the number of digits.\nNotice the leading zero possibility in the production rules:\n&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;\n&lt;digit&gt; ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9\nTherefore, a \"semantic\" is necessary to describe that leading zeros need to be ignored.\nTwo formal methods are available to describe \"semantics\". They are denotational semantics and axiomatic semantics.\nSoftware engineering and computer programming.\nSoftware engineering is a variety of techniques to produce quality \"computer programs\". Computer programming is the process of writing or editing source code. In a formal environment, a systems analyst will gather information from managers about all the organization's processes to automate. This professional then prepares a detailed plan for the new or modified system. The plan is analogous to an architect's blueprint.\nPerformance objectives.\nThe systems analyst has the objective to deliver the right information to the right person at the right time. The critical factors to achieve this objective are:\nCost objectives.\nAchieving performance objectives should be balanced with all of the costs, including:\nApplying a systems development process will mitigate the axiom: the later in the process an error is detected, the more expensive it is to correct.\nWaterfall model.\nThe waterfall model is an implementation of a \"systems development process\". As the \"waterfall\" label implies, the basic phases overlap each other:\nComputer programmer.\nA computer programmer is a specialist responsible for writing or modifying the source code to implement the detailed plan. A programming team is likely to be needed because most systems are too large to be completed by a single programmer. However, adding programmers to a project may not shorten the completion time. Instead, it may lower the quality of the system. To be effective, program modules need to be defined and distributed to team members. Also, team members must interact with one another in a meaningful and effective way.\nComputer programmers may be programming in the small: programming within a single module. Chances are a module will execute modules located in other source code files. Therefore, computer programmers may be programming in the large: programming modules so they will effectively couple with each other. Programming-in-the-large includes contributing to the application programming interface (API).\nProgram modules.\nModular programming is a technique to refine \"imperative language\" programs. Refined programs may reduce the software size, separate responsibilities, and thereby mitigate software aging. A \"program module\" is a sequence of statements that are bounded within a block and together identified by a name. Modules have a \"function\", \"context\", and \"logic\":\nThe module's name should be derived first by its \"function\", then by its \"context\". Its \"logic\" should not be part of the name. For example, codice_43 or codice_44 are appropriate module names. However, codice_45 is not.\nThe degree of interaction \"within\" a module is its level of cohesion. \"Cohesion\" is a judgment of the relationship between a module's name and its \"function\". The degree of interaction \"between\" modules is the level of coupling. \"Coupling\" is a judgement of the relationship between a module's \"context\" and the elements being performed upon.\nCohesion.\nThe levels of cohesion from worst to best are:\nCoupling.\nThe levels of coupling from worst to best are:\nData flow analysis.\n\"Data flow analysis\" is a design method used to achieve modules of \"functional cohesion\" and \"data coupling\". The input to the method is a data-flow diagram. A data-flow diagram is a set of ovals representing modules. Each module's name is displayed inside its oval. Modules may be at the executable level or the function level.\nThe diagram also has arrows connecting modules to each other. Arrows pointing into modules represent a set of inputs. Each module should have only one arrow pointing out from it to represent its single output object. (Optionally, an additional exception arrow points out.) A daisy chain of ovals will convey an entire algorithm. The input modules should start the diagram. The input modules should connect to the transform modules. The transform modules should connect to the output modules.\nFunctional categories.\n\"Computer programs\" may be categorized along functional lines. The main functional categories are application software and system software. System software includes the operating system, which couples computer hardware with application software. The purpose of the operating system is to provide an environment where application software executes in a convenient and efficient manner. Both application software and system software execute utility programs. At the hardware level, a microcode program controls the circuits throughout the central processing unit.\nApplication software.\nApplication software is the key to unlocking the potential of the computer system. Enterprise application software bundles accounting, personnel, customer, and vendor applications. Examples include enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, and supply chain management software.\nEnterprise applications may be developed in-house as a one-of-a-kind proprietary software. Alternatively, they may be purchased as off-the-shelf software. Purchased software may be modified to provide custom software. If the application is customized, then either the company's resources are used or the resources are outsourced. Outsourced software development may be from the original software vendor or a third-party developer.\nThe potential advantages of in-house software are features and reports may be developed exactly to specification. Management may also be involved in the development process and offer a level of control. Management may decide to counteract a competitor's new initiative or implement a customer or vendor requirement. A merger or acquisition may necessitate enterprise software changes. The potential disadvantages of in-house software are time and resource costs may be extensive. Furthermore, risks concerning features and performance may be looming.\nThe potential advantages of off-the-shelf software are upfront costs are identifiable, the basic needs should be fulfilled, and its performance and reliability have a track record. The potential disadvantages of off-the-shelf software are it may have unnecessary features that confuse end users, it may lack features the enterprise needs, and the data flow may not match the enterprise's work processes.\nApplication service provider.\nOne approach to economically obtaining a customized enterprise application is through an application service provider. Specialty companies provide hardware, custom software, and end-user support. They may speed the development of new applications because they possess skilled information system staff. The biggest advantage is it frees in-house resources from staffing and managing complex computer projects. Many application service providers target small, fast-growing companies with limited information system resources. On the other hand, larger companies with major systems will likely have their technical infrastructure in place. One risk is having to trust an external organization with sensitive information. Another risk is having to trust the provider's infrastructure reliability.\nOperating system.\nAn operating system is the low-level software that supports a computer's basic functions, such as scheduling processes and controlling peripherals.\nIn the 1950s, the programmer, who was also the operator, would write a program and run it. After the program finished executing, the output may have been printed, or it may have been punched onto paper tape or cards for later processing. More often than not the program did not work. The programmer then looked at the console lights and fiddled with the console switches. If less fortunate, a memory printout was made for further study. In the 1960s, programmers reduced the amount of wasted time by automating the operator's job. A program called an \"operating system\" was kept in the computer at all times.\nThe term \"operating system\" may refer to two levels of software. The operating system may refer to the kernel program that manages the processes, memory, and devices. More broadly, the operating system may refer to the entire package of the central software. The package includes a kernel program, command-line interpreter, graphical user interface, utility programs, and editor.\nKernel Program.\nThe kernel's main purpose is to manage the limited resources of a computer:\nOriginally, operating systems were programmed in assembly; however, modern operating systems are typically written in higher-level languages like C, Objective-C, and Swift.\nUtility program.\nA utility program is designed to aid system administration and software execution. Operating systems execute hardware utility programs to check the status of disk drives, memory, speakers, and printers. A utility program may optimize the placement of a file on a crowded disk. System utility programs monitor hardware and network performance. When a metric is outside an acceptable range, a trigger alert is generated.\nUtility programs include compression programs so data files are stored on less disk space. Compressed programs also save time when data files are transmitted over the network. Utility programs can sort and merge data sets. Utility programs detect computer viruses.\nMicrocode program.\nA microcode program is the bottom-level interpreter that controls the data path of software-driven computers.\n(Advances in hardware have migrated these operations to hardware execution circuits.) Microcode instructions allow the programmer to more easily implement the digital logic level\u2014the computer's real hardware. The digital logic level is the boundary between computer science and computer engineering.\nA logic gate is a tiny transistor that can return one of two signals: on or off.\nThese five gates form the building blocks of binary algebra\u2014the digital logic functions of the computer.\nMicrocode instructions are mnemonics programmers may use to execute digital logic functions instead of forming them in binary algebra. They are stored in a central processing unit's (CPU) control store.\nThese hardware-level instructions move data throughout the data path.\nThe micro-instruction cycle begins when the microsequencer uses its microprogram counter to \"fetch\" the next machine instruction from random-access memory. The next step is to \"decode\" the machine instruction by selecting the proper output line to the hardware module.\nThe final step is to \"execute\" the instruction using the hardware module's set of gates.\nInstructions to perform arithmetic are passed through an arithmetic logic unit (ALU). The ALU has circuits to perform elementary operations to add, shift, and compare integers. By combining and looping the elementary operations through the ALU, the CPU performs its complex arithmetic.\nMicrocode instructions move data between the CPU and the memory controller. Memory controller microcode instructions manipulate two registers. The memory address register is used to access each memory cell's address. The memory data register is used to set and read each cell's contents.\nMicrocode instructions move data between the CPU and the many computer buses. The disk controller bus writes to and reads from hard disk drives. Data is also moved between the CPU and other functional units via the peripheral component interconnect express bus."}
{"id": "5785", "revid": "473822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5785", "title": "Crime", "text": "In ordinary language, a crime is an unlawful act punishable by a state or other authority. The term \"crime\" does not, in modern criminal law, have any simple and universally accepted definition, though statutory definitions have been provided for certain purposes. The most popular view is that crime is a category created by law; in other words, something is a crime if declared as such by the relevant and applicable law. One proposed definition is that a crime or offence (or criminal offence) is an act harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society, or the state (\"a public wrong\"). Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law.\nThe notion that acts such as murder, rape, and theft are to be prohibited exists worldwide. What precisely is a criminal offence is defined by the criminal law of each relevant jurisdiction. While many have a catalogue of crimes called the criminal code, in some common law nations no such comprehensive statute exists.\nThe state (government) has the power to severely restrict one's liberty for committing a crime. In modern societies, there are procedures to which investigations and trials must adhere. If found guilty, an offender may be sentenced to a form of reparation such as a community sentence, or, depending on the nature of their offence, to undergo imprisonment, life imprisonment or, in some jurisdictions, death. \nUsually, to be classified as a crime, the \"act of doing something criminal\" (\"actus reus\") mustwith certain exceptionsbe accompanied by the \"intention to do something criminal\" (\"mens rea\").\nWhile every crime violates the law, not every violation of the law counts as a crime. Breaches of private law (torts and breaches of contract) are not automatically punished by the state, but can be enforced through civil procedure.\nDefinition.\nThe exact definition of crime is a philosophical issue without an agreed upon answer. Fields such as law, politics, sociology, and psychology define crime in different ways. Crimes may be variously considered as wrongs against individuals, against the community, or against the state. The criminality of an action is dependent on its context; acts of violence will be seen as crimes in many circumstances but as permissible or desirable in others. Crime was historically seen as a manifestation of evil, but this has been superseded by modern criminal theories.\nLegalism.\nLegal and political definitions of crime consider actions that are banned by authorities or punishable by law. Crime is defined by the criminal law of a given jurisdiction, including all actions that are subject to criminal procedure. There is no limit to what can be considered a crime in a legal system, so there may not be a unifying principle used to determine whether an action should be designated as a crime. From a legal perspective, crimes are generally wrong actions that are severe enough to warrant punishment that infringes on the perpetrator's liberties. \nEnglish criminal law and the related common law of Commonwealth countries can define offences that the courts alone have developed over the years, without any actual legislation: common law offences. The courts used the concept of \"malum in se\" to develop various common law offences.\nSociology.\nAs a sociological concept, crime is associated with actions that cause harm and violate social norms. Under this definition, crime is a type of social construct, and societal attitudes determine what is considered criminal. \nIn legal systems based on legal moralism, the predominant moral beliefs of society determine the legal definition as well as the social definition of crime. This system is less prominent in liberal democratic societies that prioritize individualism and multiculturalism over other moral beliefs.\nPaternalism defines crime not only as harm to others or to society, but also as harm to the self.\nPsychology.\nPsychological definitions consider the state of mind of perpetrators and their relationship with their environment. \nStudy.\nThe study of crime is called \"criminology\". Criminology is a subfield of sociology that addresses issues of social norms, social order, deviance, and violence. It includes the motivations and consequences of crime and its perpetrators, as well as preventative measures, either studying criminal acts on an individual level or the relationship of crime and the community. Due to the wide range of concepts associated with crime and the disagreement on a precise definition, the focus of criminology can vary considerably. Various theories within criminology provide different descriptions and explanations for crime, including social control theory, subcultural theory, strain theory, differential association, and labeling theory.\nSubfields of criminology and related fields of study include crime prevention, criminal law, crime statistics, anthropological criminology, criminal psychology, criminal sociology, criminal psychiatry, victimology, penology, and forensic science. Besides sociology, criminology is often associated with law and psychology.\nCrime statistics.\nInformation and statistics about crime in a given jurisdiction are collected as crime estimates, typically produced by national or international agencies. Methods to collect crime statistics may vary, even between jurisdictions within the same nation. Under-reporting of crime is common, particularly in developing nations, resulting in the dark figure of crime. Victim studies may be used to determine the frequency of crime in a given population. The gap to official statistics is generally smaller with higher severity of the crime. Clearance rate measures the fraction of crimes where a criminal charge has been laid or the responsible person convicted. Fear of crime can be distinct from crime probability.\nPublic perception.\nCrime is often a high priority political issue in developed countries, regardless of the country's crime rates. People that are not regularly exposed to crime most often experience it through media, including news reporting and crime fiction. Exposure of crime through news stories is associated with alarmism and inaccurate perceptions of crime trends. Selection bias in new stories about criminals significantly over-represent the prevalence of violent crime, and news reporting will often overemphasize a specific type of crime for a period of time, creating a \"crime wave\" effect. \nAs public opinion of morality changes over time, actions that were once condemned as crimes may be considered justifiable. \nNatural-law theory.\nJustifying the state's use of force to coerce compliance with its laws has proven a consistent theoretical problem. One of the earliest justifications involved the theory of natural law. This posits that the nature of the world or of human beings underlies the standards of morality or constructs them. Thomas Aquinas wrote in the 13th century: \"the rule and measure of human acts is the reason, which is the first principle of human acts\". He regarded people as by nature rational beings, concluding that it becomes morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms to their rational nature. Thus, to be valid, any law must conform to natural law and coercing people to conform to that law is morally acceptable. In the 1760s, William Blackstone described the thesis:\nBut John Austin (1790\u20131859), an early positivist, applied utilitarianism in accepting the calculating nature of human beings and the existence of an objective morality. He denied that the legal validity of a norm depends on whether its content conforms to morality. Thus, in Austinian terms, a moral code can objectively determine what people ought to do, the law can embody whatever norms the legislature decrees to achieve social utility, but every individual remains free to choose what to do. Similarly, H.L.A. Hart saw the law as an aspect of sovereignty, with lawmakers able to adopt any law as a means to a moral end.\nThus the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of a proposition of law involved internal logic and consistency, and that the state's agents used state power with responsibility. Ronald Dworkin rejects Hart's theory and proposes that all individuals should expect the equal respect and concern of those who govern them as a fundamental political right. He offers a theory of compliance overlaid by a theory of deference (the citizen's duty to obey the law) and a theory of enforcement, which identifies the legitimate goals of enforcement and punishment. Legislation must conform to a theory of legitimacy, which describes the circumstances under which a particular person or group is entitled to make law, and a theory of legislative justice, which describes the law they are entitled or obliged to make.\nThere are natural-law theorists who have accepted the idea of enforcing the prevailing morality as a primary function of the law. This view entails the problem that it makes any moral criticism of the law impossible: if conformity with natural law forms a necessary condition for legal validity, all valid law must, by definition, count as morally just. Thus, on this line of reasoning, the legal validity of a norm necessarily entails its moral justice.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nRestrictions on behavior existed in all prehistoric societies. Crime in early human society was seen as a personal transgression and was addressed by the community as a whole rather than through a formal legal system, often through the use of custom, religion, or the rule of a tribal leader. Some of the oldest extant writings are ancient criminal codes. The earliest known criminal code was the Code of Ur-Nammu (), and the first known criminal code that incorporated retaliatory justice was the Code of Hammurabi. The latter influenced the conception of crime across several civilizations over the following millennia.\nThe Romans systematized law and applied their system across the Roman Empire. The initial rules of Roman law regarded assaults as a matter of private compensation. The most significant Roman law concept involved \"dominion\". Most acts recognized as crimes in ancient societies, such as violence and theft, have persisted to the modern era. The criminal justice system of Imperial China existed unbroken for over 2,000 years.\nMany of the earliest conceptions of crime are associated with sin and corresponded to acts that were believed to invoke the anger of a deity. This idea was further popularized with the development of the Abrahamic religions. The understanding of crime and sin were closely associated with one another for much of history, and conceptions of crime took on many of the ideas associated with sin. Islamic law developed its own system of criminal justice as Islam spread in the seventh and eighth centuries.\nPost-classical era.\nIn post-classical Europe and East Asia, central government was limited and crime was defined locally. Towns established their own criminal justice systems, while crime in the countryside was defined by the social hierarchies of feudalism. In some places, such as the Russian Empire and the Kingdom of Italy, feudal justice survived into the 19th century.\nCommon law first developed in England under the rule of Henry II in the 12th century. He established a system of traveling judges that tried accused criminals in each region of England by applying precedent from previous rulings. Legal developments in 12th century England also resulted in the earliest known recording of official crime data.\nModern era.\nIn the modern era, crime came to be seen as an issue affecting society rather than conflicts between individuals. Writers such as Thomas Hobbes saw crime as a societal issue as early as the 17th century. Imprisonment developed as a long-term penalty for crime in the 18th century. Increasing urbanization and industrialization in the 19th century caused crime to become an immediate issue that affected society, prompting government intervention in crime and the establishment of criminology as its own field.\nAnthropological criminology was popularized by Cesare Lombroso in the late-19th century. This was a biological determinist school of thought based in social darwinism, arguing that certain people are naturally born as criminals. The eugenics movement of the early-20th century similarly held that crime was caused primarily by genetic factors.\nThe concept of crime underwent a period of change as modernism was widely accepted in the years following World War II. Crime increasingly came to be seen as a societal issue, and criminal law was seen as a means to protect the public from antisocial behavior. This idea was associated with a larger trend in the western world toward social democracy and centre-left politics.\nThrough most of history, reporting of crime was generally local. The advent of mass media through radio and television in the mid-20th century allowed for the sensationalism of crime. This created well-known stories of criminals such as Jeffrey Dahmer, and it allowed for dramatization that perpetuates misconceptions about crime. Forensic science was popularized in the 1980s, establishing DNA profiling as a new method to prevent and analyze crime.\nTypes.\nWhite-collar crime.\nWhite-collar crime refers to financially motivated, nonviolent or non-directly violent crime committed by individuals, businesses and government professionals. The crimes are believed to be committed by middle- or upper-class individuals for financial gains. Typical white-collar crimes could include wage theft, fraud, bribery, Ponzi schemes, insider trading, labor racketeering, embezzlement, cybercrime, copyright infringement, money laundering, identity theft, and forgery.\nBlue-collar crime.\nBlue-collar crime is any crime committed by an individual from a lower social class as opposed to white-collar crime which is associated with crime committed by someone of a higher-level social class. These crimes are primarily small scale, for immediate beneficial gain to the individual or group involved in them. Examples of blue-collar crime include Narcotic production or distribution, sexual assault, theft, burglary, assault or murder.\nViolent crime.\nViolent crime is crime that involves an act of violent aggression against another person. Common examples of violent crime include homicide, assault, sexual assault, and robbery. Some violent crimes, such as assault, may be committed with the intention of causing harm. Other violent crimes, such as robbery, may use violence to further another goal. Violent crime is distinct from noncriminal types of violence, such as self-defense, use of force, and acts of war. Acts of violence are most often perceived as deviant when they are committed as an overreaction or a disproportionate response to provocation.\nProperty crime.\nCommon examples of property crime include burglary, theft, and vandalism.\nExamples of financial crimes include counterfeiting, smuggling, tax evasion, and bribery. The scope of financial crimes has expanded significantly since the beginning of modern economics in the 17th century. In occupational crime, the complexity and anonymity of computer systems may help criminal employees camouflage their operations. The victims of the most costly scams include banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, and other large financial institutions.\nPublic order crime.\nPublic order crime is crime that violates a society's norms about what constitutes socially acceptable behavior. Examples of public order crimes include gambling, drug-related crime, public intoxication, prostitution, loitering, breach of the peace, panhandling, vagrancy, street harassment, excessive noise, and littering. Public order crime is associated with the broken windows theory, which posits that public order crimes increase the likelihood of other types of crime. Some public order crimes are considered victimless crimes in which no specific victim can be identified. Most nations in the Western world have moved toward decriminalization of victimless crimes in the modern era.\nAdultery, fornication, blasphemy, apostasy, and invoking the name of God are commonly recognized as crimes in theocratic societies or those heavily influenced by religion.\nPolitical crime.\nPolitical crime is crime that directly challenges or threatens the state. Examples of political crimes include subversion, rebellion, treason, mutiny, espionage, sedition, terrorism, riot, and unlawful assembly. Political crimes are associated with the political agenda of a given state, and they are necessarily applied against political dissidents. Due to their unique relation to the state, political crimes are often encouraged by one nation against another, and it is political alignment rather than the act itself that determines criminality. State crime that is carried out by the state to repress law-abiding citizens may also be considered political crime.\nInchoate crime.\nInchoate crime is crime that is carried out in anticipation of other illegal actions but does not cause direct harm. Examples of inchoate crimes include attempt and conspiracy. Inchoate crimes are defined by substantial action to facilitate a crime with the intention of the crime's occurrence. This is distinct from simple preparation for or consideration of criminal activity. They are unique in that renunciation of criminal intention is generally enough to absolve the perpetrator of criminal liability, as their actions are no longer facilitating a potential future crime.\nParticipants.\nCriminal.\nA criminal is an individual who commits a crime. What constitutes a criminal can vary depending on the context and the law, and it often carries a pejorative connotation. Criminals are often seen as embodying certain stereotypes or traits and are seen as a distinct type of person from law-abiding citizens. Despite this, no mental or physical trend is identifiable that differentiates criminals from non-criminals. Public response to criminals may be indignant or sympathetic. Indignant responses involve resentment and a desire for vengeance, wishing to see criminals removed from society or made to suffer for harm that they cause. Sympathetic responses involve compassion and understanding, seeking to rehabilitate or forgive criminals and absolve them of blame.\nVictim.\nA victim is an individual who has been treated unjustly or made to suffer. In the context of crime, the victim is the individual that is harmed by a violation of criminal law. Victimization is associated with post-traumatic stress and a long-term decrease in quality of life. Victimology is the study of victims, including their role in crime and how they are affected.\nSeveral factors affect an individual's likelihood of becoming a victim. Some factors may cause victims of crime to experience short-term or long-term \"repeat victimization\". Common long-term victims are those that have close relationships with the criminal, manifesting in crimes such as domestic violence, embezzlement, child abuse, and bullying. Repeat victimization may also occur when a potential victim appears to be a viable target, such as when indicating wealth in a less affluent region. Many of the traits that indicate criminality also indicate victimality; victims of crime are more likely to engage in unlawful behavior and respond to provocation. Overall demographic trends of victims and criminals are often similar, and victims are more likely to have engaged in criminal activities themselves.\nThe victims may only want compensation for the injuries suffered, while remaining indifferent to a possible desire for deterrence. Victims, on their own, may lack the economies of scale that could allow them to administer a penal system, let alone to collect any fines levied by a court. Historically, from ancient times until the 19th century, many societies believed that non-human animals were capable of committing crimes, and prosecuted and punished them accordingly. Prosecutions of animals gradually dwindled during the 19th century, although a few were recorded as late as the 1910s and 1920s.\nCriminal law.\nVirtually all countries in the 21st century have criminal law grounded in civil law, common law, Islamic law, or socialist law. Historically, criminal codes have often divided criminals by class or caste, prescribing different penalties depending on status. In some tribal societies, an entire clan is recognized as liable for a crime. In many cases, disputes over a crime in this system lead to a feud that lasts over several generations.\nCriminalization.\nThe state determines what actions are considered criminal in the scope of the law. Criminalization has significant human rights considerations, as it can infringe on rights of autonomy and subject individuals to unjust punishment.\nCriminal justice.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe enforcement of criminal law seeks to prevent crime and sanction crimes that do occur. This enforcement is carried out by the state through law enforcement agencies, such as police, which are empowered to arrest suspected perpetrators of crimes. Law enforcement may focus on policing individual crimes, or it may focus on bringing down overall crime rates. One common variant, community policing, seeks to prevent crime by integrating police into the community and public life.\nCriminal procedure.\nWhen the perpetrator of a crime is found guilty of the crime, the state delivers a sentence to determine the penalty for the crime.\nCorrections and punishment.\nAuthorities may respond to crime through corrections, carrying out punishment as a means to censure the criminal act. Punishment is generally reserved for serious offenses. Individuals regularly engage in activity that could be scrutinized under criminal law but are deemed inconsequential. Retributive justice seeks to create a system of accountability and punish criminals in a way that knowingly causes suffering. This may arise out of a feeling that criminals deserve to suffer and that punishment should exist for its own sake. The existence of punishment also creates an effect of deterrence that discourages criminal action for fear of punishment. \nRehabilitation seeks to understand and mitigate the causes of a criminal's unlawful action to prevent recidivism. Different criminological theories propose different methods of rehabilitation, including strengthening social networks, reducing poverty, influencing values, and providing therapy for physical and mental ailments. Rehabilitative programs may include counseling or vocational education.\nDeveloped nations are less likely to use physical punishments. Instead, they will impose financial penalties or imprisonment. In places with widespread corruption or limited rule of law, crime may be punished extralegally through mob rule and lynching.\nWhether a crime can be resolved through financial compensation varies depending on the culture and the specific context of the crime. Historically, many societies have absolved acts of homicide through compensation to the victim's relatives.\nLiability.\nIf a crime is committed, the individual responsible is considered to be liable for the crime. For liability to exist, the individual must be capable of understanding the criminal process and the relevant authority must have legitimate power to establish what constitutes a crime.\nInternational criminal law.\nInternational criminal law typically addresses serious offenses, such as genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. As with all international law, these laws are created through treaties and international custom, and they are defined through the consensus of the involved states. International crimes are not prosecuted through a standard legal system, though international organizations may establish tribunals to investigate and rule on egregious offenses such as genocide.\nCauses and correlates.\nCriminal behavior determinants include cost\u2013benefit analysis, opportunity or crime of passion. A person that commits a criminal act typically believes that its benefits will outweigh the risk of being caught and punished. Negative economic factors, such as unemployment and income inequality, can increase the incentive to commit crime, while severe punishments can deter crime in some cases.\nSocial factors similarly affect the likelihood of criminal activity. Crime corresponds heavily with social integration; groups that are less integrated with society or that are forcibly integrated with society are more likely to engage in crime. Involvement in the community, such as through a church, decreases the likelihood of crime, while associating with criminals increases the likelihood of becoming a criminal as well.\nThere is no known genetic cause of crime. Some genes have been found to affect traits that may incline individuals toward criminal activity, but no biological or physiological trait has been found to directly cause or compel criminal actions. One biological factor is the disparity between men and women, as men are significantly more likely to commit crimes than women in virtually all cultures. Crimes committed by men also tend to be more severe than those committed by women.\nCrime distribution shows a long tail with a small fraction of individuals re-offending many times due to high recidivism, while onset of crime at younger age predicts a longer criminal career."}
{"id": "5786", "revid": "13403767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5786", "title": "California Institute of Technology", "text": "The California Institute of Technology (branded as Caltech) is a private research university in Pasadena, California, United States. The university is responsible for many modern scientific advancements and is among a small group of institutes of technology in the United States that are devoted to the instruction of pure and applied sciences. \nThe institution was founded as a preparatory and vocational school by Amos G. Throop in 1891 and began attracting influential scientists such as George Ellery Hale, Arthur Amos Noyes, and Robert Andrews Millikan in the early 20th century. The vocational and preparatory schools were disbanded and spun off in 1910, and the college assumed its present name in 1920. In 1934, Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities, and the antecedents of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which Caltech continues to manage and operate, were established between 1936 and 1943 under Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n.\nCaltech has six academic divisions with strong emphasis on science and engineering, managing $332 million in research grants as of 2010. Its primary campus is located approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles, in Pasadena. First-year students are required to live on campus, and 95% of undergraduates remain in the on-campus housing system at Caltech. Students agree to abide by an honor code which allows faculty to assign take-home examinations. The Caltech Beavers compete in 13 intercollegiate sports in the NCAA Division III's Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC).\nScientists and engineers at or from the university have played an essential role in many modern scientific breakthroughs and innovations, including advances in space research, sustainability science, quantum physics, and seismology. , there are 79 Nobel laureates who have been affiliated with Caltech, making it the institution with the highest number of Nobelists per capita in America. This includes 46 alumni and faculty members (47 prizes, with chemist Linus Pauling being the only individual in history to win two unshared prizes). In addition, 66 National Medal of Science Recipients, 43 MacArthur Fellows, 14 National Medal of Technology and Innovation recipients, 11 astronauts, 5 Science Advisors to the President, 4 Fields Medalists, and 6 Turing Award winners have been affiliated with Caltech.\nHistory.\nThroop College.\nCaltech started as a vocational school founded in present-day Old Pasadena on Fair Oaks Avenue and Chestnut Street on September 23, 1891, by local businessman and politician Amos G. Throop. The school was known successively as Throop University, Throop Polytechnic Institute (and Manual Training School) and Throop College of Technology before acquiring its current name in 1920. The vocational school was disbanded and the preparatory program was split off to form the independent Polytechnic School in 1907.\nAt a time when scientific research in the United States was still in its infancy, George Ellery Hale, a solar astronomer from the University of Chicago, founded the Mount Wilson Observatory in 1904. He joined Throop's board of trustees in 1907, and soon began developing the university, and the whole of Pasadena, into a major scientific and cultural destination. He engineered the appointment of James A. B. Scherer, a literary scholar untutored in science but very capable in administration and fund-raising, to Throop's presidency in 1908. Scherer persuaded retired businessman and trustee Charles W. Gates to donate $25,000 in seed money () to build Gates Laboratory, the first science building on campus.\nWorld Wars.\nIn 1910, Throop moved to its current site. Arthur Fleming donated the land for the permanent campus site. Theodore Roosevelt delivered an address at Throop Institute on March 21, 1911, and he declared:\nI want to see institutions like Throop turn out perhaps ninety-nine of every hundred students as men who are to do given pieces of industrial work better than any one else can do them; I want to see those men do the kind of work that is now being done on the Panama Canal and on the great irrigation projects in the interior of this country\u2014and the one-hundredth man I want to see with the kind of cultural scientific training that will make him and his fellows the matrix out of which you can occasionally develop a man like your great astronomer, George Ellery Hale.\nAlso in 1911, a bill was introduced in the California Legislature calling for the establishment of a publicly funded \"California Institute of Technology,\" with an initial budget of a million dollars, ten times the budget of Throop at the time. The board of trustees offered to turn Throop over to the state, but the presidents of Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley successfully lobbied to defeat the bill, which allowed Throop to develop as the only scientific research-oriented educational institute in southern California, public or private, until the onset of World War II necessitated the broader development of research-based science education. The promise of Throop attracted physical chemist Arthur Amos Noyes from MIT to develop the institution and assist in establishing it as a center for science and technology.\nWith the onset of World War I, Hale organized the National Research Council to coordinate and support scientific work on military problems. While he supported the idea of federal appropriations for science, he took exception to a federal bill that would have funded engineering research at land-grant colleges, and instead sought to raise a $1\u00a0million national research fund entirely from private sources. To that end, as Hale wrote in \"The New York Times\":\nThroop College of Technology, in Pasadena California has recently afforded a striking illustration of one way in which the Research Council can secure co-operation and advance scientific investigation. This institution, with its able investigators and excellent research laboratories, could be of great service in any broad scheme of cooperation. President Scherer, hearing of the formation of the council, immediately offered to take part in its work, and with this object, he secured within three days an additional research endowment of one hundred thousand dollars.\nThrough the National Research Council, Hale simultaneously lobbied for science to play a larger role in national affairs, and for Throop to play a national role in science. The new funds were designated for physics research, and ultimately led to the establishment of the Norman Bridge Laboratory, which attracted experimental physicist Robert Andrews Millikan from the University of Chicago in 1917. During the course of the war, Hale, Noyes and Millikan worked together in Washington on the NRC. Subsequently, they continued their partnership in developing Caltech.\nUnder the leadership of Hale, Noyes, and Millikan (aided by the booming economy of Southern California), Caltech grew to national prominence in the 1920s and concentrated on the development of Roosevelt's \"Hundredth Man\". On November 29, 1921, the trustees declared it to be the express policy of the institute to pursue scientific research of the greatest importance and at the same time \"to continue to conduct thorough courses in engineering and pure science, basing the work of these courses on exceptionally strong instruction in the fundamental sciences of mathematics, physics, and chemistry; broadening and enriching the curriculum by a liberal amount of instruction in such subjects as English, history, and economics; and vitalizing all the work of the Institute by the infusion in generous measure of the spirit of research\". In 1923, Millikan was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. In 1925, the school established a department of geology and hired William Bennett Munro, then chairman of the division of History, Government, and Economics at Harvard University, to create a division of humanities and social sciences at Caltech. In 1928, a division of biology was established under the leadership of Thomas Hunt Morgan, the most distinguished biologist in the United States at the time, and discoverer of the role of genes and the chromosome in heredity. In 1930, Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory was established in Corona del Mar under the care of Professor George MacGinitie. In 1926, a graduate school of aeronautics was created, which eventually attracted Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n. K\u00e1rm\u00e1n later helped create the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and played an integral part in establishing Caltech as one of the world's centers for rocket science. In 1928, construction of the Palomar Observatory began.\nMillikan served as \"Chairman of the Executive Council\" (effectively Caltech's president) from 1921 to 1945, and his influence was such that the institute was occasionally referred to as \"Millikan's School\". Millikan initiated a visiting-scholars program soon after joining Caltech. Notable scientists who accepted his invitation include Paul Dirac, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Werner Heisenberg, Hendrik Lorentz and Niels Bohr. Albert Einstein arrived on the Caltech campus for the first time in 1931 to polish up his Theory of General Relativity, and he returned to Caltech subsequently as a visiting professor in 1932 and 1933.\nDuring World War II, Caltech was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. The United States Navy also maintained a naval training school for aeronautical engineering, resident inspectors of ordinance and naval material, and a liaison officer to the National Defense Research Committee on campus. During the war, some scientists from Caltech, including J. Robert Oppenheimer, Richard Tolman, and Robert Bacher, were instrumental in the Manhattan Project and contributed to critical aspects of the atomic bomb's development.\nCaltech was also directly involved in other bomb-related research with a group led by Charles Lauritsen which assisted in the development of the high-explosive lenses used in the Fat Man implosion bomb, crucial to the Trinity Test and the subsequent bombing of Nagasaki. Lauritsen\u2019s team at Caltech developed detonators that would later be used in atomic bombs. In November 1943, Caltech and the U.S. Navy established the Naval Ordnance Test Station (NOTS) in Inyokern, California, near the Mojave Desert to work on aircraft ordnance and rocket development. One of the most successful innovations was the development of the 5-inch High-Velocity Aircraft Rocket, commonly known as the \"Holy Moses,\" which was used in combat against enemy fortifications and ships. \nThe partnership between the Navy and Caltech continued to deepen throughout the war, leading to the creation of several military technologies, and by 1945, the focus of Caltech\u2019s war contributions expanded further with Project Camel, a collaboration between the Naval Ordnance Test Station and the Manhattan Project. Caltech scientists worked on a variety of assignments, including B-29 airdrop tests of model atomic bombs and the manufacturing of explosives for use in the atomic bomb\u2019s implosion mechanism. Additionally, the Salt Wells Pilot Plant at Inyokern was developed with Caltech scientists in response to concerns about the safety of explosive production at Los Alamos and began producing high explosives just days before the Trinity Test in July 1945. Early in the war, Caltech scientists, including Lauritsen\u2019s son, Thomas Lauritsen, worked on various rocket designs at the Kellogg Radiation Laboratory. These rockets, including the \"Tiny Tim\" and the \"Mighty Mouse,\" were used in critical military operations, from naval engagements to land assaults. By the end of the war, Caltech had essentially become an extension of the U.S. Navy\u2019s Bureau of Ordnance, with its rocket research providing important technology to U.S. combat capabilities.\nProject Vista.\nFrom April to December 1951, Caltech was the host of a federal classified study, Project Vista. The selection of Caltech as host for the project was based on the university's expertise in rocketry and nuclear physics. In response to the war in Korea and the pressure from the Soviet Union, the project was Caltech's way of assisting the federal government in its effort to increase national security. The project was created to study new ways of improving the relationship between tactical air support and ground troops. The Army, Air Force, and Navy sponsored the project; however, it was under contract with the Army. The study was named after the hotel, Vista del Arroyo Hotel, which housed the study. The study operated under a committee with the supervision of President Lee A. DuBridge. William A. Fowler, a professor at Caltech, was selected as research director. More than a fourth of Caltech's faculty and a group of outside scientists staffed the project. Moreover, the number increases if one takes into account visiting scientists, military liaisons, secretarial, and security staff. In compensation for its participation, the university received about $750,000.\nPost-war growth.\nFrom the 1950s to 1980s, Caltech was the home of Murray Gell-Mann and Richard Feynman, whose work was central to the establishment of the Standard Model of particle physics. Feynman was also widely known outside the physics community as an exceptional teacher and a colorful, unconventional character.\nDuring Lee A. DuBridge's tenure as Caltech's president (1946\u20131969), Caltech's faculty doubled and the campus tripled in size. DuBridge, unlike his predecessors, welcomed federal funding of science. New research fields flourished, including chemical biology, planetary science, nuclear astrophysics, and geochemistry. A 200-inch telescope was dedicated on nearby Palomar Mountain in 1948 and remained the world's most powerful optical telescope for over forty years.\nCaltech opened its doors to female undergraduates during the presidency of Harold Brown in 1970, and they made up 14% of the entering class. The portion of female undergraduates has been increasing since then.\nProtests by Caltech students are rare. The earliest was a 1968 protest outside the NBC Burbank studios, in response to rumors that NBC was to cancel \"\". In 1973, the students from Dabney House protested a presidential visit with a sign on the library bearing the simple phrase \"Impeach Nixon\". The following week, Ross McCollum, president of the National Oil Company, wrote an open letter to Dabney House stating that in light of their actions he had decided not to donate one million dollars to Caltech. The Dabney family, being Republicans, disowned Dabney House after hearing of the protest.\n21st century.\nSince 2000, the Einstein Papers Project has been located at Caltech. The project was established in 1986 to assemble, preserve, translate, and publish papers selected from the literary estate of Albert Einstein and from other collections.\nIn fall 2008, the freshman class was 42% female, a record for Caltech's undergraduate enrollment. In the same year, the Institute concluded a six-year-long fund-raising campaign. The campaign raised more than $1.4\u00a0billion from about 16,000 donors. Nearly half of the funds went into the support of Caltech programs and projects.\nIn 2010, Caltech, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and headed by Professor Nathan Lewis, established a DOE Energy Innovation Hub aimed at developing revolutionary methods to generate fuels directly from sunlight. This hub, the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, will receive up to $122\u00a0million in federal funding over five years.\nSince 2012, Caltech began to offer classes through massive open online courses (MOOCs) under Coursera, from 2013, edX, and bootcamps.\nJean-Lou Chameau, the eighth president, announced on February 19, 2013, that he would be stepping down to accept the presidency at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. Thomas F. Rosenbaum was announced to be the ninth president of Caltech on October 24, 2013, and his term began on July 1, 2014.\nIn 2019, Caltech received a gift of $750\u00a0million for sustainability research from the Resnick family of The Wonderful Company. The gift is the largest ever for environmental sustainability research and the second-largest private donation to a US academic institution (after Bloomberg's gift of $1.8\u00a0billion to Johns Hopkins University in 2018).\nOn account of President Robert A. Millikan's affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Millikan's name (and the names of five other historical figures affiliated with the Foundation), from campus buildings.\nCampus.\nCaltech's primary campus is located in Pasadena, California, approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles. It is within walking distance of Old Town Pasadena and the Pasadena Playhouse District and therefore the two locations are frequent getaways for Caltech students.\nIn 1917 Hale hired architect Bertram Goodhue to produce a master plan for the campus. Goodhue conceived the overall layout of the campus and designed the physics building, Dabney Hall, and several other structures, in which he sought to be consistent with the local climate, the character of the school, and Hale's educational philosophy. Goodhue's designs for Caltech were also influenced by the traditional Spanish mission architecture of Southern California.\nDuring the 1960s, Caltech underwent considerable expansion, in part due to the philanthropy of alumnus Arnold O. Beckman. In 1953, Beckman was asked to join the Caltech Board of Trustees. In 1964, he became its chairman. Over the next few years, as Caltech's president emeritus David Baltimore describes it, Arnold Beckman and his wife Mabel \"shaped the destiny of Caltech\".\nIn 1971 a magnitude-6.6 earthquake in San Fernando caused some damage to the Caltech campus. Engineers who evaluated the damage found that two historic buildings dating from the early days of the Institute\u2014Throop Hall and the Goodhue-designed Culbertson Auditorium\u2014had cracked.\nNew additions to the campus include the Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics and the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Center for Information Science and Technology, which opened in 2009, and the Warren and Katherine Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering followed in March 2010. The institute also concluded an upgrading of the South Houses in 2006. In late 2010, Caltech completed a 1.3 MW solar array projected to produce approximately 1.6 GWh in 2011.\nOrganization and administration.\nCaltech is incorporated as a non-profit corporation and is governed by a privately appointed 46-member board of trustees who serve five-year terms of office and retire at the age of 72. The trustees elect a president to serve as the chief executive officer of the institute and administer the affairs on the institute on behalf of the board, a provost who serves as the chief academic officer of the institute below the president, and ten other vice presidential and other senior positions. Thomas F. Rosenbaum became the ninth president of Caltech in 2014. Caltech's endowment is governed by a permanent trustee committee and administered by an investment office.\nThe institute is organized into six primary academic divisions: Biology and Biological Engineering (founded 1927), Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (founded 1926), Engineering and Applied Science (founded 1926), Geological and Planetary Sciences (founded 1927), Humanities and Social Sciences (founded 1926), Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy (founded 1926). Given Caltech's historical prestige and the small size of its faculty in many major fields, the institution is exceptionally careful in selecting candidates. This rigorous process can result in some positions remaining unfilled for several years until the right candidate is found. Caltech dedicates significant resources to attract top-tier faculty and provides them with substantial financial support to foster their research and academic endeavors. The voting faculty of Caltech include all professors, instructors, research associates and fellows, and the University Librarian. Faculty are responsible for establishing admission requirements, academic standards, and curricula. The Faculty Board is the faculty's representative body and consists of 18 elected faculty representatives as well as other senior administration officials. Full-time professors are expected to teach classes, conduct research, advise students, and perform administrative work such as serving on committees.\nFounded in 1930s, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is a federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) owned by NASA and operated as a division of Caltech through a contract between NASA and Caltech. In 2008, JPL spent over $1.6\u00a0billion on research and development and employed over 5,000 project-related and support employees. The JPL Director also serves as a Caltech Vice President and is responsible to the President of the Institute for the management of the laboratory.\nIn December 2023, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers filed to be recognized for collective bargaining as Caltech Grad researchers and Postdocs United, in affiliation with the United Auto Workers (C/GPU-UAW). On January 31st and February 1st, 2024 a vote was held by the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). In February 2024, the NLRB certified that 1335 of 1997 eligible workers voted, with 78% voting in favor of unionization. In May 2024, contract negotiations began. In December 2024, C/GPU-UAW members held a strike authorization vote, 1441 participating in the vote, and 86% voting in favor of authorizing the C/GPU bargaining team to call a strike, if necessary.\nAcademics.\nCaltech is a small four-year, highly residential research university with slightly more students in graduate programs than undergraduate. The institute has been accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges since 1949. Caltech is on the quarter system: the fall term starts in late September and ends before Christmas, the second term starts after New Year's Day and ends in mid-March, and the third term starts in late March or early April and ends in early June.\nRankings.\nCaltech was ranked within the top ten universities in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, QS World University Rankings, and Academic Ranking of World Universities\".\" For 2022, U.S. News &amp; World Report ranked Caltech as tied for 9th in the United States among national universities overall, 11th for most innovative, and 15th for best value. \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" also ranked the graduate programs in chemistry and earth sciences first among national universities.\nUndergraduate admissions.\nAdmission to Caltech is extremely rigorous. Prior to going test blind, Caltech students had the highest test scores in the nation. In admissions for the Class of 2028 (entering 2024), Caltech was ranked the hardest college in America to gain acceptance to by admit rate, at an all-time low of 2.7%. For the freshmen who enrolled in 2019 (Class of 2023) the middle 50% range of SAT were 740\u2013780 for evidence-based reading and writing and 790\u2013800 for math, and 1530\u20131570 total. The middle 50% range ACT Composite score was 35\u201336. The SAT Math Level 2 middle 50% range was 800\u2013800. The middle 50% range for the SAT Physics Subject Test was 760\u2013800; SAT Chemistry Subject Test was 760\u2013800; \nSAT Biology Subject Tests was 760\u2013800. In June 2020, Caltech announced a test-blind policy where they would not require nor consider test scores for the next two years. The moratorium was extended twice, starting July 2021, but was subsequently cancelled starting with the Class of 2029. The institute is need-blind for domestic applicants.\nFor the Class of 2027 (enrolled Fall 2023), Caltech received 13,136 applications and accepted 412 applicants for a 3.14% admit rate; 270 enrolled. The subsequent year, for the Class of 2028, Caltech reduced the number of seats by almost one hundred, accepting 315 applicants out of approximately 13,000 total applications. For the Class of 2025, 32% were of underrepresented ancestry (which includes students who self-identify as American Indian/Alaska Native, Hispanic/Latino, Black/African American, and/or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander), and 6% were foreign students.\nTuition and financial aid.\nUndergraduate tuition for the 2021\u20132022 school year was $56,394 and total annual costs were estimated to be $79,947 excluding the Caltech Student Health Insurance Plan. In 2012\u20132013, Caltech awarded $17.1\u00a0million in need-based aid, $438k in non-need-based aid, and $2.51\u00a0million in self-help support to enrolled undergraduate students. The average financial aid package of all students eligible for aid was $38,756 and students graduated with an average debt of $15,090.\nUndergraduate program.\nThe full-time, four-year undergraduate program emphasizes instruction in the arts and sciences and has high graduate coexistence. Caltech offers 28 majors (called \"options\") and 12 minors across all six academic divisions. Caltech also offers interdisciplinary programs in Applied Physics, Biochemistry, Bioengineering, Computation and Neural Systems, Control and Dynamical Systems, Environmental Science and Engineering, Geobiology and Astrobiology, Geochemistry, and Planetary Astronomy. The most popular options are Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Physics. The most popular majors of the class of 2023 were Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Electrical Engineering.\nPrior to the entering class of 2013, Caltech required students to take a core curriculum of five terms of mathematics, five terms of physics, two terms of chemistry, one term of biology, two terms of lab courses, one term of scientific communication, three terms of physical education, and 12 terms of humanities and social science. Since 2013, only three terms each of mathematics and physics have been required by the institute, with the remaining two terms each required by certain options.\nA typical class is worth 9 academic units and given the extensive core curriculum requirements in addition to individual options' degree requirements, students need to take an average of 40.5 units per term (more than four classes) to graduate in four years. 36 units is the minimum full-time load, 48 units is considered a heavy load, and registrations above 51 units require an overload petition. Approximately 20 percent of students double-major. This is achievable since the humanities and social sciences majors have been designed to be done in conjunction with a science major. Although choosing two options in the same division is discouraged, it is still possible.\nFirst-year students are enrolled in first-term classes based upon results of placement exams in math, physics, chemistry, and writing and take all classes in their first two terms on a Pass/Fail basis. There is little competition; collaboration on homework is encouraged and the honor system encourages take-home tests and flexible homework schedules. Caltech offers co-operative programs with other schools, such as the Pasadena Art Center College of Design and Occidental College.\nAccording to a PayScale study, Caltech graduates earn a median early career salary of $83,400 and $143,100 mid-career, placing them in the top 5 among graduates of US colleges and universities. The average net return on investment over a period of 20 years is $887,000, the tenth-highest among US colleges.\nCaltech offers Army and Air Force ROTC in cooperation with the University of Southern California.\nGraduate program.\nAdmission to Caltech's graduate study is highly competitive, with faculty evaluating factors such as academic preparation, research experience, scientific interests, and recommendations from teachers or mentors. A key aspect of the admission process is the matching of faculty and an applicant's research interests. Historically, many programs required applicants to submit GRE scores. However, in recent years, many departments have made the GRE optional or no longer require it at all.\nThe graduate instructional programs emphasize doctoral studies and are dominated by science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields. The institute offers graduate degree programs for the Master of Science, Engineer's Degree, Doctor of Philosophy, BS/MS and MD/PhD, with the majority of students in the PhD program. The most popular options are Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Electrical Engineering, and Chemical Engineering.\nInitially, most new graduate students are assigned a temporary advisor, allowing time to select a permanent advisor. To aid in this, some graduate options include rotations in research labs, facilitating a better match with faculty research groups that align with the students' scientific interests. Up to three rotations in the first year are allowed in some options. \nCaltech provides on-campus housing options for incoming graduate students. All new graduate students are guaranteed housing in their first year, with a variety of living experiences available to suit different needs. Approximately half of Caltech's graduate student population resides in campus housing. The application period for new student housing opens on April 15, 2023, and closes on April 30, 2023. Post-first year, students participate in a housing lottery, with the results announced two months prior to the contract end date, aiding in planning for those who need to seek off-campus housing.\nThe research facilities at Caltech are available to graduate students, but there are opportunities for students to work in facilities of other universities, research centers (such as NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory), and private industries. The graduate student to faculty ratio is 4:1. A joint program also exists between Caltech and the Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, and the Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, which grants MD/PhD degrees. Students in this program do their preclinical and clinical work at USC, UCLA, or KPSOM, and their PhD work with any member of the Caltech faculty, including the Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering and Applied Sciences Divisions. The MD degree would be from the student's respective medical school and the PhD would be awarded from Caltech.\nApproximately 99 percent of doctoral students have full financial support. Financial support for graduate students comes in the form of fellowships, research assistantships, teaching assistantships or a combination of fellowship and assistantship support.\nGraduate students are bound by the same honor code as the undergraduates, allowing for take-home examinations. The Graduate Honor Council oversees any violations of the code.\nResearch.\nCaltech is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very High Research Activity\". Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 and remains a research university with \"very high\" research activity, primarily in STEM fields. Caltech manages research expenditures of $270\u00a0million annually, 66th among all universities in the U.S. and 17th among private institutions without medical schools for 2008. The largest federal agencies contributing to research are NASA, National Science Foundation, Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Defense, and Department of Energy. Caltech received $144\u00a0million in federal funding for the physical sciences, $40.8\u00a0million for the life sciences, $33.5\u00a0million for engineering, $14.4\u00a0million for environmental sciences, $7.16\u00a0million for computer sciences, and $1.97\u00a0million for mathematical sciences in 2008.\nThe institute was awarded an all-time high funding of $357\u00a0million in 2009. Active funding from the National Science Foundation Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Science (MPS) for Caltech stands at $343\u00a0million , the highest for any educational institution in the nation, and higher than the total funds allocated to any state except California and New York.\nIn 2005, Caltech had dedicated to research: to physical sciences, to engineering, and to biological sciences.\nIn addition to managing JPL, Caltech also operates the Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, the Owens Valley Radio Observatory in Bishop, California, the Submillimeter Observatory and W. M. Keck Observatory at the Mauna Kea Observatory, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory at Livingston, Louisiana and Richland, Washington, and Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory in Corona del Mar, California. The Institute launched the Kavli Nanoscience Institute at Caltech in 2006, the Keck Institute for Space Studies in 2008, and is also the current home for the Einstein Papers Project. The Spitzer Science Center (SSC), part of the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center located on the Caltech campus, is the data analysis and community support center for NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope.\nCaltech partnered with UCLA to establish a Joint Center for Translational Medicine (UCLA-Caltech JCTM), which conducts experimental research into clinical applications, including the diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as cancer. In 1997, Caltech partnered with UCLA to train physician-scientists. \nCaltech operates several TCCON stations as part of an international collaborative effort of measuring greenhouse gases globally. One station is on campus.\nUndergraduates at Caltech are also encouraged to participate in research. About 80% of the class of 2010 did research through the annual Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) program at least once during their stay, and many continued during the school year. Students write and submit SURF proposals for research projects in collaboration with professors, and about 70 percent of applicants are awarded SURFs. The program is open to both Caltech and non-Caltech undergraduate students. It serves as preparation for graduate school and helps to explain why Caltech has the highest percentage of alumni who go on to receive a PhD of all the major universities.\nThe licensing and transferring of technology to the commercial sector is managed by the Office of Technology Transfer (OTT). OTT protects and manages the intellectual property developed by faculty members, students, other researchers, and JPL technologists. Caltech receives more invention disclosures per faculty member than any other university in the nation. , 1891 patents were granted to Caltech researchers since 1969.\nStudents.\nCaltech enrolled 987 undergraduate students and 1,410 graduate students for the 2021\u20132022 school year. Women made up 45% of the undergraduate and 33% of the graduate student body. The racial demographics of the school substantially differ from those of the nation as a whole.\nThe four-year graduation rate is 79% and the six-year rate is 92%, which is low compared to most leading U.S. universities, but substantially higher than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. Students majoring in STEM fields traditionally have graduation rates below 70%.\nStudent life.\nHouse system.\nDuring the early 20th century, a Caltech committee visited several universities and decided to transform the undergraduate housing system from fraternities to a house system. Four South Houses (or \"Hovses\", as styled in the stone engravings) were built: Blacker House, Dabney House, Fleming House and Ricketts House. In the 1960s, three North Houses were built: Lloyd House, Page House, and Ruddock House, and during the 1990s, Avery House. The four South Houses closed for renovation in 2005 and reopened in 2006. The latest addition to residential life at Caltech is Bechtel Residence, which opened in 2018. It is not affiliated with the house system. All first- and second-year students live on campus in the house system or in the Bechtel Residence.\nOn account of Albert B. Ruddock's affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Ruddock's name from campus buildings. Ruddock House was renamed as the Grant D. Venerable House.\nAthletics.\nCaltech has athletic teams in baseball, men's and women's basketball, cross country, men's and women's soccer, swimming and diving, men's and women's tennis, track and field, women's volleyball, and men's and women's water polo. Caltech's mascot is the Beaver, a homage to nature's engineer. Its teams are members of the NCAA Division III and compete in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC), which Caltech co-founded in 1915.\nOn January 6, 2007, the Beavers' men's basketball team snapped a 207-game losing streak to Division III schools, beating Bard College 81\u201352. It was their first Division III victory since 1996.\nUntil their win over Occidental College on February 22, 2011 the team had not won a game in SCIAC play since 1985. Ryan Elmquist's free throw with 3.3 seconds in regulation gave the Beavers the victory. The documentary film \"Quantum Hoops\" concerns the events of the Beavers' 2005\u201306 season.\nOn January 13, 2007, the Caltech women's basketball team snapped a 50-game losing streak, defeating the Pomona-Pitzer Sagehens 55\u201353. The women's program, which entered the SCIAC in 2002, garnered their first conference win. On the bench as honorary coach for the evening was Robert Grubbs, 2005 Nobel laureate in Chemistry. The team went on to beat Whittier College on February 10, for its second SCIAC win, and placed its first member on the All Conference team.\nIn 2007, 2008, and 2009, the women's table tennis team (a club team) competed in nationals. The women's Ultimate club team, known as \"Snatch\", has also been very successful in recent years, ranking 44 of over 200 college teams in the Ultimate Player's Association.\nOn February 2, 2013, the Caltech baseball team ended a 228-game losing streak, the team's first win in nearly 10 years.\nThe track and field team's home venue is at the South Athletic Field in Tournament Park, the site of the first eight Rose Bowl games.\nThe school also sponsored an intercollegiate football team from 1973 through 1977, and played part of its home schedule at the Rose Bowl.\nPerforming and visual arts.\nThe Caltech/Occidental College Orchestra is a full seventy-piece orchestra composed of students, faculty, and staff at Caltech and nearby Occidental College. The orchestra gives three pairs of concerts annually, at both Caltech and Occidental College. There are also two Caltech Jazz Bands and a Concert Band, as well as an active chamber music program. For vocal music, Caltech has a mixed-voice Glee Club and the smaller Chamber Singers. The theater program at Caltech is known as TACIT, or Theater Arts at the California Institute of Technology. There are two to three plays organized by TACIT per year, and they were involved in the production of the , released in 2011.\nStudent life traditions.\nAnnual events.\nEvery Halloween, Dabney House conducts the infamous \"Millikan pumpkin-drop experiment\" from the top of Millikan Library, the highest point on campus. According to tradition, a claim was once made that the shattering of a pumpkin frozen in liquid nitrogen and dropped from a sufficient height would produce a triboluminescent spark. This yearly event involves a crowd of observers, who try to spot the elusive spark. The title of the event is an oblique reference to the famous Millikan oil-drop experiment which measured \"e\", the elemental unit of electrical charge.\nOn Ditch Day, the seniors ditch school, leaving behind elaborately designed tasks and traps at the doors of their rooms to prevent underclassmen from entering. Over the years this has evolved to the point where many seniors spend months designing mechanical, electrical, and software obstacles to confound the underclassmen. Each group of seniors designs a \"stack\" to be solved by a handful of underclassmen. The faculty have been drawn into the event as well, and cancel all classes on Ditch Day so the underclassmen can participate in what has become a highlight of the academic year.\nAnother long-standing tradition is the playing of Wagner's \"Ride of the Valkyries\" at 7:00 each morning during finals week with the largest, loudest speakers available. The playing of that piece is not allowed at any other time (except if one happens to be listening to the entire 14 hours and 5 minutes of \"The Ring Cycle\"), and any offender is dragged into the showers to be drenched in cold water fully dressed. \nPranks.\nCaltech students have been known for their many pranks (also known as \"RFs\").\nThe two most famous in recent history are the changing of the Hollywood Sign to read \"Caltech\", by judiciously covering up certain parts of the letters, and the changing of the scoreboard to read Caltech 38, MIT 9 during the 1984 Rose Bowl Game. But the most famous of all occurred during the 1961 Rose Bowl Game, where Caltech students altered the flip-cards that were raised by the stadium attendees to display \"Caltech\", and several other \"unintended\" messages. This event is now referred to as the Great Rose Bowl Hoax.\nIn recent years, pranking has been officially encouraged by Tom Mannion, Caltech's Assistant VP for Student Affairs and Campus Life. \"The grand old days of pranking have gone away at Caltech, and that's what we are trying to bring back,\" reported the \"Boston Globe\".\nIn December 2011, Caltech students went to New York and pulled a prank in Manhattan's Greenwich Village. The prank involved making The Cube sculpture look like the Aperture Science Weighted Companion Cube from the video game \"Portal\".\nCaltech pranks have been documented in three Legends of Caltech books, the most recent of which was edited by alumni Autumn Looijen '99 and Mason Porter '98 and published in May 2007.\nRivalry with MIT.\nIn 2005, a group of Caltech students pulled a string of pranks during MIT's Campus Preview Weekend for admitted students. These include covering up the word Massachusetts in the \"Massachusetts Institute of Technology\" engraving on the main building fa\u00e7ade with a banner so that it read \"That Other Institute of Technology\". A group of MIT hackers responded by altering the banner so that the inscription read \"The Only Institute of Technology.\" Caltech students also passed out T-shirts to MIT's incoming freshman class that had MIT written on the front and \"...because not everyone can go to Caltech\" along with an image of a palm tree on the back.\nMIT retaliated in April 2006, when students posing as the Howe &amp; Ser (Howitzer) Moving Company stole the 130-year-old, 1.7-ton Fleming House cannon and moved it over 3,000 miles to their campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts for their 2006 Campus Preview Weekend, repeating a similar prank performed by nearby Harvey Mudd College in 1986. Thirty members of Fleming House traveled to MIT and reclaimed their cannon on April 10, 2006.\nOn April 13, 2007 (Friday the 13th), a group of students from \"The California Tech\", Caltech's campus newspaper, arrived and distributed fake copies of \"The Tech\", MIT's campus newspaper, while prospective students were visiting for their Campus Preview Weekend. Articles included \"MIT Invents the Interweb\", \"Architects Deem Campus 'Unfortunate, and \"Infinite Corridor Not Actually Infinite\".\nIn December 2009, some Caltech students declared that MIT had been sold and had become the Caltech East campus. A \"sold\" banner was hung on front of the MIT dome building and a \"Welcome to Caltech East: School of the Humanities\" banner over the Massachusetts Avenue Entrance. Newspapers and T-shirts were distributed, and door labels and fliers in the infinite corridor were put up in accordance with the \"curriculum change.\"\nIn September 2010, MIT students attempted to put a TARDIS, the time machine from the BBC's \"Doctor Who\", onto a roof. Caught in mid-act, the prank was aborted. In January 2011, Caltech students in conjunction with MIT students helped put the TARDIS on top of Baxter. Caltech students then moved the TARDIS to UC Berkeley and Stanford.\nIn April 2014, during MIT's Campus Preview Weekend, a group of Caltech students handed out mugs emblazoned with the MIT logo on the front and the words \"The Institute of Technology\" on the back. When heated, the mugs turn orange, display a palm tree, and read \"Caltech The Hotter Institute of Technology.\" Identical mugs continue to be sold at the Caltech campus store.\nHonor code.\nLife in the Caltech community is governed by the honor code, which simply states: \"No member of the Caltech community shall take unfair advantage of any other member of the Caltech community.\" This is enforced by a Board of Control, which consists of undergraduate students, and by a similar body at the graduate level, called the Graduate Honor Council.\nThe honor code aims at promoting an atmosphere of respect and trust that allows Caltech students to enjoy privileges that make for a more relaxed atmosphere. For example, the honor code allows professors to make the majority of exams as take-home, allowing students to take them on their own schedule and in their preferred environment.\nThrough the late 1990s, the only exception to the honor code, implemented earlier in the decade in response to changes in federal regulations, concerned the sexual harassment policy. Today, there are myriad exceptions to the honor code in the form of new Institute policies such as the fire policy and alcohol policy. Although both policies are presented in the Honor System Handbook given to new members of the Caltech community, some undergraduates regard them as a slight against the honor code and the implicit trust and respect it represents within the community. In recent years, the Student Affairs Office has also taken up pursuing investigations independently of the Board of Control and Conduct Review Committee, an implicit violation of both the honor code and written disciplinary policy that has contributed to further erosion of trust between some parts of the undergraduate community and the administration.\nNotable people.\nAs of October 2024, Caltech has 47 Nobel laureates to its name awarded to 26 alumni, 4 postdocs, and 17 non-alumni professors. The 26 alumni include five Caltech professors (Carl D. Anderson, Linus Pauling, William A. Fowler, Edward B. Lewis, and Kip Thorne). Among the 17 non-alumni professors, 14 were in residence at Caltech at the time of the award; David Baltimore, who shared the Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1975, became Caltech President in 1997; Renato Dulbecco, who shared the Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1975, credited his Prize to the time he had spent at Caltech; John Hopfield, who won the Prize in Physics in 2024, is the Dickinson Professor Emeritus at Caltech. The total number of Nobel Prizes is 48 because Pauling received prizes in both Chemistry and Peace. Eight faculty and alumni have received a Crafoord Prize from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, while 58 have been awarded the U.S. National Medal of Science, and 11 have received the National Medal of Technology. One alumnus, Stanislav Smirnov, won the Fields Medal in 2010. Other distinguished researchers have been affiliated with Caltech as postdoctoral scholars (for example, Barbara McClintock, James D. Watson, Sheldon Glashow and John Gurdon) or visiting professors (for example, Albert Einstein, Stephen Hawking and Edward Witten).\nAlumni.\nThere are 22,930 total living alumni in the U.S. and around the world. As of October 2022, 30 alumni and 16 non-alumni faculty have won the Nobel Prize. The Turing Award, the \"Nobel Prize of Computer Science\", has been awarded to six alumni, and one has won the Fields Medal.\nMany alumni have participated in scientific research. Some have concentrated their studies on the very small universe of atoms and molecules. Nobel laureate Carl D. Anderson (BS 1927, PhD 1930) proved the existence of positrons and muons, Nobel laureate Edwin McMillan (BS 1928, MS 1929) synthesized the first transuranium element, Nobel laureate Leo James Rainwater (BS 1939) investigated the non-spherical shapes of atomic nuclei, and Nobel laureate Douglas D. Osheroff (BS 1967) studied the superfluid nature of helium-3. Donald Knuth (PhD 1963), the \"father\" of the analysis of algorithms, wrote \"The Art of Computer Programming\" and created the TeX computer typesetting system, which is commonly used in the scientific community. Bruce Reznick (BS 1973) is a mathematician noted for his contributions to number theory and the combinatorial-algebraic-analytic investigations of\u00a0polynomials. Narendra Karmarkar (MS 1979) is known for the interior point method, a polynomial algorithm for linear programming known as Karmarkar's algorithm.\nOther alumni have turned their gaze to the universe. C. Gordon Fullerton (BS 1957, MS 1958) piloted the third Space Shuttle mission. Astronaut (and later, United States Senator) Harrison Schmitt (BS 1957) was the only geologist to have walked on the surface of the Moon. Astronomer Eugene Merle Shoemaker (BS 1947, MS 1948) co-discovered Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 (a comet which crashed into the planet Jupiter) and was the first person buried on the Moon (by having his ashes crashed into the Moon). Astronomer George O. Abell (BS 1951, MS 1952, PhD 1957) while a grad student at Caltech participated in the National Geographic Society-Palomar Sky Survey. This ultimately resulted in the publication of the \"Abell Catalogue of Clusters of Galaxies,\" the definitive work in the field.\nUndergraduate alumni founded, or co-founded, companies such as LCD manufacturer Varitronix, Hotmail, Compaq, MathWorks (which created Matlab), and database provider Imply, while graduate students founded, or co-founded, companies such as Intel, TRW, and the non-profit educational organization, the Exploratorium.\nArnold Beckman (PhD 1928) invented the pH meter and commercialized it with the founding of Beckman Instruments. His success with that company enabled him to provide seed funding for William Shockley (BS 1932), who had co-invented semiconductor transistors and wanted to commercialize them. Shockley became the founding Director of the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory division of Beckman Instruments. Shockley had previously worked at Bell Labs, whose first president was another alumnus, Frank Jewett (BS 1898). Because his aging mother lived in Palo Alto, California, Shockley established his laboratory near her in Mountain View, California. Shockley was a co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956, but his aggressive management style and odd personality at the Shockley Lab became unbearable. In late 1957, eight of his researchers resigned and with support from Sherman Fairchild formed Fairchild Semiconductor. Among the \"traitorous eight\" was Gordon E. Moore (PhD 1954), who later left Fairchild to co-found Intel. Other offspring companies of Fairchild Semiconductor include National Semiconductor and Advanced Micro Devices, which in turn spawned more technology companies in the area. Shockley's decision to use silicon instead of germanium as the semiconductor material, coupled with the abundance of silicon semiconductor related companies in the area, gave rise to the term \"Silicon Valley\" to describe that geographic region surrounding Palo Alto.\nCaltech alumni also held public offices, with Mustafa A.G. Abushagur (PhD 1984) the Deputy Prime Minister of Libya and Prime Minister-Elect of Libya, James Fletcher (PhD 1948) the 4th and 7th Administrator of NASA, Steven Koonin (PhD 1972) the Undersecretary of Energy for Science, and Regina Dugan (PhD 1993) the 19th director of DARPA. The 20th director for DARPA, Arati Prabhakar, is also a Caltech alumna (PhD 1984) as well as Charles Elachi (Phd 1971), former director of the Jet Propulsion Lab. Arvind Virmani is a former Chief Economic Adviser to the Government of India. In 2013, President Obama announced the nomination of France Cordova (PhD 1979) as the director of the National Science Foundation and Ellen Williams (PhD 1982) as the director for ARPA-E.\nFaculty and staff.\nRichard Feynman was among the most well-known physicists associated with Caltech, having published the \"Feynman Lectures on Physics\", an undergraduate physics text, and popular science texts such as \"Six Easy Pieces\" for the general audience. The promotion of physics made him a public figure of science, although his Nobel-winning work in quantum electrodynamics was already very established in the scientific community. Murray Gell-Mann, a Nobel-winning physicist, introduced a classification of hadrons and went on to postulate the existence of quarks, which is currently accepted as part of the Standard Model. Long-time Caltech President Robert Andrews Millikan was the first to calculate the charge of the electron with his well-known oil-drop experiment, while Richard Chace Tolman is remembered for his contributions to cosmology and statistical mechanics. 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics winner H. David Politzer is a current professor at Caltech, as is astrophysicist and author Kip Thorne and eminent mathematician Barry Simon. Linus Pauling pioneered quantum chemistry and molecular biology, and went on to discover the nature of the chemical bond in 1939. Seismologist Charles Richter, also an alumnus, developed the magnitude scale that bears his name, the Richter magnitude scale for measuring the power of earthquakes. One of the founders of the geochemistry department, Clair Patterson was the first to accurately determine the age of the Earth via lead:uranium ratio in meteorites. In engineering, Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n made many key advances in aerodynamics, notably his work on supersonic and hypersonic airflow characterization. A repeating pattern of swirling vortices is named after him, the von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n vortex street. Participants in von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n's GALCIT project included Frank Malina, who helped develop the WAC Corporal, which was the first U.S. rocket to reach the edge of space, Jack Parsons, a pioneer in the development of liquid and solid rocket fuels who designed the first castable composite-based rocket motor, and Qian Xuesen, who was dubbed the \"Father of Chinese Rocketry\". More recently, Michael Brown, a professor of planetary astronomy, discovered many trans-Neptunian objects, most notably the dwarf planet Eris, which prompted the International Astronomical Union to redefine the term \"planet\".\nDavid Baltimore, the Robert A. Millikan Professor of Biology, and Alice Huang, Senior Faculty Associate in Biology, served as the presidents of AAAS from 2007 to 2008 and 2010 to 2011, respectively.\n33% of the faculty are members of the National Academy of Sciences or Engineering and/or fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. This is the highest percentage of any faculty in the country with the exception of the graduate institution Rockefeller University.\nThe average salary for assistant professors at Caltech is $111,300, associate professors $121,300, and full professors $172,800. Caltech faculty are active in applied physics, astronomy and astrophysics, biology, biochemistry, biological engineering, chemical engineering, computer science, geology, mechanical engineering, and physics.\nCaltech startups.\nOver the years Caltech has actively promoted the commercialization of technologies developed within its walls. Through its Office of Technology Transfer &amp; Corporate Partnerships, scientific breakthroughs have led to the transfer of numerous technologies in a wide variety of scientific-related fields such as photovoltaic, radio-frequency identification (RFID), semiconductors, hyperspectral imaging, electronic devices, protein design, solid state amplifiers and many more. Companies such as Quora, Contour Energy Systems, Impinj, Fulcrum Microsystems, Nanosys, Inc., Photon etc., Xencor, and Wavestream Wireless have emerged from Caltech.\nIn media and popular culture.\nCaltech has appeared in many works of popular culture, both as itself and in disguised form. On television, it played a prominent role and was the workplace of all four male lead characters and one female lead character in the sitcom \"The Big Bang Theory\". Caltech is also the inspiration, and frequent film location, for the California Institute of Science in \"Numb3rs\". On film, the Pacific Tech of \"The War of the Worlds\" and \"Real Genius\" is based on Caltech.\nIn nonfiction, two 2007 documentaries examine aspects of Caltech: \"Curious\", its researchers, and \"Quantum Hoops\", its men's basketball team.\nCaltech is also prominently featured in many comics and television series by Marvel Entertainment. In Marvel Comics, the university serves as the alma mater of Hulk, Mister Fantastic, Bill Foster (Black Goliath), and Madman. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Bruno Carrelli (Kamala Khan's best friend and love interest) attends Caltech in the miniseries \"Ms. Marvel\".\nGiven its Los Angeles-area location, the grounds of the Institute are often host to short scenes in movies and television. The Athenaeum dining club appears in the \"Beverly Hills Cop\" series, \"The X-Files\", \"True Romance\", and \"The West Wing\"."}
{"id": "5788", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5788", "title": "Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction Event", "text": ""}
{"id": "5790", "revid": "49099573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5790", "title": "Carlo Goldoni", "text": "Carlo Osvaldo Goldoni (, , ; 25 February 1707 \u2013 6 February 1793) was an Italian playwright and librettist from the Republic of Venice. His works include some of Italy's most famous and best-loved plays. Audiences have admired the plays of Goldoni for their ingenious mix of wit and honesty. His plays offered his contemporaries images of themselves, often dramatizing the lives, values, and conflicts of the emerging middle classes. Though he wrote in French and Italian, his plays make rich use of the Venetian language, regional vernacular, and colloquialisms. Goldoni also wrote under the pen name and title \"Polisseno Fegeio, Pastor Arcade\", which he claimed in his memoirs the \"Arcadians of Rome\" bestowed on him.\nBiography.\nMemoirs.\nThere is an abundance of autobiographical information on Goldoni, most of which comes from the introductions to his plays and from his \"Memoirs\". However, these memoirs are known to contain many errors of fact, especially about his earlier years.\nIn these memoirs, he paints himself as a born comedian, careless, light-hearted and with a happy temperament, proof against all strokes of fate, yet thoroughly respectable and honourable.\nEarly life and studies.\nGoldoni was born in Venice in 1707, the son of Margherita Salvioni (or Saioni) and Giulio Goldoni. In his memoirs, Goldoni describes his father as a physician, and claims that he was introduced to theatre by his grandfather Carlo Alessandro Goldoni. In reality, it seems that Giulio was an apothecary; as for the grandfather, he had died four years before Carlo's birth. In any case, Goldoni was deeply interested in theatre from his earliest years, and all attempts to direct his activity into other channels were of no avail; his toys were puppets, and his books were plays.\nHis father placed him under the care of the philosopher Caldini at Rimini but the youth soon ran away with a company of strolling players and returned to Venice. In 1723 his father matriculated him into the stern Collegio Ghislieri in Pavia, which imposed the tonsure and monastic habits on its students. However, he relates in his \"Memoirs\" that a considerable part of his time was spent reading Greek and Latin comedies. He had already begun writing at this time and, in his third year, he composed a libellous poem (\"Il colosso\") in which he ridiculed the daughters of certain Pavian families. As a result of that incident (and/or of a visit with some schoolmates to a local brothel), he was expelled from the school and had to leave the city (1725). He studied law at Udine, and eventually took his degree at University of Modena. He was employed as a law clerk at Chioggia and Feltre, after which he returned to his native city and began practising.\nEducated as a lawyer, and holding lucrative positions as secretary and counsellor, he seemed, indeed, at one time to have settled down to the practice of law, but following an unexpected summons to Venice, after an absence of several years, he changed his career, and thenceforth he devoted himself to writing plays and managing theatres. His father died in 1731. In 1732, to avoid an unwanted marriage, he left the town for Milan and then for Verona where the theatre manager Giuseppe Imer helped him on his way to becoming a comical poet as well as introducing him to his future wife, Nicoletta Conio. Goldoni returned with her to Venice, where he stayed until 1743.\nTheatrical career.\nGoldoni entered the Italian theatre scene with a tragedy, \"Amalasunta\", produced in Milan. The play was a critical and financial failure.\nSubmitting it to Count Prata, director of the opera, he was told that his piece \"was composed with due regard for the rules of Aristotle and Horace, but not according to those laid down for the Italian drama.\" \"In France\", continued the count, \"you can try to please the public, but here in Italy it is the actors and actresses whom you must consult, as well as the composer of the music and the stage decorators. Everything must be done according to a certain form which I will explain to you.\"\nGoldoni thanked his critic, went back to his inn and ordered a fire, into which he threw the manuscript of his \"Amalasunta\".\nHis next play, \"Belisario\", written in 1734, was more successful, though of its success he afterwards professed himself ashamed.\nDuring this period he also wrote librettos for opera seria and served for a time as literary director of the San Giovanni Grisostomo, Venice's most distinguished opera house.\nHe wrote other tragedies for a time, but he was not long in discovering that his bent was for comedy. He had come to realize that the Italian stage needed reforming; adopting Moli\u00e8re as his model, he went to work in earnest and in 1738 produced his first real comedy, \"L'uomo di mondo\" (\"The Man of the World\"). During his many wanderings and adventures in Italy, he was constantly at work and when, at Livorno, he became acquainted with the manager Medebac, he determined to pursue the profession of playwriting in order to make a living. He was employed by Medebac to write plays for his theatre in Venice. He worked for other managers and produced during his stay in that city some of his most characteristic works. He also wrote \"Momolo Cortesan\" in 1738. By 1743, he had perfected his hybrid style of playwriting (combining the model of Moli\u00e8re with the strengths of \"Commedia dell'arte\" and his own wit and sincerity). This style was typified in \"La Donna di garbo\", the first Italian comedy of its kind.\nAfter 1748, Goldoni collaborated with the composer Baldassare Galuppi, making significant contributions to the new form of 'opera buffa'. Galuppi composed the score for more than twenty of Goldoni's librettos. As with his comedies, Goldoni's \"opera buffa\" integrates elements of the Commedia dell'arte with recognisable local and middle-class realities. His operatic works include two of the most successful musical comedies of the eighteenth century, \"Il filosofo di campagna\" (\"The Country Philosopher\"), set by Galuppi (1752) and \"La buona figliuola\" (\"The Good Girl\"), set by Niccol\u00f2 Piccinni (1760).\nIn 1753, following his return from Bologna, he defected to the Teatro San Luca of the Vendramin family, where he performed most of his plays to 1762.\nMove to France and death.\nIn 1757, he engaged in a bitter dispute with playwright Carlo Gozzi, which left him utterly disgusted with the tastes of his countrymen; so much so that in 1761 he moved to Paris, where he received a position at court and was put in charge of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien. He spent the rest of his life in France, composing most of his plays in French and writing his memoirs in that language.\nAmong the plays which he wrote in French, the most successful was \"Le bourru bienfaisant\", dedicated to Marie Ad\u00e9la\u00efde, a daughter of Louis XV and aunt to the dauphin, the future Louis XVI of France. It premiered on 4 February 1771, almost nine months after the dauphin's marriage to Marie Antoinette. Goldoni enjoyed considerable popularity in France; in 1769, when he retired to Versailles, the King gave him a pension. He lost this pension after the French Revolution. The Convention eventually voted to restore his pension the day after his death. It was restored to his widow, at the pleading of the poet Andr\u00e9 Ch\u00e9nier; \"She is old\", he urged, \"she is seventy-six, and her husband has left her no heritage save his illustrious name, his virtues and his poverty.\"\nGoldoni's impact on Italian theatre.\nIn his \"Memoirs\" Goldoni amply discusses the state of Italian comedy when he began writing. At that time, Italian comedy revolved around the conventionality of the Commedia dell'arte, or improvised comedy. Goldoni took to himself the task of superseding the comedy of masks and the comedy of intrigue with representations of actual life and manners through the characters and their behaviours. He maintained that Italian life and manners were susceptible of artistic treatment such as had not been given them before.\nHis works are a lasting monument to the changes that he initiated: a dramatic revolution that had been attempted but not achieved before. Goldoni's importance lies in providing good examples rather than precepts. Goldoni says that he took for his models the plays of Moli\u00e8re and that whenever a piece of his own succeeded he whispered to himself: \"Good, but not yet Moli\u00e8re\". Goldoni's plays are gentler and more optimistic in tone than Moli\u00e8re's.\nIt was this very success that was the object of harsh critiques by Carlo Gozzi, who accused Goldoni of having deprived the Italian theatre of the charms of poetry and imagination. The great success of Gozzi's fairy dramas so irritated Goldoni that it led to his self-exile to France.\nGoldoni gave to his country a classical form, which, though it has since been cultivated, has yet to be cultivated by a master.\nThemes.\nGoldoni's plays that were written while he was still in Italy ignore religious and ecclesiastical subjects. This may be surprising, considering his staunch Catholic upbringing. No thoughts are expressed about death or repentance in his memoirs or in his comedies. After his move to France, his position became clearer, as his plays took on a clear anti-clerical tone and often satirized the hypocrisy of monks and of the Church.\nGoldoni was inspired by his love of humanity and the admiration he had for his fellow men. He wrote, and was obsessed with, the relationships that humans establish with one another, their cities and homes, and the study of philosophy. The moral and civil values that Goldoni promotes in his plays are those of rationality, civility, humanism, the importance of the rising middle class, a progressive stance on state affairs, honour and honesty. Goldoni had a dislike for arrogance, intolerance and the abuse of power.\nGoldoni's main characters are no abstract examples of human virtue, nor monstrous examples of human vice. They occupy the middle ground of human temperament. Goldoni maintains an acute sensibility for the differences in social classes between his characters as well as environmental and generational changes. Goldoni pokes fun at the arrogant nobility and the pauper who lacks dignity.\nVenetian and Tuscan.\nAs in other theatrical works of the time and place, the characters in Goldoni's Italian comedies spoke originally either the literary Tuscan variety (which became modern Italian) or the Venetian dialect, depending on their station in life. However, in some printed editions of his plays, he often turned the Venetian texts into Tuscan, too.\nGoldoni in popular culture.\nOne of his best-known works is the comic play \"Servant of Two Masters\", which has been translated and adapted internationally numerous times. In 1966 it was adapted into an opera buffa by the American composer Vittorio Giannini. In 2011, Richard Bean adapted the play for the National Theatre of Great Britain as \"One Man, Two Guvnors\". Its popularity led to a transfer to the West End and in 2012 to Broadway.\nThe film \"Carlo Goldoni \u2013 Venice, Grand Theatre of the World\", directed by Alessandro Bettero, was released in 2007 and is available in English, Italian, French, and Japanese.\nSelected works.\nThe following is a small sampling of Goldoni's enormous output."}
{"id": "5792", "revid": "30395827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5792", "title": "Continuous probability distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "5793", "revid": "150456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5793", "title": "Cumulative distribution function", "text": "In probability theory and statistics, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a real-valued random variable formula_1, or just distribution function of formula_1, evaluated at formula_3, is the probability that formula_1 will take a value less than or equal to formula_3.\nEvery probability distribution supported on the real numbers, discrete or \"mixed\" as well as continuous, is uniquely identified by a right-continuous monotone increasing function (a c\u00e0dl\u00e0g function) formula_6 satisfying formula_7 and formula_8.\nIn the case of a scalar continuous distribution, it gives the area under the probability density function from negative infinity to formula_3. Cumulative distribution functions are also used to specify the distribution of multivariate random variables.\nDefinition.\nThe cumulative distribution function of a real-valued random variable formula_1 is the function given by\nwhere the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_3.\nThe probability that formula_1 lies in the semi-closed interval formula_14, where formula_15, is therefore\nIn the definition above, the \"less than or equal to\" sign, \"\u2264\", is a convention, not a universally used one (e.g. Hungarian literature uses \"&lt;\"), but the distinction is important for discrete distributions. The proper use of tables of the binomial and Poisson distributions depends upon this convention. Moreover, important formulas like Paul L\u00e9vy's inversion formula for the characteristic function also rely on the \"less than or equal\" formulation.\nIf treating several random variables formula_16 etc. the corresponding letters are used as subscripts while, if treating only one, the subscript is usually omitted. It is conventional to use a capital formula_17 for a cumulative distribution function, in contrast to the lower-case formula_18 used for probability density functions and probability mass functions. This applies when discussing general distributions: some specific distributions have their own conventional notation, for example the normal distribution uses formula_19 and formula_20 instead of formula_17 and formula_18, respectively.\nThe probability density function of a continuous random variable can be determined from the cumulative distribution function by differentiating using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; i.e. given formula_23,\nformula_24\nas long as the derivative exists.\nThe CDF of a continuous random variable formula_1 can be expressed as the integral of its probability density function formula_26 as follows:\nformula_27\nIn the case of a random variable formula_1 which has distribution having a discrete component at a value formula_29,\nformula_30\nIf formula_31 is continuous at formula_29, this equals zero and there is no discrete component at formula_29.\nProperties.\nEvery cumulative distribution function formula_31 is non-decreasing and right-continuous, which makes it a c\u00e0dl\u00e0g function. Furthermore,\nformula_35\nEvery function with these three properties is a CDF, i.e., for every such function, a random variable can be defined such that the function is the cumulative distribution function of that random variable.\nIf formula_1 is a purely discrete random variable, then it attains values formula_37 with probability formula_38, and the CDF of formula_1 will be discontinuous at the points formula_40:\nformula_41\nIf the CDF formula_31 of a real valued random variable formula_1 is continuous, then formula_1 is a continuous random variable; if furthermore formula_31 is absolutely continuous, then there exists a Lebesgue-integrable function formula_46 such that\nformula_47\nfor all real numbers formula_48 and formula_29. The function formula_26 is equal to the derivative of formula_31 almost everywhere, and it is called the probability density function of the distribution of formula_1.\nIf formula_1 has finite L1-norm, that is, the expectation of formula_54 is finite, then the expectation is given by the Riemann\u2013Stieltjes integral \nformula_55\nand for any formula_56,\nformula_57\nas well as\nformula_58\nas shown in the diagram (consider the areas of the two red rectangles and their extensions to the right or left up to the graph of formula_31). In particular, we have \nformula_60\nIn addition, the (finite) expected value of the real-valued random variable formula_1 can be defined on the graph of its cumulative distribution function as illustrated by the drawing in the definition of expected value for arbitrary real-valued random variables.\nExamples.\nAs an example, suppose formula_1 is uniformly distributed on the unit interval formula_63.\nThen the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nformula_65\nSuppose instead that formula_1 takes only the discrete values 0 and 1, with equal probability.\nThen the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nformula_68\nSuppose formula_1 is exponential distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nformula_71\nHere \"\u03bb\" &gt; 0 is the parameter of the distribution, often called the rate parameter.\nSuppose formula_1 is normal distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nformula_74\nHere the parameter formula_75 is the mean or expectation of the distribution; and formula_76 is its standard deviation.\nA table of the CDF of the standard normal distribution is often used in statistical applications, where it is named the standard normal table, the unit normal table, or the Z table.\nSuppose formula_1 is binomial distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nformula_79\nHere formula_80 is the probability of success and the function denotes the discrete probability distribution of the number of successes in a sequence of formula_81 independent experiments, and formula_82 is the \"floor\" under formula_83, i.e. the greatest integer less than or equal to formula_83.\nDerived functions.\nComplementary cumulative distribution function (tail distribution).\nSometimes, it is useful to study the opposite question and ask how often the random variable is \"above\" a particular level. This is called the ' (') or simply the ' or ', and is defined as\nformula_85\nThis has applications in statistical hypothesis testing, for example, because the one-sided p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic \"at least\" as extreme as the one observed. Thus, provided that the test statistic, \"T\", has a continuous distribution, the one-sided p-value is simply given by the ccdf: for an observed value formula_86 of the test statistic\nformula_87\nIn survival analysis, formula_88 is called the survival function and denoted formula_89, while the term \"reliability function\" is common in engineering.\nFolded cumulative distribution.\nWhile the plot of a cumulative distribution formula_17 often has an S-like shape, an alternative illustration is the folded cumulative distribution or mountain plot, which folds the top half of the graph over, that is\nwhere formula_104 denotes the indicator function and the second summand is the survivor function, thus using two scales, one for the upslope and another for the downslope. This form of illustration emphasises the median, dispersion (specifically, the mean absolute deviation from the median) and skewness of the distribution or of the empirical results.\nInverse distribution function (quantile function).\nIf the CDF \"F\" is strictly increasing and continuous then formula_105 is the unique real number formula_106 such that formula_107. This defines the inverse distribution function or quantile function.\nSome distributions do not have a unique inverse (for example if formula_108 for all &lt;math&gt;a&lt;x, causing formula_31 to be constant). In this case, one may use the generalized inverse distribution function, which is defined as\nSome useful properties of the inverse cdf (which are also preserved in the definition of the generalized inverse distribution function) are:\nThe inverse of the cdf can be used to translate results obtained for the uniform distribution to other distributions.\nEmpirical distribution function.\nThe empirical distribution function is an estimate of the cumulative distribution function that generated the points in the sample. It converges with probability 1 to that underlying distribution. A number of results exist to quantify the rate of convergence of the empirical distribution function to the underlying cumulative distribution function.\nMultivariate case.\nDefinition for two random variables.\nWhen dealing simultaneously with more than one random variable the joint cumulative distribution function can also be defined. For example, for a pair of random variables formula_130, the joint CDF formula_131 is given by\nwhere the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_3 and that formula_119 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_135.\nExample of joint cumulative distribution function:\nFor two continuous variables \"X\" and \"Y\": formula_136\nFor two discrete random variables, it is beneficial to generate a table of probabilities and address the cumulative probability for each potential range of \"X\" and \"Y\", and here is the example:\ngiven the joint probability mass function in tabular form, determine the joint cumulative distribution function.\nSolution: using the given table of probabilities for each potential range of \"X\" and \"Y\", the joint cumulative distribution function may be constructed in tabular form:\nDefinition for more than two random variables.\nFor formula_137 random variables formula_138, the joint CDF formula_139 is given by\nInterpreting the formula_137 random variables as a random vector formula_141 yields a shorter notation:\nformula_142\nProperties.\nEvery multivariate CDF is:\nNot every function satisfying the above four properties is a multivariate CDF, unlike in the single dimension case. For example, let formula_145 for formula_146 or formula_147 or formula_148 and let formula_149 otherwise. It is easy to see that the above conditions are met, and yet formula_17 is not a CDF since if it was, then formula_151 as explained below.\nThe probability that a point belongs to a hyperrectangle is analogous to the 1-dimensional case:\nformula_152\nComplex case.\nComplex random variable.\nThe generalization of the cumulative distribution function from real to complex random variables is not obvious because expressions of the form formula_153 make no sense. However expressions of the form formula_154 make sense. Therefore, we define the cumulative distribution of a complex random variables via the joint distribution of their real and imaginary parts:\nformula_155\nComplex random vector.\nGeneralization of yields\nformula_156\nas definition for the CDS of a complex random vector formula_157.\nUse in statistical analysis.\nThe concept of the cumulative distribution function makes an explicit appearance in statistical analysis in two (similar) ways. Cumulative frequency analysis is the analysis of the frequency of occurrence of values of a phenomenon less than a reference value. The empirical distribution function is a formal direct estimate of the cumulative distribution function for which simple statistical properties can be derived and which can form the basis of various statistical hypothesis tests. Such tests can assess whether there is evidence against a sample of data having arisen from a given distribution, or evidence against two samples of data having arisen from the same (unknown) population distribution.\nKolmogorov\u2013Smirnov and Kuiper's tests.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test is based on cumulative distribution functions and can be used to test to see whether two empirical distributions are different or whether an empirical distribution is different from an ideal distribution. The closely related Kuiper's test is useful if the domain of the distribution is cyclic as in day of the week. For instance Kuiper's test might be used to see if the number of tornadoes varies during the year or if sales of a product vary by day of the week or day of the month."}
{"id": "5794", "revid": "5791421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5794", "title": "Central tendency", "text": "In statistics, a central tendency (or measure of central tendency) is a central or typical value for a probability distribution.\nColloquially, measures of central tendency are often called \"averages.\" The term \"central tendency\" dates from the late 1920s.\nThe most common measures of central tendency are the arithmetic mean, the median, and the mode. A middle tendency can be calculated for either a finite set of values or for a theoretical distribution, such as the normal distribution. Occasionally authors use central tendency to denote \"the tendency of quantitative data to cluster around some central value.\"\nThe central tendency of a distribution is typically contrasted with its \"dispersion\" or \"variability\"; dispersion and central tendency are the often characterized properties of distributions. Analysis may judge whether data has a strong or a weak central tendency based on its dispersion.\nMeasures.\nThe following may be applied to one-dimensional data. Depending on the circumstances, it may be appropriate to transform the data before calculating a central tendency. Examples are squaring the values or taking logarithms. Whether a transformation is appropriate and what it should be, depend heavily on the data being analyzed.\nAny of the above may be applied to each dimension of multi-dimensional data, but the results may not be invariant to rotations of the multi-dimensional space.\nSolutions to variational problems.\nSeveral measures of central tendency can be characterized as solving a variational problem, in the sense of the calculus of variations, namely minimizing variation from the center. That is, given a measure of statistical dispersion, one asks for a measure of central tendency that minimizes variation: such that variation from the center is minimal among all choices of center. In a quip, \"dispersion precedes location\". These measures are initially defined in one dimension, but can be generalized to multiple dimensions. This center may or may not be unique. In the sense of spaces, the correspondence is:\nThe associated functions are called -norms: respectively 0-\"norm\", 1-norm, 2-norm, and \u221e-norm. The function corresponding to the 0 space is not a norm, and is thus often referred to in quotes: 0-\"norm\".\nIn equations, for a given (finite) data set , thought of as a vector , the dispersion about a point is the \"distance\" from to the constant vector in the -norm (normalized by the number of points ):\nFor and these functions are defined by taking limits, respectively as and . For the limiting values are and for , so the difference becomes simply equality, so the 0-norm counts the number of \"unequal\" points. For the largest number dominates, and thus the \u221e-norm is the maximum difference.\nUniqueness.\nThe mean (\"L\"2 center) and midrange (\"L\"\u221e center) are unique (when they exist), while the median (\"L\"1 center) and mode (\"L\"0 center) are not in general unique. This can be understood in terms of convexity of the associated functions (coercive functions).\nThe 2-norm and \u221e-norm are strictly convex, and thus (by convex optimization) the minimizer is unique (if it exists), and exists for bounded distributions. Thus standard deviation about the mean is lower than standard deviation about any other point, and the maximum deviation about the midrange is lower than the maximum deviation about any other point.\nThe 1-norm is not \"strictly\" convex, whereas strict convexity is needed to ensure uniqueness of the minimizer. Correspondingly, the median (in this sense of minimizing) is not in general unique, and in fact any point between the two central points of a discrete distribution minimizes average absolute deviation.\nThe 0-\"norm\" is not convex (hence not a norm). Correspondingly, the mode is not unique \u2013 for example, in a uniform distribution \"any\" point is the mode.\nClustering.\nInstead of a single central point, one can ask for multiple points such that the variation from these points is minimized. This leads to cluster analysis, where each point in the data set is clustered with the nearest \"center\". Most commonly, using the 2-norm generalizes the mean to \"k\"-means clustering, while using the 1-norm generalizes the (geometric) median to \"k\"-medians clustering. Using the 0-norm simply generalizes the mode (most common value) to using the \"k\" most common values as centers.\nUnlike the single-center statistics, this multi-center clustering cannot in general be computed in a closed-form expression, and instead must be computed or approximated by an iterative method; one general approach is expectation\u2013maximization algorithms.\nInformation geometry.\nThe notion of a \"center\" as minimizing variation can be generalized in information geometry as a distribution that minimizes divergence (a generalized distance) from a data set. The most common case is maximum likelihood estimation, where the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) maximizes likelihood (minimizes expected surprisal), which can be interpreted geometrically by using entropy to measure variation: the MLE minimizes cross-entropy (equivalently, relative entropy, Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence).\nA simple example of this is for the center of nominal data: instead of using the mode (the only single-valued \"center\"), one often uses the empirical measure (the frequency distribution divided by the sample size) as a \"center\". For example, given binary data, say heads or tails, if a data set consists of 2 heads and 1 tails, then the mode is \"heads\", but the empirical measure is 2/3 heads, 1/3 tails, which minimizes the cross-entropy (total surprisal) from the data set. This perspective is also used in regression analysis, where least squares finds the solution that minimizes the distances from it, and analogously in logistic regression, a maximum likelihood estimate minimizes the surprisal (information distance).\nRelationships between the mean, median and mode.\nFor unimodal distributions the following bounds are known and are sharp:\nwhere \"\u03bc\" is the mean, \"\u03bd\" is the median, \"\u03b8\" is the mode, and \"\u03c3\" is the standard deviation.\nFor every distribution,"}
{"id": "5796", "revid": "41938237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5796", "title": "Celebrity", "text": "Celebrity is a condition of fame and broad public recognition of a person or group due to the attention given to them by mass media. The word is also used to refer to famous individuals. A person may attain celebrity status by having great wealth, participation in sports or the entertainment industry, their position as a political figure, or even their connection to another celebrity. 'Celebrity' usually implies a favorable public image, as opposed to the neutrals 'famous' or 'notable', or the negatives 'infamous' and 'notorious'.\nHistory.\nIn his 2020 book \"Dead Famous: An Unexpected History Of Celebrity\", British historian Greg Jenner uses the definition:\nAlthough his book is subtitled \"from Bronze Age to Silver Screen\", and despite the fact that \"Until very recently, sociologists argued that \"celebrity\" was invented just over 100 years ago, in the flickering glimmer of early Hollywood\" and the suggestion that some medieval saints might qualify, Jenner asserts that the earliest celebrities lived in the early 1700s, his first example being Henry Sacheverell.\nAthletes in Ancient Greece were welcomed home as heroes, had songs and poems written in their honor, and received free food and gifts from those seeking celebrity endorsement. Ancient Rome similarly lauded actors and notorious gladiators, and Julius Caesar appeared on a coin in his own lifetime (a departure from the usual depiction of battles and divine lineage).\nIn the early 12th century, Thomas Becket became famous following his murder, the first possible case of posthumous popularity. The Christian Church promoted him as a martyr, and images of him and scenes from his life became widespread in just a few years. In a pattern often repeated, what started as an explosion of popularity (often referred to with the suffix 'mania') turned into long-lasting fame: pilgrimages to Canterbury Cathedral, where he was killed, became instantly fashionable, and the fascination with his life and death inspired plays and films.\nThe cult of personality (particularly in the west) can be traced back to the Romantics in the 18th century, whose livelihood as artists and poets depended on the currency of their reputation. Lord Byron became a celebrity in 1812 after the publication of the first two cantos of \"Childe Harold's Pilgrimage\". \"I awoke one morning and found myself famous,\" he said. According to McGann: \"He rapidly became the most brilliant star in the dazzling world of Regency London.\"\nEstablishing cultural hot spots became important in generating fame, such as in London and Paris in the 18th and 19th centuries. Newspapers started including \"gossip\" columns, and certain clubs and events became places to be seen to receive publicity. David Lodge called Charles Dickens the \"first writer to feel the intense pressure of being simultaneously an artist and an object of unrelenting public interest and adulation\", and Juliet John backed up the claim for Dickens \"to be called the first self-made global media star of the age of mass culture.\"\nTheatrical actors were often considered celebrities. Restaurants near theaters, where actors would congregate, began putting up caricatures or photographs of actors on celebrity walls in the late 19th century. The subject of widespread public and media interest, Lillie Langtry, made her West End theatre debut in 1881 causing a sensation in London by becoming the first socialite to appear on stage. The following year she became the poster-girl for Pears Soap, becoming the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product. In 1895, poet and playwright Oscar Wilde became the subject of \"one of the first celebrity trials\".\nAnother example of celebrities in the entertainment industry was in music, beginning in the mid-19th century. Never seen before in music, many people engaged in an immense fan frenzy called Lisztomania that began in 1841. This created the basis for the behavior fans have around their favorite musicians in modern society.\nThe movie industry spread around the globe in the first half of the 20th century, creating the first film celebrities. The term celebrity was not always tied to actors in films however, especially when cinema was starting as a medium. As Paul McDonald states in \"The Star System: Hollywood's Production of Popular Identities\", \"In the first decade of the twentieth century, American film production companies withheld the names of film performers, despite requests from audiences, fearing that public recognition would drive performers to demand higher salaries.\" Public fascination went well beyond the on-screen exploits of movie stars, and their private lives became headline news: for example, in Hollywood the marriages of Elizabeth Taylor and in Bollywood the affairs of Raj Kapoor in the 1950s. Like theatrical actors before them, movie actors were the subjects of celebrity walls in restaurants they frequented, near movie studios, most notably at Sardi's in Hollywood.\nThe second half of the century saw television and popular music bring new forms of celebrity, such as the rock star and the pop group, epitomised by Elvis Presley and the Beatles, respectively. John Lennon's highly controversial 1966 quote: \"We're more popular than Jesus now\", which he later insisted was not a boast, and that he was not in any way comparing himself with Christ, gives an insight into both the adulation and notoriety that fame can bring. Unlike movies, television created celebrities who were not primarily actors; for example, presenters, talk show hosts, and newsreaders. However, most of these are only famous within the regions reached by their particular broadcaster, and only a few such as Oprah Winfrey, Jerry Springer, or David Frost could be said to have broken through into wider stardom. Television also gave exposure to sportspeople, notably Pel\u00e9 after his emergence at the 1958 FIFA World Cup, with Barney Ronay in \"The Guardian\" stating, \"What is certain is that Pel\u00e9 invented this game, the idea of individual global sporting superstardom, and in a way that is unrepeatable now.\"\nIn the '60s and early '70s, the book publishing industry began to persuade major celebrities to put their names on autobiographies and other titles in a genre called celebrity publishing. In most cases, the book was not written by the celebrity but by a ghostwriter, but the celebrity would then be available for a book tour and appearances on talk shows.\nWealth.\n\"Forbes\" Celebrity 100.\n\"Forbes\" magazine releases an annual \"Forbes\" Celebrity 100 list of the highest-paid celebrities in the world. The total earnings for all top celebrity 100 earners totaled $4.5 billion in 2010 alone.\nFor instance, \"Forbes\" ranked media mogul and talk show host, Oprah Winfrey as the top earner \"Forbes magazine's annual ranking of the most powerful celebrities\", with earnings of $290 million in the past year. Forbes cites that Lady Gaga reportedly earned over $90 million in 2010. In 2011, golfer Tiger Woods was one of highest-earning celebrity athletes, with an income of $74 million and is consistently ranked one of the highest-paid athletes in the world. In 2013, Madonna was ranked as the fifth most powerful and the highest-earning celebrity of the year with earnings of $125 million. She has consistently been among the most powerful and highest-earning celebrities in the world, occupying the third place in Forbes Celebrity 100 2009 with $110 million of earnings, and getting the tenth place in the 2011 edition of the list with annual earnings equal to $58 million. Beyonc\u00e9 has also appeared in the top ten in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, 2017, and topped the list in 2014 with earnings of $115 million. Cristiano Ronaldo followed by Lionel Messi in 2020 became the first two athletes in a team sport to surpass $1\u00a0billion in earnings during their careers.\n\"Forbes\" also lists the top-earning deceased celebrities, with singer Michael Jackson, fantasy author J. R. R. Tolkien and children's author Roald Dahl each topping the annual list with earnings of $500 million over the course of a year.\nEntrepreneurship and endorsements.\nCelebrity endorsements have proven very successful around the world where, due to increasing consumerism, a person owns a \"status symbol\" by purchasing a celebrity-endorsed product. Although it has become commonplace for celebrities to place their name with endorsements onto products just for quick money, some celebrities have gone beyond merely using their names and have put their entrepreneurial spirit to work by becoming entrepreneurs by attaching themselves in the business aspects of entertainment and building their own business brand beyond their traditional salaried activities. Along with investing their salaried wages into growing business endeavors, several celebrities have become innovative business leaders in their respective industries.\nNumerous celebrities have ventured into becoming business moguls and established themselves as entrepreneurs, idolizing many well known business leaders such as Bill Gates, Richard Branson and Warren Buffett. For instance, former basketball player Michael Jordan became an entrepreneur involved with many sports-related ventures including investing a minority stake in the Charlotte Bobcats, Paul Newman started his own salad dressing business after leaving behind a distinguished acting career, and rap musician Birdman started his own record label, clothing line, and an oil business while maintaining a career as a rap artist. In 2014, David Beckham became co-owner of new Major League Soccer team Inter Miami, which began playing in 2020. Former Brazil striker and World Cup winner Ronaldo became the majority owner of La Liga club Real Valladolid in 2018. Other celebrities such as Tyler Perry, George Lucas, and Steven Spielberg have become successful entrepreneurs through starting their own film production companies and running their own movie studios beyond their traditional activities.\nTabloid magazines and talk TV shows bestow a great deal of attention to celebrities. To stay in the public eye and build wealth in addition to their salaried labor, numerous celebrities have begun participating and branching into various business ventures and endorsements, which include: animation, publishing, fashion designing, cosmetics, consumer electronics, household items and appliances, cigarettes, soft drinks and alcoholic beverages, hair care, hairdressing, jewelry design, fast food, credit cards, video games, writing, and toys.\nIn addition to these, some celebrities have been involved with some business and investment-related ventures also include: sports team ownership, fashion retailing, establishments such as restaurants, cafes, hotels, and casinos, movie theaters, advertising and event planning, management-related ventures such as sports management, financial services, model management, and talent management, record labels, film production, television production, publishing books and music, massage therapy, salons, health and fitness, and real estate.\nAlthough some celebrities have achieved additional financial success from various business ventures, the vast majority of celebrities are not successful businesspeople and still rely on salaried labored wages to earn a living. Not all celebrities eventually succeed with their businesses and other related side ventures. Some celebrities either went broke or filed for bankruptcy as a result of dabbling with such side businesses or endorsements.\nFamous for being famous.\n\"Famous for being famous\", in popular culture terminology, refers to someone who attains celebrity status for no particular identifiable reason, or who achieves fame through association with a celebrity. The term is a pejorative, suggesting the target has no particular talents or abilities. British journalist Malcolm Muggeridge made the first known usage of the phrase in the introduction to his book \"Muggeridge Through The Microphone: BBC Radio and Television\" (1967) in which he wrote:In the past if someone was famous or notorious, it was for something\u2014as a writer or an actor or a criminal; for some talent or distinction or abomination. Today one is famous for being famous. People who come up to one in the street or in public places to claim recognition nearly always say: \"I've seen you on the telly!\"\nThe coinages \"famesque\" and \"celebutante\" are of similar pejorative gist.\nThis shift has sparked criticism for promoting superficial recognition over substantive achievements and reflects broader changes in how fame and success are perceived in modern culture.\nMass media phenomena.\nMass media has dramatically reshaped the concept of celebrity by amplifying visibility and extending fame globally. With the rise of television, social media, and reality TV, individuals can achieve stardom not just through traditional talents but also through their personal lives and online presence. This heightened visibility brings intense public scrutiny, where every detail of a celebrity's life is subject to constant media coverage. Celebrities often become brands themselves, influencing trends and consumer behavior while navigating the pressures of privacy erosion and mental health challenges.\nCelebrities may be resented for their accolades, and the public may have a love/hate relationship with celebrities. Due to the high visibility of celebrities' private lives, their successes and shortcomings are often made very public. Celebrities are alternately portrayed as glowing examples of perfection, when they garner awards, or as decadent or immoral if they become associated with a scandal. When seen in a positive light, celebrities are frequently portrayed as possessing skills and abilities beyond average people; for example, celebrity actors are routinely celebrated for acquiring new skills necessary for filming a role within a very brief time, and to a level that amazes the professionals who train them. Similarly, some celebrities with very little formal education can sometimes be portrayed as experts on complicated issues. Some celebrities have been very vocal about their political views. For example, Matt Damon expressed his displeasure with 2008 US vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin, as well as with the 2011 United States debt-ceiling crisis.\nInternet.\nAlso known as being \"internet famous\".\nSocial networking and video hosting.\nMost high-profile celebrities participate in social networking services and photo or video hosting platforms such as YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Snapchat. Social networking services allow celebrities to communicate directly with their fans, removing the \"traditional\" media. Through social media, many people outside of the entertainment and sports sphere become a celebrity in their own sphere. Social media humanizes celebrities in a way that arouses public fascination as evident by the success of magazines such as \"Us Weekly\" and \"People Weekly\". Celebrity blogging has also spawned stars such as Perez Hilton who is known for not only blogging but also outing celebrities.\nSocial media and the rise of the smartphone has changed how celebrities are treated and how people gain the platform of fame. Websites like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube allow people to become a celebrity in a different manner. For example, Justin Bieber got his start on YouTube by posting videos of him singing. His fans were able to directly contact him through his content and were able to interact with him on several social media platforms. The internet, as said before, also allows fans to connect with their favorite celebrity without ever meeting them in person.\nSocial media sites have also contributed to the fame of certain celebrities, such as Tila Tequila who became known through MySpace.\nAsia.\nA report by the BBC highlighted a longtime trend of Asian internet celebrities called Wanghong in Chinese. According to the BBC, there are two kinds of online celebrities in China\u2014those who create original content, such as Papi Jiang, who is regularly censored by Chinese authorities for cursing in her videos, and Wanghongs fall under the second category, as they have clothing and cosmetics businesses on Taobao, China's equivalent of Amazon.\nAccess restriction.\nAccess to celebrities is strictly controlled by the celebrities entourage of staff which includes managers, publicists, agents, personal assistants, and bodyguards. Journalists may even have difficulty accessing celebrities for interviews. Writer and actor Michael Musto said, \"You have to go through many hoops just to talk to a major celebrity. You have to get past three different sets of publicists: the publicist for the event, the publicist for the movie, and then the celebrity's personal publicist. They all have to approve you.\"\nCelebrities also typically have security staff at their home or properties, to protect them and their belongs from similar threats.\n\"Fifteen minutes of fame\".\n\"15 minutes of fame\" is a phrase often used as slang to short-lived publicity. Certain \"15 minutes of fame\" celebrities can be average people seen with an A-list celebrity, who are sometimes noticed on entertainment news channels such as E! News. These are ordinary people becoming celebrities, often based on the ridiculous things they do.\n\"In fact, many reality show contestants fall into this category: the only thing that qualifies them to be on TV is that they're real.\"\nHealth implications.\nCommon threats such as stalking have spawned celebrity worship syndrome where a person becomes overly involved with the details of a celebrity's personal life. Psychologists have indicated that though many people obsess over glamorous film, television, sport and music stars, the disparity in salaries in society seems to value professional athletes and entertainment industry-based professionals. One study found that singers, musicians, actors and athletes die younger on average than writers, composers, academics, politicians and businesspeople, with a greater incidence of cancer and especially lung cancer. However, it was remarked that the reasons for this remained unclear, with theories including innate tendencies towards risk-taking as well as the pressure or opportunities of particular types of fame.\nFame might have negative psychological effects. An academic study on the subject said that fame has an addictive quality to it. When a celebrity's fame recedes over time, the celebrity may find it difficult to adjust psychologically.\nRecently, there has been more attention toward the impact celebrities have on health decisions of the population at large. It is believed that the public will follow celebrities' health advice to some extent. This can have positive impacts when the celebrities give solid, evidence-informed health advice, however, it can also have detrimental effects if the health advice is not accurate enough."}
{"id": "5797", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5797", "title": "Cluster sampling", "text": "In statistics, cluster sampling is a sampling plan used when mutually homogeneous yet internally heterogeneous groupings are evident in a statistical population. It is often used in marketing research. \nIn this sampling plan, the total population is divided into these groups (known as clusters) and a simple random sample of the groups is selected. The elements in each cluster are then sampled. If all elements in each sampled cluster are sampled, then this is referred to as a \"one-stage\" cluster sampling plan. If a simple random subsample of elements is selected within each of these groups, this is referred to as a \"two-stage\" cluster sampling plan. A common motivation for cluster sampling is to reduce the total number of interviews and costs given the desired accuracy. For a fixed sample size, the expected random error is smaller when most of the variation in the population is present internally within the groups, and not between the groups.\nCluster elemental.\nThe population within a cluster should ideally be as heterogeneous as possible, but there should be homogeneity between clusters. Each cluster should be a small-scale representation of the total population. The clusters should be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. A random sampling technique is then used on any relevant clusters to choose which clusters to include in the study. In single-stage cluster sampling, all the elements from each of the selected clusters are sampled. In two-stage cluster sampling, a random sampling technique is applied to the elements from each of the selected clusters.\nThe main difference between cluster sampling and stratified sampling is that in cluster sampling the cluster is treated as the sampling unit so sampling is done on a population of clusters (at least in the first stage). In stratified sampling, the sampling is done on elements within each stratum. In stratified sampling, a random sample is drawn from each of the strata, whereas in cluster sampling only the selected clusters are sampled. A common motivation for cluster sampling is to reduce costs by increasing sampling efficiency. This contrasts with stratified sampling where the motivation is to increase precision.\nThere is also multistage cluster sampling, where at least two stages are taken in selecting elements from clusters.\nWhen clusters are of different sizes.\nWithout modifying the estimated parameter, cluster sampling is unbiased when the clusters are approximately the same size. In this case, the parameter is computed by combining all the selected clusters. When the clusters are of different sizes there are several options:\nOne method is to sample clusters and then survey all elements in that cluster. Another method is a two-stage method of sampling a fixed proportion of units (be it 5% or 50%, or another number, depending on cost considerations) from within each of the selected clusters. Relying on the sample drawn from these options will yield an unbiased estimator. However, the sample size is no longer fixed upfront. This leads to a more complicated formula for the standard error of the estimator, as well as issues with the optics of the study plan (since the power analysis and the cost estimations often relate to a specific sample size).\nA third possible solution is to use probability proportionate to size sampling. In this sampling plan, the probability of selecting a cluster is proportional to its size, so a large cluster has a greater probability of selection than a small cluster. The advantage here is that when clusters are selected with probability proportionate to size, the same number of interviews should be carried out in each sampled cluster so that each unit sampled has the same probability of selection.\nApplications of cluster sampling.\nAn example of cluster sampling is area sampling or geographical cluster sampling. Each cluster is a geographical area in an area sampling frame. Because a geographically dispersed population can be expensive to survey, greater economy than simple random sampling can be achieved by grouping several respondents within a local area into a cluster. It is usually necessary to increase the total sample size to achieve equivalent precision in the estimators, but cost savings may make such an increase in sample size feasible.\nFor the organization of a population census, the first step is usually dividing the overall geographic area into enumeration areas or census tracts for the field work organization. Enumeration areas may be also useful as first-stage units for cluster sampling in many types of surveys. When a population census is outdated, the list of individuals should not be directly used as sampling frame for a socio-economic survey. Updating the whole census is economically unfeasible. A good alternative may be keeping the old enumeration areas, with some update in highly dynamic areas, such as urban suburbs, selecting a sample of enumeration areas and updating the list of individuals or households only in the selected enumeration areas. \nCluster sampling is used to estimate low mortalities in cases such as wars, famines and natural disasters.\nFisheries science.\nIt is almost impossible to take a simple random sample of fish from a population, which would require that individuals are captured individually and at random. This is because fishing gears capture fish in groups (or clusters). \nIn commercial fisheries sampling, the costs of operating at sea are often too large to select hauls individually and at random. Therefore, observations are further clustered by either vessel or fishing trip.\nEconomics.\nThe World Bank has applied adaptive cluster sampling to study informal businesses in developing countries in a cost efficient manner, as the informal sector is not captured by official records and too expensive to be studied through simple random sampling. The approach follows a two-stage sampling whereby adaptive cluster sampling is used to generate an estimate of the universe of informal businesses in operations, while the second stage to obtain a random sample about the characteristics of those businesses.\nAdvantages.\nMajor use: when the sampling frame of all elements is not available we can resort only to cluster sampling.\nMore on cluster sampling.\nTwo-stage cluster sampling.\nTwo-stage cluster sampling, a simple case of multistage sampling, is obtained by selecting cluster samples in the first stage and then selecting a sample of elements from every sampled cluster. Consider a population of \"N\" clusters in total. In the first stage, \"n\" clusters are selected using the ordinary cluster sampling method. In the second stage, simple random sampling is usually used. It is used separately in every cluster and the numbers of elements selected from different clusters are not necessarily equal. The total number of clusters \"N\", the number of clusters selected \"n\", and the numbers of elements from selected clusters need to be pre-determined by the survey designer. Two-stage cluster sampling aims at minimizing survey costs and at the same time controlling the uncertainty related to estimates of interest. This method can be used in health and social sciences. For instance, researchers used two-stage cluster sampling to generate a representative sample of the Iraqi population to conduct mortality surveys. Sampling in this method can be quicker and more reliable than other methods, which is why this method is now used frequently.\nInference when the number of clusters is small.\nCluster sampling methods can lead to significant bias when working with a small number of clusters. For instance, it can be necessary to cluster at the state or city-level, units that may be small and fixed in number. Microeconometrics methods for panel data often use short panels, which is analogous to having few observations per clusters and many clusters. The small cluster problem can be viewed as an incidental parameter problem. While the point estimates can be reasonably precisely estimated, if the number of observations per cluster is sufficiently high, we need the number of clusters formula_1 for the asymptotics to kick in. If the number of clusters is low the estimated covariance matrix can be downward biased.\nSmall numbers of clusters are a risk when there is serial correlation or when there is intraclass correlation as in the Moulton context. When having few clusters, we tend to underestimate serial correlation across observations when a random shock occurs, or the intraclass correlation in a Moulton setting. Several studies have highlighted the consequences of serial correlation and highlighted the small-cluster problem.\nIn the framework of the Moulton factor, an intuitive explanation of the small cluster problem can be derived from the formula for the Moulton factor. Assume for simplicity that the number of observations per cluster is fixed at \"n\". Below, formula_2 stands for the covariance matrix adjusted for clustering, formula_3 stands for the covariance matrix not adjusted for clustering, and \u03c1 stands for the intraclass correlation:\nThe ratio on the left-hand side indicates how much the unadjusted scenario overestimates the precision. Therefore, a high number means a strong downward bias of the estimated covariance matrix. A small cluster problem can be interpreted as a large n: when the data is fixed and the number of clusters is low, the number of data within a cluster can be high. It follows that inference, when the number of clusters is small, will not have the correct coverage.\nSeveral solutions for the small cluster problem have been proposed. One can use a bias-corrected cluster-robust variance matrix, make T-distribution adjustments, or use bootstrap methods with asymptotic refinements, such as the percentile-t or wild bootstrap, that can lead to improved finite sample inference. Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) provide microsimulations for different methods and find that the wild bootstrap performs well in the face of a small number of clusters."}
{"id": "5798", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5798", "title": "Closeted person", "text": ""}
{"id": "5799", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5799", "title": "Coming out of the closet", "text": ""}
{"id": "5801", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5801", "title": "Catholicism/Councils", "text": ""}
{"id": "5802", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5802", "title": "Catholicism/Council of Trent", "text": ""}
{"id": "5803", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5803", "title": "Catholicism/Second Vatican Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "5804", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5804", "title": "Charles Baudelaire", "text": "Charles Pierre Baudelaire (, ; ; 9 April 1821 \u2013 31 August 1867) was a French poet, essayist, translator and art critic. His poems are described as exhibiting mastery of rhyme and rhythm, containing an exoticism inherited from the Romantics, and are based on observations of real life.\nHis most famous work, a book of lyric poetry titled \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"The Flowers of Evil\"), expresses the changing nature of beauty in the rapidly industrialising Paris caused by Haussmann's renovation of Paris during the mid-19th century. Baudelaire's original style of prose-poetry influenced a generation of poets including Paul Verlaine, Arthur Rimbaud and St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9. He coined the term modernity (\"modernit\u00e9\") to designate the fleeting experience of life in an urban metropolis, and the responsibility of artistic expression to capture that experience. Marshall Berman has credited Baudelaire as being the first Modernist.\nEarly life.\nBaudelaire was born in Paris, France, on 9 April 1821, and baptized two months later at Saint-Sulpice Roman Catholic Church. His father, Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois Baudelaire (1759\u20131827), a senior civil servant and amateur artist, who at 60, was 34 years older than Baudelaire's 26-year-old mother, Caroline (n\u00e9e Dufa\u00ffs) (1794\u20131871); she was his second wife. \nJoseph-Fran\u00e7ois died during Baudelaire's childhood, at rue Hautefeuille, Paris, on 10 February 1827. The following year, Caroline married Lieutenant Colonel , who later became a French ambassador to various noble courts. \nBaudelaire's biographers have often seen this as a crucial moment, considering that finding himself no longer the sole focus of his mother's affection left him with a trauma, which goes some way to explaining the excesses later apparent in his life. He stated in a letter to her that, \"There was in my childhood a period of passionate love for you.\" Baudelaire regularly begged his mother for money throughout his career, often promising that a lucrative publishing contract or journalistic commission was just around the corner.\nBaudelaire was educated in Lyon, where he boarded. At 14, he was described by a classmate as \"much more refined and distinguished than any of our fellow pupils ... we are bound to one another ... by shared tastes and sympathies, the precocious love of fine works of literature.\" \nBaudelaire was erratic in his studies, at times diligent, at other times prone to \"idleness\". Later, he attended the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand in Paris, studying law, a popular course for those not yet decided on any particular career. He began to frequent prostitutes and may have contracted gonorrhea and syphilis during this period. He also began to run up debts, mostly for clothes. \nUpon gaining his degree in 1839, he told his brother \"I don't feel I have a vocation for anything.\" His stepfather had in mind a career in law or diplomacy, but instead Baudelaire decided to embark upon a literary career. His mother later recalled: \"Oh, what grief! If Charles had let himself be guided by his stepfather, his career would have been very different ... He would not have left a name in literature, it is true, but we should have been happier, all three of us.\"\nHis stepfather sent him on a voyage to Calcutta, India in 1841 in the hope of ending his dissolute habits. The trip provided strong impressions of the sea, sailing, and exotic ports, that he later employed in his poetry. Baudelaire later exaggerated his aborted trip to create a legend about his youthful travels and experiences, including \"riding on elephants\". \nOn returning to the taverns of Paris, he began to compose some of the poems of \"Les Fleurs du Mal\". At 21, he received a sizable inheritance but squandered much of it within a few years. His family obtained a decree to place his property in trust, which he resented bitterly, at one point arguing that allowing him to fail financially would have been the one sure way of teaching him to keep his finances in order.\nBaudelaire became known in artistic circles as a dandy and free-spender, going through much of his inheritance and allowance in a short period of time. During this time, Jeanne Duval, a Haitian born actress became his mistress. She was rejected by his family. His mother thought Duval a \"Black Venus\" who \"tortured him in every way\" and drained him of money at every opportunity. Baudelaire made a suicide attempt during this period.\nHe took part in the Revolutions of 1848 and wrote for a revolutionary newspaper. However, his interest in politics was passing, as he was later to note in his journals.\nIn the early 1850s, Baudelaire struggled with poor health, pressing debts, and irregular literary output. He often moved from one lodging to another to escape creditors. He undertook many projects that he was unable to complete, though he did finish translations of stories by Edgar Allan Poe.\nUpon the death of his stepfather in 1857, Baudelaire received no mention in the will but he was heartened nonetheless that the division with his mother might now be mended. At 36, he wrote to her: \"believe that I belong to you absolutely, and that I belong only to you.\" His mother died on 16 August 1871, outliving her son by almost four years.\nPublishing career.\nHis first published work, under the pseudonym Baudelaire Dufa\u00ffs, was his art review \"Salon of 1845\", which attracted immediate attention for its boldness. Many of his critical opinions were novel in their time, including his championing of Delacroix, and some of his views seem remarkably in tune with the future theories of the Impressionist painters.\nIn 1846, Baudelaire wrote his second Salon review, gaining additional credibility as an advocate and critic of Romanticism. His continued support of Delacroix as the foremost Romantic artist gained widespread notice. The following year Baudelaire's novella \"La Fanfarlo\" was published.\n\"The Flowers of Evil\".\nBaudelaire was a slow and very attentive worker. However, he often was sidetracked by indolence, emotional distress and illness, and it was not until 1857 that he published \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"The Flowers of Evil\"), his first and most famous volume of poems. Some of these poems had already appeared in the \"Revue des deux mondes\" (\"Review of Two Worlds\") in 1855, when they were published by Baudelaire's friend Auguste Poulet-Malassis. Some of the poems had appeared as \"fugitive verse\" in various French magazines during the previous decade.\nThe poems found a small, yet appreciative audience. However, greater public attention was given to their subject matter. The effect on fellow artists was, as Th\u00e9odore de Banville stated, \"immense, prodigious, unexpected, mingled with admiration and with some indefinable anxious fear\". Gustave Flaubert, recently attacked in a similar fashion for \"Madame Bovary\" (and acquitted), was impressed and wrote to Baudelaire: \"You have found a way to rejuvenate Romanticism...You are as unyielding as marble, and as penetrating as an English mist.\"\nThe principal themes of sex and death were considered scandalous for the period. He also touched on lesbianism, sacred and profane love, metamorphosis, melancholy, the corruption of the city, lost innocence, the oppressiveness of living, and wine. Notable in some poems is Baudelaire's use of imagery of the sense of smell and of fragrances, which is used to evoke feelings of nostalgia and past intimacy.\nThe book, however, quickly became a byword for unwholesomeness among mainstream critics of the day. Some critics called a few of the poems \"masterpieces of passion, art and poetry,\" but other poems were deemed to merit no less than legal action to suppress them. J. Habas led the charge against Baudelaire, writing in : \"Everything in it which is not hideous is incomprehensible, everything one understands is putrid.\" Baudelaire responded to the outcry in a prophetic letter to his mother:\n\"You know that I have always considered that literature and the arts pursue an aim independent of morality. Beauty of conception and style is enough for me. But this book, whose title (\"Fleurs du mal\") says everything, is clad, as you will see, in a cold and sinister beauty. It was created with rage and patience. Besides, the proof of its positive worth is in all the ill that they speak of it. The book enrages people. Moreover, since I was terrified myself of the horror that I should inspire, I cut out a third from the proofs. They deny me everything, the spirit of invention and even the knowledge of the French language. I don't care a rap about all these imbeciles, and I know that this book, with its virtues and its faults, will make its way in the memory of the lettered public, beside the best poems of V. Hugo, Th. Gautier and even Byron.\"\nBaudelaire, his publisher and the printer were successfully prosecuted for creating an offense against public morals. They were fined, but Baudelaire was not imprisoned. Six of the poems were suppressed, but printed later as \"Les \u00c9paves\" (\"The Wrecks\") (Brussels, 1866). Another edition of \"Les Fleurs du mal\", without these poems, but with considerable additions, appeared in 1861. Many notables rallied behind Baudelaire and condemned the sentence. Victor Hugo wrote to him: \"Your \"fleurs du mal\" shine and dazzle like stars...I applaud your vigorous spirit with all my might.\" Baudelaire did not appeal the judgment, but his fine was reduced. Nearly 100 years later, on 11 May 1949, Baudelaire was vindicated, the judgment officially reversed, and the six banned poems reinstated in France.\nIn the poem \"Au lecteur\" (\"To the Reader\") that prefaces \"Les Fleurs du mal\", Baudelaire accuses his readers of hypocrisy and of being as guilty of sins and lies as the poet:\nFinal years.\nBaudelaire next worked on a translation and adaptation of Thomas De Quincey's \"Confessions of an English Opium-Eater\". Other works in the years that followed included \"Petits Po\u00e8mes en prose\" (\"Small Prose poems\"); a series of art reviews published in the \"Pays, Exposition universelle\" (\"Country, World Fair\"); studies on Gustave Flaubert (in \"L'Artiste\", 18 October 1857); on Th\u00e9ophile Gautier (\"Revue contemporaine\", September 1858); various articles contributed to Eug\u00e8ne Cr\u00e9pet's \"Po\u00e8tes fran\u00e7ais\"; \"Les Paradis artificiels: opium et haschisch\" (\"French poets; Artificial Paradises: opium and hashish\") (1860); and \"Un Dernier Chapitre de l'histoire des oeuvres de Balzac\" (\"A Final Chapter of the history of works of Balzac\") (1880), originally an article \"Comment on paye ses dettes quand on a du g\u00e9nie\" (\"How one pays one's debts when one has genius\"), in which his criticism turns against his friends Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, and G\u00e9rard de Nerval.\nBy 1859, his illnesses, his long-term use of laudanum, his life of stress, and his poverty had taken a toll and Baudelaire had aged noticeably. But at last, his mother relented and agreed to let him live with her for a while at Honfleur. Baudelaire was productive and at peace in the seaside town, his poem \"Le Voyage\" being one example of his efforts during that time. In 1860, he became an ardent supporter of Richard Wagner.\nHis financial difficulties increased again, however, particularly after his publisher Poulet Malassis went bankrupt in 1861. In 1864, he left Paris for Belgium, partly in the hope of selling the rights to his works and to give lectures. His long-standing relationship with Jeanne Duval continued on-and-off, and he helped her to the end of his life. Baudelaire's relationships with actress Marie Daubrun and with courtesan Apollonie Sabatier, though the source of much inspiration, never produced any lasting satisfaction. He smoked opium, and in Brussels he began to drink to excess. Baudelaire suffered a massive stroke in 1866 and paralysis followed. After more than a year of aphasia, he received the last rites of the Catholic Church. The last year of his life was spent in a semi-paralyzed state in various \"maisons de sant\u00e9\" in Brussels and in Paris, where he died on 31 August 1867. His funeral was held at the Saint-Honor\u00e9 d'Eylau church, with a few dozen persons in attendance. Baudelaire is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse, Paris.\nMany of Baudelaire's works were published posthumously. After his death, his mother paid off his substantial debts, and she found some comfort in Baudelaire's emerging fame. \"I see that my son, for all his faults, has his place in literature.\" She lived another four years.\nPoetry.\nBaudelaire is one of the major innovators in French literature. His poetry is influenced by the French romantic poets of the earlier 19th century, although its attention to the formal features of verse connects it more closely to the work of the contemporary \"Parnassians\". As for theme and tone, in his works we see the rejection of the belief in the supremacy of nature and the fundamental goodness of man as typically espoused by the romantics and expressed by them in rhetorical, effusive and public voice in favor of a new urban sensibility, an awareness of individual moral complexity, an interest in vice (linked with decadence) and refined sensual and aesthetic pleasures, and the use of urban subject matter, such as the city, the crowd, individual passers-by, all expressed in highly ordered verse, sometimes through a cynical and ironic voice. Formally, the use of sound to create atmosphere, and of \"symbols\" (images that take on an expanded function within the poem), betray a move towards considering the poem as a self-referential object, an idea further developed by the Symbolists Verlaine and Mallarm\u00e9, who acknowledge Baudelaire as a pioneer in this regard.\nBeyond his innovations in versification and the theories of symbolism and \"correspondences\", an awareness of which is essential to any appreciation of the literary value of his work, aspects of his work that regularly receive much critical discussion include the role of women, the theological direction of his work and his alleged advocacy of \"satanism\", his experience of drug-induced states of mind, the figure of the dandy, his stance regarding democracy and its implications for the individual, his response to the spiritual uncertainties of the time, his criticisms of the bourgeois, and his advocacy of modern music and painting (e.g., Wagner, Delacroix). He made Paris the subject of modern poetry. He brought the city's details to life in the eyes and hearts of his readers.\nCritiques.\nBaudelaire was an active participant in the artistic life of his times. As critic and essayist, he wrote extensively and perceptively about the luminaries and themes of French culture. He was frank with friends and enemies, rarely took the diplomatic approach and sometimes responded violently verbally, which often undermined his cause. His associations were numerous, including Gustave Courbet, Honor\u00e9 Daumier, F\u00e9licien Rops, Franz Liszt, Champfleury, Victor Hugo, Gustave Flaubert, and Balzac.\nEdgar Allan Poe.\nIn 1847, Baudelaire became acquainted with the works of Poe, in which he found tales and poems that had, he claimed, long existed in his own brain but never taken shape. Baudelaire saw in Poe a precursor and tried to be his French contemporary counterpart. From this time until 1865, he was largely occupied with translating Poe's works; his translations were widely praised. Baudelaire was not the first French translator of Poe, but his \"scrupulous translations\" were considered among the best. These were published as \"Histoires extraordinaires\" (\"Extraordinary stories\") (1856), \"Nouvelles histoires extraordinaires\" (\"New extraordinary stories\") (1857), \"Aventures d'Arthur Gordon Pym\", \"\", and \"Histoires grotesques et s\u00e9rieuses\" (\"Grotesque and serious stories\") (1865). Two essays on Poe are to be found in his \"\u0152uvres compl\u00e8tes\" (\"Complete works\") (vols. v. and vi.).\nEug\u00e8ne Delacroix.\nA strong supporter of the Romantic painter Delacroix, Baudelaire called him \"a poet in painting\". Baudelaire also absorbed much of Delacroix's aesthetic ideas as expressed in his journals. As Baudelaire elaborated in his \"Salon of 1846\", \"As one contemplates his series of pictures, one seems to be attending the celebration of some grievous mystery...This grave and lofty melancholy shines with a dull light.. plaintive and profound like a melody by Weber.\" Delacroix, though appreciative, kept his distance from Baudelaire, particularly after the scandal of \"Les Fleurs du mal\". In private correspondence, Delacroix stated that Baudelaire \"really gets on my nerves\" and he expressed his unhappiness with Baudelaire's persistent comments about \"melancholy\" and \"feverishness\".\nRichard Wagner.\nBaudelaire had no formal musical training, and knew little of composers beyond Beethoven and Weber. Weber was in some ways Wagner's precursor, using the leitmotif and conceiving the idea of the \"total art work\" (\"Gesamtkunstwerk\"), both of which gained Baudelaire's admiration. Before even hearing Wagner's music, Baudelaire studied reviews and essays about him, and formulated his impressions. Later, Baudelaire put them into his non-technical analysis of Wagner, which was highly regarded, particularly his essay \"Richard Wagner et Tannh\u00e4user \u00e0 Paris\". Baudelaire's reaction to music was passionate and psychological. \"Music engulfs (possesses) me like the sea.\" After attending three Wagner concerts in Paris in 1860, Baudelaire wrote to the composer: \"I had a feeling of pride and joy in understanding, in being possessed, in being overwhelmed, a truly sensual pleasure like that of rising in the air.\" Baudelaire's writings contributed to the elevation of Wagner and to the cult of Wagnerism that swept Europe in the following decades.\nTh\u00e9ophile Gautier.\nGautier, writer and poet, earned Baudelaire's respect for his perfection of form and his mastery of language, though Baudelaire thought he lacked deeper emotion and spirituality. Both strove to express the artist's inner vision, which Heinrich Heine earlier stated: \"In artistic matters, I am a supernaturalist. I believe that the artist can not find all his forms in nature, but that the most remarkable are revealed to him in his soul.\" Gautier's frequent meditations on death and the horror of life are themes which influenced Baudelaire's writings. In gratitude for their friendship and commonality of vision, Baudelaire dedicated \"Les Fleurs du mal\" to Gautier.\n\u00c9douard Manet.\nManet and Baudelaire became constant companions from around 1855. In the early 1860s, Baudelaire accompanied Manet on daily sketching trips and often met him socially. Manet also lent Baudelaire money and looked after his affairs, particularly when Baudelaire went to Belgium. Baudelaire encouraged Manet to strike out on his own path and not succumb to criticism. \"Manet has great talent, a talent which will stand the test of time. But he has a weak character. He seems to me crushed and stunned by shock.\" In his painting \"Music in the Tuileries\", Manet includes portraits of his friends Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Jacques Offenbach, and Baudelaire. While it's difficult to differentiate who influenced whom, both Manet and Baudelaire discussed and expressed some common themes through their respective arts. Baudelaire praised the modernity of Manet's subject matter: \"almost all our originality comes from the stamp that 'time' imprints upon our feelings.\" When Manet's famous \"Olympia\" (1865), a portrait of a nude prostitute, provoked a scandal for its blatant realism mixed with an imitation of Renaissance motifs, Baudelaire worked privately to support his friend, though he offered no public defense (he was, however, ill at the time). When Baudelaire returned from Belgium after his stroke, Manet and his wife were frequent visitors at the nursing home and she played passages from Wagner for Baudelaire on the piano.\nNadar.\nNadar (F\u00e9lix Tournachon) was a noted caricaturist, scientist and important early photographer. Baudelaire admired Nadar, one of his close friends, and wrote: \"Nadar is the most amazing manifestation of vitality.\" They moved in similar circles and Baudelaire made many social connections through him. Nadar's ex-mistress Jeanne Duval became Baudelaire's mistress around 1842. Baudelaire became interested in photography in the 1850s, and denouncing it as an art form, advocated its return to \"its real purpose, which is that of being the servant to the sciences and arts\". Photography should not, according to Baudelaire, encroach upon \"the domain of the impalpable and the imaginary\". Nadar remained a stalwart friend right to Baudelaire's last days and wrote his obituary notice in .\nPhilosophy.\nMany of Baudelaire's philosophical proclamations were considered scandalous and intentionally provocative in his time. He wrote on a wide range of subjects, drawing criticism and outrage from many quarters. Along with Poe, Baudelaire named the arch-reactionary Joseph de Maistre as his \"ma\u00eetre \u00e0 penser\" and adopted increasingly aristocratic views. In his journals, he wrote:\nInfluence and legacy.\nBaudelaire's influence on the direction of modern French (and English) language literature was considerable. The most significant French writers to come after him were generous with tributes; four years after his death, Arthur Rimbaud praised him in a letter as \"the king of poets, a true God\". In 1895, St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9 published \"Le Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire\", a sonnet in Baudelaire's memory. Marcel Proust, in an essay published in 1922, stated that, along with Alfred de Vigny, Baudelaire was \"the greatest poet of the nineteenth century\".\nIn the English-speaking world, Edmund Wilson credited Baudelaire as providing an initial impetus for the Symbolist movement by virtue of his translations of Poe. In 1930, T. S. Eliot, while asserting that Baudelaire had not yet received a \"just appreciation\" even in France, claimed that the poet had \"great genius\" and asserted that his \"technical mastery which can hardly be overpraised ... has made his verse an inexhaustible study for later poets, not only in his own language\". In a lecture delivered in French on \"Edgar Allan Poe and France\" (Edgar Poe et la France) in Aix-en-Provence in April 1948, Eliot stated that \"I am an English poet of American origin who learnt his art under the aegis of Baudelaire and the Baudelairian lineage of poets.\" Eliot also alluded to Baudelaire's poetry directly in his own poetry. For example, he quoted the last line of Baudelaire's \"Au Lecteur\" in the last line of Section I of \"The Waste Land\".\nAt the same time that Eliot was affirming Baudelaire's importance from a broadly conservative and explicitly Christian viewpoint, left-wing critics such as Wilson and Walter Benjamin were able to do so from a dramatically different perspective. Benjamin translated Baudelaire's \"Tableaux Parisiens\" into German and published a major essay on translation as the foreword.\nIn the late 1930s, Benjamin used Baudelaire as a starting point and focus for \"Das Passagenwerk\", his monumental attempt at a materialist assessment of 19th-century culture. For Benjamin, Baudelaire's importance lay in his anatomies of the crowd, of the city and of modernity. He says that, in \"Les Fleurs du mal\", \"the specific devaluation of the world of things, as manifested in the commodity, is the foundation of Baudelaire's allegorical intention.\"\nFran\u00e7ois Porch\u00e9 published a poetry collection called \"Charles Baudelaire: Poetry Collection\" in memory of Baudelaire.\nThe novel \"A Singular Conspiracy\" (1974) by Barry Perowne is a fictional treatment of the unaccounted period in Edgar Allan Poe's life from January to May 1844, in which (among other things) Poe becomes involved with a young Baudelaire in a plot to expose Baudelaires' stepfather to blackmail, to free up Baudelaires' patrimony.\nVanderbilt University has \"assembled one of the world's most comprehensive research collections on ... Baudelaire\"."}
{"id": "5808", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5808", "title": "Casey at the Bat", "text": "\"Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic, Sung in the Year 1888\" is a mock-heroic poem written in 1888 by Ernest Thayer. It was first published anonymously in \"The San Francisco Examiner\" (then called \"The Daily Examiner\") on June 3, 1888, under the pen name \"Phin\", based on Thayer's college nickname, \"Phinney\". Featuring a dramatic narrative about a baseball game, the poem was later popularized by DeWolf Hopper in many vaudeville performances. It has become one of the best-known poems in American literature.\nSynopsis.\nA baseball team from the fictional town of \"Mudville\" (the home team) is losing by two runs in its last inning. Both the team and its fans, a crowd of 5,000, believe that they can win if Casey, Mudville's star player, gets to bat. However, Casey is scheduled to be the fifth batter of the inning, and the first two batters (Cooney and Barrows) fail to get on base. The next two batters (Flynn and Jimmy Blake) are perceived to be weak hitters with little chance of reaching base to allow Casey a chance to bat.\nSurprisingly, Flynn hits a single, and Blake follows with a double that allows Flynn to reach third base. Both runners are now in scoring position and Casey represents the potential winning run. Casey is so sure of his abilities that he does not swing at the first two pitches, both called strikes. On the last pitch, the overconfident Casey strikes out swinging, ending the game and sending the crowd home unhappy.\nText.\nThe text is filled with references to baseball as it was in 1888, which in many ways is not far removed from today's version. As a work, the poem encapsulates much of the appeal of baseball, including the involvement of the crowd. It also has a fair amount of baseball jargon that can pose challenges for the uninitiated.\nThis is the complete poem as it originally appeared in \"The Daily Examiner\". After publication, various versions with minor changes were produced.\nInspiration.\nThayer said he chose the name \"Casey\" after a non-player of Irish ancestry he once knew named Daniel H. Casey; it is open to debate whom, if anyone, he modeled the character after. It has been reported that Thayer's best friend Samuel Winslow, who played baseball at Harvard, was the inspiration for Casey.\nAnother candidate is National League player Mike \"King\" Kelly, who became famous when Boston paid Chicago a record $10,000 for him. He had a personality that fans liked to cheer or jeer. After the 1887 season, Kelly went on a playing tour to San Francisco. Thayer, who wrote \"Casey\" in 1888, covered the San Francisco leg for the \"San Francisco Examiner\".\nThayer, in a letter he wrote in 1905, mentions Kelly as showing \"impudence\" in claiming to have written the poem. The author of the 2004 definitive biography of Kelly\u2014which included a close tracking of his vaudeville career\u2014did not find Kelly claiming to have been the author.\nComposition and publication history.\n\"Casey at the Bat\" was first published in \"The Daily Examiner\" on June 3, 1888.\nA month after the poem was published, it was reprinted as \"Kelly at the Bat\" in the \"New York Sporting Times\".\nAside from omitting the first five verses, the only changes from the original are substitutions of Kelly for Casey, and Boston for Mudville. King Kelly, then of the Boston Beaneaters, was one of baseball's two biggest stars at the time (along with Cap Anson).\nIn 1897, the magazine \"Current Literature\" noted the two versions and said, \"The locality, as originally given, is Mudville, not Boston; the latter was substituted to give the poem local color.\"\nLive performances.\nDeWolf Hopper gave the poem's first stage recitation on August 14, 1888, at New York's Wallack Theatre as part of the comic opera \"Prinz Methusalem\" in the presence of the Chicago White Stockings and New York Giants baseball teams; August 14, 1888 was also Thayer's 25th birthday. Hopper became known as an orator of the poem, and recited it more than 10,000 times (by his count\u2014some tabulations are as much as four times higher) before his death.\nOn stage in the early 1890s, baseball star Kelly recited the original \"Casey\" a few dozen times and not the parody. For example, in a review in 1893 of a variety show he was in, the \"Indianapolis News\" said, \"Many who attended the performance had heard of Kelly's singing and his reciting, and many had heard De Wolf Hopper recite 'Casey at the Bat' in his inimitable way. Kelly recited this in a sing-song, school-boy fashion.\" Upon Kelly's death, a writer would say he gained \"considerable notoriety by his ludicrous rendition of 'Casey at the Bat,' with which he concluded his 'turn' [act] at each performance.\"\nDuring the 1980s, the magic/comedy team Penn &amp; Teller performed a version of \"Casey at the Bat\" with Teller (the \"silent\" partner) struggling to escape a straitjacket while suspended upside-down over a platform of sharp steel spikes. The set-up was that Penn Jillette would leap off his chair upon finishing the poem, releasing the rope which supported Teller, and send Teller to a gruesome death if Teller had failed to free himself by that time. Jillette enhanced the drama of the performance by drastically accelerating the pace of his recital after the first few stanzas, greatly reducing the time that Teller had left to work free from his bonds.\nRecordings.\nThe first recorded version of \"Casey at the Bat\" was made by Russell Hunting, speaking in a broad Irish accent, in 1893; an 1898 cylinder recording of the text made for the Columbia Graphophone label by Hunting can be accessed from the Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.\nDeWolf Hopper's more famous recorded recitation was released in October 1906.\nIn 1946, Walt Disney released a recording of the narration of the poem by Jerry Colonna, which accompanied the studio's animated cartoon adaptation of the poem (see below).\nIn 1973, the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra commissioned its former Composer-in-Residence, Frank Proto, to create a work to feature Baseball Hall-of-Famer Johnny Bench with the orchestra. The result \"Casey At The Bat \u2013 an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra\" was an immediate hit and recorded by Bench and the orchestra. It has since been performed more than 800 times by nearly every major and Metropolitan orchestra in the U.S. and Canada.\nIn 1980, baseball pitcher Tug McGraw recorded \"Casey at The Bat\u2014an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra\" by Frank Proto with Peter Nero and the Philly Pops.\nIn 1996, actor James Earl Jones recorded the poem with arranger/composer Steven Reineke and the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra.\nOn a 1997 CD set with memorable moments and stories from the game of baseball titled \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" produced by Jerry Hoffman and Douglas Duer, a Vincent Price oration of the poem is a slightly altered version of the original.\nIn 1998, actor Sir Derek Jacobi recorded the poem with composer/arranger Randol Alan Bass and the National Symphony of London, with the composer conducting. This work, titled \"Casey at the Bat\", has been recorded by the Boston Pops Orchestra, Keith Lockhart conducting.\nIn 2013, Dave Jageler and Charlie Slowes, both radio announcers for the Washington Nationals, each made recordings of the poem for the Library of Congress to mark the 125th anniversary of its first publication.\nMudville.\nA rivalry of sorts has developed between two cities claiming to be the Mudville described in the poem.\nResidents of Holliston, Massachusetts, where there is a neighborhood called Mudville, claim it as the Mudville described in the poem. Thayer grew up in nearby Worcester, Massachusetts, where he wrote the poem in 1888; his family owned a wool mill less than from Mudville's baseball field.\nHowever, residents of Stockton, California\u2014which was known for a time as Mudville prior to incorporation in 1850\u2014also lay claim to being the inspiration for the poem. In 1887, Thayer covered baseball for \"The Daily Examiner\"\u2014owned by his Harvard classmate William Randolph Hearst\u2014and is said to have covered the local California League team, the Stockton Ports. For the 1902 season, after the poem became popular, Stockton's team was renamed the Mudville Nine. The team reverted to the Mudville Nine moniker for the 2000 and 2001 seasons. The Visalia Rawhide, another California League team, currently keeps Mudville alive playing in Mudville jerseys on June\u00a03 each year.\nDespite the towns' rival claims, Thayer himself told the \"Syracuse Post-Standard\" that \"the poem has no basis in fact.\"\nAdaptations.\nThe poem has been adapted to diverse types of media:\nDerivations.\nFor a relatively short poem apparently dashed off quickly (and denied by its author for years), \"Casey at the Bat\" had a profound effect on American popular culture. It has been recited, re-enacted, adapted, dissected, parodied, and subjected to just about every other treatment one could imagine.\nParodies.\nOf the many parodies made of the poem, some of the notable ones include:\nTranslations.\nThere are three known translations of the poem into a foreign language, one in French, written in 2007 by French Canadian linguist Paul Laurendeau, with the title \"Casey au b\u00e2ton\", and two in Hebrew. One by the sports journalist Menachem Less titled \"\u05d4\u05ea\u05d5\u05e8 \u05e9\u05dc \u05e7\u05d9\u05d9\u05e1\u05d9 \u05dc\u05d7\u05d1\u05d5\u05d8\" [Hator Shel Casey Lachbot], and the other more recent and more true to the original cadence and style by Jason H. Elbaum called \u05e7\u05b5\u05d9\u05e1\u05b4\u05d9 \u05d1\u05b7\u05bc\u05de\u05b7\u05bc\u05d7\u05b0\u05d1\u05b5\u05bc\u05d8 [Casey BaMachbayt].\nNames.\nCasey Stengel describes in his autobiography how his original nickname \"K.C.\" (for his hometown, Kansas City, Missouri) evolved into \"Casey\". It was influenced not just by the name of the poem, which was widely popular in the 1910s, but also because he tended to strike out frequently in his early career so fans and writers started calling him \"strikeout Casey\".\nContemporary culture.\nPostage stamp.\nOn July 11, 1996, the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp depicting \"Mighty Casey.\" The stamp was part of a set commemorating American folk heroes. Other stamps in the set depicted Paul Bunyan, John Henry, and Pecos Bill."}
{"id": "5810", "revid": "117624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5810", "title": "Classical guitar", "text": "The classical guitar, also known as Spanish guitar, is a member of the guitar family used in classical music and other styles. An acoustic wooden string instrument with strings made of gut or nylon, it is a precursor of the modern steel-string acoustic and electric guitars, both of which use metal strings. Classical guitars derive from instruments such as the lute, the vihuela, the gittern (the name being a derivative of the Greek \"kithara\"), which evolved into the Renaissance guitar and into the 17th and 18th-century baroque guitar. Today's \"modern classical guitar\" was established by the late designs of the 19th-century Spanish luthier, Antonio Torres Jurado.\nFor a right-handed player, the traditional classical guitar has 12 frets clear of the body and is properly held up by the left leg, so that the hand that plucks or strums the strings does so near the back of the sound hole (this is called the classical position). However, the right-hand may move closer to the fretboard to achieve different tonal qualities. The player typically holds the left leg higher by the use of a foot rest. The modern steel string guitar, on the other hand, usually has 14 frets clear of the body (see Dreadnought) and is commonly held with a strap around the neck and shoulder.\nThe phrase \"classical guitar\" may refer to either of two concepts other than the instrument itself:\nThe term \"modern classical guitar\" sometimes distinguishes the classical guitar from older forms of guitar, which are in their broadest sense also called \"classical\", or more specifically, \"early guitars\". Examples of early guitars include the six-string early romantic guitar ( \u2013 1880), and the earlier baroque guitars with five courses.\nThe materials and the methods of classical guitar construction may vary, but the typical shape is either \"modern classical guitar\" or that \"historic classical guitar\" similar to the early romantic guitars of Spain, France and Italy. Classical guitar strings once made of gut are now made of materials such as nylon or fluoropolymers, typically with silver-plated copper fine wire wound about the acoustically lower (d-A-E in standard tuning) strings.\nA guitar family tree may be identified. The flamenco guitar derives from the modern classical, but has differences in material, construction and sound.\nContexts.\nThe classical guitar has a long history and one is able to distinguish various:\nBoth instrument and repertoire can be viewed from a combination of various perspectives:\nHistorical (chronological period of time)\nGeographical\nCultural\nHistorical perspective.\nEarly guitars.\nWhile \"classical guitar\" is today mainly associated with the modern classical guitar design, there is an increasing interest in early guitars; and understanding the link between historical repertoire and the particular period guitar that was originally used to perform this repertoire. The musicologist and author Graham Wade writes:\nNowadays it is customary to play this repertoire on reproductions of instruments authentically modelled on concepts of musicological research with appropriate adjustments to techniques and overall interpretation. Thus over recent decades we have become accustomed to specialist artists with expertise in the art of vihuela (a 16th-century type of guitar popular in Spain), lute, Baroque guitar, 19th-century guitar, etc.\nDifferent types of guitars have different sound aesthetics, e.g. different colour-spectrum characteristics (the way the sound energy is spread in the fundamental frequency and the overtones), different response, etc. These differences are due to differences in construction; for example, modern classical guitars usually use a different bracing (fan-bracing) from that used in earlier guitars (they had ladder-bracing); and a different voicing was used by the luthier.\nThere is a historical parallel between musical styles (baroque, classical, romantic, flamenco, jazz) and the style of \"sound aesthetic\" of the musical instruments used, for example: Robert de Vis\u00e9e played a baroque guitar with a very different sound aesthetic from the guitars used by Mauro Giuliani and Luigi Legnani \u2013 they used 19th-century guitars. These guitars in turn sound different from the Torres models used by Segovia that are suited for interpretations of romantic-modern works such as Moreno Torroba.\nWhen considering the guitar from a historical perspective, the musical instrument used is as important as the musical language and style of the particular period. As an example: It is impossible to play a historically informed de Visee or Corbetta (baroque guitarist-composers) on a modern classical guitar. The reason is that the baroque guitar used courses, which are two strings close together (in unison), that are plucked together. This gives baroque guitars an unmistakable sound characteristic and tonal texture that is an integral part of an interpretation. Additionally, the sound aesthetic of the baroque guitar (with its strong overtone presence) is very different from modern classical type guitars, as is shown below.\nToday's use of Torres and post-Torres type guitars for repertoire of all periods is sometimes critically viewed: Torres and post-Torres style modern guitars (with their fan-bracing and design) have a thick and strong tone, very suitable for modern-era repertoire. However, they are considered to emphasize the fundamental too heavily (at the expense of overtone partials) for earlier repertoire (Classical/Romantic: Carulli, Sor, Giuliani, Mertz,\u00a0...; Baroque: de Visee,\u00a0...; etc.). \"Andr\u00e9s Segovia presented the Spanish guitar as a versatile model for all playing styles\" to the extent, that still today, \"many guitarists have tunnel-vision of the world of the guitar, coming from the modern Segovia tradition\".\nWhile fan-braced modern classical Torres and post-Torres style instruments coexisted with traditional ladder-braced guitars at the beginning of the 20th century, the older forms eventually fell away. Some attribute this to the popularity of Segovia, considering him \"the catalyst for change toward the Spanish design and the so-called 'modern' school in the 1920s and beyond.\" The styles of music performed on ladder-braced guitars were becoming unfashionable\u2014and, e.g., in Germany, more musicians were turning towards folk music (Schrammel-music and the Contraguitar). This was localized in Germany and Austria and became unfashionable again. On the other hand, Segovia was playing concerts around the world, popularizing modern classical guitar\u2014and, in the 1920s, Spanish romantic-modern style with guitar works by Moreno Torroba, de Falla, etc.\nThe 19th-century classical guitarist Francisco T\u00e1rrega first popularized the Torres design as a classical solo instrument. However, some maintain that Segovia's influence led to its domination over other designs. Factories around the world began producing them in large numbers.\nStyle periods.\nRenaissance.\nComposers of the Renaissance period who wrote for four-course guitar include Alonso Mudarra, Miguel de Fuenllana, Adrian Le Roy, , Guillaume de Morlaye, and .\nFour-course guitar\nBaroque.\nSome well known composers of the Baroque guitar were Gaspar Sanz, Robert de Vis\u00e9e, Francesco Corbetta and Santiago de Murcia.\nClassical and romantic.\nFrom approximately 1780 to 1850, the guitar had numerous composers and performers including:\nHector Berlioz studied the guitar as a teenager; Franz Schubert owned at least two and wrote for the instrument; and Ludwig van Beethoven, after hearing Giuliani play, commented the instrument was \"a miniature orchestra in itself\". Niccol\u00f2 Paganini was also a guitar virtuoso and composer. He once wrote: \"I love the guitar for its harmony; it is my constant companion in all my travels\". He also said, on another occasion: \"I do not like this instrument, but regard it simply as a way of helping me to think.\"\nFrancisco T\u00e1rrega.\nThe guitarist and composer Francisco T\u00e1rrega (November 21, 1852 \u2013 December 15, 1909) was one of the great guitar virtuosos and teachers and is considered the father of modern classical guitar playing. As a professor of guitar at the conservatories of Madrid and Barcelona, he defined many elements of the modern classical technique and elevated the importance of the guitar in the classical music tradition.\nModern period.\nAt the beginning of the 1920s, Andr\u00e9s Segovia popularized the guitar with tours and early phonograph recordings. Segovia collaborated with the composers Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaqu\u00edn Turina with the aim of extending the guitar repertoire with new music. Segovia's tour of South America revitalized public interest in the guitar and helped the guitar music of Manuel Ponce and Heitor Villa-Lobos reach a wider audience. The composers Alexandre Tansman and Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco were commissioned by Segovia to write new pieces for the guitar. Luiz Bonf\u00e1 popularized Brazilian musical styles such as the newly created Bossa Nova, which was well received by audiences in the USA.\n\"New music\" \u2013 avant-garde.\nThe classical guitar repertoire also includes modern contemporary works \u2013 sometimes termed \"New Music\" \u2013 such as Elliott Carter's \"Changes\", Crist\u00f3bal Halffter's \"Codex I\", Luciano Berio's \"Sequenza XI\", Maurizio Pisati's \"Sette Studi\", Maurice Ohana's \"Si Le Jour Para\u00eet\", Sylvano Bussotti's \"Rara (eco sierologico)\", Ernst Krenek's \"Suite f\u00fcr Guitarre allein, Op. 164\", Franco Donatoni's \"Algo: Due pezzi per chitarra\", Paolo Coggiola's \"Variazioni Notturne\", etc.\nPerformers who are known for including modern repertoire include J\u00fcrgen Ruck, Elena C\u00e0soli, Leo Brouwer (when he was still performing), John Schneider, Reinbert Evers, Maria K\u00e4mmerling, Siegfried Behrend, David Starobin, Mats Scheidegger, Magnus Andersson, etc.\nThis type of repertoire is usually performed by guitarists who have particularly chosen to focus on the avant-garde in their performances.\nWithin the contemporary music scene itself, there are also works which are generally regarded as extreme. These include works such as Brian Ferneyhough's \"Kurze Schatten II\", Sven-David Sandstr\u00f6m's \"away from\" and Rolf Riehm's \"Toccata Orpheus\" etc. which are notorious for their extreme difficulty.\nThere are also a variety of databases documenting modern guitar works such as Sheer Pluck and others.\nBackground.\nThe evolution of the classical guitar and its repertoire spans more than four centuries. It has a history that was shaped by contributions from earlier instruments, such as the lute, the vihuela, and the baroque guitar.\nHistory.\nOverview of the classical guitar's history.\nThe origins of the modern guitar are not known with certainty. Some believe it is indigenous to Europe, while others think it is an imported instrument. Guitar-like instruments appear in ancient carvings and statues recovered from Egyptian, Sumerian, and Babylonian civilizations. This means that contemporary Iranian instruments such as the tanbur and setar are distantly related to the European guitar, as they all derive ultimately from the same ancient origins, but by very different historical routes and influences. Gitterns called \"guitars\" were already in use since the 13th century, but their construction and tuning were different from modern guitars. The time where the most changes were made to the guitar was in the 1500s to the 1800s.\nRenaissance guitar.\nAlonso de Mudarra's book \"Tres Libros de M\u00fasica\", published in Spain in 1546, contains the earliest known written pieces for a four-course guitarra. This four-course \"guitar\" was popular in France, Spain, and Italy. In France this instrument gained popularity among aristocrats. A considerable volume of music was published in Paris from the 1550s to the 1570s: Simon Gorlier's Le Troysi\u00e8me Livre... mis en tablature de Guiterne was published in 1551. In 1551 Adrian Le Roy also published his Premier Livre de Tablature de Guiterne, and in the same year he also published Briefve et facile instruction pour apprendre la tablature a bien accorder, conduire, et disposer la main sur la Guiterne. Robert Ballard, Gr\u00e9goire Brayssing from Augsburg, and Guillaume Morlaye ( \u2013 ) significantly contributed to its repertoire. Morlaye's Le Premier Livre de Chansons, Gaillardes, Pavannes, Bransles, Almandes, Fantasies \u2013 which has a four-course instrument illustrated on its title page \u2013 was published in partnership with Michel Fedenzat, and among other music, they published six books of tablature by lutenist Albert de Rippe (who was very likely Guillaume's teacher).\nVihuela.\nThe written history of the classical guitar can be traced back to the early 16th century with the development of the \"vihuela\" in Spain. While the lute was then becoming popular in other parts of Europe, the Spaniards did not take to it well because of its association with the Moors. Instead, the lute-like vihuela appeared with two more strings that gave it more range and complexity. In its most developed form, the vihuela was a guitar-like instrument with six double strings made of gut, tuned like a modern classical guitar with the exception of the third string, which was tuned half a step lower. It has a high sound and is rather large to hold. Few have survived and most of what is known today come from diagrams and paintings.\n\"Early romantic guitar\" or \"Guitar during the Classical music era\".\nThe earliest extant six-string guitar is believed to have been built in 1779 by Gaetano Vinaccia (1759 \u2013 after 1831) in Naples, Italy; however, the date on the label is a little ambiguous. The Vinaccia family of luthiers is known for developing the mandolin. This guitar has been examined and does not show tell-tale signs of modifications from a double-course guitar.\nThe authenticity of guitars allegedly produced before the 1790s is often in question. This also corresponds to when Moretti's 6-string method appeared, in 1792.\nModern classical guitar.\nThe modern classical guitar was developed in the 19th century by Antonio de Torres Jurado, Ignacio Fleta, Hermann Hauser Sr., and Robert Bouchet. The Spanish luthier and player Antonio de Torres gave the modern classical guitar its definitive form, with a broadened body, increased waist curve, thinned belly, and improved internal bracing. The modern classical guitar replaced an older form for the accompaniment of song and dance called flamenco, and a modified version, known as the flamenco guitar, was created.\nTechnique.\nThe fingerstyle is used fervently on the modern classical guitar. The thumb traditionally plucks the bass \u2013 or root note \u2013 whereas the fingers ring the melody and its accompanying parts. Often classical guitar technique involves the use of the nails of the right hand to pluck the notes. Noted players were: Francisco T\u00e1rrega, Emilio Pujol, Andr\u00e9s Segovia, Julian Bream, Agust\u00edn Barrios, and John Williams (guitarist).\nPerformance.\nThe modern classical guitar is usually played in a seated position, with the instrument resting on the left lap \u2013 and the left foot placed on a footstool. Alternatively \u2013 if a footstool is not used \u2013 a \"guitar support\" can be placed between the guitar and the left lap (the support usually attaches to the instrument's side with suction cups). (There are of course exceptions, with some performers choosing to hold the instrument another way.)\nRight-handed players use the fingers of the right hand to pluck the strings, with the thumb plucking from the top of a string downwards (downstroke) and the other fingers plucking from the bottom of the string upwards (upstroke). The little finger in classical technique as it evolved in the 20th century is used only to ride along with the ring finger without striking the strings and to thus physiologically facilitate the ring finger's motion.\nIn contrast, Flamenco technique, and classical compositions evoking Flamenco, employ the little finger semi-independently in the Flamenco four-finger rasgueado, that rapid strumming of the string by the fingers in reverse order employing the back of the fingernail\u2014a familiar characteristic of Flamenco.\nFlamenco technique, in the performance of the rasgueado also uses the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb: the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side. This was also used in a technique of the vihuela called dedillo which has recently begun to be introduced on the classical guitar.\nSome modern guitarists, such as \u0160t\u011bp\u00e1n Rak and Kazuhito Yamashita, use the little finger independently, compensating for the little finger's shortness by maintaining an extremely long fingernail. Rak and Yamashita have also generalized the use of the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb (the same technique as in the rasgueado of the Flamenco: as explained above the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side) both as a free stroke and as a rest stroke.\nDirect contact with strings.\nAs with other plucked instruments (such as the lute), the musician directly touches the strings (usually plucking) to produce the sound. This has important consequences: Different tone/timbre (of a single note) can be produced by plucking the string in different manners (apoyando or tirando) and in different positions (such as closer and further away from the guitar bridge). For example, plucking an open string will sound brighter than playing the same note(s) on a fretted position (which would have a warmer tone).\nThe instrument's versatility means it can create a variety of tones, but this finger-picking style also makes the instrument harder to learn than a standard acoustic guitar's strumming technique.\nFingering notation.\nIn guitar \"scores\" the five fingers of the right-hand (which pluck the strings) are designated by the first letter of their Spanish names namely p = thumb (\"pulgar\"), i = index finger (\"\u00edndice\"), m = middle finger (\"mayor\"), a = ring finger (\"anular\"), c = little finger or pinky (\"me\u00f1ique/chiquito\")\nThe four fingers of the left hand (which fret the strings) are designated 1 = index, 2 = major, 3 = ring finger, 4 = little finger. 0 designates an open string\u2014a string not stopped by a finger and whose full length thus vibrates when plucked. It is rare to use the left hand thumb in performance, the neck of a classical guitar being too wide for comfort, and normal technique keeps the thumb behind the neck. However Johann Kaspar Mertz, for example, is notable for specifying the thumb to fret bass notes on the sixth string, notated with an up arrowhead (\u2303).\nScores (contrary to \"tablatures\") do not systematically indicate the string to pluck (though the choice is usually obvious). When indicating the string is useful, the score uses the numbers 1 to 6 inside circles (highest-pitch sting to lowest).\nScores do not systematically indicate fretboard positions (where to put the first finger of the fretting hand), but when helpful (mostly with barr\u00e9s chords) the score indicates positions with Roman numerals from the first position I (index finger on the 1st fret: F-B flat-E flat-A flat-C-F) to the twelfth position XII (index finger on the 12th fret: E-A-D-G-B-E. The 12th fret is where the body begins) or even higher up to position XIX (the classical guitar most often having 19 frets, with the 19th fret being most often split and not being usable to fret the 3rd and 4th strings).\nAlternation.\nTo achieve tremolo effects and rapid, fluent scale passages, the player must practice alternation, that is, never plucking a string with the same finger twice in a row. \nUsing p to indicate the thumb, i the index finger, m the middle finger and a the ring finger, common alternation patterns include:\nRepertoire.\nMusic written specifically for the classical guitar dates from the addition of the sixth string (the baroque guitar normally had five pairs of strings) in the late 18th century.\nA guitar recital may include a variety of works, e.g., works written originally for the lute or vihuela by composers such as John Dowland (b. England 1563) and Luis de Narv\u00e1ez (b. Spain ), and also music written for the harpsichord by Domenico Scarlatti (b. Italy 1685), for the baroque lute by Sylvius Leopold Weiss (b. Germany 1687), for the baroque guitar by Robert de Vis\u00e9e (b. France ) or even Spanish-flavored music written for the piano by Isaac Alb\u00e9niz (b. Spain 1860) and Enrique Granados (b. Spain 1867). The most important composer who did not write for the guitar but whose music is often played on it is Johann Sebastian Bach (b. Germany 1685), whose baroque lute, violin, and cello works have proved highly adaptable to the instrument.\nOf music written originally for guitar, the earliest important composers are from the classical period and include Fernando Sor (b. Spain 1778) and Mauro Giuliani (b. Italy 1781), both of whom wrote in a style strongly influenced by Viennese classicism. In the 19th-century guitar composers such as Johann Kaspar Mertz (b. Slovakia, Austria 1806) were strongly influenced by the dominance of the piano. Not until the end of the nineteenth century did the guitar begin to establish its own unique identity. Francisco T\u00e1rrega (b. Spain 1852) was central to this, sometimes incorporating stylized aspects of flamenco's Moorish influences into his romantic miniatures. This was part of late 19th century mainstream European musical nationalism. Alb\u00e9niz and Granados were central to this movement; their evocation of the guitar was so successful that their compositions have been absorbed into the standard guitar repertoire.\nThe steel-string and electric guitars characteristic to the rise of rock and roll in the post-WWII era became more widely played in North America and the English-speaking world. Agust\u00edn Barrios Mangor\u00e9 of Paraguay composed many works and brought into the mainstream the characteristics of Latin American music, as did the Brazilian composer Heitor Villa-Lobos. Andr\u00e9s Segovia commissioned works from Spanish composers such as Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo, Italians such as Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco and Latin American composers such as Manuel Ponce of Mexico. Other prominent Latin American composers are Leo Brouwer of Cuba, Antonio Lauro of Venezuela and Enrique Solares of Guatemala. Julian Bream of Britain managed to get nearly every British composer from William Walton and Benjamin Britten to Peter Maxwell Davies to write significant works for guitar. Bream's collaborations with tenor Peter Pears also resulted in song cycles by Britten, Lennox Berkeley and others. There are significant works by composers such as Hans Werner Henze of Germany, Gilbert Biberian of England and Roland Chadwick of Australia.\nThe classical guitar also became widely used in popular music and rock &amp; roll in the 1960s after guitarist Mason Williams popularized the instrument in his instrumental hit Classical Gas. Guitarist Christopher Parkening is quoted in the book \"Classical Gas: The Music of Mason Williams\" as saying that it is the most requested guitar piece besides Malague\u00f1a and perhaps the best-known instrumental guitar piece today.\nIn the field of New Flamenco, the works and performances of Spanish composer and player Paco de Luc\u00eda are known worldwide.\nNot many classical guitar concertos were written through history. Nevertheless, some guitar concertos are nowadays widely known and popular, especially Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo's \"Concierto de Aranjuez\" (with the famous theme from 2nd movement) and \"Fantas\u00eda para un gentilhombre\". Composers, who also wrote famous guitar concertos are: Antonio Vivaldi (originally for mandolin or lute), Mauro Giuliani, Heitor Villa-Lobos, Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Manuel Ponce, Leo Brouwer, Lennox Berkeley and Malcolm Arnold. \nNowadays, more and more contemporary composers decide to write a guitar concerto, among them \"Bosco Sacro\" by Federico Biscione, for guitar and string orchestra, is one of the most inspired.\nPhysical characteristics.\nThe classical guitar is distinguished by a number of characteristics:\nParts.\nParts of typical classical guitars include:\nFretboard.\nThe fretboard (also called the fingerboard) is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that constitutes the top of the neck. It is flat or slightly curved. The curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius, which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard's surface constitutes a segment. The smaller the fretboard radius, the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. Fretboards are most commonly made of ebony, but may also be made of rosewood, some other hardwood, or of phenolic composite (\"micarta\").\nFrets.\nFrets are the metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fingerboard and placed at points that divide the length of string mathematically. The strings' vibrating length is determined when the strings are pressed down behind the frets. Each fret produces a different pitch and each pitch spaced a half-step apart on the 12 tone scale. The ratio of the widths of two consecutive frets is the twelfth root of two (formula_1), whose numeric value is about 1.059463. The twelfth fret divides the string into two exact halves and the 24th fret (if present) divides the string in half yet again. Every twelve frets represents one octave. This arrangement of frets results in equal tempered tuning.\nNeck.\nA classical guitar's frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck. The wood for the fretboard usually differs from the wood in the rest of the neck. The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used. The most common scale length for classical guitar is 650mm (calculated by measuring the distance between the end of the nut and the center of the 12th fret, then doubling that measurement). However, scale lengths may vary from 635-664mm or more.\nNeck joint or 'heel'.\nThis is the point where the neck meets the body. In the traditional Spanish neck joint, the neck and block are one piece with the sides inserted into slots cut in the block. Other necks are built separately and joined to the body either with a dovetail joint, mortise or flush joint. These joints are usually glued and can be reinforced with mechanical fasteners. Recently many manufacturers use bolt-on fasteners. Bolt-on neck joints were once associated only with less expensive instruments but now some top manufacturers and hand builders are using variations of this method. Some people believed that the Spanish-style one piece neck/block and glued dovetail necks have better sustain, but testing has failed to confirm this.\nWhile most traditional Spanish style builders use the one-piece neck/heel block, Fleta, a prominent Spanish builder, used a dovetail joint due to the influence of his early training in violin making.\nOne reason for the introduction of mechanical joints was to make it easier to repair necks. This is more of a problem with steel string guitars than with nylon strings, which have about half the string tension. This is why nylon string guitars often do not include a truss rod either.\nBody.\nThe body of the instrument is a major determinant of the overall sound variety for acoustic guitars. The guitar top, or soundboard, is a finely crafted and engineered element often made of spruce or red cedar. Considered the most prominent factor in determining the sound quality of a guitar, this thin (often 2 or 3\u00a0mm thick) piece of wood has a uniform thickness and is strengthened by different types of internal bracing. The back is made in rosewood and Brazilian rosewood is especially coveted, but mahogany or other decorative woods are sometimes used.\nThe majority of the sound is caused by the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it. Different patterns of wood bracing have been used through the years by luthiers (Torres, Hauser, Ram\u00edrez, Fleta, and C.F. Martin being among the most influential designers of their times); to not only strengthen the top against collapsing under the tremendous stress exerted by the tensioned strings, but also to affect the resonance of the top. Some contemporary guitar makers have introduced new construction concepts such as \"double-top\" consisting of two extra-thin wooden plates separated by Nomex, or carbon-fiber reinforced lattice \u2013 pattern bracing. The back and sides are made out of a variety of woods such as mahogany, maple, cypress Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood (\"Dalbergia nigra\"). Each one is chosen for its aesthetic effect and structural strength, and such choice can also play a role in determining the instrument's timbre. These are also strengthened with internal bracing, and decorated with inlays and purfling.\nAntonio de Torres Jurado proved that it was the top, and not the back and sides of the guitar that gave the instrument its sound, in 1862 he built a guitar with back and sides of papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9. (This guitar resides in the Museu de la Musica in Barcelona, and before the year 2000 it was restored to playable condition by the brothers Yag\u00fce, Barcelona). \nThe body of a classical guitar is a resonating chamber that projects the vibrations of the body through a \"sound hole\", allowing the acoustic guitar to be heard without amplification. The sound hole is normally a single round hole in the top of the guitar (under the strings), though some have different placement, shapes, or numbers of holes. How much air an instrument can move determines its maximum volume.\nBinding, purfling and kerfing.\nThe top, back and sides of a classical guitar body are very thin, so a flexible piece of wood called \"kerfing\" (because it is often scored, or \"kerfed\" so it bends with the shape of the rim) is glued into the corners where the rim meets the top and back. This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20\u00a0mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints.\nDuring final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which are called \"purfling\". This binding serves to seal off the endgrain of the top and back. Binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or high-quality plastic materials.\nBridge.\nThe main purpose of the bridge on a classical guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings. The bridge holds the strings in place on the body. Also, the position of the saddle, usually a strip of bone or plastic that supports the strings off the bridge, determines the distance to the nut (at the top of the fingerboard).\nSizes.\nThe modern full-size classical guitar has a scale length of around , with an overall instrument length of . The scale length has remained quite consistent since it was chosen by the originator of the instrument, Antonio de Torres. This length may have been chosen because it's twice the length of a violin string. As the guitar is tuned to one octave below that of the violin, the same size gut could be used for the first strings of both instruments.\nSmaller-scale instruments are produced to assist children in learning the instrument as the smaller scale leads to the frets being closer together, making it easier for smaller hands. The scale-size for the smaller guitars is usually in the range , with an instrument length of . Full-size instruments are sometimes referred to as 4/4, while the smaller sizes are 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, and even as small as 1/8 for very small children. However, there is not a standardized set of dimensions for fractional guitars, and their size difference is not linear from a full size guitar.\nTuning.\nA variety of different tunings are used. The most common by far, which one could call the \"standard tuning\" is:\nThe above order is the tuning from the \"1st string\" (highest-pitched string e'\u2014spatially the bottom string in playing position) to the \"6th string\" \u2013 lowest-pitched string E\u2014spatially the upper string in playing position, and hence comfortable to pluck with the thumb.\nThe explanation for this \"asymmetrical\" tuning (in the sense that the maj 3rd is not between the two middle strings, as in the tuning of the viola da gamba) is probably that the guitar originated as a 4-string instrument (actually an instrument with 4 double courses of strings, see above) with a maj 3rd between the 2nd and 3rd strings, and it only became a 6-string instrument by gradual addition of a 5th string and then a 6th string tuned a 4th apart:\n\"The development of the modern tuning can be traced in stages. One of the tunings from the 16th century is C-F-A-D. This is equivalent to the top four strings of the modern guitar tuned a tone lower. However, the absolute pitch for these notes is not equivalent to modern \"concert pitch\". The tuning of the four-course guitar was moved up by a tone and toward the end of the 16th century, five-course instruments were in use with an added lower string tuned to A. This produced A-D-G-B-E, one of a wide number of variant tunings of the period. The low E string was added during the 18th century.\"\nThis tuning is such that neighboring strings are at most 5 semitones apart.\nThere are also a variety of commonly used alternate tunings. The most common is known as Drop D tuning which has the 6th string tuned down from an E to a D."}
{"id": "5813", "revid": "3022076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5813", "title": "C. S. Lewis", "text": "Clive Staples Lewis (29 November 1898\u00a0\u2013 22 November 1963) was a British writer, literary scholar, and Anglican lay theologian. He held academic positions in English literature at both Magdalen College, Oxford (1925\u20131954), and Magdalene College, Cambridge (1954\u20131963). He is best known as the author of \"The Chronicles of Narnia\", but he is also noted for his other works of fiction, such as \"The Screwtape Letters\" and \"The Space Trilogy\", and for his non-fiction Christian apologetics, including \"Mere Christianity\", \"Miracles\", and \"The Problem of Pain.\"\nLewis was a close friend of J.\u00a0R.\u00a0R. Tolkien, author of \"The Lord of the Rings\". Both men served on the English faculty at Oxford University and were active in the informal Oxford literary group known as the Inklings. According to Lewis's 1955 memoir \"Surprised by Joy\", he was baptized in the Church of Ireland but fell away from his faith during adolescence. Lewis returned to Anglicanism at the age of 32, owing to the influence of Tolkien and other friends, and he became an \"ordinary layman of the Church of England\". Lewis's faith profoundly affected his work, and his wartime radio broadcasts on the subject of Christianity brought him wide acclaim.\nLewis wrote more than 30 books which have been translated into more than 30 languages and have sold millions of copies. The books that make up \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" have sold the most and have been popularized on stage, TV, radio, and cinema. His philosophical writings are widely cited by Christian scholars from many denominations.\nIn 1956, Lewis married American writer Joy Davidman; she died of cancer four years later at the age of 45. Lewis died on 22 November 1963 from kidney failure, at age 64. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis was honoured with a memorial in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.\nLife.\nChildhood.\nClive Staples Lewis was born in Belfast in Ulster, Ireland (before partition), on 29 November 1898. His father was Albert James Lewis (1863\u20131929), a solicitor whose father Richard Lewis had come to Ireland from Wales during the mid-19th century. Lewis's mother was Florence Augusta Lewis Hamilton (1862\u20131908), known as Flora, the daughter of Thomas Hamilton, a Church of Ireland priest, and the great-granddaughter of both Bishop Hugh Hamilton and John Staples. She was the first female mathematics graduate to study at Queen\u2019s College Belfast. Lewis had an elder brother, Warren Hamilton Lewis (known as \"Warnie\"). He was baptized on 29 January 1899 by his maternal grandfather in St Mark's Church, Dundela.\nWhen his dog Jacksie was fatally struck by a horse-drawn carriage, the four-year-old Lewis adopted the name Jacksie. At first, he would answer to no other name, but later accepted Jack, the name by which he was known to friends and family for the rest of his life. When he was seven, his family moved into \"Little Lea\", the family home of his childhood, in the Strandtown area of East Belfast.\nAs a boy, Lewis was fascinated with anthropomorphic animals; he fell in love with Beatrix Potter's stories and often wrote and illustrated his own animal tales. Along with his brother Warnie, he created the world of Boxen, a fantasy land inhabited and run by animals. Lewis loved to read from an early age. His father's house was filled with books; he later wrote that finding something to read was as easy as walking into a field and \"finding a new blade of grass\".\nLewis was schooled by private tutors until age nine, when his mother died in 1908 from cancer. His father then sent him to England to live and study at Wynyard School in Watford, Hertfordshire. Lewis's brother had enrolled there three years previously. Not long after, the school was closed due to a lack of pupils. Lewis then attended Campbell College in the east of Belfast about a mile from his home, but left after a few months due to respiratory problems.\nHe was then sent back to England to the health-resort town of Malvern, Worcestershire, where he attended the preparatory school Cherbourg House, which Lewis referred to as \"Chartres\" in his autobiography. It was during this time that he abandoned the Christianity he was taught as a child and became an atheist. During this time he also developed a fascination with European mythology and the occult.\nIn September 1913, Lewis enrolled at Malvern College, where he remained until the following June. He found the school socially competitive, and some of the fellow pupils of his house, such as Donald Hardman, had mixed feelings about him. Hardman later recalled: \nHe was a bit of a rebel; he had a wonderful sense of humour and was a past master of mimicry. I think he took his work seriously, but nothing else; never took any interest in games and never played any so for as I can remember unless he had to. ... I met him in Oxford after the war and noticed he had changed, but was staggered to find him the author of \"The Screwtape Letters\". When I knew him I can only describe him as a riotously amusing atheist. He really was pretty foul mouthed about it. \nAfter leaving Malvern, he studied privately with William T. Kirkpatrick, his father's old tutor and former headmaster of Lurgan College.\nAs a teenager, Lewis was wonderstruck by the songs and legends of what he called \"Northernness\", the ancient literature of Scandinavia preserved in the Icelandic sagas. These legends intensified an inner longing that he would later call \"joy\". He also grew to love nature; its beauty reminded him of the stories of the North, and the stories of the North reminded him of the beauties of nature. His teenage writings moved away from the tales of Boxen, and he began experimenting with different art forms such as epic poetry and opera to try to capture his new-found interest in Norse mythology and the natural world.\nStudying with Kirkpatrick (\"The Great Knock\", as Lewis afterward called him) instilled in him a love of Greek literature and mythology and sharpened his debate and reasoning skills. In 1916, Lewis was awarded a scholarship at University College, Oxford.\n\"My Irish life\".\nLewis experienced a certain cultural shock on first arriving in England: \"No Englishman will be able to understand my first impressions of England,\" Lewis wrote in \"Surprised by Joy\". \"The strange English accents with which I was surrounded seemed like the voices of demons. But what was worst was the English landscape\u00a0... I have made up the quarrel since; but at that moment I conceived a hatred for England which took many years to heal.\"\nFrom boyhood, Lewis had immersed himself in Norse and Greek mythology, and later in Irish mythology and literature. He also expressed an interest in the Irish language, though there is not much evidence that he laboured to learn it. He developed a particular fondness for W. B. Yeats, in part because of Yeats's use of Ireland's Celtic heritage in poetry. In a letter to a friend, Lewis wrote, \"I have here discovered an author exactly after my own heart, whom I am sure you would delight in, W. B. Yeats. He writes plays and poems of rare spirit and beauty about our old Irish mythology.\"\nIn 1921, Lewis met Yeats twice, since Yeats had moved to Oxford. Lewis was surprised to find his English peers indifferent to Yeats and the Celtic Revival movement, and wrote: \"I am often surprised to find how utterly ignored Yeats is among the men I have met: perhaps his appeal is purely Irish\u00a0\u2013 if so, then thank the gods that I am Irish.\" Early in his career, Lewis considered sending his work to the major Dublin publishers, writing: \"If I do ever send my stuff to a publisher, I think I shall try Maunsel, those Dublin people, and so tack myself definitely onto the Irish school.\"\nAfter his conversion to Christianity, his interests gravitated towards Christian theology and away from pagan Celtic mysticism (as opposed to Celtic Christian mysticism).\nLewis occasionally expressed a somewhat tongue-in-cheek chauvinism towards the English. Describing an encounter with a fellow Irishman, he wrote: \"Like all Irish people who meet in England, we ended by criticisms on the invincible flippancy and dullness of the Anglo-Saxon race. After all, there is no doubt, \"ami\", that the Irish are the only people: with all their faults, I would not gladly live or die among another folk.\" Throughout his life, he sought out the company of other Irish people living in England and visited Northern Ireland regularly. In 1958 he spent his honeymoon there at the Old Inn, Crawfordsburn, which he called \"my Irish life\".\nVarious critics have suggested that it was Lewis's dismay over the sectarian conflict in his native Belfast which led him to eventually adopt such an ecumenical brand of Christianity. As one critic has said, Lewis \"repeatedly extolled the virtues of all branches of the Christian faith, emphasising a need for unity among Christians around what the Catholic writer called 'Mere Christianity', the core doctrinal beliefs that all denominations share\".\nPaul Stevens of the University of Toronto wrote an opinion that \"Lewis' mere Christianity masked many of the political prejudices of an old-fashioned Ulster Protestant, a native of middle-class Belfast for whom British withdrawal from Northern Ireland even in the 1950s and 1960s was unthinkable.\"\nFirst World War and Oxford University.\nLewis entered Oxford in the 1917 summer term, studying at University College, and shortly after, he joined the Officers' Training Corps at the university as his \"most promising route into the army\". From there, he was drafted into a Cadet Battalion for training. After his training, he was commissioned into the 3rd Battalion of the Somerset Light Infantry of the British Army as a Second Lieutenant, and was later transferred to the 1st Battalion of the regiment, then serving in France (he would not remain with the 3rd Battalion as it moved to Northern Ireland). Within months of entering Oxford, he was shipped by the British Army to France to fight in the First World War.\nOn his 19th birthday (29 November 1917), Lewis arrived at the front line in the Somme Valley in France, where he experienced trench warfare for the first time. On 15 April 1918, as 1st Battalion, Somerset Light Infantry assaulted the village of Riez du Vinage in the midst of the German spring offensive, Lewis was wounded and two of his colleagues were killed by a British shell falling short of its target. He was depressed and homesick during his convalescence and, upon his recovery in October, he was assigned to duty in Andover, England. He was demobilized in December 1918 and soon restarted his studies. In a later letter, Lewis stated that his experience of the horrors of war, along with the loss of his mother and unhappiness in school, were the basis of his pessimism and atheism.\nAfter Lewis returned to Oxford University, he received a First in Honour Moderations (Greek and Latin literature) in 1920, a First in Greats (Philosophy and Ancient History) in 1922, and a First in English in 1923. In 1924 he became a Philosophy tutor at University College and, in 1925, was elected a Fellow and Tutor in English Literature at Magdalen College, where he served for 29 years until 1954.\nJanie Moore.\nDuring his army training, Lewis shared a room with another cadet, Edward Courtnay Francis \"Paddy\" Moore (1898\u20131918). Maureen Moore, Paddy's sister, said that the two made a mutual pact that if either died during the war, the survivor would take care of both of their families. Paddy was killed in action in 1918 and Lewis kept his promise. Paddy had earlier introduced Lewis to his mother, Janie King Moore, and a friendship quickly sprang up between Lewis, who was 18 when they met, and Janie, who was 45. The friendship with Moore was particularly important to Lewis while he was recovering from his wounds in hospital, as his father did not visit him.\nLewis lived with and cared for Moore until she was hospitalized in the late 1940s. He routinely introduced her as his mother, referred to her as such in letters, and developed a deeply affectionate friendship with her. Lewis's own mother had died when he was a child, while his father was distant, demanding, and eccentric.\nSpeculation regarding their relationship resurfaced with the 1990 publication of A. N. Wilson's biography of Lewis. Wilson (who never met Lewis) attempted to make a case for their having been lovers for a time. Wilson's biography was not the first to address the question of Lewis's relationship with Moore. George Sayer knew Lewis for 29 years, and he had sought to shed light on the relationship during the period of 14 years before Lewis's conversion to Christianity. In his biography \"Jack: A Life of C. S. Lewis\", he wrote:\nLater Sayer changed his mind. In the introduction to the 1997 edition of his biography of Lewis he wrote:\nHowever, the romantic nature of the relationship is doubted by other writers; for example, Philip Zaleski and Carol Zaleski write in \"The Fellowship\" that\nLewis spoke well of Mrs. Moore throughout his life, saying to his friend George Sayer, \"She was generous and taught me to be generous, too.\" In December 1917, Lewis wrote in a letter to his childhood friend Arthur Greeves that Janie and Greeves were \"the two people who matter most to me in the world\".\nIn 1930, Lewis moved into The Kilns with his brother Warnie, Mrs. Moore, and her daughter Maureen. The Kilns was a house in the district of Headington Quarry on the outskirts of Oxford, now part of the suburb of Risinghurst. They all contributed financially to the purchase of the house, which eventually passed to Maureen, who by then was Dame Maureen Dunbar, when Warren died in 1973.\nMoore had dementia in her later years and was eventually moved into a nursing home, where she died in 1951. Lewis visited her every day in this home until her death.\nReturn to Christianity.\nLewis was raised in a religious family that attended the Church of Ireland. He became an atheist at age 15, though he later described his young self as being paradoxically \"very angry with God for not existing\" and \"equally angry with him for creating a world\". His early separation from Christianity began when he started to view his religion as a chore and a duty; around this time, he also gained an interest in the occult, as his studies expanded to include such topics. Lewis quoted Lucretius (\"De rerum natura\", 5.198\u20139) as having one of the strongest arguments for atheism:\n&lt;poem&gt;\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nwhich he translated poetically as follows:\n&lt;poem&gt;Had God designed the world, it would not be\nA world so frail and faulty as we see.&lt;/poem&gt;\nLewis's interest in the works of the Scottish writer George MacDonald was part of what turned him from atheism. This can be seen particularly well through this passage in Lewis's \"The Great Divorce\", chapter nine, when the semi-autobiographical main character meets MacDonald in Heaven:\nHe eventually returned to Christianity, having been influenced by arguments with his Oxford colleague and friend J. R. R. Tolkien, whom he seems to have met for the first time on 11 May 1926, as well as the book \"The Everlasting Man\" by G. K. Chesterton. Lewis vigorously resisted conversion, noting that he was brought into Christianity like a prodigal, \"kicking, struggling, resentful, and darting his eyes in every direction for a chance to escape\". He described his last struggle in \"Surprised by Joy\":\nAfter his conversion to theism in 1929, Lewis converted to Christianity in 1931, following a long discussion during a late-night walk along Addison's Walk with close friends Tolkien and Hugo Dyson. He records making a specific commitment to Christian belief while on his way to the zoo with his brother. He became a member of the Church of England\u00a0\u2013 somewhat to the disappointment of Tolkien, who had hoped that he would join the Catholic Church.\nLewis was a committed Anglican who upheld a largely orthodox Anglican theology, though in his apologetic writings, he made an effort to avoid espousing any one denomination. In his later writings, some believe that he proposed ideas such as purification of venial sins after death in purgatory (\"The Great Divorce\" and \"Letters to Malcolm\") and mortal sin (\"The Screwtape Letters\"), which are generally considered to be Roman Catholic teachings, although they are also widely held in Anglicanism (particularly in high church Anglo-Catholic circles). Regardless, Lewis considered himself an entirely orthodox Anglican to the end of his life, reflecting that he had initially attended church only to receive communion and had been repelled by the hymns and the poor quality of the sermons. He later came to consider himself honoured by worshipping with men of faith who came in shabby clothes and work boots and who sang all the verses to all the hymns.\nSecond World War.\nAfter the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, the Lewises took child evacuees from London and other cities into The Kilns. Lewis was only 40 when the war began, and he tried to re-enter military service, offering to instruct cadets; however, his offer was not accepted. He rejected the recruiting office's suggestion of writing columns for the Ministry of Information in the press, as he did not want to \"write lies\" to deceive the enemy. He later served in the local Home Guard in Oxford.\nFrom 1941 to 1943, Lewis spoke on religious programmes broadcast by the BBC from London while the city was under periodic air raids. These broadcasts were appreciated by civilians and servicemen at that stage. For example, Air Chief Marshal Sir Donald Hardman wrote:\nThe youthful Alistair Cooke was less impressed, and in 1944 described \"the alarming vogue of Mr. C.S. Lewis\" as an example of how wartime tends to \"spawn so many quack religions and Messiahs\". The broadcasts were anthologized in \"Mere Christianity\". From 1941, Lewis was occupied at his summer holiday weekends visiting R.A.F. stations to speak on his faith, invited by Chaplain-in-Chief Maurice Edwards.\nIt was also during the same wartime period that Lewis was invited to become first President of the Oxford Socratic Club in January 1942, a position that he enthusiastically held until he resigned on appointment to Cambridge University in 1954.\nHonour declined.\nLewis was named on the last list of honours by George VI in December 1951 as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) but declined so as to avoid association with any political issues.\nChair at Cambridge University.\nIn 1954, Lewis accepted the newly founded chair in Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he finished his career. He maintained a strong attachment to the city of Oxford, keeping a home there and returning on weekends until his death in 1963.\nJoy Davidman.\nIn later life, Lewis corresponded with Joy Davidman Gresham, an American writer of Jewish background, a former Communist, and a convert from atheism to Christianity. She was separated from her alcoholic and abusive husband, novelist William L. Gresham, and came to England with her two sons, David and Douglas. Lewis at first regarded her as an agreeable intellectual companion and personal friend, and it was on this level that he agreed to enter into a civil marriage contract with her so that she could continue to live in the UK. They were married at the register office, 42 St Giles', Oxford, on 23 April 1956. Lewis's brother Warren wrote: \"For Jack the attraction was at first undoubtedly intellectual. Joy was the only woman whom he had met\u00a0... who had a brain which matched his own in suppleness, in width of interest, and in analytical grasp, and above all in humour and a sense of fun.\" After complaining of a painful hip, she was diagnosed with terminal bone cancer, and the relationship developed to the point that they sought a Christian marriage. Since she was divorced, this was not straightforward in the Church of England at the time, but a friend, the Rev. Peter Bide, performed the ceremony at her bed in the Churchill Hospital on 21 March 1957.\nGresham's cancer soon went into remission, and the couple lived together as a family with Warren Lewis until 1960, when her cancer recurred. She died on 13 July 1960. Earlier that year, the couple took a brief holiday in Greece and the Aegean; Lewis was fond of walking but not of travel, and this marked his only crossing of the English Channel after 1918. Lewis's book \"A Grief Observed\" describes his experience of bereavement in such a raw and personal fashion that he originally released it under the pseudonym N. W. Clerk to keep readers from associating the book with him. Ironically, many friends recommended the book to Lewis as a method for dealing with his own grief. After Lewis's death, his authorship was made public by Faber, with the permission of the executors.\nLewis had adopted Gresham's two sons and continued to raise them after her death. Douglas Gresham is a Christian like Lewis and his mother, while David Gresham turned to his mother's ancestral faith, becoming Orthodox Jewish in his beliefs. His mother's writings had featured the Jews in an unsympathetic manner, particularly on \"shechita\" (ritual slaughter). David informed Lewis that he was going to become a \"shohet\", a ritual slaughterer, to present this type of Jewish religious functionary to the world in a more favourable light. In a 2005 interview, Douglas Gresham acknowledged that he and his brother were not close, although they had corresponded via email. \nDavid died on 25 December 2014. In 2020, Douglas revealed that his brother had died at a Swiss mental hospital, and that when David was a young man he had been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.\nIllness and death.\nIn early June 1961, Lewis began experiencing nephritis, which resulted in blood poisoning. His illness caused him to miss the autumn term at Cambridge, though his health gradually began improving in 1962 and he returned that April. His health continued to improve and, according to his friend George Sayer, Lewis was fully himself by early 1963.\nOn 15 July that year, Lewis fell ill and was admitted to the hospital; he had a heart attack at 5:00\u00a0pm the next day and lapsed into a coma, but unexpectedly woke the following day at 2:00\u00a0pm. After he was discharged from the hospital, Lewis returned to the Kilns, though he was too ill to return to work. As a result, he resigned from his post at Cambridge in August 1963.\nLewis's condition continued to decline, and he was diagnosed with end-stage kidney failure in mid-November. He collapsed in his bedroom at 5:30\u00a0pm on 22 November, at age 64, and died a few minutes later. He is buried in the churchyard of Holy Trinity Church, Headington, Oxford. His brother Warren died on 9 April 1973 and was buried in the same grave.\nMedia coverage of Lewis's death was almost completely overshadowed by news of the assassination of John F. Kennedy, which occurred on the same day (approximately 55 minutes following Lewis's collapse), as did the death of English writer Aldous Huxley, author of \"Brave New World\". This coincidence was the inspiration for Peter Kreeft's book \"Between Heaven and Hell: A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, &amp; Aldous Huxley\". Lewis is commemorated on 22 November in the church calendar of the Episcopal Church.\nCareer.\nScholar.\nLewis began his academic career as an undergraduate student at Oxford University, where he won a triple first, the highest honours in three areas of study. He was then elected a Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, where he worked for nearly thirty years, from 1925 to 1954. In 1954, he was awarded the newly founded chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Cambridge University, and was elected a fellow of Magdalene College. Concerning his appointed academic field, he argued that there was no such thing as an English Renaissance. Much of his scholarly work concentrated on the later Middle Ages, especially its use of allegory. His \"The Allegory of Love\" (1936) helped reinvigorate the serious study of late medieval narratives such as the \"Roman de la Rose\".\nLewis was commissioned to write the volume \"English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (Excluding Drama)\" for the Oxford History of English Literature. His book \"A Preface to Paradise Lost\" is still cited as a criticism of that work. His last academic work, \"The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature\" (1964), is a summary of the medieval world view, a reference to the \"discarded image\" of the cosmos.\nLewis was a prolific writer, and his circle of literary friends became an informal discussion society known as the \"Inklings\", including J. R. R. Tolkien, Nevill Coghill, Lord David Cecil, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and his brother Warren Lewis. Glyer points to December 1929 as the Inklings' beginning date. Lewis's friendship with Coghill and Tolkien grew during their time as members of the Kolb\u00edtar, an Old Norse reading group that Tolkien founded and which ended around the time of the inception of the Inklings. At Oxford, he was the tutor of poet John Betjeman, critic Kenneth Tynan, mystic Bede Griffiths, novelist Roger Lancelyn Green and Sufi scholar Martin Lings, among many other undergraduates. The religious and conservative Betjeman detested Lewis, whereas the anti-establishment Tynan retained a lifelong admiration for him.\nOf Tolkien, Lewis writes in \"Surprised by Joy\":\nNovelist.\nIn addition to his scholarly work, Lewis wrote several popular novels, including the science fiction \"Space Trilogy\" for adults and the Narnia fantasies for children. Most deal implicitly with Christian themes such as sin, humanity's fall from grace, and redemption.\nHis first novel after becoming a Christian was \"The Pilgrim's Regress\" (1933), which depicted his journey to Christianity in the allegorical style of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\". The book was poorly received by critics at the time, although David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, one of Lewis's contemporaries at Oxford, gave him much-valued encouragement. Asked by Lloyd-Jones when he would write another book, Lewis replied, \"When I understand the meaning of prayer.\"\nThe \"Space Trilogy\" (also called the \"Cosmic Trilogy\" or \"Ransom Trilogy\") dealt with what Lewis saw as the dehumanizing trends in contemporary science fiction. The first book, \"Out of the Silent Planet\", was apparently written following a conversation with his friend J. R. R. Tolkien about these trends. Lewis agreed to write a \"space travel\" story and Tolkien a \"time travel\" one, but Tolkien never completed \"The Lost Road\", linking his Middle-earth to the modern world. Lewis's main character Elwin Ransom is based in part on Tolkien, a fact to which Tolkien alludes in his letters.\nThe second novel, \"Perelandra\", depicts a new Garden of Eden on the planet Venus, a new Adam and Eve, and a new \"serpent figure\" to tempt Eve. The story can be seen as an account of what might have happened if the terrestrial Adam had defeated the serpent and avoided the Fall of Man, with Ransom intervening in the novel to \"ransom\" the new Adam and Eve from the deceptions of the enemy. The third novel, \"That Hideous Strength\", develops the theme of nihilistic science threatening traditional human values, embodied in Arthurian legend.\nMany ideas in the trilogy, particularly opposition to dehumanization as portrayed in the third book, are presented more formally in \"The Abolition of Man\", based on a series of lectures by Lewis at Durham University in 1943. Lewis stayed in Durham, where he says he was overwhelmed by the magnificence of the cathedral. \"That Hideous Strength\" is in fact set in the environs of \"Edgestow\" university, a small English university like Durham, though Lewis disclaims any other resemblance between the two.\nWalter Hooper, Lewis's literary executor, discovered a fragment of another science-fiction novel apparently written by Lewis called \"The Dark Tower\". Ransom appears in the story but it is not clear whether the book was intended as part of the same series of novels. The manuscript was eventually published in 1977, though Lewis scholar Kathryn Lindskoog doubts its authenticity.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\", considered a classic of children's literature, is a series of seven fantasy novels. Written between 1949 and 1954 and illustrated by Pauline Baynes, the series is Lewis's most popular work, having sold over 100 million copies in 41 languages . It has been adapted several times, complete or in part, for radio, television, stage and cinema. In 1956, the final novel in the series, \"The Last Battle\", won the Carnegie Medal.\nThe books contain Christian ideas intended to be easily accessible to young readers. In addition to Christian themes, Lewis also borrows characters from Greek and Roman mythology, as well as traditional British and Irish fairy tales.\nLewis's last novel, \"Till We Have Faces\", a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche, was published in 1956. Although Lewis called it \"far and away my best book\", it was not as well-reviewed as his previous work.\nOther works.\nLewis wrote several works on Heaven and Hell. One of these, \"The Great Divorce\", is a short novella in which a few residents of Hell take a bus ride to Heaven, where they are met by people who dwell there. The proposition is that they can stay if they choose, in which case they can call the place where they had come from \"Purgatory\", instead of \"Hell\", but many find it not to their taste. The title is a reference to William Blake's \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\", a concept that Lewis found a \"disastrous error\". This work deliberately echoes two other more famous works with a similar theme: the \"Divine Comedy\" of Dante Alighieri, and Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\".\nAnother short work, \"The Screwtape Letters\", which he dedicated to J. R. R. Tolkien, consists of letters of advice from senior demon Screwtape to his nephew Wormwood on the best ways to tempt a particular human and secure his damnation. Lewis's last novel was \"Till We Have Faces\", which he thought of as his most mature and masterly work of fiction but which was never a popular success. It is a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche from the unusual perspective of Psyche's sister. It is deeply concerned with religious ideas, but the setting is entirely pagan, and the connections with specific Christian beliefs are left implicit.\nBefore Lewis's conversion to Christianity, he published two books: \"Spirits in Bondage\", a collection of poems, and \"Dymer\", a single narrative poem. Both were published under the pen name Clive Hamilton. Other narrative poems have since been published posthumously, including \"Launcelot\", \"The Nameless Isle\", and \"The Queen of Drum\".\nHe also wrote \"The Four Loves\", which rhetorically explains four categories of love: friendship, eros, affection, and charity.\nIn 2009, a partial draft was discovered of \"Language and Human Nature\", which Lewis had begun co-writing with J. R. R. Tolkien, but which was never completed.\nIn 2024 an original poem was discovered in a collection of documents in Special Collections at the University of Leeds. Its Old English title, \"M\u00f3d \u00der\u00fd\u00fee Ne W\u00e6g\", is not easily translated into modern English and references the epic poem \"Beowulf\". The poem was addressed to professor of English Eric Valentine Gordon and his wife Dr Ida Gordon. It was written under the pen name Nat Whilk, meaning \"someone\" in Old English.\nChristian apologist.\nLewis is also regarded by many as one of the most influential Christian apologists of his time, in addition to his career as an English professor and an author of fiction. \"Mere Christianity\" was voted best book of the 20th century by \"Christianity Today\" in 2000. He has been called \"The Apostle to the Skeptics\" due to his approach to religious belief as a sceptic, and his following conversion.\nLewis was very interested in presenting an argument from reason against metaphysical naturalism and for the existence of God. \"Mere Christianity\", \"The Problem of Pain\", and \"Miracles\" were all concerned, to one degree or another, with refuting popular objections to Christianity, such as the question, \"How could a good God allow pain to exist in the world?\" He also became a popular lecturer and broadcaster, and some of his writing originated as scripts for radio talks or lectures (including much of \"Mere Christianity\").\nAccording to George Sayer, losing a 1948 debate with Elizabeth Anscombe, also a Christian, led Lewis to re-evaluate his role as an apologist, and his future works concentrated on devotional literature and children's books. Anscombe had a completely different recollection of the debate's outcome and its emotional effect on Lewis. Victor Reppert also disputes Sayer, listing some of Lewis's post-1948 apologetic publications, including the second and revised edition of his \"Miracles\" in 1960, in which Lewis addressed Anscombe's criticism.&lt;ref name=\"Reppert 2005 https://books.google.com/books?id=hn1gaNlri1cC&amp;pg=PA266 266\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Noteworthy too is Roger Teichman's suggestion in \"The Philosophy of Elizabeth Anscombe\" that the intellectual impact of Anscombe's paper on Lewis's philosophical self-confidence should not be over-rated: \"...\u00a0it seems unlikely that he felt as irretrievably crushed as some of his acquaintances have made out; the episode is probably an inflated legend, in the same category as the affair of Wittgenstein's Poker. Certainly, Anscombe herself believed that Lewis's argument, though flawed, was getting at something very important; she thought that this came out more in the improved version of it that Lewis presented in a subsequent edition of \"Miracles\"\u00a0\u2013 though that version also had 'much to criticize in it'.\"\nLewis wrote an autobiography titled \"Surprised by Joy\", which places special emphasis on his own conversion. He also wrote many essays and public speeches on Christian belief, many of which were collected in \"God in the Dock\" and \"The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses\".\nHis most famous works, the \"Chronicles of Narnia\", contain many strong Christian messages and are often considered allegory. Lewis, an expert on the subject of allegory, maintained that the books were not allegory, and preferred to call the Christian aspects of them \"suppositional\". As Lewis wrote in a letter to a Mrs. Hook in December 1958:\nPrior to his conversion, Lewis used the word \"Moslem\" to refer to Muslims, adherents of Islam; following his conversion, however, he started using \"Mohammedans\" and described Islam as a Christian heresy rather than an independent religion.\n\"Trilemma\".\nIn a much-cited passage from \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis challenged the view that Jesus was a great moral teacher but not God. He argued that Jesus made several implicit claims to divinity, which would logically exclude that claim:\nAlthough this argument is sometimes called \"Lewis's trilemma\", Lewis did not invent it but rather developed and popularized it. It has also been used by Christian apologist Josh McDowell in his book \"More Than a Carpenter\". It has been widely repeated in Christian apologetic literature but largely ignored by professional theologians and biblical scholars.\nLewis's Christian apologetics, and this argument in particular, have been criticized. Philosopher John Beversluis described Lewis's arguments as \"textually careless and theologically unreliable\", and this particular argument as logically unsound and an example of a false dilemma. The Anglican New Testament scholar N. T. Wright criticizes Lewis for failing to recognize the significance of Jesus's Jewish identity and setting\u00a0\u2013 an oversight which \"at best, drastically short-circuits the argument\" and which lays Lewis open to criticism that his argument \"doesn't work as history, and it backfires dangerously when historical critics question his reading of the gospels\", although he argues that this \"doesn't undermine the eventual claim\".\nLewis used a similar argument in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", when the old Professor advises his young guests that their sister's claims of a magical world must logically be taken as either lies, madness, or truth.\nUniversal morality.\nOne of the main theses in Lewis's apologia is that there is a common morality known throughout humanity, which he calls \"natural law\". In the first five chapters of \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis discusses the idea that people have a standard of behaviour to which they expect people to adhere. Lewis claims that people all over the earth know what this law is and when they break it. He goes on to claim that there must be someone or something behind such a universal set of principles.\nLewis also portrays Universal Morality in his works of fiction. In \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" he describes Universal Morality as the \"deep magic\" which everyone knew.\nIn the second chapter of \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis recognizes that \"many people find it difficult to understand what this Law of Human Nature\u00a0... is.\" And he responds first to the idea \"that the Moral Law is simply our herd instinct\" and second to the idea \"that the Moral Law is simply a social convention\". In responding to the second idea Lewis notes that people often complain that one set of moral ideas is better than another, but that this actually argues for there existing some \"Real Morality\" to which they are comparing other moralities. Finally, he notes that sometimes differences in moral codes are exaggerated by people who confuse differences in beliefs about morality with differences in beliefs about facts:\nLewis also had fairly progressive views on the topic of \"animal morality\", in particular the suffering of animals, as is evidenced by several of his essays: most notably, \"On Vivisection\" and \"On the Pains of Animals\".\nPolitical views.\nLewis eschewed political involvement and partisan politics, took little interest in transitory political issues, and held many politicians in disdain. He refused a knighthood for fear that his detractors might then use it to accuse him of holding a political viewpoint, and he saw his role as a Christian apologist. His worldview was Christian, but he also did not believe in establishment of Christian parties. He avoided the political sphere, although he was not ignorant of it. He did not see himself as a political philosopher, but his work, \"The Abolition of Man\" (1943) defends objective value and the concept of natural law. Lewis referred to this work as almost his own favourite, although he felt it had been largely ignored. \"The Abolition of Man\" was not presented as something new. Instead, he paid attention to ideas, with the intent of recovering them. In \"The Abolition of Man\", \"Lewis offered the postmodern world a vision of reality that could make sense of our lived moral experiences, and he put forth a powerful defense of natural law as a necessary basis for \"the very idea of a rule which is not tyranny or an obedience which is not slavery\".\nLegacy.\nLewis continues to attract a wide readership. In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked him eleventh on their list of \"the 50 greatest British writers since 1945\". Readers of his fiction are often unaware of what Lewis considered the Christian themes of his works. His Christian apologetics are read and quoted by members of many Christian denominations. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis joined some of Britain's greatest writers recognized at Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey. The dedication service, at noon on 22 November 2013, included a reading from \"The Last Battle\" by Douglas Gresham, younger stepson of Lewis. Flowers were laid by Walter Hooper, trustee and literary advisor to the Lewis Estate. An address was delivered by former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams. The floor stone inscription is a quotation from an address by Lewis:\nLewis has been the subject of several biographies, a few of which were written by close friends, such as Roger Lancelyn Green and George Sayer. In 1985, the screenplay \"Shadowlands\" by William Nicholson dramatized Lewis's life and relationship with Joy Davidman Gresham. It was aired on British television starring Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom. This was also staged as a theatre play starring Nigel Hawthorne in 1989 and made into the 1993 feature film \"Shadowlands\" starring Anthony Hopkins and Debra Winger.\nMany books have been inspired by Lewis, including \"A Severe Mercy\" by his correspondent and friend Sheldon Vanauken. \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" has been particularly influential. Modern children's literature has been more or less influenced by Lewis's series, such as Daniel Handler's \"A Series of Unfortunate Events\", Eoin Colfer's \"Artemis Fowl\", Philip Pullman's \"His Dark Materials\", and J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\". Pullman is an atheist and is known to be sharply critical of C. S. Lewis's work, accusing Lewis of featuring religious propaganda, misogyny, racism, and emotional sadism in his books. However, he has also modestly praised \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" for being a \"more serious\" work of literature in comparison with Tolkien's \"trivial\" \"The Lord of the Rings\". Authors of adult fantasy literature such as Tim Powers have also testified to being influenced by Lewis's work.\nMost of Lewis's posthumous work has been edited by his literary executor Walter Hooper. Kathryn Lindskoog, an independent Lewis scholar, argued that Hooper's scholarship is not reliable and that he has made false statements and attributed forged works to Lewis. Lewis's stepson, Douglas Gresham, denies the forgery claims, saying that \"[t]he whole controversy thing was engineered for very personal reasons\u00a0... Her fanciful theories have been pretty thoroughly discredited.\"\nA bronze statue of Lewis's character Digory from \"The Magician's Nephew\" stands in Belfast's Holywood Arches in front of the Holywood Road Library.\nSeveral C. S. Lewis Societies exist around the world, including one which was founded in Oxford in 1982. The C.S. Lewis Society at the University of Oxford meets at Pusey House during term time to discuss papers on the life and works of Lewis and the other Inklings, and generally appreciate all things Lewisian.\nLive-action film adaptations have been made of three of \"The Chronicles of Narnia: \" (2005), ' (2008) and ' (2010).\nLewis is featured as a main character in \"The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica\" series by James A. Owen. He is one of two characters in Mark St. Germain's 2009 play \"Freud's Last Session\", which imagines a meeting between Lewis, aged 40, and Sigmund Freud, aged 83, at Freud's house in Hampstead, London, in 1939, as the Second World War is about to break out. In 2023, Freud's Last Session was released as a movie starring Anthony Hopkins as Freud and Matthew Goode as Lewis. The movie had additional characters as well, including Anna Freud, played by Liv Lisa Fries.\nIn 2021, \"The Most Reluctant Convert\", a biographical drama about Lewis's life and conversion, was released.\nThe CS Lewis Nature Reserve, on ground owned by Lewis, lies behind his house, The Kilns.There is public access."}
{"id": "5814", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5814", "title": "Chinese dominoes", "text": "Chinese dominoes are used in several tile-based games, namely, tien gow, pai gow, tiu u and kap tai shap. In Cantonese they are called (), which literally means \"bone tiles\"; it is also the name of a northern Chinese game, where the rules are quite different from the southern Chinese version of tien gow.\nHistory.\nMing author Xie Zhaozhe (1567\u20131624) records the legend of dominoes having been presented to Song Emperor Huizong in 1112. However the contemporary Li Qingzhao (1084 \u2013 ) made no mention of dominoes in her compendium of games.\nIn China, early \"domino\" tiles were functionally identical to playing cards. An identifiable version of Chinese dominoes developed in the 12th or 13th century.\nThe oldest confirmed written mention of dominoes in China comes from the \"Former Events in Wulin\" (i.e. the capital Hangzhou) written by the Yuan Dynasty (1271\u20131368) author Zhou Mi (1232\u20131298), who listed \"pupai\" (gambling plaques or dominoes) as well as dice as items sold by peddlers during the reign of Song Emperor Xiaozong (). Andrew Lo asserts that Zhou Mi meant dominoes when referring to \"pupai\", since the Ming author Lu Rong (1436\u20131494) explicitly defined \"pupai\" as dominoes (in regards to a story of a suitor who won a maiden's hand by drawing out four winning \"pupai\" from a set). Tiles dating from the 12th to 14th centuries have survived. Unlike most modern tiles they are white with black and red pips.\nThe earliest known manual written about dominoes is the \"Manual of the Xuanhe Period\" () written by Qu You (1341\u20131427), but some Chinese scholars believe this manual is a forgery from a later time. In the \"Encyclopedia of a Myriad of Treasures\", Zhang Pu (1602\u20131641) described the game of laying out dominoes as \"pupai\", although the character for \"pu\" had changed, yet retained a similar pronunciation.\nDuring the Qing dynasty (1644-1912), the suits known as \"Chinese\" and \"barbarian\" were renamed to \"civil\" and \"military\" respectively to avoid offending the ruling Manchus. Tiles with blank ends, like those found in Western \"double-six\" dominoes, once existed during the 17th century. These games employed two sets of \"double-six\" tiles. It is possible that these were the types of dominoes that made it to Europe the following century. However, the 32-piece Chinese domino set, made to represent each possible face of two thrown dice and thus have no blank faces, differs from the 28-piece domino set found in the West during the mid 18th century. Chinese dominoes with blank faces were known during the 17th century.\nEach domino originally represented one of the 21 results of throwing two six-sided dice (2d6). One half of each domino is set with the pips from one die and the other half contains the pips from the second die. Chinese sets also introduce duplicates of some throws and divide the tiles into two suits: military and civil. Chinese dominoes are also longer than typical European ones.\nTraditional Chinese domino games include \"Tien Gow, Pai Gow, Che Deng\", and others.\nDeck composition and ranking.\nEach tile pattern in the Chinese domino set is equivalent to a single outcome when two six-sided dice are thrown. Each combination is only used once, so there are 21 unique possible patterns. Eleven of these 21 unique patterns are repeated to make a total of 32 tiles in a Chinese dominoes set. The 32-tile set is divided into two \"suits\" or groups called \"military\" and \"civil\". There are no markings on the tiles to distinguish these suits; a player must simply remember which tiles belong to which group. There are two each of the eleven civil suit tiles (6-6, 1-1, 4-4, 1-3, 5-5, 3-3, 2-2, 5-6, 4-6, 1-6, 1-5) and one each of the ten military suit tiles (3-6, 4-5; 2-6, 3-5; 2-5, 3-4; 2-4; 1-4, 2-3; 1-2).\nCivil suit.\nEach civil tile also has a Chinese name (and common rough translation to English):\nThe civil tiles are ranked according to the Chinese cultural significance of the tile names, and must be memorized. The hendiatris of () dates back for over two thousand years while the harmony () of the three have been in dice and domino games since at least the Ming dynasty. Remembering the suits and rankings of the tiles is easier if one understands the Chinese names of the tiles and the symbolism behind them.\nMilitary suit.\nThe military tiles are named and ranked according to the total pips or points on the tiles. For example, the \"nines\" (3-6 and 4-5) rank higher than the \"eights\" (2-6 and 3-5). The rankings of the individual tiles are similar in most games. However, the ranking of combinations of tiles is slightly different in Pai Gow and Tien Gow.\nSince there is only one of each military tile, these are usually grouped in four mixed \"pairs\" of equivalent total points: nines, eights, sevens, and fives; for example, the 3-6 and 4-5 tiles \"match\" because they have same total points (nine) and both are in the military suit. Among the military tiles, individual tiles of the same pair rank equally, such as 1-4 and 2-3, each totaling five.\nThe 2-4 (six) and 1-2 (three) military tiles also are paired together in many games despite the nominal difference in total points. They are the only tiles in the entire set that have no corresponding tile in the military suit, considering sums. In Pai Gow both of these tiles may be scored as three or six, depending on which is more advantageous. This pair when played together is considered a suit on its own, called the \"gi jun\" ( supreme). It is the highest ranking pair in the game of Pai Gow, though the tiles rank low individually (in their normal order). When either tile of this pair is played individually in the game of Tien Gow, each takes its regular ranking according to the total points among the other military suit tiles.\nPhysical characteristics.\nStewart Culin stated that traditional dominoes are made of Chinese ebony with measurements of long, wide, and thick.\nValues are marked with white and red pips. Using the same coloring scheme as traditional Chinese dice, every half-domino with 1 or 4 pips has those pips colored red; for example, the 4-5 domino has four red pips and five white pips. The only exception is the pair of 6-6 tiles. Half of the pips on the 6-6 domino are colored red to make them stand out as the top ranking tiles.\nTypically, one of the short edges is marked with a single red pip, and the backs may be marked with three pips, arrayed diagonally white-red-white.\nVariants.\nThere are also sets with where the tiles have Xiangqi characters next to the pips. As Xiangqi also has 32 pieces, these dual use sets can be used to play Giog.\nVariant sets include the Digging Flowers () game, which use the same 21 patterns generated by the 2d6 combination; some tiles have flowers or frames printed on them while others have their values duplicated. In addition, a Digging Flowers set may include several bonus tiles from mahjong, including flower, season, and blank tiles.\nDominoes from Korea also come in a set of 32 and bear markings schematically identical to Chinese dominoes, based on the throw of two dice, although the tiles are closer in size and shape to those used in mahjong, measuring , and the pip size may vary, especially for the 1- and 4-pip halves. The pairings for the \"military\" suit also differ: 1-2 and 4-5; 1-4 and 2-3, 2-4 and 3-4, 2-5 and 3-5, and 2-6 and 3-6.\nChinese Dominoes may also appear in a card format (). () have the 21 patterns (from the 2d6 combinations) quadruplicated to form an 84-card deck. Si Chuan Cards () may have the 21 patterns plus two additional cards (the \"listen - use\" and the \"god of wealth\") duplicated up to 5 times to form a 115-card deck.\nBone tiles game.\nThe eponymous game of Bone Tiles (\"g\u01d4p\u00e1i\" in Mandarin) is played in northern and central China and as far south as Hunan. The name suggests that it is or became the default game played with dominoes in those regions. It is a trick-taking game similar to Tien Gow but has been simplified. In single-tile tricks, the civil and military suits have been merged into a single suit. In double-tile tricks, there is a new ranking order similar to Pai Gow. Triple-tile and quadruple-tile tricks are not allowed as in older versions of Tien Gow. Scoring has been simplified to number of stacks won."}
{"id": "5816", "revid": "1273003943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5816", "title": "Cenozoic", "text": "The Cenozoic Era ( ; ) is Earth's current geological era, representing the last 66million years of Earth's history. It is characterized by the dominance of mammals, insects, birds and angiosperms (flowering plants). It is the latest of three geological eras of the Phanerozoic Eon, preceded by the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. The Cenozoic started with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, when many species, including the non-avian dinosaurs, became extinct in an event attributed by most experts to the impact of a large asteroid or other celestial body, the Chicxulub impactor.\nThe Cenozoic is also known as the Age of Mammals because the terrestrial animals that dominated both hemispheres were mammalsthe eutherians (placentals) in the Northern Hemisphere and the metatherians (marsupials, now mainly restricted to Australia and to some extent South America) in the Southern Hemisphere. The extinction of many groups allowed mammals and birds to greatly diversify so that large mammals and birds dominated life on Earth. The continents also moved into their current positions during this era.\nThe climate during the early Cenozoic was warmer than today, particularly during the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum. However, the Eocene to Oligocene transition and the Quaternary glaciation dried and cooled Earth.\nNomenclature.\n\"Cenozoic\" derives from the Greek words ( 'new') and ( 'life'). The name was proposed in 1840 by the British geologist John Phillips (1800\u20131874), who originally spelled it \"Kainozoic\". The era is also known as the \"C\u00e6nozoic\", \"Caenozoic\", or \"Cainozoic\" ().\nIn name, the Cenozoic () is comparable to the preceding Mesozoic ('middle life') and Paleozoic ('old life') Eras, as well as to the Proterozoic ('earlier life') Eon.\nDivisions.\nThe Cenozoic is divided into three periods: the Paleogene, Neogene, and Quaternary; and seven epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene. The Quaternary Period was officially recognised by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in June 2009. In 2004, the Tertiary Period was officially replaced by the Paleogene and Neogene Periods. The common use of epochs during the Cenozoic helps palaeontologists better organise and group the many significant events that occurred during this comparatively short interval of time. Knowledge of this era is more detailed than any other era because of the relatively young, well-preserved rocks associated with it.\nPaleogene.\nThe Paleogene spans from the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, 66 million years ago, to the dawn of the Neogene, 23.03\u00a0million years ago. It features three epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene and Oligocene. \nThe Paleocene Epoch lasted from 66 million to 56\u00a0million years ago. Modern placental mammals originated during this time. The devastation of the K\u2013Pg extinction event included the extinction of large herbivores, which permitted the spread of dense but usually species-poor forests. The Early Paleocene saw the recovery of Earth. The continents began to take their modern shape, but all the continents and the subcontinent of India were separated from each other. Afro-Eurasia was separated by the Tethys Sea, and the Americas were separated by the strait of Panama, as the isthmus had not yet formed. This epoch featured a general warming trend, with jungles eventually reaching the poles. The oceans were dominated by sharks as the large reptiles that had once predominated were extinct. Archaic mammals filled the world such as creodonts (extinct carnivores, unrelated to existing Carnivora).\nThe Eocene Epoch ranged from 56 million years to 33.9\u00a0million years ago. In the Early-Eocene, species living in dense forest were unable to evolve into larger forms, as in the Paleocene. Among them were early primates, whales and horses along with many other early forms of mammals. At the top of the food chains were huge birds, such as Paracrax. Carbon dioxide levels were approximately 1,400 ppm. The temperature was 30 degrees Celsius with little temperature gradient from pole to pole. In the Mid-Eocene, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current between Australia and Antarctica formed. This disrupted ocean currents worldwide and as a result caused a global cooling effect, shrinking the jungles. This allowed mammals to grow to mammoth proportions, such as whales which, by that time, had become almost fully aquatic. Mammals like \"Andrewsarchus\" were at the top of the food-chain. The Late Eocene saw the rebirth of seasons, which caused the expansion of savanna-like areas, along with the evolution of grasses. The end of the Eocene was marked by the Eocene\u2013Oligocene extinction event, the European face of which is known as the Grande Coupure.\nThe Oligocene Epoch spans from 33.9\u00a0million to 23.03\u00a0million years ago. The Oligocene featured the expansion of grasslands which had led to many new species to evolve, including the first elephants, cats, dogs, marsupials and many other species still prevalent today. Many other species of plants evolved in this period too. A cooling period featuring seasonal rains was still in effect. Mammals still continued to grow larger and larger.\nNeogene.\nThe Neogene spans from 23.03\u00a0million to 2.58\u00a0million years ago. It features two epochs: the Miocene, and the Pliocene.\nThe Miocene Epoch spans from 23.03 to 5.333\u00a0million years ago and is a period in which grasses spread further, dominating a large portion of the world, at the expense of forests. Kelp forests evolved, encouraging the evolution of new species, such as sea otters. During this time, Perissodactyla thrived, and evolved into many different varieties. Apes evolved into 30 species. The Tethys Sea finally closed with the creation of the Arabian Peninsula, leaving only remnants as the Black, Red, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas. This increased aridity. Many new plants evolved: 95% of modern seed plants families were present by the end of the Miocene.\nThe Pliocene Epoch lasted from 5.333 to 2.58\u00a0million years ago. The Pliocene featured dramatic climatic changes, which ultimately led to modern species of flora and fauna. The Mediterranean Sea dried up for several million years (because the ice ages reduced sea levels, disconnecting the Atlantic from the Mediterranean, and evaporation rates exceeded inflow from rivers). \"Australopithecus\" evolved in Africa, beginning the human branch. The Isthmus of Panama formed, and animals migrated between North and South America during the great American interchange, wreaking havoc on local ecologies. Climatic changes brought: savannas that are still continuing to spread across the world; Indian monsoons; deserts in central Asia; and the beginnings of the Sahara desert. The world map has not changed much since, save for changes brought about by the glaciations of the Quaternary, such as the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Baltic Sea.\nQuaternary.\nThe Quaternary spans from 2.58\u00a0million years ago to present day, and is the shortest geological period in the Phanerozoic Eon. It features modern animals, and dramatic changes in the climate. It is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene and the Holocene.\nThe Pleistocene lasted from 2.58\u00a0million to 11,700 years ago. This epoch was marked by ice ages as a result of the cooling trend that started in the Mid-Eocene. There were at least four separate glaciation periods marked by the advance of ice caps as far south as 40\u00b0 N in mountainous areas. Meanwhile, Africa experienced a trend of desiccation which resulted in the creation of the Sahara, Namib, and Kalahari deserts. Many animals evolved including mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, sabre-toothed cats, and \"Homo sapiens\". 100,000 years ago marked the end of one of the worst droughts in Africa, and led to the expansion of primitive humans. As the Pleistocene drew to a close, a major extinction wiped out much of the world's megafauna, including some of the hominid species, such as Neanderthals. All the continents were affected, but Africa to a lesser extent. It still retains many large animals, such as hippos.\nThe Holocene began 11,700 years ago and lasts to the present day. All recorded history and \"the Human history\" lies within the boundaries of the Holocene Epoch. Human activity is blamed for a mass extinction that began roughly 10,000 years ago, though the species becoming extinct have only been recorded since the Industrial Revolution. This is sometimes referred to as the \"Sixth Extinction\". It is often cited that over 322 recorded species have become extinct due to human activity since the Industrial Revolution, but the rate may be as high as 500 vertebrate species alone, the majority of which have occurred after 1900.\nTectonics.\nGeologically, the Cenozoic is the era when the continents moved into their current positions. Australia-New Guinea, having split from Pangea during the early Cretaceous, drifted north and, eventually, collided with Southeast Asia; Antarctica moved into its current position over the South Pole; the Atlantic Ocean widened and, later in the era (2.8\u00a0million years ago), South America became attached to North America with the isthmus of Panama.\nIndia collided with Asia creating the Himalayas; Arabia collided with Eurasia, closing the Tethys Ocean and creating the Zagros Mountains, around .\nThe break-up of Gondwana in Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic times led to a shift in the river courses of various large African rivers including the Congo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Limpopo and Zambezi.\nClimate.\nIn the Cretaceous, the climate was hot and humid with lush forests at the poles, there was no permanent ice and sea levels were around 300 metres higher than today. This continued for the first 10\u00a0million years of the Paleocene, culminating in the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum about . Around , Earth entered a period of long term cooling. This was mainly due to the collision of India with Eurasia, which caused the rise of the Himalayas: the upraised rocks eroded and reacted with in the air, causing a long-term reduction in the proportion of this greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. Around , permanent ice began to build up on Antarctica. The cooling trend continued in the Miocene, with relatively short warmer periods. When South America became attached to North America creating the Isthmus of Panama around , the Arctic region cooled due to the strengthening of the Humboldt and Gulf Stream currents, eventually leading to the glaciations of the Quaternary ice age, the current interglacial of which is the Holocene Epoch.\nRecent analysis of the geomagnetic reversal frequency, oxygen isotope record, and tectonic plate subduction rate, which are indicators of the changes in the heat flux at the core mantle boundary, climate and plate tectonic activity, shows that all these changes indicate similar rhythms on million years' timescale in the Cenozoic Era occurring with the common fundamental periodicity of ~13 Myr during most of the time. The levels of carbonate ions in the ocean fell over the course of the Cenozoic.\nLife.\nEarly in the Cenozoic, following the K-Pg event, the planet was dominated by relatively small fauna, including small mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. From a geological perspective, it did not take long for mammals to greatly diversify in the absence of the dinosaurs that had dominated during the Mesozoic. Birds also diversified rapidly; some flightless birds grew larger than humans. These species are sometimes referred to as \"terror birds\", and were formidable predators. Mammals came to occupy almost every available niche (both marine and terrestrial), and some also grew very large, attaining sizes not seen in most of today's terrestrial mammals. The ranges of many Cenozoic bird clades were governed by latitude and temperature and have contracted over the course of this era as the world cooled.\nDuring the Cenozoic, mammals proliferated from a few small, simple, generalised forms into a diverse collection of terrestrial, marine, and flying animals, giving this period its other name, the Age of Mammals. The Cenozoic is just as much the age of savannas, the age of co-dependent flowering plants and insects, and the age of birds. Grasses also played a very important role in this era, shaping the evolution of the birds and mammals that fed on them. One group that diversified significantly in the Cenozoic as well were the snakes. Evolving in the Cenozoic, the variety of snakes increased tremendously, resulting in many colubrids, following the evolution of their current primary prey source, the rodents.\nIn the earlier part of the Cenozoic, the world was dominated by the gastornithid birds, terrestrial crocodylians like \"Pristichampsus\", large sharks such as Otodus, and a handful of primitive large mammal groups like uintatheres, mesonychians, and pantodonts. But as the forests began to recede and the climate began to cool, other mammals took over.\nThe Cenozoic is full of mammals both strange and familiar, including chalicotheres, creodonts, whales, primates, entelodonts, sabre-toothed cats, mastodons and mammoths, three-toed horses, giant rhinoceros like \"Paraceratherium\", the rhinoceros-like brontotheres, various bizarre groups of mammals from South America, such as the vaguely elephant-like pyrotheres and the dog-like marsupial relatives called borhyaenids and the monotremes and marsupials of Australia. Mammal evolution in the Cenozoic was predominantly shaped by climatic and geological processes.\nCenozoic calcareous nannoplankton experienced rapid rates of speciation and reduced species longevity, while suffering prolonged declines in diversity during the Eocene and Neogene. Diatoms, in contrast, experienced major diversification over the Eocene, especially at high latitudes, as the world's oceans cooled. Diatom diversification was particularly concentrated at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. A second major pulse of diatom diversification occurred over the course of the Middle and Late Miocene."}
{"id": "5820", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5820", "title": "Confucianism", "text": "Confucianism, also known as Ruism or Ru classicism, is a system of thought and behavior originating in ancient China, and is variously described as a tradition, philosophy (humanistic or rationalistic), religion, theory of government, or way of life. Confucianism developed from teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551\u2013479\u00a0BC), during a time that was later referred to as the Hundred Schools of Thought era. Confucius considered himself a transmitter of cultural values inherited from the Xia (c.\u00a02070\u20131600\u00a0BC), Shang (c.\u00a01600\u20131046\u00a0BC), and Western Zhou (c.\u20091046\u2013771\u00a0BC) dynasties. Confucianism was suppressed during the Legalist and autocratic Qin dynasty (221\u2013206\u00a0BC), but survived. During the Han dynasty (206\u00a0BC \u2013 220\u00a0AD), Confucian approaches edged out the \"proto-Taoist\" Huang\u2013Lao as the official ideology, while the emperors mixed both with the realist techniques of Legalism.\nConfucianism regards principles contained in the Five Classics, the key tenets that should be followed to promote the harmony of the family and the society as a whole. A Confucian revival began during the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907\u00a0AD). In the late Tang, Confucianism further developed in response to the increasing influence of Buddhism and Taoism and was reformulated as Neo-Confucianism. This reinvigorated form was adopted as the basis of the imperial exams and the core philosophy of the scholar-official class in the Song dynasty (960\u20131297). The abolition of the examination system in 1905 marked the end of official Confucianism. The intellectuals of the New Culture Movement of the early twentieth century blamed Confucianism for China's weaknesses. They searched for new doctrines to replace Confucian teachings; some of these new ideologies include the \"Three Principles of the People\" with the establishment of the Republic of China, and then Maoism under the People's Republic of China. In the late twentieth century, the Confucian work ethic has been credited with the rise of the East Asian economy.\nWith particular emphasis on the importance of the family and social harmony, rather than on an otherworldly source of spiritual values, the core of Confucianism is humanistic. According to American philosopher Herbert Fingarette's conceptualisation of Confucianism as a philosophical system which regards \"the secular as sacred\", Confucianism transcends the dichotomy between religion and humanism, considering the ordinary activities of human life\u2014and especially human relationships\u2014as a manifestation of the sacred, because they are the expression of humanity's moral nature (), which has a transcendent anchorage in \"tian\" (). While the Confucian concept of \"tian\" shares some similarities with the concept of a deity, it is primarily an impersonal absolute principle like the \"tao\" or the \"Brahman\". Most scholars and practitioners do not think of \"tian\" as a god, and the deities that many Confucians worship do not originate from orthodox Confucianism. Confucianism focuses on the practical order that is given by a this-worldly awareness of \"tian\".\nThe worldly concern of Confucianism rests upon the belief that human beings are fundamentally good, and teachable, improvable, and perfectible through personal and communal endeavor, especially self-cultivation and self-creation. Confucian thought focuses on the cultivation of virtue in a morally organised world. Some of the basic Confucian ethical concepts and practices include \"ren\", \"yi\", \"li\", and \"zhi\". \"Ren\" is the essence of the human being which manifests as compassion. It is the virtue-form of Heaven. \"Yi\" is the upholding of righteousness and the moral disposition to do good. \"Li\" is a system of ritual norms and propriety that determines how a person should properly act in everyday life in harmony with the law of Heaven. \"Zhi\" () is the ability to see what is right and fair, or the converse, in the behaviors exhibited by others. Confucianism holds one in contempt, either passively or actively, for failure to uphold the cardinal moral values of \"ren\" and \"yi\".\nTraditionally, cultures and countries in the Chinese cultural sphere are strongly influenced by Confucianism, including China, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, as well as various territories settled predominantly by Han Chinese people, such as Singapore. Today, it has been credited for shaping East Asian societies and overseas Chinese communities, and to some extent, other parts of Asia. Most Confucianist movements have had significant differences from the original Zhou-era teachings, and are typically much more complex because of their reliance on \"elaborate doctrine\" and other factors such as traditions with long histories. In the past few decades, there have been talks of a \"Confucian Revival\" in the academic and the scholarly community, and there has been a grassroots proliferation of various types of Confucian churches. In late 2015, many Confucian personalities formally established a national Confucian Church () in China to unify the many Confucian congregations and civil society organisations.\nTerminology.\nStrictly speaking, there is no term in Chinese which directly corresponds to \"Confucianism\". The closest catch-all term for things related to Confucianism is the word \"ru\" (). Its literal meanings in modern Chinese include 'scholar', 'learned', or 'refined man'. In Old Chinese the word had a distinct set of meanings, including 'to tame', 'to mould', 'to educate', and 'to refine'. Several different terms, some of which with modern origin, are used in different situations to express different facets of Confucianism, including:\nThree of them use \"ru\". These names do not use the name \"Confucius\" at all, but instead focus on the ideal of the Confucian man. The use of the term \"Confucianism\" has been avoided by some modern scholars, who favor \"Ruism\" and \"Ruists\" instead. Robert Eno argues that the term has been \"burdened... with the ambiguities and irrelevant traditional associations\". Ruism, as he states, is more faithful to the original Chinese name for the school.\nThe term \"Traditionalist\" has been suggested by David Schaberg to emphasize the connection to the past, its standards, and inherited forms, in which Confucius himself placed so much importance. This translation of the word \"ru\" is followed by e.g. Yuri Pines.\nAccording to Zhou Youguang, \"ru\" originally referred to shamanic methods of holding rites and existed before Confucius's times, but with Confucius it came to mean devotion to propagating such teachings to bring civilisation to the people. Confucianism was initiated by the disciples of Confucius, developed by Mencius ( 372\u2013289\u00a0BC) and inherited by later generations, undergoing constant transformations and restructuring since its establishment, but preserving the principles of humaneness and righteousness at its core.\nIn the Western world, the character for water is often used as a symbol for Confucianism, which is not the case in modern China. However, the \"five phases\" were used as important symbols representing leadership in Han dynasty thought, including Confucianist works.\nFive Classics and the Confucian vision.\nTraditionally, Confucius was thought to be the author or editor of the Five Classics which were the basic texts of Confucianism, all edited into their received versions around 500 years later by Imperial Librarian Liu Xin. The scholar Yao Xinzhong allows that there are good reasons to believe that Confucian classics took shape in the hands of Confucius, but that \"nothing can be taken for granted in the matter of the early versions of the classics\". The sixth classic similar to the Classic of Poetry was the Classic of Music. It was lost during the Han Dynasty. Music carried an invaluable tool to induce focus in performing rituals. These were the internal (music) and external (rites) keys to harmonizing society. Yao suggests that most modern scholars hold the \"pragmatic\" view that Confucius and his followers did not intend to create a system of classics, but nonetheless \"contributed to their formation\".\nThe scholar Tu Weiming explains these classics as embodying \"five visions\" which underlie the development of Confucianism:\nDoctrines.\nTheory and theology.\nConfucianism revolves around the pursuit of the unity of the individual self and \"tian\" (\"heaven\"). To put it another way, it focuses on the relationship between humanity and heaven. The principle or way of Heaven (\"tian li\" or \"tian tao\") is the order of the world and the source of divine authority. \"Tian li\" or \"tian tao\" is monistic, meaning that it is singular and indivisible. Individuals may realise their humanity and become one with Heaven through the contemplation of such order. This transformation of the self may be extended to the family and society to create a harmonious community. Jo\u00ebl Thoraval studied Confucianism as a diffused civil religion in contemporary China, finding that it expresses itself in the widespread worship of five cosmological entities: Heaven and Earth (), the sovereign or the government (), ancestors (), and masters ().\nAccording to the scholar Stephan Feuchtwang, in Chinese cosmology, which is not merely Confucian but shared by many Chinese religions, \"the universe creates itself out of a primary chaos of material energy\" (\"hundun\" and \"qi\"), and is organized through the polarity of yin and yang that characterises any thing and life. Creation is therefore a continuous ordering; it is not creation 'ex nihilo\".\" \"Yin and yang are the invisible and visible, the receptive and the active, the unshaped and the shaped; they characterise the yearly cycle (winter and summer), the landscape (shady and bright), the sexes (female and male), and even sociopolitical history (disorder and order). Confucianism is concerned with finding \"middle ways\" between yin and yang at every new configuration of the world.\"'\nConfucianism conciliates both the inner and outer polarities of spiritual cultivation\u2014that is to say self-cultivation and world redemption\u2014synthesised in the ideal of \"sageliness within and kingliness without\". \"Ren\", translated as \"humaneness\" or the essence proper of a human being, is the character of compassionate mind; it is the virtue endowed by Heaven and at the same time the means by which man may achieve oneness with Heaven comprehending his own origin in Heaven and therefore divine essence. In the \"\", it is defined as \"to form one body with all things\" and \"when the self and others are not separated... compassion is aroused\".\n\"Lord Heaven\" and \"Jade Emperor\" were terms for a Confucianist supreme deity who was an anthropromorphized \"tian\", and some conceptions of it thought of the two names as synonymous.\n\"Tian\" and the gods.\n\"Tian\", a key concept in Chinese thought, refers to the God of Heaven, the northern culmen of the skies and its spinning stars, earthly nature and its laws which come from Heaven, to 'Heaven and Earth' (that is, \"all things\"), and to the awe-inspiring forces beyond human control. There are so many uses in Chinese thought that it is impossible to give a single English translation.\nConfucius used the term in a mystical way. He wrote in the \"Analects\" (7.23) that \"tian\" gave him life, and that \"tian\" watched and judged (6.28; 9.12). In 9.5 Confucius says that a person may know the movements of \"tian\", and this provides with the sense of having a special place in the universe. In 17.19 Confucius says that \"tian\" spoke to him, though not in words. The scholar Ronnie Littlejohn warns that \"tian\" was not to be interpreted as a personal God comparable to that of the Abrahamic faiths, in the sense of an otherworldly or transcendent creator. Rather it is similar to what Taoists meant by \"Dao\": \"the way things are\" or \"the regularities of the world\", which Stephan Feuchtwang equates with the ancient Greek concept of \"physis\", \"nature\" as the generation and regenerations of things and of the moral order. \"Tian\" may also be compared to the \"Brahman\" of Hindu and Vedic traditions. The scholar Promise Hsu, in the wake of Robert B. Louden, explained 17:19 (\"What does \"Tian\" ever say? Yet there are four seasons going round and there are the hundred things coming into being. What does \"Tian\" say?\") as implying that even though \"Tian\" is not a \"speaking person\", it constantly \"does\" through the rhythms of nature, and communicates \"how human beings ought to live and act\", at least to those who have learnt to carefully listen to it.\nDuanmu Ci, a disciple of Confucius, said that \"Tian\" had set the master on the path to become a wise man (9.6). In 7.23 Confucius says that he has no doubt left that \"Tian\" gave him life, and from it he had developed right virtue (\"de\"). In 8.19, he says that the lives of the sages are interwoven with \"Tian\".\nRegarding personal gods (\"shen\", energies who emanate from and reproduce \"Tian\") enliving nature, in the \"Analects\" Confucius says that it is appropriate (\"yi\") for people to worship () them, although only through proper rites (\"li\"), implying respect of positions and discretion. Confucius himself was a ritual and sacrificial master.\nAnswering to a disciple who asked whether it is better to sacrifice to the god of the stove or to the god of the family (a popular saying), in 3.13 Confucius says that in order to appropriately pray to gods, one should first know and respect Heaven. In 3.12, he explains that religious rituals produce meaningful experiences, and one has to offer sacrifices in person, acting in presence, otherwise \"it is the same as not having sacrificed at all\". Rites and sacrifices to the gods have an ethical importance: they generate good life, because taking part in them leads to the overcoming of the self. Analects 10.11 tells that Confucius always took a small part of his food and placed it on the sacrificial bowls as an offering to his ancestors.\nSome Confucian movements worship Confucius, although not as a supreme being or anything else approaching the power of \"tian\" or the \"tao\", and/or gods from Chinese folk religion. These movements are not a part of mainstream Confucianism, although the boundary between Chinese folk religion and Confucianism can be blurred.\nOther movements, such as Mohism which was later absorbed by Taoism, developed a more theistic idea of Heaven. Feuchtwang explains that the difference between Confucianism and Taoism primarily lies in the fact that the former focuses on the realisation of the starry order of Heaven in human society, while the latter on the contemplation of the Dao which spontaneously arises in nature. However, Confucianism does venerate many aspects of nature and also respects various \"tao\", as well as what Confucius saw as the main \"tao\", the \"[Way] of Heaven.\"\nThe Way of Heaven involves \"lifelong and sincere devotion to traditional cultural forms\" and \"wu wei\", \"a state of spontaneous harmony between individual inclinations and the sacred Way\".\nKelly James Clark argued that Confucius himself saw \"Tian\" as an anthropomorphic god that Clark hypothetically refers to as \"Heavenly Supreme Emperor\", although most other scholars on Confucianism disagree with this view.\nSocial morality and ethics.\nAs explained by Stephan Feuchtwang, the order coming from Heaven preserves the world, and has to be followed by humanity finding a \"middle way\" between yin and yang forces in each new configuration of reality. Social harmony or morality is identified as patriarchy, which is expressed in the worship of ancestors and deified progenitors in the male line, at ancestral shrines.\nConfucian ethical codes are described as humanistic. They may be practiced by all the members of a society. Confucian ethics is characterised by the promotion of virtues, encompassed by the Five Constants, elaborated by Confucian scholars out of the inherited tradition during the Han dynasty. The Five Constants are:\nThese are accompanied by the classical four virtues (), one of which (\"Yi\") is also included among the Five Constants:\nThere are many other traditionally Confucian values, such as , , , , a , , , , , and ).\nRen.\n\"Ren (\u4ec1 )\" is the Confucian virtue denoting the good feeling a virtuous human experiences when being altruistic. Internally \"ren\" can mean \"to look up\" meaning \"to aspire to higher Heavenly principles or ideals\", It is exemplified by a normal adult's protective feelings for children. It is considered the essence of the human being, endowed by Heaven, and at the same time the means by which someone may act according to the principle of Heaven and become one with it.\nYan Hui, Confucius's most outstanding student, once asked his master to describe the rules of \"ren\" and Confucius replied, \"one should see nothing improper, hear nothing improper, say nothing improper, do nothing improper.\" Confucius also defined \"ren\" in the following way: \"wishing to be established himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.\"\nAnother meaning of \"ren\" is \"not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself.\" Confucius also said, \"\"ren\" is not far off; he who seeks it has already found it.\" \"Ren\" is close to man and never leaves him.\nRite and centring.\n\"Li\" () is a word which finds its most extensive use in Confucian and post-Confucian Chinese philosophy. \"Li\" is variously translated as 'rite' or 'reason', 'ratio' in the pure sense of Vedic ('right', 'order') when referring to the cosmic law, but when referring to its realisation in the context of human social behaviour it has also been translated as 'customs', 'measures' and 'rules', among other terms. \"Li\" also means religious rites which establish relations between humanity and the gods.\nAccording to Stephan Feuchtwang, rites are conceived as \"what makes the invisible visible\", making possible for humans to cultivate the underlying order of nature. Correctly performed rituals move society in alignment with earthly and heavenly (astral) forces, establishing the harmony of the three realms\u2014Heaven, Earth and humanity. This practice is defined as \"centering\" ( or ). Among all things of creation, humans themselves are \"central\" because they have the ability to cultivate and centre natural forces.\n\"Li\" embodies the entire web of interaction between humanity, human objects, and nature. Confucius includes in his discussions of \"li\" such diverse topics as learning, tea drinking, titles, mourning, and governance. Xunzi cites \"songs and laughter, weeping and lamentation... rice and millet, fish and meat... the wearing of ceremonial caps, embroidered robes, and patterned silks, or of fasting clothes and mourning clothes... spacious rooms and secluded halls, soft mats, couches and benches\" as vital parts of the fabric of \"li\".\nConfucius envisioned proper government being guided by the principles of \"li\". Some Confucians proposed that all human beings may pursue perfection by learning and practising \"li\". Overall, Confucians believe that governments should place more emphasis on \"li\" and rely much less on penal punishment when they govern.\nLoyalty.\nLoyalty () is particularly relevant for the social class to which most of Confucius's students belonged, because the most important way for an ambitious young scholar to become a prominent official was to enter a ruler's civil service.\nConfucius himself did not propose that \"might makes right\", but rather that a superior should be obeyed because of his moral rectitude. In addition, loyalty does not mean subservience to authority. This is because reciprocity is demanded from the superior as well. As Confucius stated \"a prince should employ his minister according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness (loyalty).\"\nSimilarly, Mencius also said that \"when the prince regards his ministers as his hands and feet, his ministers regard their prince as their belly and heart; when he regards them as his dogs and horses, they regard him as another man; when he regards them as the ground or as grass, they regard him as a robber and an enemy.\" Moreover, Mencius indicated that if the ruler is incompetent, he should be replaced. If the ruler is evil, then the people have the right to overthrow him. A good Confucian is also expected to remonstrate with his superiors when necessary. At the same time, a proper Confucian ruler should also accept his ministers' advice, as this will help him govern the realm better.\nIn later ages, however, emphasis was often placed more on the obligations of the ruled to the ruler, and less on the ruler's obligations to the ruled. Like filial piety, loyalty was often subverted by the autocratic regimes in China. Nonetheless, throughout the ages, many Confucians continued to fight against unrighteous superiors and rulers. Many of these Confucians suffered and sometimes died because of their conviction and action. During the Ming-Qing era, prominent Confucians such as Wang Yangming promoted individuality and independent thinking as a counterweight to subservience to authority. The famous thinker Huang Zongxi also strongly criticised the autocratic nature of the imperial system and wanted to keep imperial power in check.\nMany Confucians also realised that loyalty and filial piety have the potential of coming into conflict with one another. This may be true especially in times of social chaos, such as during the period of the Ming-Qing transition.\nFilial piety.\nIn Confucian philosophy, is a virtue of respect for one's parents and ancestors, and of the hierarchies within society: father\u2013son, elder\u2013junior and male\u2013female. The Confucian classic \"Xiaojing\" (\"Book of Piety\"), thought to be written during the Qin or Han dynasties, has historically been the authoritative source on the Confucian tenet of \"xiao\". The book, a conversation between Confucius and his disciple Zeng Shen, is about how to set up a good society using the principle of \"xiao\".\nIn more general terms, filial piety means to be good to one's parents; to take care of one's parents; to engage in good conduct not just towards parents but also outside the home so as to bring a good name to one's parents and ancestors; to perform the duties of one's job well so as to obtain the material means to support parents as well as carry out sacrifices to the ancestors; not be rebellious; show love, respect and support; the wife in filial piety must obey her husband absolutely and take care of the whole family wholeheartedly. display courtesy; ensure male heirs, uphold fraternity among brothers; wisely advise one's parents, including dissuading them from moral unrighteousness, for blindly following the parents' wishes is not considered to be \"xiao\"; display sorrow for their sickness and death; and carry out sacrifices after their death.\nFilial piety is considered a key virtue in Chinese culture, and it is the main concern of a large number of stories. One of the most famous collections of such stories is \"The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars\". These stories depict how children exercised their filial piety in the past. While China has always had a diversity of religious beliefs, filial piety has been common to almost all of them; historian Hugh D.R. Baker calls respect for the family the only element common to almost all Chinese believers.\nRelationships.\nSocial harmony results in part from every individual knowing his or her place in the natural order, and playing his or her part well. Reciprocity or responsibility (\"renqing\") extends beyond filial piety and involves the entire network of social relations, even the respect for rulers. This is shown in the story where Duke Jing of Qi asks Confucius about government, by which he meant proper administration so as to bring social harmony:\nParticular duties arise from one's particular situation in relation to others. The individual stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people: as a junior in relation to parents and elders, and as a senior in relation to younger siblings, students, and others. While juniors are considered in Confucianism to owe their seniors reverence, seniors also have duties of benevolence and concern toward juniors. The same is true with the husband and wife relationship where the husband needs to show benevolence towards his wife and the wife needs to respect the husband in return. This theme of mutuality still exists in East Asian cultures even to this day.\nThe Five Bonds are: ruler to ruled, father to son, husband to wife, elder brother to younger brother, friend to friend. Specific duties were prescribed to each of the participants in these sets of relationships. Such duties are also extended to the dead, where the living stand as sons to their deceased family. The only relationship where respect for elders is not stressed was the friend to friend relationship, where mutual equal respect is emphasised instead. All these duties take the practical form of prescribed rituals, for instance wedding and death rituals.\n\"Junzi\".\nThe \"junzi\" ('lord's son') is a Chinese philosophical term often translated as \"gentleman\" or \"superior person\" and employed by Confucius in the \"Analects\" to describe the ideal man.\nIn Confucianism, the sage or wise is the ideal personality; however, it is very hard to become one of them. Confucius created the model of \"junzi\", gentleman, which may be achieved by any individual. Later, Zhu Xi defined \"junzi\" as second only to the sage. There are many characteristics of the \"junzi\": he may live in poverty, he does more and speaks less, he is loyal, obedient and knowledgeable. The \"junzi\" disciplines himself. \"Ren\" is fundamental to become a \"junzi\".\nAs the potential leader of a nation, a son of the ruler is raised to have a superior ethical and moral position while gaining inner peace through his virtue. To Confucius, the \"junzi\" sustained the functions of government and social stratification through his ethical values. Despite its literal meaning, any righteous man willing to improve himself may become a \"junzi\".\nIn contrast to the \"junzi\", the \"xiaoren\" (, \"small or petty person\") does not grasp the value of virtues and seeks only immediate gains. The petty person is egotistic and does not consider the consequences of his action in the overall scheme of things. Should the ruler be surrounded by \"xiaoren\" as opposed to \"junzi\", his governance and his people will suffer due to their small-mindness. Examples of such \"xiaoren\" individuals may range from those who continually indulge in sensual and emotional pleasures all day to the politician who is interested merely in power and fame; neither sincerely aims for the long-term benefit of others.\nThe \"junzi\" enforces his rule over his subjects by acting virtuously himself. It is thought that his pure virtue would lead others to follow his example. The ultimate goal is that the government behaves much like a family, the \"junzi\" being a beacon of filial piety.\nRectification of names.\nConfucius believed that social disorder often stemmed from failure to perceive, understand, and deal with reality. Fundamentally, then, social disorder may stem from the failure to call things by their proper names, and his solution to this was the . He gave an explanation of this concept to one of his disciples:\nZi-lu said, \"The vassal of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?\"\nThe Master replied, \"What is necessary to rectify names.\"\n\"So! indeed!\" said Zi-lu. \"You are wide off the mark! Why must there be such rectification?\"\nThe Master said, \"How uncultivated you are, Yu! The superior man [Junzi] cannot care about the everything, just as he cannot go to check all himself!\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties and music do not flourish.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When proprieties and music do not flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to move hand or foot.\nTherefore a superior man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man requires is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect.\"\n\"Xunzi\" chapter (22) \"On the Rectification of Names\" claims the ancient sage-kings chose names () that directly corresponded with actualities (), but later generations confused terminology, coined new nomenclature, and thus could no longer distinguish right from wrong. Since social harmony is of utmost importance, without the proper rectification of names, society would essentially crumble and \"undertakings [would] not [be] completed.\"\nHistory.\nMetaphysical antecedents.\nAccording to He Guanghu, Confucianism may be identified as a continuation of the Shang-Zhou (\u2013256 BC) official religion, or the Chinese aboriginal religion which has lasted uninterrupted for three thousand years. Both the dynasties worshipped a supreme \"godhead\", called \"Shangdi\" ('Highest Deity') or \"Di\" by the Shang and \"Tian\" ('Heaven') by the Zhou. \"Shangdi\" was conceived as the first ancestor of the Shang royal house, an alternate name for him being the \"Supreme Progenitor\" (). Shang theology viewed the multiplicity of gods of nature and ancestors as parts of \"Di\". \"Di\" manifests as the \"Wufang Shangdi\" with the winds () as its cosmic will. With the Zhou dynasty, which overthrew the Shang, the name for the supreme godhead became \"tian\". While the Shang identified \"Shangdi\" as their ancestor-god to assert their claim to power by divine right, the Zhou transformed this claim into a legitimacy based on moral power, the Mandate of Heaven. In Zhou theology, \"Tian\" had no singular earthly progeny, but bestowed divine favour on virtuous rulers. Zhou kings declared that their victory over the Shang was because they were virtuous and loved their people, while the Shang were tyrants and thus were deprived of power by \"Tian\".\nJohn C. Didier and David Pankenier relate the shapes of both the ancient Chinese characters for \"Di\" and \"Tian\" to the patterns of stars in the northern skies, either drawn, in Didier's theory by connecting the constellations bracketing the north celestial pole as a square, or in Pankenier's theory by connecting some of the stars which form the constellations of the Big Dipper and broader Ursa Major, and Ursa Minor (Little Dipper). Cultures in other parts of the world have also conceived these stars or constellations as symbols of the origin of things, the supreme godhead, divinity and royal power. The supreme godhead was also identified with the dragon, symbol of unlimited power (\"qi\"), of the protean primordial power which embodies both yin and yang in unity, associated to the constellation Draco which winds around the north ecliptic pole, and slithers between the Little and Big Dipper.\nZhou traditions wane.\nBy the 6th century BC, the power of \"Tian\" and the symbols that represented it on earth (architecture of cities, temples, altars and ritual vessels, and the Zhou system of rites) became \"diffuse\" and claimed by different potentates in the Zhou states to legitimise economic, political, and military ambitions. Communication with the divine no longer was an exclusive privilege of the Zhou royal house, but might be bought by anyone able to afford the elaborate ceremonies and the old and new rites required to access the authority of \"Tian\".\nBesides the waning Zhou ritual system, what may be defined as traditions, or traditions outside of the official system, developed as attempts to access the will of \"Tian\". As central political authority crumbled in the wake of the collapse of the Western Zhou, the population lost faith in the official tradition, which was no longer perceived as an effective way to communicate with Heaven. The traditions of the and of the \"Yijing\" flourished. Chinese thinkers, faced with this challenge to legitimacy, diverged in a \"Hundred Schools of Thought\", each positing its own philosophical lens for understanding the processes of the world.\nConfucius (551\u2013479 BC) appeared in this period of political reconfiguration and spiritual questioning. He was educated in Shang\u2013Zhou traditions, which he contributed to transmit and reformulate giving centrality to self-cultivation and agency of humans, and the educational power of the self-established individual in assisting others to establish themselves (the ). As the Zhou reign collapsed, traditional values were abandoned resulting in a period of perceived moral decline. Confucius saw an opportunity to reinforce values of compassion and tradition into society, with the intended goal of reconstructing what he believed to be a lost perfect moral order of high antiquity. Disillusioned with the culture, opposing scholars, and religious authorities of the time, he began to advance an ethical interpretation of traditional Zhou religion. In his view, the power of \"Tian\" is pervasive, and responds positively to the sincere heart driven by humaneness and rightness, decency and altruism. Confucius conceived these qualities as the foundation needed to restore socio-political harmony. Like many contemporaries, Confucius saw ritual practices as efficacious ways to access \"Tian\", but he thought that the crucial knot was the reverent inner state that participants enter prior to engaging in the ritual acts. Confucius is said to have amended and recodified the classical books inherited from the Xia-Shang-Zhou dynasties, and to have composed the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\".\nConfucianism rises.\nPhilosophers in the Warring States period, both focused on state-endorsed ritual and non-aligned to state ritual built upon Confucius's legacy, compiled in the \"Analects\", and formulated the classical metaphysics that became the lash of Confucianism. In accordance with Confucius, they identified mental tranquility as the state of \"Tian\", or , which in each individual is the Heaven-bestowed divine power to rule one's own life and the world. They also extended the theory, proposing the oneness of production and reabsorption into the cosmic source, and the possibility to understand and therefore reattain it through correct state of mind. This line of thought would have influenced all Chinese individual and collective-political mystical theories and practices thereafter.\nIn the Han dynasty, Confucians beginning with Dong Zhongshu synthesised Warring States Confucianism with ideas of yin and yang, and \"wuxing\", as well as folk superstition and the prior schools that led up to the School of Naturalists.\nIn the 460s, Confucianism competed with Chinese Buddhism and \"traditional Confucianism\" was \"a broad cosmology that was as much about personal ethics as about spiritual beliefs\" and had roots that went back to Confucianist philosophers from over a thousand years before.\nDecline.\nThe Confucian examination system was abolished in Korea in 1894, in China in 1905, and in Vietnam in 1919. This meant that conformity to Confucian ideology was no longer a prerequisite for a career in the civil service or politics, allowing persons of other ideologies (notably Nationalism and Socialism) to attain leading positions in society.\nOrganisation and liturgy.\nSince the 2000s, there has been a growing identification of the Chinese intellectual class with Confucianism. In 2003, the Confucian intellectual Kang Xiaoguang published a manifesto in which he made four suggestions: Confucian education should enter official education at any level, from elementary to high school; the state should establish Confucianism as the state religion by law; Confucian religion should enter the daily life of ordinary people through standardisation and development of doctrines, rituals, organisations, churches and activity sites; the Confucian religion should be spread through non-governmental organisations. Another modern proponent of the institutionalisation of Confucianism in a state church is Jiang Qing.\nIn 2005, the Center for the Study of Confucian Religion was established, and \"guoxue\" started to be implemented in public schools on all levels. Being well received by the population, even Confucian preachers have appeared on television since 2006. The most enthusiastic New Confucians proclaim the uniqueness and superiority of Confucian Chinese culture, and have generated some popular sentiment against Western cultural influences in China.\nThe idea of a \"Confucian church\" as the state religion of China has roots in the thought of Kang Youwei, an exponent of the early New Confucian search for a regeneration of the social relevance of Confucianism, at a time when it was de-institutionalised with the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the Chinese empire. Kang modeled his ideal \"Confucian Church\" after European national Christian churches, as a hierarchic and centralised institution, closely bound to the state, with local church branches, devoted to the worship and the spread of the teachings of Confucius.\nIn contemporary China, the Confucian revival has developed into various interwoven directions: the proliferation of Confucian schools or academies, the resurgence of Confucian rites, and the birth of new forms of Confucian activity on the popular level, such as the Confucian communities (). Some scholars also consider the reconstruction of lineage churches and their ancestral temples, as well as cults and temples of natural and national gods within broader Chinese traditional religion, as part of the renewal of Confucianism.\nOther forms of revival are salvationist folk religious movements groups with a specifically Confucian focus, or Confucian churches, for example the of Beijing, the of Shanghai, Confucian Shenism (also known as the \"phoenix churches\"), the Confucian Fellowship () in northern Fujian which has spread rapidly over the years after its foundation, and ancestral temples of the Kong kin (the lineage of the descendants of Confucius himself) operating as Confucian-teaching churches.\nAlso, the Hong Kong Confucian Academy, one of the direct heirs of Kang Youwei's Confucian Church, has expanded its activities to the mainland, with the construction of statues of Confucius, Confucian hospitals, restoration of temples and other activities. In 2009, Zhou Beichen founded another institution which inherits the idea of Kang Youwei's Confucian Church, the Holy Hall of Confucius () in Shenzhen, affiliated with the Federation of Confucian Culture of Qufu City. It was the first of a nationwide movement of congregations and civil organisations that was unified in 2015 in the Holy Confucian Church. The first spiritual leader of the church is the scholar Jiang Qing, the founder and manager of the Yangming Confucian Abode (), a Confucian academy in Guiyang, Guizhou.\nChinese folk religious temples and kinship ancestral shrines may, on peculiar occasions, choose Confucian liturgy (called or led by Confucian ritual masters () to worship the gods, instead of Taoist or popular ritual. \"Confucian businessmen\" (, also \"refined businessman\") is a recently \"rediscovered\" concept defining people of the economic-entrepreneurial elite who recognise their social responsibility and therefore apply Confucian culture to their business.\nConfucianists historically tried to proselytize to others, although this is rarely done in modern times. Given Confucianism's place of importance in historical Chinese governments, the argument has been made that Imperial China's wars were Confucianism's wars, but the connection between Confucianism and war is not so direct or simple. Modern Confucianism is the descendant of movements that greatly changed how they practiced the teachings of Confucius and his disciples from previous orthodox teachings.\nGovernance.\nA key Confucian concept is that in order to govern others one must first govern oneself according to the universal order. When actual, the king's personal virtue (\"de\") spreads beneficent influence throughout the kingdom. This idea is developed further in the Great Learning and is tightly linked with the Taoist concept of \"wu wei\": the less the king does, the more gets done. By being the \"calm center\" around which the kingdom turns, the king allows everything to function smoothly and avoids having to tamper with the individual parts of the whole.\nThis idea may be traced back to the ancient shamanic beliefs of the king being the axle between the sky, human beings, and the Earth. The emperors of China were considered agents of Heaven, endowed with the Mandate of Heaven, one of the most vital concepts in imperial-era political theory. Some Confucianists believed they held the power to define the hierarchy of divinities, by bestowing titles upon mountains, rivers and dead people, acknowledging them as powerful and therefore establishing their cults.\nConfucianism, despite supporting the importance of obeying national authority, places this obedience under absolute moral principles that curbed the willful exercise of power, rather than being unconditional. Submission to authority was only taken within the context of the moral obligations that rulers had toward their subjects, in particular \"ren\". Confucians\u2014including the most pro-authoritarian scholars such as Xunzi\u2014have always recognised the right of revolution against tyranny.\nMeritocracy.\nAlthough Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and Herrlee G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue. \"Junzi\" ('lord's son'), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius's work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English \"gentleman\".\nA virtuous commoner who cultivates his qualities may be a \"gentleman\", while a shameless son of the king is only a \"petty person\". That Confucius admitted students of different classes as disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures that defined pre-imperial Chinese society.\nAnother new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole family. The Chinese imperial examination system started in the Sui dynasty. Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing a set of written government examinations.\nConfucian political meritocracy is not merely a historical phenomenon. The practice of meritocracy still exists across China and East Asia today, and a wide range of contemporary intellectuals\u2014from Daniel Bell to Tongdong Bai, Joseph Chan, and Jiang Qing\u2014defend political meritocracy as a viable alternative to liberal democracy.\nIn \"Just Hierarchy\", Daniel Bell and Wang Pei argue that hierarchies are inevitable. Faced with ever-increasing complexity at scale, modern societies must build hierarchies to coordinate collective action and tackle long-term problems such as climate change. In this context, people need not\u2014and should not\u2014want to flatten hierarchies as much as possible. They ought to ask what makes political hierarchies just and use these criteria to decide the institutions that deserve preservation, those that require reform, and those that need radical transformation. They call this approach \"progressive conservatism\", a term that reflects the ambiguous place of the Confucian tradition within the Left-Right dichotomy.\nBell and Wang propose two justifications for political hierarchies that do not depend on a \"one person, one vote\" system. First is raw efficiency, which may require centralized rule in the hands of the competent few. Second, and most important, is serving the interests of the people (and the common good more broadly). In \"Against Political Equality\", Tongdong Bai complements this account by using a proto-Rawlsian \"political difference principle\". Just as Rawls claims that economic inequality is justified so long as it benefits those at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder, so Bai argues that political inequality is justified so long as it benefits those materially worse off.\nBell, Wang, and Bai all criticize liberal democracy to argue that government the people may not be government the people in any meaningful sense of the term. They argue that voters tend to act in irrational, tribal, short-termist ways; they are vulnerable to populism and struggle to account for the interests of future generations. In other words, at a minimum, democracy needs Confucian meritocratic checks.\nIn \"The China Model\", Bell argues that Confucian political meritocracy provides\u2014and has provided\u2014a blueprint for China's development. For Bell, the ideal according to which China should reform itself (and has reformed itself) follows a simple structure: Aspiring rulers first pass hyper-selective examinations, then have to rule well at the local level to be promoted to positions as the provincial level, then have to excel at the provincial level to access positions at the national level, and so on. This system aligns with what Harvard historian James Hankins calls \"virtue politics\", or the idea that institutions should be built to select the most competent and virtuous rulers\u2014as opposed to institutions concerned first and foremost with limiting the power of rulers.\nWhile contemporary defenders of Confucian political meritocracy all accept this broad frame, they disagree with each other on three main questions: institutional design, the means by which meritocrats are promoted, and the compatibility of Confucian political meritocracy with liberalism.\nInstitutional design.\nBell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. As Bell puts it, he defends \"democracy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top.\" Bell and Wang argue that this combination conserves the main advantages of democracy\u2014involving the people in public affairs at the local level, strengthening the legitimacy of the system, forcing some degree of direct accountability, etc.\u2014while preserving the broader meritocratic character of the regime.\nJiang Qing, by contrast, imagines a tricameral government with one chamber selected by the people (the ), one chamber composed of Confucian meritocrats selected via examination and gradual promotion (the ), and one body made up of descendants of Confucius himself (the ). Jiang's aim is to construct a legitimacy that will go beyond what he sees as the atomistic, individualist, and utilitarian ethos of modern democracies and ground authority in something sacred and traditional. While Jiang's model is closer to an ideal theory than Bell's proposals, it represents a more traditionalist alternative.\nTongdong Bai presents an in-between solution by proposing a two-tiered bicameral system. At the local level, as with Bell, Bai advocates Deweyan participatory democracy. At the national level, Bai proposes two chambers: one of meritocrats (selected by examination, by examination and promotion, from leaders in certain professional fields, etc.), and one of representatives elected by the people. While the lower house does not have any legislative power per se, it acts as a popular accountability mechanism by championing the people and putting pressure on the upper house. More generally, Bai argues that his model marries the best of meritocracy and democracy. Following Dewey's account of democracy as a way of life, he points to the participatory features of his local model: citizens still get to have a democratic lifestyle, participate in political affairs, and be educated as \"democratic men\". Similarly, the lower house allows citizens to be represented, have a voice in public affairs (albeit a weak one), and ensure accountability. Meanwhile, the meritocratic house preserves competence, statesmanship, and Confucian virtues.\nPromotion system.\nDefenders of Confucian political meritocracy generally champion a system in which rulers are selected on the basis of intellect, social skills, and virtue. Bell proposes a model wherein aspiring meritocrats take hyper-selective exams and prove themselves at the local levels of government before reaching the higher levels of government, where they hold more centralized power. In his account, the exams select for intellect and other virtues\u2014for instance, the ability to argue three different viewpoints on a contentious issue may indicate a certain degree of openness. Tongdong Bai's approach incorporates different ways to select members of the meritocratic house, from exams to performance in various fields\u2014business, science, administration, and so on. In every case, Confucian meritocrats draw on China's extensive history of meritocratic administration to outline the pros and cons of competing methods of selection.\nFor those who, like Bell, defend a model in which performance at the local levels of government determines future promotion, an important question is how the system judges who \"performs best\". In other words, while examinations may ensure that early-career officials are competent and educated, how is it thereafter ensured that \"only\" those who rule well get promoted? The literature opposes those who prefer evaluation by peers to evaluation by superiors, with some thinkers including quasi-democratic selection mechanisms along the way. Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. Because they believe that promotion should depend upon peer evaluations only, Bell and Wang argue against transparency\u2014i.e. the public should not know how officials are selected, since ordinary people are in no position to judge officials beyond the local level. Others, like Jiang Qing, defend a model in which superiors decide who gets promoted; this method is in line with more traditionalist strands of Confucian political thought, which place a greater emphasis on strict hierarchies and epistemic paternalism\u2014that is, the idea that older and more experienced people know more.\nCompatibility with liberalism and democracy, and critique of political meritocracy.\nAnother key question is whether Confucian political thought is compatible with liberalism. Tongdong Bai, for instance, argues that while Confucian political thought departs from the \"one person, one vote\" model, it can conserve many of the essential characteristics of liberalism, such as freedom of speech and individual rights. In fact, both Daniel Bell and Tongdong Bai hold that Confucian political meritocracy can tackle challenges that liberalism wants to tackle, but cannot by itself. At the cultural level, for instance, Confucianism, its institutions, and its rituals offer bulwarks against atomization and individualism. At the political level, the non-democratic side of political meritocracy is\u2014for Bell and Bai\u2014more efficient at addressing long-term questions such as climate change, in part because the meritocrats do not have to worry about the whims of public opinion.\nJoseph Chan defends the compatibility of Confucianism with both liberalism and democracy. In his book \"Confucian Perfectionism\", he argues that Confucians can embrace both democracy and liberalism on instrumental grounds; that is, while liberal democracy may not be valuable for its own sake, its institutions remain valuable\u2014particularly when combined with a broadly Confucian culture\u2014to serve Confucian ends and inculcate Confucian virtues.\nOther Confucians have criticized Confucian meritocrats like Bell for their rejection of democracy. For them, Confucianism does not have to be premised on the assumption that meritorious, virtuous political leadership is inherently incompatible with popular sovereignty, political equality and the right to political participation. These thinkers accuse the meritocrats of overestimating the flaws of democracy, mistaking temporary flaws for permanent and inherent features, and underestimating the challenges that the construction of a true political meritocracy poses in practice\u2014including those faced by contemporary China and Singapore. Franz Mang claims that, when decoupled from democracy, meritocracy tends to deteriorate into an oppressive regime under putatively \"meritorious\" but actually \"authoritarian\" rulers; Mang accuses Bell's China model of being self-defeating, as\u2014Mang claims\u2014the CCP's authoritarian modes of engagement with the dissenting voices illustrate. He Baogang and Mark Warren add that \"meritocracy\" should be understood as a concept describing a regime's character rather than its type, which is determined by distribution of political power\u2014on their view, democratic institutions can be built which are meritocratic insofar as they favour competence.\nRoy Tseng, drawing on the New Confucians of the twentieth century, argues that Confucianism and liberal democracy can enter into a dialectical process, in which liberal rights and voting rights are rethought into resolutely modern, but nonetheless Confucian ways of life. This synthesis, blending Confucians rituals and institutions with a broader liberal democratic frame, is distinct from both Western-style liberalism\u2014which, for Tseng, suffers from excessive individualism and a lack of moral vision\u2014and from traditional Confucianism\u2014which, for Tseng, has historically suffered from rigid hierarchies and sclerotic elites. Against defenders of political meritocracy, Tseng claims that the fusion of Confucian and democratic institutions can conserve the best of both worlds, producing a more communal democracy which draws on a rich ethical tradition, addresses abuses of power, and combines popular accountability with a clear attention to the cultivation of virtue in elites.\nInfluence.\nIn 17th-century Europe.\nThe works of Confucius were translated into European languages through the agency of Jesuit missionaries stationed in China. Matteo Ricci was among the very earliest to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and father Prospero Intorcetta wrote about the life and works of Confucius in Latin in 1687.\nTranslations of Confucian texts influenced European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.\nConfucianism influenced the German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived similarity to his own. It is postulated that certain elements of Leibniz's philosophy, such as \"simple substance\" and \"Pre-established harmony\", were borrowed from his interactions with Confucianism. \nThe French philosopher Voltaire, Leibniz's intellectual rival, was also influenced by Confucius, seeing the concept of Confucian rationalism as an alternative to Christian dogma. He praised Confucian ethics and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for Europe:\nOn Islamic thought.\nFrom the late 17th century onwards a whole body of literature known as the Han Kitab developed amongst the Hui Muslims of China who infused Islamic thought with Confucianism. Especially the works of Liu Zhi such as \"Tianfang Dianli\" () sought to harmonise Islam with not only Confucianism but also with Taoism and is considered to be one of the crowning achievements of the Chinese Islamic culture.\nIn modern times.\nImportant military and political figures in modern Chinese history continued to be influenced by Confucianism, like the Muslim warlord Ma Fuxiang. The New Life Movement in the early 20th century was also influenced by Confucianism.\nReferred to variously as the Confucian hypothesis and as a debated component of the more all-encompassing Asian Development Model, there exists among political scientists and economists a theory that Confucianism plays a large latent role in the ostensibly non-Confucian cultures of modern-day East Asia, in the form of the rigorous work ethic it endowed those cultures with. These scholars have held that, if not for Confucianism's influence on these cultures, many of the people of the East Asia region would not have been able to modernise and industrialise as quickly as Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and even China have done.\nFor example, the impact of the Vietnam War on Vietnam was devastating, but over the last few decades Vietnam has been re-developing in a very fast pace. Most scholars attribute the origins of this idea to futurologist Herman Kahn's \"World Economic Development: 1979 and Beyond\".\nOther studies, for example Cristobal Kay's \"Why East Asia Overtook Latin America: Agrarian Reform, Industrialization, and Development\", have attributed the Asian growth to other factors, for example the character of agrarian reforms, \"state-craft\" (state capacity), and interaction between agriculture and industry.\nHistorical and current Confucianists were and are often environmentalists out of their respect for \"tian\" and the other aspects of nature and the \"Principle\" that comes from their unity and, more generally, harmony as a whole, which is \"the basis for a sincere mind\".\nOn Chinese martial arts.\nAfter Confucianism had become the official 'state religion' in China, its influence penetrated all walks of life and all streams of thought in Chinese society for the generations to come. This did not exclude martial arts culture. Though in his own day, Confucius had rejected the practice of Martial Arts (with the exception of Archery), he did serve under rulers who used military power extensively to achieve their goals. In later centuries, Confucianism heavily influenced many educated martial artists of great influence, such as Sun Lutang, especially from the 19th century onwards, when bare-handed martial arts in China became more widespread and had begun to more readily absorb philosophical influences from Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism.\nCriticism.\nConfucius and Confucianism were opposed or criticised from the start, including Laozi's philosophy and Mozi's critique, and Legalists such as Han Fei ridiculed the idea that virtue would lead people to be orderly. In modern times, waves of opposition and vilification showed that Confucianism, instead of taking credit for the glories of Chinese civilisation, now had to take blame for its failures. The Taiping Rebellion described Confucianism sages as well as gods in Taoism and Buddhism as devils.\nContradiction with modernist values.\nIn the New Culture Movement, Lu Xun criticised Confucianism for shaping Chinese people into the condition they had reached by the late Qing dynasty: his criticisms are expressed metaphorically in the work \"Diary of a Madman\", in which traditional Chinese Confucian society is portrayed as feudalistic, hypocritical, socially cannibalistic, despotic, fostering a \"slave mentality\" favouring despotism, lack of critical thinking and blind obedience and worship of authority, fuelling a form of \"Confucian authoritarianism\" which persists into the present day. Leftists during the Cultural Revolution described Confucius as the representative of the slave-owning class.\nIn South Korea, there has long been criticism. Some South Koreans believe Confucianism has not contributed to the modernisation of South Korea. For example, South Korean writer Kim Kyong-il wrote a book in 1998 entitled \"Confucius Must Die For the Nation to Live\" (, \"gongjaga jug-eoya naraga sanda\"). Kim said that filial piety is one-sided and blind, and if it continues, social problems will continue as government keeps forcing Confucian filial obligations onto families.\nWomen in Confucian thought.\nConfucianism \"largely defined the mainstream discourse on gender in China from the Han dynasty onward.\" The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability. The Three Obediences and Four Virtues is one of the moral standards for feudal etiquette to bind women. Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: \"To starve to death is a small matter, but to lose one's chastity is a great matter.\" It was during the Song dynasty that the value of chastity was so severe, Confucian scholars criminalized the remarriage of widows. Widows were revered and memorialised during the Ming and Qing periods. The principle of chaste widowhood was made an official institution during the Ming dynasty. This \"cult of chastity\" accordingly condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a social stigma on remarriage. Though the repercussions for widows at times went beyond poverty and loneliness, as for some the preservation of chastity resulted in suicide. The ideal of a chaste widow became an extremely high honor and esteem, especially for a woman who chose to end her life after her husband's death. Many instances of such acts were recorded in, Biographies of Virtuous Women, \"a collection of stories of women who distinguished themselves by committing suicide after their husband\u2019s deaths to guard their chastity and purity\". Though it can be contested whether all these instances can be deemed self-sacrificing for the virtue of chastity, as it became common practice for women to be forced to commit suicide after their husband's death. This resulted from the honor which chaste widowhood garnered, lending itself to the husband's family as well as his clan or village.\nFor years, many modern scholars have regarded Confucianism as a sexist, patriarchal ideology that was historically damaging to Chinese women. It has also been argued by some Chinese and Western writers that the rise of neo-Confucianism during the Song dynasty had led to a decline of status of women. Some critics have also accused the prominent Song neo-Confucian scholar Zhu Xi for believing in the inferiority of women and that men and women need to be kept strictly separate, while Sima Guang also believed that women should remain indoors and not deal with the matters of men in the outside world. Finally, scholars have discussed the attitudes toward women in Confucian texts such as Analects. In a much-discussed passage, women are grouped together with , meaning people of low status or low morals) and described as being difficult to cultivate or deal with. Many traditional commentators and modern scholars have debated over the precise meaning of the passage, and whether Confucius referred to all women or just certain groups of women.\nFurther analysis suggests, however, that women's place in Confucian society may be more complex. During the Han dynasty period, the influential Confucian text \"Lessons for Women\" was written by Ban Zhao (45\u2013114\u00a0CE) to instruct her daughters how to be proper Confucian wives and mothers, that is, to be silent, hard-working, and compliant. She stresses the complementarity and equal importance of the male and female roles according to yin-yang theory, but she clearly accepts the dominance of the male. However, she does present education and literary power as important for women. In later dynasties, a number of women took advantage of the Confucian acknowledgment of education to become independent in thought.\nJoseph A. Adler points out that \"Neo-Confucian writings do not necessarily reflect either the prevailing social practices or the scholars' own attitudes and practices in regard to actual women.\" Matthew Sommers has also indicated that the Qing dynasty government began to realise the utopian nature of enforcing the \"cult of chastity\" and began to allow practices such as widow remarrying to stand. Moreover, some Confucian texts like Dong Zhongshu's \"Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals\" have passages that suggest a more equal relationship between a husband and his wife. More recently, some scholars have also begun to discuss the viability of constructing a \"Confucian feminism\".\nCatholic controversy over Chinese rites.\nEver since Europeans first encountered Confucianism, the issue of how Confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate. In the 16th and the 17th centuries, the earliest European arrivals in China, the Christian Jesuits, considered Confucianism to be an ethical system, not a religion, and one that was compatible with Christianity. The Jesuits, including Matteo Ricci, saw Chinese rituals as \"civil rituals\" that could co-exist alongside the spiritual rituals of Catholicism.\nBy the early 18th century, this initial portrayal was rejected by the Dominicans and Franciscans, creating a dispute among Catholics in East Asia that was known as the \"Rites Controversy\". The Dominicans and Franciscans argued that Chinese ancestral worship was a form of idolatry that was contradictory to the tenets of Christianity. This view was reinforced by Pope Benedict XIV, who ordered a ban on Chinese rituals, though this ban was re-assessed and repealed in 1939 by Pope Pius XII, provided that such traditions harmonize with the true and authentic spirit of the liturgy.\nSome critics view Confucianism as definitely pantheistic and nontheistic, in that it is not based on the belief in the supernatural or in a personal god existing separate from the temporal plane. Confucius views about \"tian\" and about the divine providence ruling the world, can be found above (in this page) and in Analects 6:26, 7:22, and 9:12, for example. On spirituality, Confucius said to Chi Lu, one of his students: \"You are not yet able to serve men, how can you serve spirits?\" Attributes such as ancestor worship, ritual, and sacrifice were advocated by Confucius as necessary for social harmony; these attributes may be traced to the traditional Chinese folk religion.\nScholars recognise that classification ultimately depends on how one defines religion. Using stricter definitions of religion, Confucianism has been described as a moral science or philosophy. But using a broader definition, such as Frederick Streng's characterisation of religion as \"a means of ultimate transformation\", Confucianism could be described as a \"sociopolitical doctrine having religious qualities\". With the latter definition, Confucianism is religious, even if non-theistic, in the sense that it \"performs some of the basic psycho-social functions of full-fledged religions\".\nBibliography.\nTranslations of the \"Analects\"\nExternal links.\nInstitutional"}
{"id": "5822", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5822", "title": "Chinese philosophy", "text": "Chinese philosophy originates in the Spring and Autumn period and Warring States period, during a period known as the \"Hundred Schools of Thought\", which was characterized by significant intellectual and cultural developments. Although much of Chinese philosophy begun in the Warring States period (475\u2013221 BCE), elements of Chinese philosophy have existed for several thousand years. Some can be found in the \"I Ching\" (the \"Book of Changes\"), an ancient compendium of divination, which dates back to at least 672 BCE.\nThe Han dynasty \"Records of the Grand Historian\" by Sima Tan looked back on the Warring States era and grouped the thinkers into the major philosophical schools, Confucianism, Legalism, and Taoism, along with philosophies that later fell into obscurity, like Agriculturalism, Mohism, Chinese Naturalism, and the Logicians. Even in modern society, Confucianism is still the creed of social behaviour.\nChinese philosophy as a philosophy.\nThe debate over whether the \"thought\" of ancient Chinese masters should be called philosophy has been discussed since the introduction of this academic discipline into China. See Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy for details.\nEarly beliefs.\nEarly Shang dynasty thought was based on cycles like the 10 stems and 12 earthly branches. This notion stems from what the people of the Shang dynasty could observe around them: day and night cycles, the seasons progressed again and again, and even the moon waxed and waned until it waxed again. Thus, this notion, which remained relevant throughout Chinese history, reflects the order of nature. In juxtaposition, it also marks a fundamental distinction from western philosophy, in which the dominant view of time is a linear progression. During the Shang, Ancestor worship was present and universally recognized.\nWhen the Shang were overthrown by the Zhou a new political, religious and philosophical concept was introduced called the Mandate of Heaven. This mandate was said to be taken when rulers became unworthy of their position and provided a justification for Zhou rule it is said that the Duke of Zhou made the early solar terms by measuring with a gnomon that was added to make the complete solar terms. He is also said to have used try squares and wrote the \"Zhoubi Suanjing\" with his astrologer. Several early beliefs might be found in the \"Guicang\" and perhaps the earliest Chinese book, the small calendar of the Xia in Da Dai Liji, though debated to exist the Xia dynasty is said to be its origin.\nOverview.\nConfucianism developed during the Spring and Autumn period from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551\u2013479 BCE), who considered himself a retransmitter of Zhou values. His philosophy concerns the fields of ethics and politics, emphasizing personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice, traditionalism, and sincerity. The Analects stress the importance of ritual, but also the importance of \"ren\", which loosely translates as \"human-heartedness\", Confucianism, along with Legalism, is responsible for creating one of the world's first meritocracies, which holds that one's status should be determined by education and character rather than ancestry, wealth, or friendship. Confucianism was and continues to be a major influence in Chinese culture, the state of China and the surrounding areas of East Asia.\nBefore the Han dynasty the largest rivals to Confucianism were Chinese Legalism, and Mohism. Confucianism largely became the dominant philosophical school of China during the early Han dynasty following the replacement of its contemporary, the more Taoist Huang-Lao. Legalism as a coherent philosophy disappeared largely due to its relationship with the unpopular authoritarian rule of Qin Shi Huang, however, many of its ideas and institutions would continue to influence Chinese philosophy throughout the Han dynasty and after.\nMohism, though initially popular due to its emphasis on brotherly love versus harsh Legalism, fell out of favour during the Han dynasty due to the efforts of Confucians in establishing their views as political orthodoxy. The Six Dynasties era saw the rise of the Xuanxue philosophical school and the maturation of Chinese Buddhism, which had entered China from India during the Late Han dynasties. By the time of the Tang dynasty five-hundred years after Buddhism's arrival into China, it had transformed into a thoroughly Chinese religious philosophy dominated by the school of Zen Buddhism. Neo-Confucianism became highly popular during the Song dynasty and Ming dynasty due in large part to the eventual combination of Confucian and Buddhist and even Taoist Philosophy.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, Chinese philosophy integrated concepts from Western philosophy. Anti-Qing dynasty revolutionaries, involved in the Xinhai Revolution, saw Western philosophy as an alternative to traditional philosophical schools; students in the May Fourth Movement called for completely abolishing the old imperial institutions and practices of China. During this era, Chinese scholars attempted to incorporate Western philosophical ideologies such as democracy, Marxism, socialism, liberalism, republicanism, anarchism and nationalism into Chinese philosophy. The most notable examples are Sun Yat-sen's Three Principles of the People ideology and Mao Zedong's Maoism, a variant of Marxism\u2013Leninism. In the modern People's Republic of China, the official ideology is Deng Xiaoping's \"market economy socialism\".\nAlthough the People's Republic of China has been historically hostile to the philosophy of ancient China, the influences of past are still deeply ingrained in the Chinese culture. In the post-Chinese economic reform era, modern Chinese philosophy has reappeared in forms such as \"New Confucianism\". As in Japan, philosophy in China has become a melting pot of ideas. It accepts new concepts, while attempting also to accord old beliefs their due. Chinese philosophy still carries profound influence amongst the people of East Asia, and even Southeast Asia.\nAncient philosophy.\nSpring and Autumn period.\nAround 500 BCE, after the Zhou state weakened and China moved into the Spring and Autumn period, the classic period of Chinese philosophy began. This is known as the Hundred Schools of Thought (; \"zh\u016bz\u01d0 b\u01ceiji\u0101\"; \"various scholars, hundred schools\"). This period is considered the golden age of Chinese philosophy. Of the many schools founded at this time and during the subsequent Warring States period, the four most influential ones were Confucianism, Daoism (often spelled \"Taoism\"), Mohism and Legalism.\nConfucianism.\nConfucianism is a philosophical school developed from the teachings of Confucius collected and written by his disciples after his death in \"The Analects\", and in the Warring States period, Mencius in \"The Mencius\" and Xunzi in \"The Xunzi\". It is a system of moral, social, political, and religious thought that has had tremendous influence on Chinese history, thought, and culture down to the 20th century. Some Westerners have considered it to have been the \"state religion\" of imperial China because of its lasting influence on Asian culture. Its influence also spread to Korea, Japan, Vietnam and many other Asian countries.\nConfucianism reached its peak of influence during the Tang and Song dynasties under a rebranded Confucianism called Neo-Confucianism. Confucius expanded on the already present ideas of Chinese religion and culture to reflect the time period and environment of political chaos during the Warring States period. Because Confucius embedded the Chinese culture so heavily into his philosophy it was able to resonate with the people of China. This high approval of Confucianism can be seen through the reverence of Confucius in modern-day China.\nThe major Confucian concepts include filial piety, loyalty (), \"li\" (ritual), \"ren\" (humanity or humaneness), the rectification of names (i.e., to ensure everything is what its name implies it should be). Confucius taught both positive and negative versions of the Golden Rule. The concepts yin and yang represent two opposing forces that are permanently in conflict with each other, leading to perpetual contradiction and change. The Confucian idea of \"Rid of the two ends, take the middle\" is a Chinese equivalent of the idea of \"thesis, antithesis, and synthesis\", often attributed to Hegel, which is a way of reconciling opposites, arriving at some middle ground combining the best of both.\nConfucius heavily emphasized the idea of microcosms in society (subunits of family and community) success's were the foundations for a successful state or country. Confucius believed in the use of education to further knowledge the people in ethics, societal behavior, and reverence in other humans. With the combination of education, successful family, and his ethical teachings he believed he could govern a well established society in China.\nTaoism.\nTaoism arose as a philosophy and later also developed into a religion based on the texts the \"Tao Te Ching\" (ascribed to Laozi) and the \"Zhuangzi\" (partly ascribed to Zhuang Zhou). The word \"Tao\" (; also transliterated as \"Dao\") literally means 'path' or 'way'. However, in Taoism it refers more often to a meta-physical force that encompasses the entire universe but which cannot be described nor felt.\nAll major Chinese philosophical schools have investigated the correct \"Way\" to go about a moral life, but in Taoism it takes on the most abstract meanings, leading this school to be named after it. It advocated nonaction (\"wu wei\"), the strength of softness, spontaneity, and relativism. Although it serves as a rival to Confucianism, a school of active morality, this rivalry is compromised and given perspective by the idiom \"practice Confucianism on the outside, Taoism on the inside.\"\nMost of Taoism's focus is on the notion that human attempts to make the world better actually make the world worse. Therefore, it is better to strive for harmony, minimising potentially harmful interference with nature or in human affairs.\nWarring States period.\nLegalism.\nPhilosopher Han Fei synthesized together earlier the methods of his predecessors, which famous historian Sima Tan posthumously termed Legalism. With an essential principle like \"when the epoch changed, the ways changed\", late pre-Han dynasty reformers emphasized rule by law.\nIn Han Fei's philosophy, a ruler should govern his subjects by the following trinity:\nWhat has been termed by some as the intrastate Realpolitik of the Warring States period was highly progressive, and extremely critical of the Confucian and Mohist schools. But that of the Qin dynasty would be blamed for creating a totalitarian society, thereby experiencing decline. Its main motto is: \"Set clear strict laws, or deliver harsh punishment\". In Han Fei's philosophy the ruler possessed authority regarding reward and penalty, enacted through law. Shang Yang and Han Fei promoted absolute adherence to the law, regardless of the circumstances or the person. Ministers were only to be rewarded if their words were accurate to the results of their proposals. Legalism, in accordance with Shang Yang's interpretation, could encourage the state to be a militaristic autarky.\nNaturalists.\nThe School of Naturalists or the School of Yin-yang () was a Warring States era philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the \"wuxing\"; Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school. His theory attempted to explain the universe in terms of basic forces in nature: the complementary agents of yin (dark, cold, female, negative) and yang (light, hot, male, positive) and the Five Elements or Five Phases (water, fire, wood, metal, and earth).\nIn its early days, this theory was most strongly associated with the states of Yan and Qi. In later periods, these epistemological theories came to hold significance in both philosophy and popular belief. This school was absorbed into Taoism's alchemic and magical dimensions as well as into the Chinese medical framework. The earliest surviving recordings of this are in the Mawangdui texts and \"Huangdi Neijing\".\nMohism.\nMohism (Moism), founded by Mozi, promotes universal love with the aim of mutual benefit. Everyone must love each other equally and impartially to avoid conflict and war. Mozi was strongly against Confucian ritual, instead emphasizing pragmatic survival through farming, fortification, and statecraft. Tradition is inconsistent, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviors that maximize general benefit. As motivation for his theory, Mozi brought in the \"Will of Heaven\", but rather than being religious his philosophy parallels utilitarianism.\nLogicians.\nThe logicians (School of Names) were concerned with logic, paradoxes, names and actuality (similar to Confucian rectification of names). The logician Hui Shi was a friendly rival to Zhuangzi, arguing against Taoism in a light-hearted and humorous manner. Another logician, Gongsun Long, originated the famous When a White Horse is Not a Horse dialogue.\nAgriculturalists.\nAgriculturalism was an early agrarian social and political philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism. The philosophy is founded on the notion that human society originates with the development of agriculture, and societies are based upon \"people's natural propensity to farm.\"\nThe Agriculturalists believed that the ideal government, modeled after the semi-mythical governance of Shennong, is led by a benevolent king, one who works alongside the people in tilling the fields. The Agriculturalist king is not paid by the government through its treasuries; his livelihood is derived from the profits he earns working in the fields, not his leadership. Unlike the Confucians, the Agriculturalists did not believe in the division of labour, arguing instead that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon an egalitarian self sufficiency. The Agriculturalists supported the fixing of prices, in which all similar goods, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.\nEarly imperial era philosophy.\nHistory.\nQin and Han dynasties.\nThe short founder Qin dynasty, where Legalism was the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools. Legalism remained influential during the early Han dynasty under the Taoist-Realist ideology Huang-Lao until Emperor Wu of Han adopted Confucianism as official doctrine. Confucianism and Taoism became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism.\nConfucianism was particularly strong during the Han dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu, who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace.\nIn contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination \"Old Text\") that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortal\nSix Dynasties.\nThe 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the \"Xuanxue\" (mysterious learning), also called \"Neo-Taoism\".\nBuddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern, Sui and Tang dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. At the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect. Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana, and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng. But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.\nIn the mid-Tang Buddhism reached its peak, and reportedly there were 4,600 monasteries, 40,000 hermitages and 260,500 monks and nuns. The power of the Buddhist clergy was so great and the wealth of the monasteries so impressive, that it instigated criticism from Confucian scholars, who considered Buddhism as a foreign religion. In 845 Emperor Wuzong ordered the Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution, confiscating the riches and returning monks and nuns to lay life. From then on, Buddhism lost much of its influence.\nSchools of thought.\nXuanxue.\nXuanxue was a philosophical school that combined elements of Confucianism and Taoism to reinterpret the I Ching\",\"Tao Te Ching\",\" and \"Zhuangzi.\" The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, \"ming\" and \"wuming\"). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of \"feng liu\" (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism is a religion, a practical philosophy, and arguably a psychology, focusing on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, who lived on the Indian subcontinent most likely from the mid-6th to the early 5th century BCE. When used in a generic sense, a Buddha is generally considered to be someone who discovers the true nature of reality.\nBuddhism until the 4th century AD had little impact on China but in the 4th century its teachings hybridized with those of Taoism. Buddhism brought to China the idea of many hells, where sinners went, but the deceased sinners souls could be saved by pious acts. Since Chinese traditional thought focused more on ethics rather than metaphysics, the merging of Buddhist and Taoist concepts developed several schools distinct from the originating Indian schools.\nThe most prominent examples with philosophical merit are Sanlun, Tiantai, Huayan, and Chan (a.k.a. Zen). They investigate consciousness, levels of truth, whether reality is ultimately empty, and how enlightenment is to be achieved. Buddhism has a spiritual aspect that complements the action of Neo-Confucianism, with prominent Neo-Confucians advocating certain forms of meditation.\nMid to late imperial era philosophy.\nHistory.\nNeo-Confucianism was a revived version of old Confucian principles that appeared around the Song dynasty, with Buddhist, Taoist, and Legalist features. The first philosophers, such as Shao Yong, Zhou Dunyi and Chang Zai, were cosmologists and worked on the \"I Ching\". The Cheng brothers, Cheng Yi and Cheng Hao, are considered the founders of the two main schools of thought of Neo-Confucianism: the School of Principle the first, the School of Mind the latter.\nThe School of Principle gained supremacy during the Song dynasty with the philosophical system elaborated by Zhu Xi, which became mainstream and officially adopted by the government for the imperial examinations under the Yuan dynasty. The School of Mind was developed by Lu Jiuyuan, Zhu Xi's main rival, but was soon forgotten. Only during the Ming dynasty was the School of Mind revived by Wang Shouren, whose influence is equal to that of Zhu Xi. This school was particularly important in Japan.\nDuring the Qing dynasty many philosophers objected against Neo-Confucianism and there was a return to the Han dynasty Confucianism, and also the reprise of the controversy between Old Text and New Text. In this period also started the penetration of Western culture, but most Chinese thought that the Westerners were maybe more advanced in technology and warfare, but that China had primacy in moral and intellectual fields.\nChinese culture was highly influential on the traditions of other East Asian states, and its philosophy directly influenced Korean philosophy, Vietnamese philosophy and Japanese philosophy. During later Chinese dynasties like the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), as well as in the Korean Joseon dynasty (1392\u20131897), a resurgent Neo-Confucianism led by thinkers such as Wang Yangming (1472\u20131529) became the dominant school of thought and was promoted by the imperial state. In Japan, the Tokugawa shogunate (1603\u20131867) was also strongly influenced by Confucian philosophy.\nSchools of thought.\nNeo-Confucianism.\nDespite Confucianism losing popularity to Taoism and Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism combined those ideas into a more metaphysical framework. Its concepts include \"li\" (principle, akin to Plato's forms), \"qi\" (vital or material force), \"taiji\" (the Great Ultimate), and \"xin\" (mind). Song dynasty philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017\u20131073) is commonly seen as the first true \"pioneer\" of Neo-Confucianism, using Daoist metaphysics as a framework for his ethical philosophy.\nNeo-Confucianism developed both as a renaissance of traditional Confucian ideas, and as a reaction to the ideas of Buddhism and religious Daoism. Although the Neo-Confucianists denounced Buddhist metaphysics, Neo-Confucianism did borrow Daoist and Buddhist terminology and concepts.\nNeo-Confucianist philosophers like Zhu Xi and Wang Yangming are seen as the most important figures of Neo-Confucianism.\nModern era.\nDuring the Industrial and Modern Ages, Chinese philosophy had also begun to integrate concepts of Western philosophy, as steps toward modernization. Chinese philosophy never developed the concept of human rights, so that classical Chinese lacked words for them. In 1864, W.A.P. Martin had to invent the word \"quanli\" () to translate the Western concept of \"rights\" in the process of translating Henry Wheaton's \"Elements of International Law\" into classical Chinese.\nBy the time of the Xinhai Revolution in 1911, there were many calls such as the May Fourth Movement to completely abolish the old imperial institutions and practices of China. There have been attempts to incorporate democracy, republicanism, and industrialism into Chinese philosophy, notably by Sun Yat-Sen at the beginning of the 20th century. Mao Zedong added Marxism, Stalinism, Chinese Marxist Philosophy and other communist thought.\nWhen the Chinese Communist Party took over in 1949, previous schools of thought were denounced as backward, and later purged during the Cultural Revolution as part of the campaign against the Four Olds.\nDuring the Xi Jinping administration, the People's Republic of China has promoted a revival in Chinese philosophy. In 2024, East China Normal University established the Chinese Zhuzi Research Institute to promote the study of Chinese philosophies.\nConcepts.\nAlthough the individual philosophical schools differ considerably, they nevertheless share a common vocabulary and set of concerns.\nAmong the terms commonly found in Chinese philosophy are:\nAmong the commonalities of Chinese philosophies are:"}
{"id": "5823", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5823", "title": "Confucius", "text": "Confucius (; pinyin: ; ; ), born Kong Qiu (), was a Chinese philosopher of the Spring and Autumn period who is traditionally considered the paragon of Chinese sages. Much of the shared cultural heritage of the Sinosphere originates in the philosophy and teachings of Confucius. His philosophical teachings, called Confucianism, emphasized personal and governmental morality, harmonious social relationships, righteousness, kindness, sincerity, and a ruler's responsibilities to lead by virtue.\nConfucius considered himself a transmitter for the values of earlier periods which he claimed had been abandoned in his time. He advocated for filial piety, endorsing strong family loyalty, ancestor veneration, the respect of elders by their children and of husbands by their wives. Confucius recommended a robust family unit as the cornerstone for an ideal government. He championed the Silver Rule, or a negative form of the Golden Rule, advising, \"Do not do unto others what you do not want done to yourself.\"\nThe time of Confucius's life saw a rich diversity of thought, and was a formative period in China's intellectual history. His ideas gained in prominence during the Warring States period, but experienced setback immediately following the Qin conquest. Under Emperor Wu of Han, Confucius's ideas received official sanction, with affiliated works becoming mandatory readings for career paths leading to officialdom. During the Tang and Song dynasties, Confucianism developed into a system known in the West as Neo-Confucianism, and later as New Confucianism. From ancient dynasties to the modern era, Confucianism has integrated into the Chinese social fabric and way of life.\nTraditionally, Confucius is credited with having authored or edited many of the ancient texts including all of the Five Classics. However, modern scholars exercise caution in attributing specific assertions to Confucius himself, for at least some of the texts and philosophy associated with him were of a more ancient origin. Aphorisms concerning his teachings were compiled in the \"Analects\", but not until many years after his death.\nName.\nThe name \"Confucius\" is a Latinized form of the Mandarin Chinese (, \"Master Kong\"), and was coined in the late 16th century by early Jesuit missionaries to China. Confucius's family name was Kong () and his given name was Qiu (). His courtesy name, a capping (\"guan\": ) given at his coming of age ceremony, and by which he would have been known to all but his older family members, was Zhongni (), the \"Zh\u00f2ng\" indicating that he was the second son in his family.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nIt is thought that Confucius was born on 28 September 551 BCE, in Zou (, in modern Shandong). The area was notionally controlled by the kings of Zhou but effectively independent under the local lords of Lu, who ruled from the nearby city of Qufu. His father Kong He (or Shuliang He) was an elderly commandant of the local Lu garrison. His ancestry traced back through the dukes of Song to the Shang dynasty which had preceded the Zhou. Traditional accounts of Confucius's life relate that Kong He's grandfather had migrated the family from Song to Lu. Not all modern scholars accept Confucius's descent from Song nobility.\nKong He died when Confucius was three years old, and Confucius was raised by his mother Yan Zhengzai () in poverty. His mother later died at less than 40 years of age. At age 19, he married Lady Qiguan (), and a year later the couple had their first child, their son Kong Li (). Qiguan and Confucius later had two daughters together, one of whom is thought to have died as a child and one was named Kong Jiao ().\nConfucius was educated at schools for commoners, where he studied and learned the Six Arts.\nConfucius was born into the class of \"shi\" (), between the aristocracy and the common people. He is said to have worked in various government jobs during his early 20s, and as a bookkeeper and a caretaker of sheep and horses, using the proceeds to give his mother a proper burial. When his mother died, Confucius (aged 23) is said to have mourned for three years, as was the tradition.\nPolitical career.\nIn Confucius's time, the state of Lu was headed by a ruling ducal house. Under the duke were three aristocratic families, whose heads bore the title of viscount and held hereditary positions in the Lu bureaucracy. The Ji family held the position \"Minister over the Masses\", who was also the \"Prime Minister\"; the Meng family held the position \"Minister of Works\"; and the Shu family held the position \"Minister of War\". In the winter of , Yang Hu\u2014a retainer of the Ji family\u2014rose up in rebellion and seized power from the Ji family. However, by the summer of , the three hereditary families had succeeded in expelling Yang Hu from Lu. By then, Confucius had built up a considerable reputation through his teachings, while the families came to see the value of proper conduct and righteousness, so they could achieve loyalty to a legitimate government. Thus, that year (), Confucius came to be appointed to the minor position of governor of a town. Eventually, he rose to the position of Minister of Crime. The \"Xunzi\" says that once assuming the post, Confucius ordered the execution of Shaozheng Mao, another Lu state official and scholar whose lectures attracted the three thousand disciples several times except Yan Hui. Shaozheng Mao was accused of 'five crimes', each worth execution, including 'concealed evilness, stubborn abnormality, eloquent duplicity, erudition in bizarre facts and generosity to evildoers'.\nConfucius desired to return the authority of the state to the duke by dismantling the fortifications of the city\u2014strongholds belonging to the three families. This way, he could establish a centralized government. However, Confucius relied solely on diplomacy as he had no military authority himself. In , Hou Fan\u2014the governor of Hou\u2014revolted against his lord of the Shu family. Although the Meng and Shu families unsuccessfully besieged Hou, a loyalist official rose up with the people of Hou and forced Hou Fan to flee to the state of Qi. The situation may have been in favor for Confucius as this likely made it possible for Confucius and his disciples to convince the aristocratic families to dismantle the fortifications of their cities. Eventually, after a year and a half, Confucius and his disciples succeeded in convincing the Shu family to raze the walls of Hou, the Ji family in razing the walls of Bi, and the Meng family in razing the walls of Cheng. First, the Shu family led an army towards their city Hou and tore down its walls in .\nSoon thereafter, Gongshan Furao, a retainer of the Ji family, revolted and took control of the forces at Bi. He immediately launched an attack and entered the capital Lu. Earlier, Gongshan had approached Confucius to join him, which Confucius considered as he wanted the opportunity to put his principles into practice but he gave up on the idea in the end. Confucius disapproved the use of a violent revolution by principle, even though the Ji family dominated the Lu state by force for generations and had exiled the previous duke. Creel states that, unlike the rebel Yang Hu before him, Gongshan may have sought to destroy the three hereditary families and restore the power of the duke. However, Dubs is of the view that Gongshan was encouraged by Viscount Ji Huan to invade the Lu capital in an attempt to avoid dismantling the Bi fortified walls. Whatever the situation may have been, Gongshan was considered an upright man who continued to defend the state of Lu, even after he was forced to flee.\nDuring the revolt by Gongshan, Zhong You had managed to keep the duke and the three viscounts together at the court. Zhong You was one of the disciples of Confucius and Confucius had arranged for him to be given the position of governor by the Ji family. When Confucius heard of the raid, he requested that Viscount Ji Huan allow the duke and his court to retreat to a stronghold on his palace grounds. Thereafter, the heads of the three families and the duke retreated to the Ji's palace complex and ascended the Wuzi Terrace. Confucius ordered two officers to lead an assault against the rebels. At least one of the two officers was a retainer of the Ji family, but they were unable to refuse the orders while in the presence of the duke, viscounts, and court. The rebels were pursued and defeated at Gu. Immediately after the revolt was defeated, the Ji family razed the Bi city walls to the ground.\nThe attackers retreated after realizing that they would have to become rebels against the state and their lord. Through Confucius' actions, the Bi officials had inadvertently revolted against their own lord, thus forcing Viscount Ji Huan's hand in having to dismantle the walls of Bi\u2014as it could have harbored such rebels\u2014or confess to instigating the event by going against proper conduct and righteousness as an official. Dubs suggests that the incident brought to light Confucius' foresight, practical political ability, and insight into human character.\nWhen it was time to dismantle the city walls of the Meng family, the governor was reluctant to have his city walls torn down and convinced the head of the Meng family not to do so. The \"Zuo Zhuan\" recalls that the governor advised against razing the walls to the ground as he said that it made Cheng vulnerable to Qi, and cause the destruction of the Meng family. Even though Viscount Meng Yi gave his word not to interfere with an attempt, he went back on his earlier promise to dismantle the walls.\nLater in , Duke Ding of Lu personally went with an army to lay siege to Cheng in an attempt to raze its walls to the ground, but he did not succeed. Thus, Confucius could not achieve the idealistic reforms that he wanted including restoration of the legitimate rule of the duke. He had made powerful enemies within the state, especially with Viscount Ji Huan, due to his successes so far. According to accounts in the \"Zuo Zhuan\" and the \"Records of the Grand Historian\", Confucius departed his homeland in after his support for the failed attempt of dismantling the fortified city walls of the powerful Ji, Meng, and Shu families. He left the state of Lu without resigning, remaining in self-exile and unable to return as long as Viscount Ji Huan was alive.\nExile.\nThe \"Shiji\" stated that the neighboring Qi state was worried that Lu was becoming too powerful while Confucius was involved in the government of the Lu state. According to this account, Qi decided to sabotage Lu's reforms by sending 100 good horses and 80 beautiful dancing girls to the duke of Lu. The duke indulged himself in pleasure and did not attend to official duties for three days. Confucius was disappointed and resolved to leave Lu and seek better opportunities, yet to leave at once would expose the misbehavior of the duke and therefore bring public humiliation to the ruler Confucius was serving. Confucius therefore waited for the duke to make a lesser mistake. Soon after, the duke neglected to send to Confucius a portion of the sacrificial meat that was his due according to custom, and Confucius seized upon this pretext to leave both his post and the Lu state.\nAfter Confucius's resignation, he travelled around the principality states of north-east and central China including Wey, Song, Zheng, Cao, Chu, Qi, Chen, and Cai (and a failed attempt to go to Jin). At the courts of these states, he expounded his political beliefs but did not see them implemented.\nReturn home.\nAccording to the \"Zuozhuan\", Confucius returned home to his native Lu when he was 68, after he was invited to do so by Ji Kangzi, the chief minister of Lu. The \"Shiji\" depicts him spending his last years teaching 3000 pupils, with 72 or 77 accomplished disciples that mastered the Six Arts. Meanwhile, Confucius dedicated himself in transmitting the old wisdom by writing or editing the Five Classics. \nDuring his return, Confucius sometimes acted as an advisor to several government officials in Lu, including Ji Kangzi, on matters including governance and crime.\nBurdened by the loss of both his son and his favorite disciples, he died at the age of 71 or 72 from natural causes. Confucius was buried on the bank of the Sishui River, to the north of Qufu City in Shandong Province. Starting as a humble tomb, the cemetery of Confucius had been expanded by emperors since the Han Dynasty. To date, the Cemetery of Confucius (\u5b54\u6797) covers an area of 183 hectares with more than 100,000 graves of the Kong descendants, it is included in the World Heritage List for its cultural and architectural value.\nPhilosophy.\nIn the \"Analects\", Confucius presents himself as a \"transmitter who invented nothing\". He puts the greatest emphasis on the importance of study, and it is the Chinese character for study (\u5b78) that opens the text. Far from trying to build a systematic or formalist theory, he wanted his disciples to master and internalize older classics, so that they can capture the ancient wisdoms that promotes \"harmony and order\", to aid their self-cultivation to become a perfect man. For example, the \"Annals\" would allow them to relate the moral problems of the present to past political events; the \"Book of Odes\" reflects the \"mood and concerns\" of the commoners and their view on government; while the \"Book of Changes\" encompasses the key theory and practice of divination. \nAlthough some Chinese people follow Confucianism in a religious manner, many argue that its values are secular and that it is less a religion than a secular morality. Proponents of religious Confucianism argue that despite the secular nature of Confucianism's teachings, it is based on a worldview that is religious. Confucius was considered more of a humanist than a spiritualist, his discussions on afterlife and views concerning Heaven remained indeterminate, and he is largely unconcerned with spiritual matters often considered essential to religious thought, such as the nature of souls.\nEthics.\nOne of the deepest teachings of Confucius may have been the superiority of personal exemplification over explicit rules of behavior. His moral teachings emphasized self-cultivation, emulation of moral exemplars, and the attainment of skilled judgment rather than knowledge of rules. Confucian ethics may, therefore, be considered a type of virtue ethics. His teachings rarely rely on reasoned argument, and ethical ideals and methods are conveyed indirectly, through allusion, innuendo, and even tautology. His teachings require examination and context to be understood. A good example is found in this famous anecdote:\nThis remark was considered a strong manifestation of Confucius' advocacy in humanism. \nOne of his teachings was a variant of the Golden Rule, sometimes called the \"Silver Rule\" owing to its negative form:\nOften overlooked in Confucian ethics are the virtues to the self: sincerity and the cultivation of knowledge. Virtuous action towards others begins with virtuous and sincere thought, which begins with knowledge. A virtuous disposition without knowledge is susceptible to corruption, and virtuous action without sincerity is not true righteousness. Cultivating knowledge and sincerity is also important for one's own sake; the superior person loves learning for the sake of learning and righteousness for the sake of righteousness.\nThe Confucian theory of ethics as exemplified in \"l\u01d0\" () is based on three important conceptual aspects of life: (a) ceremonies associated with sacrifice to ancestors and deities of various types, (b) social and political institutions, and (c) the etiquette of daily behavior. Some believed that \"l\u01d0\" originated from the heavens, but Confucius stressed the development of \"l\u01d0\" through the actions of sage leaders in human history. His discussions of \"l\u01d0\" seem to redefine the term to refer to all actions committed by a person to build the ideal society, rather than those conforming with canonical standards of ceremony.\nIn the early Confucian tradition, \"l\u01d0\" was doing the proper thing at the proper time; balancing between maintaining existing norms to perpetuate an ethical social fabric, and violating them in order to accomplish ethical good. Training in the \"l\u01d0\" of past sages, cultivates virtues in people that include ethical judgment about when \"l\u01d0\" must be adapted in light of situational contexts.\nIn Confucianism, the concept of \"li\" is closely related to \"y\u00ec\" (), which is based upon the idea of reciprocity. \"Y\u00ec\" can be translated as righteousness, though it may mean what is ethically best to do in a certain context. The term contrasts with action done out of self-interest or profitableness (). While pursuing one's own self-interest is not necessarily bad, one would be a better, more righteous person if one's life was based upon following a path designed to enhance the greater good. Thus an outcome of \"y\u00ec\" is doing the right thing for its own sake, without regarding the material gains.\nJust as action according to \"l\u01d0\" should be adapted to conform to the aspiration of adhering to \"y\u00ec\", so \"y\u00ec\" is linked to the core value of \"r\u00e9n\" (). \"R\u00e9n\" consists of five basic virtues: seriousness, generosity, sincerity, diligence, and kindness. \"R\u00e9n\" is the virtue of perfectly fulfilling one's responsibilities toward others, most often translated as \"benevolence\", \"humaneness\", or \"empathy\"; translator Arthur Waley calls it \"Goodness\" (with a capital \"G\"), and other translations that have been put forth include \"authoritativeness\" and \"selflessness\". Confucius's moral system was based upon empathy and understanding others, rather than divinely ordained rules. To develop one's spontaneous responses of \"r\u00e9n\" so that these could guide action intuitively was even better than living by the rules of \"y\u00ec\". Confucius asserts that virtue is a mean between extremes. For example, the properly generous person gives the right amount \u2013 not too much and not too little.\nPolitics.\nConfucius's political thought is based upon his ethical thought. He argued that the best government is one that rules through \"rites\" (\"l\u01d0\") and morality, and \"not\" by using incentives and coercion. He explained that this is one of the most important analects: \"If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of the shame, and moreover will become good.\" (\"Analects\" 2.3, tr. Legge). This \"sense of shame\" is an internalization of duty. Confucianism prioritizes creating a harmonious society over the ruler's interests, opposes material incentives and harsh punishments, and downplays the role of institutions in guiding behavior as in Legalism, emphasizing moral virtues instead.\nConfucius looked nostalgically upon earlier days, and urged the Chinese, particularly those with political power, to model themselves on earlier examples. In times of division, chaos, and endless wars between feudal states, he wanted to restore the Mandate of Heaven () that could unify the \"world\" (, \"all under Heaven\") and bestow peace and prosperity on the people. Because his vision of personal and social perfections was framed as a revival of the ordered society of earlier times, Confucius is often considered a great proponent of conservatism, but a closer look at what he proposes often shows that he used (and perhaps twisted) past institutions and rites to push a new political agenda of his own: a revival of a unified royal state, whose rulers would succeed to power on the basis of their moral merits instead of lineage. These would be rulers devoted to their people, striving for personal and social perfection, and such a ruler would spread his own virtues to the people instead of imposing proper behavior with laws and rules.\nWhile Confucius supported the idea of government ruling by a virtuous king, his ideas contained a number of elements to limit the power of rulers. He argued for representing truth in language, and honesty was of paramount importance. Even in facial expression, truth must always be represented. Confucius believed that if a ruler is to lead correctly, by action, that orders would be unnecessary in that others will follow the proper actions of their ruler. In discussing the relationship between a king and his subject (or a father and his son), he underlined the need to give due respect to superiors. This demanded that the subordinates must advise their superiors if the superiors are considered to be taking a course of action that is wrong. Confucius believed in ruling by example, if you lead correctly, orders by force or punishment are not necessary.\nMusic and poetry.\nMusic was one of the six arts that students needed to master, together with archery, charioteering, mathematics, calligraphy, and a partner to music, the purpose of rituals. Confucius heavily promoted the use of music with rituals or the rites order. Unlike other philosophers around the world, Confucius viewed music and music theory beyond a mere art form or curriculum subject, and stated that it was intrinsically intertwined with rites in structuring man. \"Music is that which moves man from the internal; rites are that which affects man\non the external. Music brings about harmony. Rites ensure obedience.\" To Confucius, music created the focus necessary to unite and harmonize man. Thus, music and rites together were more than beneficial but were to make people act in a manner compatible with heaven and earth. The scholar Li Zehou argued that Confucianism is based on the idea of rites. Rites serve as the starting point for each individual and that these sacred social functions allow each person's human nature to be harmonious with reality. Given this, Confucius believed that \"music is the harmonization of heaven and earth; the rites is the order of heaven and earth.\" Therefore, the application of music in rites creates the order that makes it possible for society to prosper.\nThe Confucian approach to music was heavily inspired by the and the , which was said to be the sixth Confucian classic until it was lost during the Han dynasty. The serves as one of the current Confucian classics and is a book on poetry that contains a diversified variety of poems as well as poems meant for folk songs. Confucius is traditionally ascribed with compiling these classics within his school. In the Analects, Confucius described the importance of poetry in the intellectual and moral development of an individual:\nConfucians in later generations had conservative and mixed views on international musical influences encroaching on China, in particular those with varying styles that did not traditionally accompany rites, and some preached against sentimental tendencies from the Persians, the Greco-Bactrians, and the Mongols.\nLegacy.\nConfucius's teachings were later turned into an elaborate set of rules and practices by his numerous disciples and followers, who organized his teachings into the \"Analects\". Confucius's disciples and his only grandson, Zisi, continued his philosophical school after his death. These efforts spread Confucian ideals to students who then became officials in many of the royal courts in China, thereby giving Confucianism the first wide-scale test of its dogma.\nTwo of Confucius's most famous later followers emphasized radically different aspects of his teachings. In the centuries after his death, Mencius () and Xunzi () both composed important teachings elaborating in different ways on the fundamental ideas associated with Confucius. Mencius () articulated the innate goodness in human beings as a source of the ethical intuitions that guide people towards \"r\u00e9n\", \"y\u00ec\", and \"l\u01d0\", while Xunzi () underscored the realistic and materialistic aspects of Confucian thought, stressing that morality was inculcated in society through tradition and in individuals through training. In time, their writings, together with the \"Analects\" and other core texts came to constitute the philosophical corpus of Confucianism.\nThis realignment in Confucian thought was parallel to the development of Legalism, which held that humanity and righteousness were not sufficient in government, and that rulers should instead rely on statecrafts, punishments, and law. A disagreement between these two political philosophies came to a head in when the Qin state conquered all of China. Li Si, Prime Minister of the Qin dynasty, convinced Qin Shi Huang to abandon the Confucians' recommendation of awarding fiefs akin to the Zhou dynasty before them which he saw as being against to the Legalist idea of centralizing the state around the ruler. \nUnder the succeeding Han and Tang dynasties, Confucian ideas gained even more widespread prominence. Under Emperor Wu of Han, the works attributed to Confucius were made the official imperial philosophy and required reading for civil service examinations in which was continued nearly unbroken until the end of the 19th century. As Mohism lost support by the time of the Han, the main philosophical contenders were Legalism, which Confucian thought somewhat absorbed, the teachings of Laozi, whose focus on more spiritual ideas kept it from direct conflict with Confucianism, and the new Buddhist religion, which gained acceptance during the Southern and Northern Dynasties era. Both Confucian ideas and Confucian-trained officials were relied upon in the Ming dynasty and even the Yuan dynasty, although Kublai Khan distrusted handing over provincial control to them.\nDuring the Song dynasty, Confucianism was revitalized in a movement known as Neo-Confucianism. Neo-Confucianism was a revival of Confucianism that expanded on classical theories by incorporating metaphysics and new approaches to self-cultivation and enlightenment, influenced by Buddhism and Daoism. The most renowned scholar of this period was Zhu Xi (1130-1200CE). There are clear Buddhist and Daoist influences in the Neo-Confucian advocacy of \"quiet sitting\" (meditation) as a technique of self-cultivation that leads to transformative experiences of insight.\" In his life, Zhu Xi was largely ignored, but not long after his death, his ideas became the new orthodox view of what Confucian texts actually meant. Modern historians view Zhu Xi as having created something rather different and call his way of thinking \"Neo-Confucianism\". Neo-Confucianism held sway in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam until the 19th century. \nThe works of Confucius were first translated into European languages by Jesuit missionaries in the 16th century during the late Ming dynasty. The first known effort was by Michele Ruggieri, who returned to Italy in 1588 and carried on his translations while residing in Salerno. Matteo Ricci started to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and a team of Jesuits\u2014Prospero Intorcetta, Philippe Couplet, and two others\u2014published a translation of several Confucian works and an overview of Chinese history in Paris in 1687. Fran\u00e7ois No\u00ebl, after failing to persuade ClementXI that Chinese veneration of ancestors and Confucius did not constitute idolatry, completed the Confucian canon at Prague in 1711, with more scholarly treatments of the other works and the first translation of the collected works of Mencius. It is thought that such works had considerable importance on European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.\nIn the modern era Confucian movements, such as New Confucianism, still exist, but during the Cultural Revolution, Confucianism was frequently attacked by leading figures in the Chinese Communist Party. This was partially a continuation of the condemnations of Confucianism by intellectuals and activists in the early 20th century as a cause of the ethnocentric close-mindedness and refusal of the Qing dynasty to modernize that led to the tragedies that befell China in the 19th century. \nConfucius's works are studied by scholars in many other Asian countries, particularly those in the Chinese cultural sphere, such as Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Many of those countries still hold the traditional memorial ceremony every year.\nAmong Tibetans, Confucius is often worshipped as a holy king and master of magic, divination and astrology. Tibetan Buddhists see him as learning divination from the Buddha Manjushri (and that knowledge subsequently reaching Tibet through Princess Wencheng), while Bon practitioners see him as being a reincarnation of Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche, the legendary founder of Bon.\nThe Ahmadiyya believes Confucius was a Divine Prophet of God, as were Lao-Tzu and other eminent Chinese personages.\nAccording to the Siddhar tradition of Tamil Nadu, Confucius is one of the 18 esteemed Siddhars of yore, and is better known as Kalangi Nathar or Kamalamuni. The Thyagaraja Temple in Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu is home to his Jeeva Samadhi.\nIn modern times, Asteroid 7853, \"Confucius\", was named after the Chinese thinker.\nTeaching and Disciples.\nConfucius was regarded as the first teacher who advocated for public welfare and the spread of education in China. Confucius devoted his entire life, from a relatively young age, to teaching. He pioneered private education adopting a curriculum known as the Six Arts, aimed at making education accessible to all social classes, and believed in its power to cultivate character rather than merely vocational skills. Confucius not only made teaching his profession but also contributed to the development of a distinct class of professionals in ancient China\u2014the gentlemen who were neither farmers, artisans, merchants, nor officials but instead dedicated themselves to teaching and potential government service.\nConfucius began teaching after he turned 30, and taught more than 3,000 students in his life, about 70 of whom were considered outstanding. His disciples and the early Confucian community they formed became the most influential intellectual force in the Warring States period. The Han dynasty historian Sima Qian dedicated a chapter in his \"Records of the Grand Historian\" to the biographies of Confucius's disciples, accounting for the influence they exerted in their time and afterward. Sima Qian recorded the names of 77 disciples in his collective biography, while \"Kongzi Jiayu\", another early source, records 76, not completely overlapping. The two sources together yield the names of 96 disciples. Twenty-two of them are mentioned in the \"Analects\", while the \"Mencius\" records 24.\nConfucius did not charge any tuition, and only requested a symbolic gift of a bundle of dried meat from any prospective student. According to his disciple Zigong, his master treated students like doctors treated patients and did not turn anybody away. Most of them came from Lu, Confucius's home state, with 43 recorded, but he accepted students from all over China, with six from the state of Wey (such as Zigong), three from Qin, two each from Chen and Qi, and one each from Cai, Chu, and Song. Confucius considered his students' personal background irrelevant, and accepted noblemen, commoners, and even former criminals such as Yan Zhuoju and Gongye Chang. His disciples from richer families would pay a sum commensurate with their wealth which was considered a ritual donation.\nConfucius's favorite disciple was Yan Hui, most probably one of the most impoverished of them all. Sima Niu, in contrast to Yan Hui, was from a hereditary noble family hailing from the Song state. Under Confucius's teachings, the disciples became well learned in the principles and methods of government. He often engaged in discussion and debate with his students and gave high importance to their studies in history, poetry, and ritual. Confucius advocated loyalty to principle rather than to individual acumen, in which reform was to be achieved by persuasion rather than violence. Even though Confucius denounced them for their practices, the aristocracy was likely attracted to the idea of having trustworthy officials who were studied in morals as the circumstances of the time made it desirable. In fact, the disciple Zilu even died defending his ruler in Wey.\nYang Hu, who was a subordinate of the Ji family, had dominated the Lu government from 505 to 502 and even attempted a coup, which narrowly failed. As a likely consequence, it was after this that the first disciples of Confucius were appointed to government positions. A few of Confucius's disciples went on to attain official positions of some importance, some of which were arranged by Confucius. By the time Confucius was 50 years old, the Ji family had consolidated their power in the Lu state over the ruling ducal house. Even though the Ji family had practices with which Confucius disagreed and disapproved, they nonetheless gave Confucius's disciples many opportunities for employment. Confucius continued to remind his disciples to stay true to their principles and renounced those who did not, all the while being openly critical of the Ji family.\nIn the West.\nThe influence of Confucius has been observed on multiple Western thinkers, including Niels Bohr, Benjamin Franklin, Allen Ginsberg, Thomas Jefferson, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Robert Cummings Neville, Alexander Pope, Ezra Pound, Fran\u00e7ois Quesnay, Friedrich Schiller, Voltaire, and Christian Wolff.\nVisual portraits.\nNo contemporary painting or sculpture of Confucius survives, and it was only during the Han dynasty that he was portrayed visually. Carvings often depict his legendary meeting with Laozi. Since that time there have been many portraits of Confucius as the ideal philosopher. An early verbal portrayal of Confucius is found in the chapter \"External Things\" () of the book \"Zhuangzi\" (), finished in about 3rd BCE, long after Confucius's death. The oldest known portrait of Confucius has been unearthed in the tomb of the Han dynasty ruler Marquis of Haihun (died ). The picture was painted on the wooden frame to a polished bronze mirror.\nIn former times, it was customary to have a portrait in Confucius Temples; however, during the reign of Hongwu Emperor (Taizu) of the Ming dynasty, it was decided that the only proper portrait of Confucius should be in the temple in his home town, Qufu in Shandong. In other temples, Confucius is represented by a memorial tablet. In 2006, the China Confucius Foundation commissioned a standard portrait of Confucius based on the Tang dynasty portrait by Wu Daozi.\nThe South Wall Frieze in the courtroom of the Supreme Court of the United States depicts Confucius as a teacher of harmony, learning, and virtue.\nFictional portrayals.\nThere have been two film adaptations of Confucius' life: the 1940 film \"Confucius\" starring Tang Huaiqiu, and the 2010 film \"Confucius\" starring Chow Yun-fat.\nConfucius appears as a leader in \"Civilization VII\", leading China.\nMemorials.\nSoon after Confucius's death, Qufu, his home town, became a place of devotion and remembrance. The Han dynasty \"Records of the Grand Historian\" records that it had already become a place of pilgrimage for ministers. It is still a major destination for cultural tourism, and many people visit his grave and the surrounding temples. There are also numerous temples dedicated to Confucius and distinguished Confucian scholars. These temples have been used for ceremonies paying tribute to Confucius as a revered Master, honoring his guiding principles that have shaped Chinese society.\nFollowers of Confucianism have a tradition of holding spectacular memorial ceremonies of Confucius () every year, using ceremonies that supposedly derived from Zhou Li () as recorded by Confucius, on the date of Confucius's birth. In the 20th century, this tradition was interrupted for several decades in mainland China, where the official stance of the Communist Party and the State was that Confucius and Confucianism represented reactionary feudalist beliefs which held that the subservience of the people to the aristocracy is a part of the natural order. All such ceremonies and rites were therefore banned. Only after the 1990s did the ceremony resume. As it is now considered a veneration of Chinese history and tradition, even Communist Party members may be found in attendance.\nIn Taiwan, where the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) strongly promoted Confucian beliefs in ethics and behavior, the tradition of the memorial ceremony of Confucius () is supported by the government and has continued without interruption. While not a national holiday, it does appear on all printed calendars, much as Father's Day or Christmas Day do in the Western world.\nIn South Korea, a grand-scale memorial ceremony called Seokjeon Daeje is held twice a year on Confucius's birthday and the anniversary of his death, at Confucian academies across the country and Sungkyunkwan in Seoul.\nDescendants.\nConfucius's descendants were repeatedly identified and honored by successive imperial governments with titles of nobility and official posts. They were honored with the rank of a marquis 35 times since Gaozu of the Han dynasty, and they were promoted to the rank of duke 42 times from the Tang dynasty to the Qing dynasty. Emperor Xuanzong of Tang first bestowed the title of \"Duke Wenxuan\" on Kong Suizhi of the 35th generation. In 1055, Emperor Renzong of Song first bestowed the title of \"Duke Yansheng\" on Kong Zongyuan of the 46th generation.\nDuring the Southern Song dynasty, the Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou fled south with the Song Emperor to Quzhou in Zhejiang, while the newly established Jin dynasty (1115\u20131234) in the north appointed Kong Duanyou's brother Kong Duancao who remained in Qufu as Duke Yansheng. From that time up until the Yuan dynasty, there were two Duke Yanshengs, one in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou. An invitation to come back to Qufu was extended to the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu by the Yuan-dynasty Emperor Kublai Khan. The title was taken away from the southern branch after Kong Zhu rejected the invitation, so the northern branch of the family kept the title of Duke Yansheng. The southern branch remained in Quzhou where they live to this day. Confucius's descendants in Quzhou alone number 30,000. The Hanlin Academy rank of Wujing boshi \u4e94\u7d93\u535a\u58eb was awarded to the southern branch at Quzhou by a Ming Emperor while the northern branch at Qufu held the title Duke Yansheng. The leader of the southern branch was \u5b54\u7965\u6977 Kong Xiangkai.\nIn 1351, during the reign of Emperor Toghon Tem\u00fcr of the Yuan dynasty, 54th-generation Kong Shao () moved from China to Korea during the Goryeo dynasty, and was received courteously by Princess Noguk (the Mongolian-born queen consort of the future king Gongmin). After being naturalized as a subject of Goryeo, he changed the hanja of his name from \"\u662d\" to \"\u7d39\" (both pronounced \"so\" in Korean), married a Korean woman and bore a son (Gong Yeo (), 1329\u20131397), therefore establishing the Changwon Gong clan (), whose ancestral seat was located in Changwon, South Gyeongsang Province. In 1794, during the reign of King Jeongjo, the clan then changed its name to Gokbu Gong clan () in honor of Confucius's birthplace Qufu ().\nFamous descendants include actors such as Gong Yoo (real name Gong Ji-cheol (\uacf5\uc9c0\ucca0)) and Gong Hyo-jin (\uacf5\ud6a8\uc9c4); and artists such as male idol group B1A4 member Gongchan (real name Gong Chan-sik (\uacf5\ucc2c\uc2dd)), singer-songwriter Minzy (real name Gong Min-ji (\uacf5\ubbfc\uc9c0)), as well as her great aunt, traditional folk dancer (\uacf5\uc625\uc9c4).\nDespite repeated dynastic change in China, the title of Duke Yansheng was bestowed upon successive generations of descendants until it was abolished by the Nationalist government in 1935. The last holder of the title, Kung Te-cheng of the 77th generation, was appointed Sacrificial Official to Confucius. Kung Te-cheng died in October 2008, and his son, Kung Wei-yi, the 78th lineal descendant, died in 1989. Kung Te-cheng's grandson, Kung Tsui-chang, the 79th lineal descendant, was born in 1975; his great-grandson, Kung Yu-jen, the 80th lineal descendant, was born in Taipei on 1 January 2006. Te-cheng's sister, Kong Demao, lives in mainland China and has written a book about her experiences growing up at the family estate in Qufu. Another sister, Kong Deqi, died as a young woman. Many descendants of Confucius still live in Qufu today.\nA descendant of Confucius, H. H. Kung, was the Premier of the Republic of China. One of his sons, (\u5b54\u4ee4\u5091), married Debra Paget who gave birth to Gregory Kung ().\nConfucius's family, the Kongs, have the longest recorded extant pedigree in the world today. The father-to-son family tree, now in its 83rd generation, has been recorded since the death of Confucius. According to the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC), he has two million known and registered descendants, and there are an estimated three million in all. Of these, several tens of thousands live outside of China. In the 14th century, a Kong descendant went to Korea, where an estimated 34,000 descendants of Confucius live today. One of the main lineages fled from the Kong ancestral home in Qufu during the Chinese Civil War in the 1940s and eventually settled in Taiwan. There are also branches of the Kong family who have converted to Islam after marrying Muslim women, in Dachuan in Gansu province in the 1800s, and in 1715 in Xuanwei in Yunnan province. Many of the Muslim Confucius descendants are descended from the marriage of Ma Jiaga (), a Muslim woman, and Kong Yanrong (), 59th generation descendant of Confucius in the year 1480, and are found among the Hui and Dongxiang peoples. The new genealogy includes the Muslims. Kong Dejun () is a prominent Islamic scholar and Arabist from Qinghai province and a 77th generation descendant of Confucius.\nBecause of the huge interest in the Confucius family tree, there was a project in China to test the DNA of known family members of the collateral branches in mainland China. Among other things, this would allow scientists to identify a common Y chromosome in male descendants of Confucius. If the descent were truly unbroken, father-to-son, since Confucius's lifetime, the males in the family would all have the same Y chromosome as their direct male ancestor, with slight mutations due to the passage of time. The aim of the genetic test was to help members of collateral branches in China who lost their genealogical records to prove their descent. However, in 2009, many of the collateral branches decided not to agree to DNA testing. Bryan Sykes, professor of genetics at Oxford University, understands this decision: \"The Confucius family tree has an enormous cultural significance ... It's not just a scientific question.\" The DNA testing was originally proposed to add new members, many of whose family record books were lost during 20th century upheavals, to the Confucian family tree. The main branch of the family which fled to Taiwan was never involved in the proposed DNA test at all.\nIn 2013, a DNA test performed on multiple different families who claimed descent from Confucius found that they shared the same Y chromosome as reported by Fudan University.\nThe fifth and most recent edition of the Confucius genealogy was printed by the CGCC. It was unveiled in a ceremony at Qufu on 24 September 2009. Women are now included for the first time.\nFurther reading.\n\"See and for extensive bibliographies\""}
{"id": "5826", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5826", "title": "Complex number", "text": "In mathematics, a complex number is an element of a number system that extends the real numbers with a specific element denoted , called the imaginary unit and satisfying the equation formula_1; every complex number can be expressed in the form formula_2, where and are real numbers. Because no real number satisfies the above equation, was called an imaginary number by Ren\u00e9 Descartes. For the complex number is called the ', and is called the '. The set of complex numbers is denoted by either of the symbols formula_3 or . Despite the historical nomenclature, \"imaginary\" complex numbers have a mathematical existence as firm as that of the real numbers, and they are fundamental tools in the scientific description of the natural world.\nComplex numbers allow solutions to all polynomial equations, even those that have no solutions in real numbers. More precisely, the fundamental theorem of algebra asserts that every non-constant polynomial equation with real or complex coefficients has a solution which is a complex number. For example, the equation\nformula_4\nhas no real solution, because the square of a real number cannot be negative, but has the two nonreal complex solutions formula_5 and formula_6.\nAddition, subtraction and multiplication of complex numbers can be naturally defined by using the rule formula_7 along with the associative, commutative, and distributive laws. Every nonzero complex number has a multiplicative inverse. This makes the complex numbers a field with the real numbers as a subfield. Because of these properties, , and which form is written depends upon convention and style considerations.\nThe complex numbers also form a real vector space of dimension two, with formula_8 as a standard basis. This standard basis makes the complex numbers a Cartesian plane, called the complex plane. This allows a geometric interpretation of the complex numbers and their operations, and conversely some geometric objects and operations can be expressed in terms of complex numbers. For example, the real numbers form the real line, which is pictured as the horizontal axis of the complex plane, while real multiples of formula_9 are the vertical axis. A complex number can also be defined by its geometric polar coordinates: the radius is called the absolute value of the complex number, while the angle from the positive real axis is called the argument of the complex number. The complex numbers of absolute value one form the unit circle. Adding a fixed complex number to all complex numbers defines a translation in the complex plane, and multiplying by a fixed complex number is a similarity centered at the origin (dilating by the absolute value, and rotating by the argument). The operation of complex conjugation is the reflection symmetry with respect to the real axis. \nThe complex numbers form a rich structure that is simultaneously an algebraically closed field, a commutative algebra over the reals, and a Euclidean vector space of dimension two. \nDefinition and basic operations.\nA complex number is an expression of the form , where and are real numbers, and is an abstract symbol, the so-called imaginary unit, whose meaning will be explained further below. For example, is a complex number.\nFor a complex number , the real number is called its \"real part\" , and the real number (not the complex number ) is its \"imaginary part\". The real part of a complex number is denoted , formula_10, or formula_11; the imaginary part is , formula_12, or formula_13: for example,formula_14, formula_15.\nA complex number can be identified with the ordered pair of real numbers formula_16, which may be interpreted as coordinates of a point in a Euclidean plane with standard coordinates, which is then called the \"complex plane\" or \"Argand diagram,\". The horizontal axis is generally used to display the real part, with increasing values to the right, and the imaginary part marks the vertical axis, with increasing values upwards. \nA real number can be regarded as a complex number , whose imaginary part is 0. A purely imaginary number is a complex number , whose real part is zero. It is common to write , , and ; for example, .\nThe set of all complex numbers is denoted by formula_17 (blackboard bold) or (upright bold).\nIn some disciplines such as electromagnetism and electrical engineering, is used instead of , as frequently represents electric current, and complex numbers are written as or .\nAddition and subtraction.\nTwo complex numbers formula_18 and formula_19 are added by separately adding their real and imaginary parts. That is to say:\nformula_20\nSimilarly, subtraction can be performed as\nformula_21\nThe addition can be geometrically visualized as follows: the sum of two complex numbers and , interpreted as points in the complex plane, is the point obtained by building a parallelogram from the three vertices , and the points of the arrows labeled and (provided that they are not on a line). Equivalently, calling these points , , respectively and the fourth point of the parallelogram the triangles and are congruent.\nMultiplication.\nThe product of two complex numbers is computed as follows:\nFor example, formula_23 \nIn particular, this includes as a special case the fundamental formula\nThis formula distinguishes the complex number \"i\" from any real number, since the square of any (negative or positive) real number is always a non-negative real number.\nWith this definition of multiplication and addition, familiar rules for the arithmetic of rational or real numbers continue to hold for complex numbers. More precisely, the distributive property, the commutative properties (of addition and multiplication) hold. Therefore, the complex numbers form an algebraic structure known as a \"field\", the same way as the rational or real numbers do.\nComplex conjugate, absolute value, argument and division.\nThe \"complex conjugate\" of the complex number is defined as\nformula_25 It is also denoted by some authors by formula_26. Geometrically, is the \"reflection\" of about the real axis. Conjugating twice gives the original complex number: formula_27 A complex number is real if and only if it equals its own conjugate. The unary operation of taking the complex conjugate of a complex number cannot be expressed by applying only their basic operations addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. \nFor any complex number , the product \nis a \"non-negative real\" number. This allows to define the \"absolute value\" (or \"modulus\" or \"magnitude\") of \"z\" to be the square root\nformula_29\nBy Pythagoras' theorem, formula_30 is the distance from the origin to the point representing the complex number \"z\" in the complex plane. In particular, the circle of radius one around the origin consists precisely of the numbers \"z\" such that formula_31. If formula_32 is a real number, then formula_33: its absolute value as a complex number and as a real number are equal. \nUsing the conjugate, the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number formula_34 can be computed to be \nformula_35 of reals to formula_3 is an instance of the \"Cayley\u2013Dickson construction\". Applying this construction iteratively to formula_37 then yields the quaternions, the octonions, the sedenions, and the trigintaduonions. This construction turns out to diminish the structural properties of the involved number systems. \nUnlike the reals, formula_17 is not an ordered field, that is to say, it is not possible to define a relation that is compatible with the addition and multiplication. In fact, in any ordered field, the square of any element is necessarily positive, so precludes the existence of an ordering on formula_39 Passing from formula_37 to the quaternions formula_41 loses commutativity, while the octonions (additionally to not being commutative) fail to be associative. The reals, complex numbers, quaternions and octonions are all normed division algebras over formula_42. By Hurwitz's theorem they are the only ones; the sedenions, the next step in the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction, fail to have this structure.\nThe Cayley\u2013Dickson construction is closely related to the regular representation of formula_43 thought of as an formula_42-algebra (an formula_45-vector space with a multiplication), with respect to the basis . This means the following: the formula_42-linear map\nformula_47\nfor some fixed complex number can be represented by a matrix (once a basis has been chosen). With respect to the basis , this matrix is\nformula_48\nthat is, the one mentioned in the section on matrix representation of complex numbers above. While this is a linear representation of formula_3 in the 2 \u00d7 2 real matrices, it is not the only one. Any matrix\nformula_50\nhas the property that its square is the negative of the identity matrix: . Then\nformula_51\nis also isomorphic to the field formula_43 and gives an alternative complex structure on formula_53 This is generalized by the notion of a linear complex structure.\nHypercomplex numbers also generalize formula_54 formula_43 formula_56 and formula_57 For example, this notion contains the split-complex numbers, which are elements of the ring formula_58 (as opposed to formula_59 for complex numbers). In this ring, the equation has four solutions.\nThe field formula_42 is the completion of formula_61 the field of rational numbers, with respect to the usual absolute value metric. Other choices of metrics on formula_62 lead to the fields formula_63 of -adic numbers (for any prime number ), which are thereby analogous to formula_45. There are no other nontrivial ways of completing formula_62 than formula_42 and formula_67 by Ostrowski's theorem. The algebraic closures formula_68 of formula_63 still carry a norm, but (unlike formula_3) are not complete with respect to it. The completion formula_71 of formula_68 turns out to be algebraically closed. By analogy, the field is called -adic complex numbers.\nThe fields formula_54 formula_67 and their finite field extensions, including formula_43 are called local fields."}
{"id": "5828", "revid": "308199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5828", "title": "Cryptozoology", "text": "Cryptozoology is a pseudoscience and subculture that searches for and studies unknown, legendary, or extinct animals whose present existence is disputed or unsubstantiated, particularly those popular in folklore, such as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster, Yeti, the chupacabra, the Jersey Devil, or the Mokele-mbembe. Cryptozoologists refer to these entities as \"cryptids\", a term coined by the subculture. Because it does not follow the scientific method, cryptozoology is considered a pseudoscience by mainstream science: it is neither a branch of zoology nor of folklore studies. It was originally founded in the 1950s by zoologists Bernard Heuvelmans and Ivan T. Sanderson.\nScholars have noted that the subculture rejected mainstream approaches from an early date, and that adherents often express hostility to mainstream science. Scholars studying cryptozoologists and their influence (including cryptozoology's association with Young Earth creationism) noted parallels in cryptozoology and other pseudosciences such as ghost hunting and ufology, and highlighted uncritical media propagation of cryptozoologist claims.\nTerminology, history, and approach.\nAs a field, cryptozoology originates from the works of Bernard Heuvelmans, a Belgian zoologist, and Ivan T. Sanderson, a Scottish zoologist. Notably, Heuvelmans published \"On the Track of Unknown Animals\" (French: ) in 1955, a landmark work among cryptozoologists that was followed by numerous other similar works. In addition, Sanderson published a series of books that contributed to the developing hallmarks of cryptozoology, including \"Abominable Snowmen: Legend Come to Life\" (1961). Heuvelmans himself traced cryptozoology to the work of Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans, who theorized that a large unidentified species of seal was responsible for sea serpent reports.\n\"Cryptozoology\" is 'the study of hidden animals' (from Ancient Greek: \u03ba\u03c1\u03c5\u03c0\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2, \"krypt\u00f3s\" \"hidden, secret\"; Ancient Greek \u03b6\u1ff7\u03bf\u03bd, \"z\u014dion\" \"animal\", and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2, \"logos\", i.e. \"knowledge, study\"). The term dates from 1959 or before\u2014 Heuvelmans attributes the coinage of the term \"cryptozoology\" to Sanderson. Following \"cryptozoology\", the term \"cryptid\" was coined in 1983 by cryptozoologist J. E. Wall in the summer issue of the International Society of Cryptozoology newsletter. According to Wall \"[It has been] suggested that new terms be coined to replace sensational and often misleading terms like 'monster'. My suggestion is 'cryptid', meaning a living thing having the quality of being hidden or unknown ... describing those creatures which are (or may be) subjects of cryptozoological investigation.\" \nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines the noun \"cryptid\" as \"an animal whose existence or survival to the present day is disputed or unsubstantiated; any animal of interest to a cryptozoologist\". While used by most cryptozoologists, the term \"cryptid\" is not used by academic zoologists. In a textbook aimed at undergraduates, academics Caleb W. Lack and Jacques Rousseau note that the subculture's focus on what it deems to be \"cryptids\" is a pseudoscientific extension of older belief in monsters and other similar entities from the folkloric record, yet with a \"new, more scientific-sounding name: cryptids\".\nWhile biologists regularly identify new species, cryptozoologists often focus on creatures from the folkloric record. Most famously, these include the Loch Ness Monster, Champ (folklore), Bigfoot, the chupacabra, as well as other \"imposing beasts that could be labeled as monsters\". In their search for these entities, cryptozoologists may employ devices such as motion-sensitive cameras, night-vision equipment, and audio-recording equipment. While there have been attempts to codify cryptozoological approaches, unlike biologists, zoologists, botanists, and other academic disciplines, however, \"there are no accepted, uniform, or successful methods for pursuing cryptids\". Some scholars have identified precursors to modern cryptozoology in certain medieval approaches to the folkloric record, and the psychology behind the cryptozoology approach has been the subject of academic study.\nFew cryptozoologists have a formal science education, and fewer still have a science background directly relevant to cryptozoology. Adherents often misrepresent the academic backgrounds of cryptozoologists. According to writer Daniel Loxton and paleontologist Donald Prothero, \"[c]ryptozoologists have often promoted 'Professor Roy Mackal, PhD.' as one of their leading figures and one of the few with a legitimate doctorate in biology. What is rarely mentioned, however, is that he had no training that would qualify him to undertake competent research on exotic animals. This raises the specter of 'credential mongering', by which an individual or organization feints a person's graduate degree as proof of expertise, even though his or her training is not specifically relevant to the field under consideration.\" Besides Heuvelmans, Sanderson, and Mackal, other notable cryptozoologists with academic backgrounds include Grover Krantz, Karl Shuker, and Richard Greenwell.\nHistorically, notable cryptozoologists have often identified instances featuring \"irrefutable evidence\" (such as Sanderson and Krantz), only for the evidence to be revealed as the product of a hoax. This may occur during a closer examination by experts or upon confession of the hoaxer.\nExpeditions.\nCryptozoologists have often led unsuccessful expeditions to find evidence of cryptids. Bigfoot researcher Ren\u00e9 Dahinden led searches into caves to find evidence of sasquatch, as early sasquatch legends claimed they lived in rocky areas. Despite the failure of these searches, he spent years trying to find proof of bigfoot. Lensgrave Adam Christoffer Knuth led an expedition into Lake Tele in the Congo to find the Mokele-mbembe in 2018. While the expedition was a failure, they discovered a new species of green algae.\nYoung Earth creationism.\nA subset of cryptozoology promotes the pseudoscience of Young Earth creationism, rejecting conventional science in favor of a literal Biblical interpretation and promoting concepts such as \"living dinosaurs\". Science writer Sharon A. Hill observes that the Young Earth creationist segment of cryptozoology is \"well-funded and able to conduct expeditions with a goal of finding a living dinosaur that they think would invalidate evolution\".\nAnthropologist Jeb J. Card says that \"[c]reationists have embraced cryptozoology and some cryptozoological expeditions are funded by and conducted by creationists hoping to disprove evolution.\" In a 2013 interview, paleontologist Donald Prothero notes an uptick in creationist cryptozoologists. He observes that \"[p]eople who actively search for Loch Ness monsters or Mokele Mbembe do it entirely as creationist ministers. They think that if they found a dinosaur in the Congo it would overturn all of evolution. It wouldn't. It would just be a late-occurring dinosaur, but that's their mistaken notion of evolution.\"\nCiting a 2013 exhibit at the Petersburg, Kentucky-based Creation Museum, which claimed that dragons were once biological creatures who walked the earth alongside humanity and is broadly dedicated to Young Earth creationism, religious studies academic Justin Mullis notes that \"[c]ryptozoology has a long and curious history with Young Earth Creationism, with this new exhibit being just one of the most recent examples\".\nAcademic Paul Thomas analyzes the influence and connections between cryptozoology in his 2020 study of the Creation Museum and the creationist theme park Ark Encounter. Thomas comments that, \"while the Creation Museum and the Ark Encounter are flirting with pseudoarchaeology, coquettishly whispering pseudoarchaeological rhetoric, they are each fully in bed with cryptozoology\" and observes that \"[y]oung-earth creationists and cryptozoologists make natural bed fellows. As with pseudoarchaeology, both young-earth creationists and cryptozoologists bristle at the rejection of mainstream secular science and lament a seeming conspiracy to prevent serious consideration of their claims.\"\nLack of critical media coverage.\nMedia outlets have often uncritically disseminated information from cryptozoologist sources, including newspapers that repeat false claims made by cryptozoologists or television shows that feature cryptozoologists as monster hunters (such as the popular and purportedly nonfiction American television show \"MonsterQuest\", which aired from 2007 to 2010). Media coverage of purported \"cryptids\" often fails to provide more likely explanations, further propagating claims made by cryptozoologists.\nReception and pseudoscience.\nThere is a broad consensus among academics that cryptozoology is a pseudoscience. The subculture is regularly criticized for reliance on anecdotal information and because in the course of investigating animals that most scientists believe are unlikely to have existed, cryptozoologists do not follow the scientific method. No academic course of study nor university degree program grants the status of \"cryptozoologist\" and the subculture is primarily the domain of individuals without training in the natural sciences.\nAnthropologist Jeb J. Card summarizes cryptozoology in a survey of pseudoscience and pseudoarchaeology:\nCard notes that \"cryptozoologists often show their disdain and even hatred for professional scientists, including those who enthusiastically participated in cryptozoology\", which he traces back to Heuvelmans's early \"rage against critics of cryptozoology\". He finds parallels with cryptozoology and other pseudosciences, such as ghost hunting and ufology, and compares the approach of cryptozoologists to colonial big-game hunters, and to aspects of European imperialism. According to Card, \"[m]ost cryptids are framed as the subject of indigenous legends typically collected in the heyday of comparative folklore, though such legends may be heavily modified or worse. Cryptozoology's complicated mix of sympathy, interest, and appropriation of indigenous culture (or non-indigenous construction of it) is also found in New Age circles and dubious \"Indian burial grounds\" and other legends [...] invoked in hauntings such as the \"Amityville\" hoax [...]\".\nIn a 2011 foreword for \"The American Biology Teacher\", then National Association of Biology Teachers president Dan Ward uses cryptozoology as an example of \"technological pseudoscience\" that may confuse students about the scientific method. Ward says that \"Cryptozoology [...] is not valid science or even science at all. It is monster hunting.\" Historian of science Brian Regal includes an entry for cryptozoology in his \"Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia\" (2009). Regal says that \"as an intellectual endeavor, cryptozoology has been studied as much as cryptozoologists have sought hidden animals\".\nIn a 1992 issue of \"Folklore\", folklorist V\u00e9ronique Campion-Vincent says:\nCampion-Vincent says that \"four currents can be distinguished in the study of mysterious animal appearances\": \"Forteans\" (\"compiler[s] of anomalies\" such as via publications like the \"Fortean Times\"), \"occultists\" (which she describes as related to \"Forteans\"), \"folklorists\", and \"cryptozoologists\". Regarding cryptozoologists, Campion-Vincent says that \"this movement seems to deserve the appellation of parascience, like parapsychology: the same corpus is reviewed; many scientists participate, but for those who have an official status of university professor or researcher, the participation is a private hobby\".\nIn her \"Encyclopedia of American Folklore\", academic Linda Watts says that \"folklore concerning unreal animals or beings, sometimes called monsters, is a popular field of inquiry\" and describes cryptozoology as an example of \"American narrative traditions\" that \"feature many monsters\".\nIn his analysis of cryptozoology, folklorist Peter Dendle says that \"cryptozoology devotees consciously position themselves in defiance of mainstream science\" and that:\nIn a paper published in 2013, Dendle refers to cryptozoologists as \"contemporary monster hunters\" that \"keep alive a sense of wonder in a world that has been very thoroughly charted, mapped, and tracked, and that is largely available for close scrutiny on Google Earth and satellite imaging\" and that \"on the whole the devotion of substantial resources for this pursuit betrays a lack of awareness of the basis for scholarly consensus (largely ignoring, for instance, evidence of evolutionary biology and the fossil record).\"\nAccording to historian Mike Dash, few scientists doubt there are thousands of unknown animals, particularly invertebrates, awaiting discovery; however, cryptozoologists are largely uninterested in researching and cataloging newly discovered species of ants or beetles, instead focusing their efforts towards \"more elusive\" creatures that have often defied decades of work aimed at confirming their existence.\nPaleontologist George Gaylord Simpson (1984) lists cryptozoology among examples of human gullibility, along with creationism:\nPaleontologist Donald Prothero (2007) cites cryptozoology as an example of pseudoscience and categorizes it, along with Holocaust denial and UFO abductions claims, as aspects of American culture that are \"clearly baloney\".\nIn \"Scientifical Americans: The Culture of Amateur Paranormal Researchers\" (2017), Hill surveys the field and discusses aspects of the subculture, noting internal attempts at creating more scientific approaches and the involvement of Young Earth creationists and a prevalence of hoaxes. She concludes that many cryptozoologists are \"passionate and sincere in their belief that mystery animals exist. As such, they give deference to every report of a sighting, often without critical questioning. As with the ghost seekers, cryptozoologists are convinced that they will be the ones to solve the mystery and make history. With the lure of mystery and money undermining diligent and ethical research, the field of cryptozoology has serious credibility problems.\"\nOrganizations.\nThere have been several organizations, of varying types, dedicated or related to cryptozoology. These include:\nMuseums and exhibitions.\nThe zoological and cryptozoological collection and archive of Bernard Heuvelmans is held at the Mus\u00e9e Cantonal de Zoologie in Lausanne and consists of around \"1,000 books, 25,000 files, 25,000 photographs, correspondence, and artifacts\".\nIn 2006, the Bates College Museum of Art held the \"Cryptozoology: Out of Time Place Scale\" exhibition, which compared cryptozoological creatures with recently extinct animals like the thylacine and extant taxa like the coelacanth, once thought long extinct (living fossils). The following year, the American Museum of Natural History put on a mixed exhibition of imaginary and extinct animals, including the elephant bird \"Aepyornis maximus\" and the great ape \"Gigantopithecus blacki\", under the name \"Mythic Creatures: Dragons, Unicorns and Mermaids\".\nIn 2003, cryptozoologist Loren Coleman opened the International Cryptozoology Museum in Portland, Maine. The museum houses more than 3000 cryptozoology related artifacts."}
{"id": "5829", "revid": "46241567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5829", "title": "Craig Charles", "text": "Craig Joseph Charles (born 11 July 1964) is an English actor, comedian, DJ, and television and radio presenter. He is best known for his roles as Dave Lister in the science fiction sitcom \"Red Dwarf\" and Lloyd Mullaney in the soap opera \"Coronation Street\" (2005\u20132015). He presented the gladiator-style game show \"Robot Wars\" from 1998 to 2004, and narrated the comedy endurance show \"Takeshi's Castle\". As a DJ, he appears on BBC Radio 6 Music.\nCharles first appeared on television as a performance poet, which led to minor presenting roles. After finding fame in \"Red Dwarf\", he regularly featured on national television with celebrity appearances on many popular shows while he continued to host a wide variety of programmes. From 2017 to 2022, Charles hosted \"The Gadget Show\" for Channel 5. His acting credits include playing inmate Eugene Buffy in the ITV drama \"The Governor\", and leading roles in the British films \"Fated\" and \"Clubbing to Death\". \nCharles has hosted \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\" on BBC radio since 2002, and performs DJ sets at numerous clubs and festivals, nationally and internationally. In September 2015, he left \"Coronation Street\" after ten years of acting, to film new episodes of \"Red Dwarf\" and to continue his BBC Radio 6 Music and BBC Radio 2 broadcasting.\nEarly life.\nCraig Joseph Charles was born in Liverpool on 11 July 1964, the son of a Guyanese father and Irish mother. He grew up on the Cantril Farm housing estate with his older brother, Dean (died 2014), and two other brothers, Jimmy and Emile. He attended West Derby Comprehensive School followed by Childwall Hall College of Further Education, studying A-levels in History, Government &amp; Politics, English Literature and General Studies. He won a national competition run by \"The Guardian\" newspaper for a poem he wrote when he was 12 years old. Upon leaving school, Charles spent time working in a studio at Central Hall on Renshaw Street in Liverpool.\nEarly career.\nCharles began his career as a contemporary and urban performance poet on the British cabaret circuit. His performances were considered original, with Charles described as having a natural ironic wit which appealed to talent scouts. In 1981, Charles climbed on stage at a Teardrop Explodes concert and recited a humorous, but derogatory, poem about the band's singer, Julian Cope. Charles was invited to open subsequent gigs for the group, and went on to perform as a support act in pubs and clubs for the following three years, and at events such as the \"Larks in the Park\" music festival at Sefton Park (1982). He performed poetry reading poems by Vladimir Mayakovsky, W. H. Auden and E. E. Cummings, at Liverpool's Everyman Theatre (1983), with such poets as Roger McGough and Adrian Henri.\nCharles was involved in the Liverpool music scene, writing and singing lyrics for a number of local rock bands. In 1980, he played keyboards, bass and provided voice in the rock band Watt 4. He performed his political rap lyrics as a 'Wordsmith'. In 1983, Charles was invited to record a session on the John Peel BBC Radio show, performing his poems backed by a band. This was his first professional engagement. He recorded a further Peel Session in 1984.\nCharles realised he was using poetry as a vehicle for his sense of humour, and progressed into stand-up comedy. He was part of the \"Red Wedge\" comedy tour in 1986, which aimed to raise awareness of the social problems of the time, in support of the Labour Party. He also performed his first one-man show in 1986, which premiered in Edinburgh, and then toured internationally. Charles was a guest on programmes including Janice Long's Radio 1 show, and he was a regular panellist on Ned Sherrin's chat show \"Loose Ends\" (1987\u201388) on BBC Radio 4.\nTelevision career.\nPerformance poetry.\nCharles first appeared on television as the resident poet on the arts programme \"Riverside\" on BBC2 and on the day-time BBC1 chat show \"Pebble Mill at One\". Charles was the resident poet on the Channel 4 programme \"Black on Black\" (1985) and its entertainment-based successor \"Club Mix\" (1986), and he appeared, weekly, as a John Cooper Clarke-style 'punk poet' on the BBC2 pop music programme \"Oxford Road Show\" (ORS). Charles performed his political poems as stand-up comedy on the late-night show \"Saturday Live\" (1985\u201387) and on the prime-time BBC1 chat show \"Wogan\" (1986\u201387), where he performed a topical poem in a weekly feature. He also appeared as a guest on shows including \"Open Air\" (1988). Charles included significant acting in his performance style, enabling him to put the emotion across.\nIn September 2015, Charles performed his \"epic\" poem \"Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood\" live with the BBC Philharmonic orchestra, in a concert to be broadcast on BBC Radio 2's \"Friday Night Is Music Night\" at Halloween.\n\"Red Dwarf\".\nCharles' first television acting role was the Liverpudlian slob Dave Lister in science fiction comedy series \"Red Dwarf\" starting in 1988. He was introduced to the show by \"Saturday Live\" and \"Red Dwarf\" producer Paul Jackson, who wanted his opinion on whether the black character Cat was a racist stereotype. Charles, who like all of the eventual main cast had no acting experience, was eventually offered an audition after begging Jackson.\nCharles has appeared in all twelve series, as well as \"\" (2020). Charles' younger brother, Emile Charles, guest-starred in the third-series episode \"Timeslides\", and the songs \"Bad News\" and \"Cash\" in this episode were written by Charles and performed by his band. The role has involved Charles playing a variety of alternative characters, including a gangster, a cowboy and angelic and evil versions of Lister, and in him carrying out a wide range of stunts, and acting involving special effects. All series, except 7 and 9, were recorded in front of a studio audience. Along with Danny John-Jules (Cat), Charles is one of only two cast members to appear in every episode of \"Red Dwarf\" to date.\nCharles reads the audiobook editions of both the \"Red Dwarf\" novel \"Last Human\" and his book \"The Log: A Dwarfer's Guide to Everything\", and he regularly attends sci-fi, comedy and memorabilia conventions in connection with the \"Red Dwarf\" franchise. During \"\", Lister visits the set of \"Coronation Street\", where he meets the actor Craig Charles.\n\"Robot Wars\".\nCharles presented \"Robot Wars\" on BBC2 (1998\u20132003) and Channel 5 (2003\u201304), from series 2 until series 7, which included two \"Extreme\" series and numerous 'specials'. Charles was the main host and presided over the arena in which teams of amateur engineers battled their home-made radio-controlled robots against each other, and against the house robots. Charles introduced the show, enthusiastically announced the results of the battles and spoke to the contestants after the main events. He ended each episode with a short \"Robot Wars\"-themed poem. Charles' son, Jack, appeared on the show on several occasions, and was a contestant on \"Team Nemesis\" during series 4. Charles also hosted the \"Robot Wars Live\" UK tour, in 2001 and shows performed at the Wembley Arena.\n\"Robot Wars\" returned to the BBC in 2016. Charles stated his interest in hosting it again, but the job went to Dara \u00d3 Briain and Angela Scanlon.\n\"Takeshi's Castle\".\nCharles provided the English voice-over commentary for the Challenge (2002\u201304) rebroadcast of the popular game show \"Takeshi's Castle\", originally by Tokyo Broadcasting System in Japan. In each episode, between 100 and 142 contestants attempted to pass a series of wacky and near-impossible physical challenges to reach the Show Down at the castle against Japanese actor Takeshi Kitano for a chance to win large cash prizes. Charles co-wrote the programme and commentated throughout all 122 episodes of the four series, and also some special and \"best of\" episodes. He provided comedy insights into the contestants' abilities, which were designed to appeal to adult audiences, as well as younger viewers \u2013 and also coined the term \"Keshi Heads\" to describe fans of the show. A 2013 reboot narrated by Dick and Dom was not as well received.\n\"Coronation Street\".\nIn 2005, Charles joined the main cast of \"Coronation Street\", playing a philandering taxicab driver, Lloyd Mullaney. Charles introduced aspects of the character himself, making Lloyd a Northern Soul DJ and record collector, and funk music enthusiast. Charles has chosen funk and soul songs playing as backing tracks during scenes, and posters for \"The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club\" and \"Red Dwarf\" have appeared in the background.\nCharles portrayed Lloyd as tough, but kind-hearted and romantic, and the character was popular with viewers. Charles added a comedy element to the role, but was also involved in traumatic and emotional scenes with intricate storylines. In 2010, his character was involved in the show's dramatic 50th anniversary tram crash storyline, which was broadcast live. Charles presented documentaries for the show, including \"50 Years of Corrie Stunts\" (2010), which is included on the \"Tram Crash\" DVD. In November 2011, Charles took time off from \"Coronation Street\" to film a new series of \"Red Dwarf\", returning in April 2012. In February 2014 an online mini-series, \"Steve &amp; Lloyd's Streetcar Stories\", ran alongside the television show's storyline.\nIn May 2015, Craig announced he would be leaving \"Coronation Street\" for \"Red Dwarf,\" BBC Radio 2 and BBC Radio 6 Music. Lloyd left in a red Cadillac during the live episode on 23 September, although his final pre-recorded farewell scenes with Steve were shown during the following episode.\nOther acting roles.\nCharles has acted in episodes of popular dramas such as \"The Bill\" (1995), \"EastEnders\" (2002) and \"Holby City\" (2003) and in the comedy \"The 10 Percenters\" (1996). Charles played the emotionally disturbed and violent prisoner, Eugene Buffy, in the highly successful Lynda La Plante drama series \"The Governor\" (1996); the title role in the Channel 4 pirate sitcom \"Captain Butler\" (1997); the warden of a women's prison in the Canadian sci-fi fantasy \"Lexx\" (2001); Detective Chief Inspector Mercer in seven episodes of the BBC soap opera \"Doctors\" (2003); and soccer agent, Joel Brooks, in the Sky TV football soap \"Dream Team\" (2004).\nOther presenting roles.\nCharles has presented children's television programmes, including \"What's That Noise?\" (1989) and \"Parallel 9\" (1992) on BBC1 and \"Go Getters\" (1994) on ITV. He was the travelling reporter for the highly acclaimed, but controversial, BBC 'mockumentary' \"Ghostwatch\", which tricked viewers into believing it was a live investigation into ghost sightings in a suburban home on Halloween night (1992). Charles presented the virtual reality game show \"Cyberzone\" (1993) on BBC2; the late-night entertainment show \"Funky Bunker\" (1997) on ITV; the reality show \"Jailbreak\" (2000) on Channel 5; the discussion show \"Amazing Space: The Pub Guide to the Universe\" (2001) on National Geographic; and the late-night current affairs chat show \"Weapons of Mass Distraction\" (2004) on ITV.\nOther appearances.\nCharles has appeared on celebrity editions of \"University Challenge\" (1998), \"Can't Cook, Won't Cook\" (1998), \"The Weakest Link\" (2004), \"The Chase\" (2012) and \"Pointless\" (2013), and comedy panel shows such as \"Have I Got News for You\" (1995), \"Just a Minute\" (1995) and \"They Think It's All Over\" (1996) and Keith Lemon's \"Through the Keyhole\" (2014). He was a team captain on the sci-fi quiz series \"Space Cadets\" (1997) on Channel 4, which guest-starred William Shatner. Charles has opened \"The National Lottery Draw\" (1997) and his home has featured on \"Through the Keyhole\". Charles was a contestant in the \"Celebrity Poker Club\" tournament (2004) on Challenge, where he reached the semi-finals, and in the Channel 4 reality game show, \"The Games\" (2005), which documented the contestants' intensive training regime and each live Olympic Games-style sporting event.\nFrom 16 November 2014, Charles took part in the fourteenth series of \"I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!\" However, on 20 November, Charles left the series soon after learning that his brother Dean had died after suffering a heart attack.\nRadio.\nAs well as his early appearances on shows such as Radio 4's \"Loose Ends\" (1987\u201388) and \"Kaleidoscope\" in the early 1990s, Charles could be heard on the London Radio Station Kiss 100 (Kiss FM) as the breakfast show presenter. In 1995, Charles played the Porter in Steven Berkoff's adaptation of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\" on Radio 4.\nSince 2002, Charles has been a DJ on BBC Radio 6 Music presenting \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\", on air on Saturday evenings 6\u00a0pm to 9\u00a0pm, where he plays a diverse range of funk and soul music, from classic tracks to the latest releases, and provides publicity for less familiar bands. Charles explains the context for the music and carries out interviews with guest musicians. He was with the station at its launch, and while it was being tested during the previous year, under the name Network Y. Charles has also hosted the station's \"Breakfast Show\" (2004), and sits in for other presenters including Andrew Collins, Phil Wilding, Phill Jupitus and Radcliffe &amp; Maconie.\nFrom January until November 2014, Charles also broadcast \"The Funk and Soul Show\" live on BBC Radio 2, immediately after his 6 Music show. He regularly sits in for various presenters, and has presented numerous programmes on the station, including \"The Craig Charles Soul All-Nighter\" (2011), which he hosted continuously for 12 hours, and the \"Beatleland\" (2012) documentary on The Beatles. Charles has also chosen music as a guest of other broadcasters such as Ken Bruce on Radio 2 and Liz Kershaw on 6 Music. Charles covered for Graham Norton on Radio 2's Saturday mid-morning show during Norton's ten-week 2015 summer break. From 16 April 2016 until 18 June 2022, Charles presented the House Party on Saturday nights on BBC Radio 2, with the show airing between 10\u00a0pm and midnight. For eight weeks from April\u2013June 2020, he also presented \"Craig Charles At Teatime\" between 4\u00a0pm and 7\u00a0pm on weekdays on Radio 6 Music. The show was sometimes billed as \"Craig Charles Weekend Workout\" on Fridays.\nSince 18 October 2021, Charles has hosted the weekday afternoon show on BBC Radio 6 Music (1\u00a0pm \u2013 4\u00a0pm). The shows include the \"Trunk of Punk\" and the \"Jar of Ska\". In 2023 the weekday show won the Gold Aria award for Best Music Entertainment Show.\nMusic.\nCharles has been involved in the music industry through much of his career. His bands have included Watt 4 (1980), in which he played keyboards and sang; Craig Charles and the Beat Burglars (1989); The Sons of Gordon Gekko (1989), where he wrote lyrics and also composed tunes; and The Eye (2000\u201302), with whom he recorded the rock album \"Giving You the Eye, Live at the Edinburgh Festival\". Charles plays guitar and piano.\nIn 1987, Charles provided the poem track used for the opening credits of the BBC series \"The Marksman\" (in which he also acted), which is included on the album \"The Marksman: Music from the BBC TV Series\". Charles wrote lyrics for Suzanne Rhatigan's album \"To Hell with Love\" (1992). In 1993, Charles was signed to the Acid Jazz record label.\nIn 2009, Charles formed the Fantasy Funk Band from the leading British musicians in the genre, and has presented the band at festivals, including Glastonbury and the BBC's Proms in the Park. As a continuation of his 6 Music show, Charles regularly takes the Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club to varied venues across the UK and abroad, and to the major UK music festivals. He performs live DJ sets, occasionally comperes and curates events, including his own Craig Charles Fantasy Weekender, and has broadcast the radio show live from festival locations.\nIn 2012, Charles released the compilation album \"The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club\", on CD and as a digital download, as part of a three-album deal with Freestyle Records. The second volume was released in the same format in 2013, and the third in 2014. He followed these with a \"Craig Charles Funk and Soul Classics\" album of three CDs in 2015.\nStand-up comedy and theatre.\nCharles returned to stand-up comedy between 1995 and 2001, regularly touring his one-man adult-rated shows nationally and releasing the videos \"Craig Charles: Live on Earth!\" (1995), \"Live Official Bootleg\" (1996) and \"Sickbag\" (2000). International performances included the Great Norwegian Comedy Festival and the Melbourne International Comedy Festival.\nCharles appeared in the John Godber comedy play \"Teechers\", in which he swapped in and out of various roles, at the Arts Theatre, London, and at the Edinburgh Festival (1989), and he played Idle Jack in the pantomime \"Dick Whittington\", at the Hull New Theatre (1997). In 2000, he performed the show \"Craig Charles and His Band\" at the Edinburgh Festival.\nCharles has a regular slot at Butlins Minehead House Of Fun Weekend every third November for three nights, of DJing, Comedy, Twanging and singing.\nFilm roles.\nCharles played Eddie in the 1987 political drama \"Business as Usual\". In 2006, Charles starred in two British feature films: the fantasy film \"Fated\" and the gangster film \"Clubbing to Death\". Charles voiced Zipper the Cat in the animation \"Prince Cinders\" (1993) and Asterix in \"Asterix Conquers America\" (1994). Roles in short films include playing Keith Dennis in the comedy \"The Colour of Funny\" (1999) and Mark in the drama \"Ten Minutes\" (2004).\nWriting.\nIn 1993, Charles worked with Russell Bell on the \"Craig Charles Almanac of Total Knowledge\", writing about his 'streetwise' sense of humour on a range of topics, from the world's most embarrassing stories to how to explain the mysteries of the universe. In 1997, Charles and Bell wrote Charles' \"Red Dwarf\" character's book \"The Log\", in which Lister decides to leave a log detailing mankind's greatest achievements. In 1998, Charles published \"No Other Blue\", a collection of his poetry, with illustrations by Philippa Drakeford, on diverse personal subjects including prison, his mother's final illness, love and politics at home and abroad. More recently, he has written a series of nursery rhymes titled \"Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood\".\nIn 2000, Charles wrote his first autobiography about his experiences growing up in Liverpool, titled \"No Irish, No Niggers\". In 2007, he announced he would release his autobiography, planned for March 2008, published by Hodder Headline and titled \"On the Rocks\", which would cover the recent incidents in his life and be based on much of his journal, which Charles said he kept while in rehab.\nCharles has been involved in journalism and has had a column in \"Time Out\" magazine. In 1994, he launched a single issue of \"Comedy\" magazine with articles dedicated to the comedy circuit. In 2005 and 2006, Charles was a monthly columnist for the \"Liverpool Echo\" newspaper. His television writing credits include \"The Easter Stories\" (1994), \"Funky Bunker\" (1997) and \"Takeshi's Castle\" (2002). He is also involved in music journalism, as he wrote liner notes for the funk and soul music producer Mr. Confuse for his albums \"Feel The Fire\" (2008), \"Do You Realize\" (2012) and \"Only A Man\" (2018) regarding his work as a music presenter for \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\" on BBC Radio 6 Music.\nPersonal life.\nCharles resides in Altrincham, Greater Manchester. He has three children: a son named Jack from his first marriage to actress Cathy Tyson, and two daughters named Anna-Jo and Nellie from his second marriage to Jackie Fleming.\nIn July 1994, Charles and another man were charged with rape and four counts of indecent assault, following allegations by an associate and ex-girlfriend of Charles. Charles was remanded in custody for three-and-a-half months before being granted bail, during which time he was assaulted by a man wielding a makeshift knife. In March 1995, Charles and his co-accused were acquitted of all charges at trial. After being acquitted, Charles spoke of the need to restore anonymity for those accused of rape. He stated: \"The fact that my name and address along with my picture can appear on the front of the papers before the so-called 'victim' has even signed a statement proves that anonymity for rape defendants is a must and that the law must be changed.\"\nCharles has battled drug addiction: he described himself in 2015 as \"quite an addictive person\", trying to find healthier addictions, of which work was one. In June 2006, newspaper allegations of crack cocaine use resulted in Charles being suspended from both \"Coronation Street\" and BBC Radio 6 Music. In August, Charles was arrested and released on bail pending further enquiries, and in September he accepted a caution for possession of a Class A drug. Charles returned to hosting his 6 Music show from November 2006 and filming \"Coronation Street\" from January 2007. In a 2015 interview, Charles spoke of his need to remain \"vigilant\" in abstaining from drugs. In 2020, he said that the newspaper reports were the best thing that could have happened to him, leading him to join Narcotics Anonymous and straighten out his personal life."}
{"id": "5830", "revid": "48135610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5830", "title": "County Mayo", "text": "County Mayo (; ) is a county in Ireland. In the West of Ireland, in the province of Connacht, it is named after the village of Mayo, now generally known as Mayo Abbey. Mayo County Council is the local authority. The population was 137,231 at the 2022 census. The boundaries of the county, which was formed in 1585, reflect the Mac William \u00cdochtar lordship at that time.\nGeography.\nIt is bounded on the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean; on the south by County Galway; on the east by County Roscommon; and on the northeast by County Sligo. Mayo is the third-largest of Ireland's 32 counties in area and 18th largest in terms of population. It is the second-largest of Connacht's five counties in both size and population. Mayo has of coastline, or approximately 21% of the total coastline of the State. It is one of three counties which claims to have the longest coastline in Ireland, alongside Cork and Donegal. There is a distinct geological difference between the west and the east of the county. The west consists largely of poor subsoils and is covered with large areas of extensive Atlantic blanket bog, whereas the east is largely a limestone landscape. Agricultural land is therefore more productive in the east than in the west.\nThere are nine historic baronies, four in the northern area and five in the south of the county:\nNorth Mayo\nSouth Mayo\nLargest towns by population.\nAccording to the 2022 census:\nFlora and fauna.\nA survey of the terrestrial and freshwater algae of Clare Island was made between 1990 and 2005 and published in 2007. A record of \"Gunnera tinctoria\" is also noted.\nConsultants working for the Corrib gas project have carried out extensive surveys of wildlife flora and fauna in Kilcommon Parish, Erris between 2002 and 2009. This information is published in the Corrib Gas Proposal Environmental impact statements 2009 and 2010.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThere is evidence of human occupation of what is now County Mayo going far back into prehistory. At Belderrig on the north Mayo coast, there is evidence for Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) communities around 4500 BC. while throughout the county there is a wealth of archaeological remains from the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period (ca. 4,000 BC to 2,500 BC), particularly in terms of megalithic tombs and ritual stone circles.\nThe first people who came to Ireland \u2013 mainly to coastal areas as the interior was heavily forested \u2013 arrived during the Middle Stone Age, as far back as eleven thousand years ago. Artefacts of hunter/gatherers are sometimes found in middens, rubbish pits around hearths where people would have rested and cooked over large open fires. Once cliffs erode, midden remains become exposed as blackened areas containing charred stones, bones, and shells. They are usually found a metre below the surface. Mesolithic people did not have major rituals associated with burial, unlike those of the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period.\nThe Neolithic period followed the Mesolithic around 6,000 years ago. People began to farm the land, domesticate animals for food and milk, and settle in one place for longer periods. These people had skills such as making pottery, building houses from wood, weaving, and knapping (stone tool working). The first farmers cleared forestry to graze livestock and grow crops. In North Mayo, where the ground cover was fragile, thin soils washed away and blanket bog covered the land farmed by the Neolithic people.\nExtensive pre-bog field systems have been discovered under the blanket bog, particularly along the North Mayo coastline in Erris and north Tyrawley at sites such as the C\u00e9ide Fields, centred on the northeast coast.\nThe Neolithic people developed rituals associated with burying their dead; this is why they built huge, elaborate, galleried stone tombs for their dead leaders, known nowadays as megalithic tombs. There are over 160 recorded megaliths in County Mayo, such as Faulagh.\nMegalithic tombs.\nThere are four distinct types of Irish megalithic tombs\u2014court tombs, portal tombs, passage tombs and wedge tombs\u2014examples of all of which can be found in County Mayo. Areas particularly rich in megalithic tombs include Achill, Kilcommon, Ballyhaunis, Moygownagh, Killala and the Behy/Glenurla area around the C\u00e9ide Fields.\nBronze Age (ca. 2,500 BC to 500 BC).\nMegalithic tomb building continued into the Bronze Age when metal began to be used for tools alongside the stone tools. The Bronze Age lasted approximately from 4,500 years ago to 2,500 years ago (2,500 BC to 500 BC). Archaeological remains from this period include stone alignments, stone circles and fulachta fiadh (early cooking sites). They continued to bury their chieftains in megalithic tombs which changed design during this period, more being of the wedge tomb type and cist burials.\nIron Age (ca. 500 BC to AD 325).\nAround 2,500 years ago the Iron Age took over from the Bronze Age as more and more metalworking took place. This is thought to have coincided with the arrival of Celtic speaking peoples and the introduction of the ancestor of the Irish language. Towards the end of this period, the Roman Empire was at its height in Britain but it is not thought that the Roman Empire extended into Ireland. Remains from this period, which lasted until the Early Christian period began about AD 325 (with the arrival of Saint Patrick into Ireland, as a slave) include crann\u00f3gs (Lake dwellings), promontory forts, ringforts and souterrains of which there are numerous examples across the county. The Iron Age was a time of tribal warfare and kingships, each fighting neighbouring kings, vying for control of territories and taking slaves. Territories were marked by tall stone markers, Ogham stones, using the first written down words using the Ogham alphabet. The Iron Age is the time period in which the mythological tales of the Ulster Cycle and sagas took place, as well as that of the T\u00e1in B\u00f3 Flidhais, whose narrative is set in mainly in Erris.\nEarly Christian period (ca. AD 325 to AD 800).\nChristianity came to Ireland around the start of the 5th century. It brought many changes including the introduction of the Latin alphabet. The tribal 'tuatha' and new Christian religious settlements existed side by side. Sometimes it suited the chieftains to become part of the early Churches, other times they remained as separate entities. St. Patrick (4th century) may have spent time in County Mayo and it is believed that he spent forty days and forty nights on Croagh Patrick praying for the people of Ireland. From the middle of the 6th-century hundreds of small monastic settlements were established around the county. Some examples of well-known early monastic sites in Mayo include Mayo Abbey, Aughagower, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Cong Abbey, Killala, Turlough on the outskirts of Castlebar, and island settlements off the Mullet Peninsula like the Inishkea Islands, Inishglora and Duvillaun.\nIn 795 the first of the Viking raids took place. The Vikings came from Scandinavia to raid the monasteries as they were places of wealth with precious metal working taking place in them. Some of the larger ecclesiastical settlements erected round towers to prevent their precious items from being plundered and also to show their status and strength against these pagan raiders from the north. There are round towers at Aughagower, Balla, Killala, Turlough and Meelick. The Vikings established settlements that later developed into towns (Dublin, Cork, Wexford, Waterford etc.) but none were in County Mayo. Between the reigns of Kings of Connacht Cathal mac Conchobar mac Taidg (973\u20131010) and Tairrdelbach Ua Conchobair (1106\u20131156), various tribal territories were incorporated into the kingdom of Connacht and ruled by the Siol Muirdaig dynasty, based initially at Rathcroghan in County Roscommon, and from 1050 at Tuam. The families of O'Malley and O'Dowd of Mayo served as admirals of the fleet of Connacht, while families such as O'Lachtnan, Mac Fhirbhisigh, and O'Cleary were ecclesiastical and bardic clans.\nAnglo-Normans (12th to 16th centuries).\nIn AD 1169 when one of the warring kings in the east of Ireland, Dermot MacMurrough, appealed to the King of England for help in his fight with a neighbouring king, the response resulted in the Anglo-Norman colonisation of Ireland.\nCounty Mayo came under Norman control in AD 1235. Norman control meant the eclipse of many Gaelic lords and chieftains, chiefly the O'Connors of Connacht. During the 1230s, the Anglo-Normans and Welsh under Richard M\u00f3r de Burgh (c. 1194 \u2013 1242) invaded and settled in the county, introducing new families such as Burke, Gibbons, Staunton, Prendergast, Morris, Joyce, Walsh, Barrett, Lynott, Costello, Padden and Price, Norman names are still common in County Mayo. Following the collapse of the lordship in the 1330s, all these families became estranged from the Anglo-Irish administration based in Dublin and assimilated with the Gaelic-Irish, adopting their language, religion, dress, laws, customs and culture and marrying into Irish families. They became \"more Irish than the Irish themselves\".\nThe most powerful clan to emerge during this era were the Mac William Burkes, also known as the Mac William Iochtar (see Burke Civil War 1333\u20131338), descended from Sir William Liath de Burgh, who defeated the Gaelic-Irish at the Second Battle of Athenry in August 1316. They were frequently at war with their cousins, Clanricarde of Galway, and in alliance with or against various factions of the O'Conor's of Siol Muiredaig and O'Kelly's of U\u00ed Maine. The O'Donnell's of Tyrconnell regularly invaded in an attempt to secure their right to rule.\nThe Anglo-Normans encouraged and established many religious orders from continental Europe to settle in Ireland. Mendicant orders\u2014Augustinians, Carmelites, Dominicans and Franciscans began new settlements across Ireland and built large churches, many under the patronage of prominent Gaelic families. Some of these sites include Cong, Strade, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Burrishoole Abbey and Mayo Abbey. During the 15th and 16th centuries, despite regular conflicts between them as England chopped and changed between religious beliefs, the Irish usually regarded the King of England as their King. When Elizabeth I came to the throne in the mid-16th century, the English people, as was customary at that time, followed the religious practices of the reigning monarch and became Protestant. Many Irish people such as Grace O'Malley, the famous pirate queen, had close relationships with the English monarchy, and the English kings and queens were welcome visitors to Irish shores. The Irish however, generally held onto their Catholic religious practices and beliefs. The early plantations of settlers in Ireland began during the reign of Queen Mary in the mid-16th century and continued throughout the long reign of Queen Elizabeth I until 1603. By then the term \"County Mayo\" had come into use. In the summer of 1588, the galleons of the Spanish Armada were wrecked by storms along the west coast of Ireland. Some of the hapless Spaniards came ashore in Mayo, only to be robbed and imprisoned, and in many cases slaughtered.\nAlmost all the religious foundations set up by the Anglo-Normans were suppressed in the wake of the Reformation in the 16th century.\nProtestant settlers from Scotland, England, and elsewhere in Ireland, settled in the County in the early 17th century. Many would be killed or forced to flee because of the 1641 Rebellion, during which a number of massacres were committed by the Catholic Gaelic Irish, most notably at Shrule in 1642. A third of the overall population was reported to have perished due to warfare, famine and plague between 1641 and 1653, with several areas remaining disturbed and frequented by Reparees into the 1670s.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nPirate Queen Grace O'Malley is probably the best-known person from County Mayo between the mid-16th century and the turn of the 17th century. In the 1640s, when Oliver Cromwell overthrew the English monarchy and set up a parliamentarian government, Ireland suffered severely. With a stern regime in absolute control needing to pay its armies and allies, the need to pay them with grants of land in Ireland led to the 'to hell or to Connaught' policies. Displaced native Irish families from other (eastern and southern mostly) parts of the country were either forced to leave the country or were awarded grants of land 'west of the Shannon' and put off their own lands in the east. The land in the west was divided and sub-divided between more and more people as huge estates were granted on the best land in the east to those who best pleased the English. Mayo does not seem to have been affected much during the Williamite War in Ireland, though many natives were outlawed and exiled.\nFor the vast majority of people in County Mayo the 18th century was a period of unrelieved misery. Because of the penal laws, Catholics had no hope of social advancement while they remained in their native land. Some, like William Brown (1777\u20131857), left Foxford with his family at the age of nine and thirty years later was an admiral in the fledgeling Argentine Navy. Today he is a national hero in that country.\nThe general unrest in Ireland was felt just as keenly across Mayo, and as the 19th century approached and news reached Ireland about the American War of Independence and the French Revolution, the downtrodden Irish, constantly suppressed by Government policies and decisions from Dublin and London, began to rally themselves for their own stand against British rule in their country. 1798 saw Mayo become a central part of the United Irishmen Rebellion when General Humbert from France landed in Killala with over 1,000 soldiers playing to support the main uprising. They marched across the county towards the administrative centre of Castlebar, leading to the Battle of Castlebar. Taking the garrison by surprise Humbert's army was victorious. He established a ' Republic of Connacht' with John Moore of the Moore family from Moore Hall near Partry as its head. Humbert's army marched on towards Sligo, Leitrim and Longford where they were suddenly faced with a massive British army and were forced to surrender in less than half an hour. The French soldiers were treated honourably, but for the Irish the surrender meant slaughter. Many died on the scaffold in towns like Castlebar and Claremorris, where the high sheriff for County Mayo, the Honourable Denis Browne, M.P., brother of Lord Altamont, wreaked a terrible vengeance \u2013 thus earning for himself the nickname which has survived in folk memory to the present day, 'Donnchadh an R\u00f3pa' (Denis of the Rope).\nIn the 18th century and early 19th century, sectarian tensions arose as evangelical Protestant missionaries sought to 'redeem the Irish poor from the errors of Popery'. One of the best known was the Rev. Edward Nangle's mission at Dugort in Achill. These too were the years of the campaign for Catholic Emancipation and, later, for the abolition of the tithes, which a predominately Catholic population was forced to pay for the upkeep of the clergy of the Established (Protestant) Church.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nDuring the early years of the 19th\u00a0century, famine was a common occurrence, particularly where population pressure was a problem. The population of Ireland grew to over eight million people prior to the Irish Famine (or Great Famine) of 1845\u201347. The Irish people depended on the potato crop for their sustenance. Disaster struck in August 1845, when a killer fungus (later diagnosed as Phytophthora infestans) started to destroy the potato crop. When widespread famine struck, about a million people died and a further million left the country. People died in the fields of starvation and disease. The catastrophe was particularly bad in County Mayo, where nearly ninety per cent of the population depended on the potato as their staple food. By 1848, Mayo was a county of total misery and despair, with any attempts at alleviating measures in complete disarray.\nThere are numerous reminders of the Great Famine to be seen on the Mayo landscape: workhouse sites, famine graves, sites of soup kitchens, deserted homes and villages and even traces of undug 'lazy-beds' in fields on the sides of hills. Many roads and lanes were built as famine relief measures. There were nine workhouses in the county: Ballina, Ballinrobe, Belmullet, Castlebar, Claremorris, Killala, Newport, Swinford and Westport.\nA small poverty-stricken place called Knock, County Mayo, made headlines when it was announced that an apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Joseph and St. John had taken place there on 21 August 1879, witnessed by fifteen local people.\nA national movement was initiated in County Mayo during 1879 by Michael Davitt, James Daly, and others, which brought about a major social change in Ireland. Michael Davitt, a labourer whose family had moved to England joined forces with Charles Stewart Parnell to win back the land for the people from the landlords and stop evictions for non-payment of rents. The organisation became known as the Irish National Land League, and its struggle to win rights for poor farmers in Ireland was known as the Land War.\nIt was in this era of agrarian unrest that a new verb was introduced to the English language by Mayo - \"to boycott\". Charles Boycott was an English landlord deeply unpopular with his tenants. When Charles Steward Parnell made a speech in Ennis, County Clare, urging nonviolent resistance against landlords, his tactics were enthusiastically taken in Mayo against Boycott. The entire Catholic community around Lough Mask in South Mayo where Boycott had his estate became a campaign of total social ostracisation against Boycott, a tactic that would one day come to bear his name. The campaign against Boycott became a in the British press after he wrote a letter to \"The Times\". The British elite rallied to his cause and Fifty Orangemen from County Cavan and County Monaghan travelled to his estate to harvest the crops, while a regiment of the 19th Royal Hussars and more than 1,000 men of the Royal Irish Constabulary were deployed to protect the harvesters. However, the cost of doing this was completely uneconomic: It cost the British government somewhere in the region of \u00a310,000 to simply harvest \u00a3500 worth of crops. Boycott sold off the estate and the British government's resolve to try to break boycotts in this completely dissolved, resulting in victory for the tenants.\nThe \"Land Question\" was gradually resolved by a scheme of state-aided land purchase schemes. The tenants became the owners of their lands under the newly set-up Land Commission.\nA Mayo nun, Mother Agnes Morrogh-Bernard, set up the Foxford Woollen Mill in 1892. She made Foxford synonymous throughout the world with high-quality tweeds, rugs and blankets.\nMayo, as all parts of what became the Irish Free State, was affected by the events of the Irish revolutionary period, including the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Irish Civil War. Major John MacBride of Westport was amongst those who took part in the 1916 Easter Rising and was subsequently executed by the British for his participation. His death served as a rallying call for Republicans in Mayo and led to Mayo men such as P. J. Ruttledge, Ernie O'Malley, Michael Kilroy and Thomas Derrig to rise up during the War of Independence. In the ensuing Civil War, many of these leading figures chose the Anti-treaty side and fought in bitter battles such as those in Ballina, which changed hands between pro and anti-treaty forces a number of times.\nIn the aftermath of the Civil War, there was a consolidation of many of those with anti-treaty feelings into the new political party Fianna F\u00e1il. PJ Ruttledge and Thomas Derrig would become founding members of the party and served in \u00c9amon de Valera's first-ever Fianna F\u00e1il government as ministers. Mayo politicians would continue to contribute to the national political scene over the decades. In 1990 Mary Robinson, from County Mayo, became the first-ever female President of Ireland, and is widely credited with revitalising the position with importance and focus it had never possessed before. During her tenure she unveiled Ireland's National Famine Memorial which is situated in the village of Murrisk, County Mayo.\nIn 2011 Enda Kenny became the first politician from a Mayo constituency and the second Mayo native to serve as Taoiseach, the head of government of Ireland. Kenny went on to become the longest-serving Fine Gael Taoiseach in Irish history.\nClans and families.\nIn the early historic period, what is now County Mayo consisted of a number of large kingdoms, minor lordships and tribes of obscure origins. They included:\nPolitics.\nLocal government and political subdivisions.\nMayo County Council is the authority responsible for local government. As a county council, it is governed by the Local Government Act 2001. The county is divided into four municipal districts of Ballina, Castlebar, Claremorris and Westport\u2013Belmullet, each with a population of roughly 32,000 to 34,000 people. The council is responsible for housing and community, roads and transportation, urban planning and development, amenity and culture, and environment.\nCounty Mayo is divided into six local electoral areas (LEAs). Councillors are elected for a five-year term.\nThe county town is at \"\u00c1ras an Contae\" in Castlebar, the main population centre located in the centre of the county.\nNational politics.\nSince 2016, Mayo has been represented on a national political level by four TDs who represent the constituency of Mayo in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. Previous to 2016 the constituency had five TDs but this was reduced based on the county's current population in line with proportional representation. The electoral divisions of Cong, Dalgan, Houndswood, Kilmaine, Neale, Shrule, in the former Rural District of Ballinrobe, are in Galway West.\nVoting patterns and political history.\nHistorically, Mayo has tended to vote Fianna F\u00e1il, as Fianna F\u00e1il managed to position themselves in the 20th century as the party best fit to represent farmers with small holdings, who were plentiful in Mayo. With so many of Mayo's electorate being small farmers, the county became a base for the emergence of Clann na Talmhan, an agrarian party in the 1940s and 1950s. Clann an Talmhan's second leader, Joseph Blowick came from South Mayo and that is where his seat was. The party was not able to last in the long run though as it was unable to hold together its voting bloc of both small farmers in the west of Ireland and large farmers in the east.\nTowards the start of the 21st century, the balance of power in Mayo began to shift towards Fine Gael, thanks in part to the emergence of Enda Kenny and Michael Ring. Kenny, who became Taoiseach in 2011, led Fine Gael to a historic victory in the 2011 Irish general election which included securing four out of five available seats for his party in Mayo.\nIn 2020, Rose Conway-Walsh came within 200 votes of topping the poll and became the first Sinn F\u00e9in TD for Mayo since 1927, riding a nationwide surge for Sinn F\u00e9in that year.\nDespite being historically the third-largest party in Ireland, Labour has struggled to ever make inroads into Mayo. The party has only ever had one TD for Mayo, former party leader Thomas J. O'Connell, who represented South Mayo between 1927 and 1932. While Labour has not proven itself electorally successful in Mayo, Mayo has provided important members to the Labour Party. Mary Robinson from Ballina became the first-ever female President of Ireland as a Labour candidate while Pat Rabbitte, originally from Claremorris, served as leader of the Labour Party from 2002 to 2007. Serving alongside Rabbitte was Emmet Stagg, one of the longest-standing Labour TDs of the modern era, himself from Hollymount not far from Claremorris.\nDemographics.\nIrish history has been defined by waves of emigration due to push and pull factors. Mayo was one of the counties most depopulated by emigration in the ninetieth and twentieth century. Initially triggered by starvation during the Great Famine, the population fell from 388,887 to 274,830 between 1841 and 1851. Then in search of work in the newly industrialising United Kingdom and the United States, the population plummeted from 388,887 in 1841 to 199,166 in 1901. It reached a low of 109,525 in 1971. Emigration slowed dramatically as the Irish economy began to expand in the 1990s and early 2000s, and the population of Mayo increased from 110,713 in 1991 to 130,638 in 2011.\nReligion.\nIn the 2006 National Census, the religious demographic breakdown for County Mayo was 114,215 Roman Catholics, 2,476 Church of Ireland, 733 Muslims, 409 other Christians, 280 Presbyterians, 250 Orthodox Christians, 204 Methodists, 853 other stated religions, 3,267 no religion and 1,152 no stated religion.\nIrish language.\n9% of the population of County Mayo live in the Gaeltacht. The Gaeltacht Irish-speaking region in County Mayo is the third-largest in Ireland with 10,886 inhabitants. These Irish-speaking areas of Mayo contain 5,956 Irish speakers. Tourmakeady is the largest village in this area. All schools in the area use Irish as the language of instruction. Mayo has four gaelscoileanna in its four major towns, providing primary education to students through Irish.\nTransport.\nRail.\nWestport railway station is the terminus station on the Dublin to Westport Rail service. Railway stations are also located at Ballyhaunis, Claremorris, Castlebar, Manulla, Ballina and Foxford. All railway stations are located on the same railway line, with the exception of Ballina and Foxford which requires passengers to change at Manulla Junction. There are currently four services each way every day on the line.\nThere are also proposals to reopen the currently disused Western Railway Corridor connecting Limerick with Sligo.\nRoad.\nThere are a number of national primary roads in the county including the N5 road connecting Westport with Dublin, the N17 road connecting the county with Galway and Sligo and the N26 road connecting Ballina with Dublin via the N5. There are a number of national secondary roads in the county also including the N58 road, N59 road, N60 road, N83 road &amp; N84 road. As of 2021, a new road running from northwest of Westport to east of Castlebar is under construction. The road is a dual carriageway with junctions at the N59, N84 and N60 and will open in late 2022.\nAir.\nIreland West Airport is an international airport located in the county. The name is derived from the nearby village of Knock. Recent years have seen the airport's passenger numbers grow to over 650,000 yearly with a number of UK and European destinations. August 2014 saw the airport have its busiest month on record with 102,774 passengers using the airport.\nMedia.\nNewspapers in County Mayo include \"The Mayo News\", the \"Connaught Telegraph\", the \"Connacht Tribune\", \"Western People\", and \"Mayo Advertiser\", which is Mayo's only free newspaper.\n\"Mayo Now\" is a monthly entertainment and culture magazine for the towns of Ballina, Foxford, Killala, Crossmolina and surrounding areas \u2013 this is out on the first Friday of each month.\nMayo has its own online TV channel \"Mayo TV\" which was launched in 2011. It covers news and events from around the county and regularly broadcasts live to a worldwide audience. Local radio stations include Erris FM, Community Radio Castlebar, Westport Community Radio, BCR FM (Ballina Community Radio) and M.W.R. (Mid West Radio).\nThe documentary \"Pipe Down\", which won best feature documentary at the 2009 Waterford Film Festival, was made in Mayo.\nEnergy.\nEnergy controversy.\nThere is local resistance to Shell's decision to process raw gas from the Corrib gas field at an onshore terminal. In 2005, five local men were jailed for contempt of court after refusing to follow an Irish court order. Subsequent protests against the project led to the Shell to Sea and related campaigns.\nEnergy audit.\nThe Mayo Energy Audit 2009\u20132020 is an investigation into the implications of peak oil and subsequent fossil fuel depletion for a rural county in west of Ireland. The study draws together many different strands to examine current energy supply and demand within the area of study, and assesses these demands in\nthe face of the challenges posed by the declining production of fossil fuels and expected disruptions to supply chains, and by long-term economic recession.\nSport.\nThe Mayo GAA senior team last won the Sam Maguire Cup in 1951, when the team was captained by Se\u00e1n Flanagan. The team's third title followed victories in 1936 and the previous year, 1950. Since 1951, the team have made numerous All-Ireland Final appearances (in 1989, twice in 1996, 1997, 2004, 2006, 2012, 2013, twice again in 2016 against Dublin, 2017, 2020, with their latest appearance being against Tyrone in the 2021 final), though the team have failed on all occasions to achieve victory over their opponents.\nThe team's unofficial supporters club are Mayo Club '51, named after the last team who won the Sam Maguire. The county colours of Mayo GAA are traditionally green and red.\nThe county's most popular association football teams are Westport United and Castlebar Celtic.\nAlthough Gaelic football and association football are the most popular sport in the county, other sports are popular in the county as well such as rugby, basketball, hurling, swimming, tennis, badminton, athletics, handball and racquetball."}
{"id": "5833", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5833", "title": "County Fermanagh", "text": "County Fermanagh ( ; ) is one of the thirty-two counties of Ireland, one of the nine counties of Ulster and one of six counties of Northern Ireland.\nThe county covers an area of and had a population of 63,585 as of 2021. Enniskillen is the county town and largest in both size and population.\nFermanagh is one of four counties of Northern Ireland to have a majority of its population from a Catholic background, according to the 2011 census.\nGeography.\nFermanagh spans an area of 1,851\u00a0km2 (715\u00a0sq;\u00a0mi), accounting for 13.2% of the landmass of Northern Ireland. Nearly a third of the county is covered by lakes and waterways, including Upper and Lower Lough Erne and the River Erne. Forests cover 14% of the landmass (42,000 hectares). It is the only county in Northern Ireland that does not border Lough Neagh.\nThe county has three prominent upland areas: \nThe county borders:\nFermanagh is by far the least populous of Northern Ireland's six counties, with just over one-third the population of Tyrone, the next least populous county.\nIt is approximately from Belfast and from Dublin. The county town, Enniskillen, is the largest settlement in Fermanagh, situated in the middle of the county.\nThe county enjoys a temperate oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"') with cool winters, mild humid summers, and a lack of temperature extremes, according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nThe National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty manages three sites of historic and natural beauty in the county: Crom Estate, Florence Court, and Castle Coole.\nGeology.\nThe oldest sediments in the county are found north of Lough Erne. These so-called red beds were formed approximately 550 million years ago. Extensive sandstone can be found in the eastern part of the county, laid down during the Devonian, 400 million years ago. Much of the rest of the county's sediments are shale and limestone dating from the Carboniferous, 354 to 298 million years ago. These softer sediments have produced extensive cave systems such as the Shannon Cave, the Marble Arch Caves and the Caves of the Tullybrack and Belmore hills. The carboniferous shale exists in several counties of northwest Ireland, an area known colloquially as the Lough Allen basin. The basin is estimated to contain 9.4 trillion cubic metres of natural gas, equivalent to 1.5 billion barrels of oil.\nThe county is situated over a sequence of prominent faults, primarily the Killadeas \u2013 Seskinore Fault, the Tempo \u2013 Sixmilecross Fault, the Belcoo Fault and the Clogher Valley Fault which cross-cuts Lough Erne.\nHistory.\nThe Menapii are the only known Celtic tribe specifically named on Ptolemy's 150 AD map of Ireland, where they located their first colony\u2014Menapia\u2014on the Leinster coast . They later settled around Lough Erne, becoming known as the Fir Manach, and giving their name to Fermanagh and Monaghan. Mong\u00e1n mac Fiachnai, a 7th-century King of Ulster, is the protagonist of several legends linking him with Manann\u00e1n mac Lir. They spread across Ireland, evolving into historic Irish (also Scottish and Manx) clans.\nThe Annals of Ulster which cover medieval Ireland between AD 431 to AD 1540 were written at Belle Isle on Lough Erne near Lisbellaw.\nIn the early 9th century, the Erne was considered to be the boundary of Connacht and Ulster, specifically the over-kingdom of Airg\u00edalla. The Fir Manach proper, Tirkennedy and Magherastephana, along with Clankelly were part of the western Airg\u00edalla group-kingdom of U\u00ed Creamthainn with its seat at Clogher, whereas Lurg was associated with the northern Airg\u00edalla branch of U\u00ed Fiachrach centred at Ardstraw.\nFermanagh was a stronghold of the Maguire clan and Donn Carrach Maguire (died 1302) was the first of the chiefs of the Maguire dynasty. However, on the confiscation of lands relating to Hugh Maguire, Fermanagh was divided in a similar manner to the other five escheated counties among Scottish and English undertakers and native Irish. The baronies of Knockninny and Magheraboy were allotted to Scottish undertakers, those of Clankelly, Magherastephana and Lurg to English undertakers and those of Clanawley, Coole, and Tyrkennedy, to servitors and natives. The chief families to benefit under the new settlement were the families of Cole, Blennerhasset, Butler, Hume, and Dunbar.\nFermanagh was made into a county by a statute of Elizabeth I, but it was not until the time of the Plantation of Ulster that it was finally brought under civil government.\nThe closure of all the lines of Great Northern Railway (Ireland) within County Fermanagh in 1957 left the county as the first non-island county in the UK without a railway service.\nAdministration.\nThe county was administered by Fermanagh County Council from 1899 until the abolition of county councils in Northern Ireland in 1973. With the creation of Northern Ireland's district councils, Fermanagh District Council became the only one of the 26 that contained all of the county from which it derived its name. After the re-organisation of local government in 2015, Fermanagh was still the only county wholly within one council area, namely Fermanagh and Omagh District Council, albeit that it constituted only a part of that entity.\nFor the purposes of elections to the UK Parliament, the territory of Fermanagh is part of the Fermanagh and South Tyrone Parliamentary Constituency. This constituency elected Provisional IRA hunger-striker Bobby Sands as a member of parliament in the April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election, shortly before his death.\nDemographics.\n2011 census.\nOn Census Day 27 March 2011, the usually resident population of Fermanagh Local Government District, the borders of the district were very similar to those of the traditional County Fermanagh, was 61,805. Of these:\n2021 Census.\nOn Census Day (2021), the usually resident population of Fermanagh Local Government District, the borders of the district were very similar to those of the traditional County Fermanagh, was 63,585. Of these:\nIndustry and tourism.\nAgriculture and tourism are two of the most important industries in Fermanagh. The main types of farming in the area are beef, dairy, sheep, pigs and some poultry. Most of the agricultural land is used as grassland for grazing and silage or hay rather than for other crops.\nThe waterways are extensively used by cabin cruisers, other small pleasure craft and anglers. The main town of Fermanagh is Enniskillen (, 'Ceithleann's island'). The island town hosts a range of attractions including the Castle Coole Estate and Enniskillen Castle, which is home to the museum of The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers and the 5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards. Fermanagh is also home to The Boatyard Distillery, a distillery producing gin.\nAttractions outside Enniskillen include:\nSettlements.\nThe classification of settlements by NISRA defines six categories following the 2011 census (ignoring Belfast and Derry City which have their own separate categories), namely; Large towns, Medium towns, Small towns, Intermediate settlements, Villages and Small villages or hamlets. The majority of the settlements in County Fermanagh lie within the final category, five within the village category and one each in the intermediate settlements and medium towns categories. No settlements in the county are classified as Large towns or Small towns.\nPopulation of Settlements.\nPopulation statistics were not made available from the 2001, 2011 and 2021 censuses, where noted with an \"N/A\".\nSubdivisions.\nBaronies\nParishes\nTownlands\nMedia.\nNewspapers\nEducation.\nThere are 41 primary schools currently in operation in County Fermanagh, 10 secondary schools, one special school and one further education college.\nPrimary Schools\nSecondary Schools\nFurther Education College\nSpecial School\nClosed Schools \nSport.\nFermanagh GAA has never won a Senior Provincial or an All-Ireland title in any Gaelic games, it is only one of two counties to win neither title. There are 22 GAA clubs in the county, this is the second least of all 32 counties (Longford now has the least, with 21 GAA clubs).\nOnly Ballinamallard United F.C. take part in the Northern Ireland football league system. All other Fermanagh clubs play in the Fermanagh &amp; Western FA league systems. Fermanagh Mallards F.C. played in the Women's Premier League until 2013.\nEnniskillen RFC was founded in 1925 and is still going. There is also a rugby league team, the Fermanagh Redskins\nFamous football players from Fermanagh include \u2013\nNotable people.\nFamous people born, raised in or living in Fermanagh include: \nSurnames.\nThe most common surnames in County Fermanagh at the time of the United Kingdom Census of 1901 were:\nRailways.\nThe railway lines in County Fermanagh connected Enniskillen railway station with Derry from 1854, Dundalk from 1861, Bundoran from 1868 and Sligo from 1882.\nThe railway companies that served the county, prior to the establishment by the merger of Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway, Enniskillen and Bundoran Railway the Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway which was later named the Irish North Western Railway, thus forming the Great Northern Railway (Ireland). By 1883 the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) absorbed all the lines except the Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway, which remained independent throughout its existence.\nIn October 1957 the Government of Northern Ireland closed the GNR line, which made it impossible for the SL&amp;NCR continue and forced it also to close.\nThe nearest railway station to Enniskillen is Sligo station which is served by trains to Dublin Connolly and is operated by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann. The Dublin-Sligo railway line has a two-hourly service run by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann. The connecting bus from Sligo via Manorhamilton to Enniskillen is route 66 operated by Bus \u00c9ireann."}
{"id": "5835", "revid": "45854474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5835", "title": "Christian (disambiguation)", "text": "Christian most often refers to:\nChristian or The Christian may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5836", "revid": "1251582449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5836", "title": "Geography of Colombia", "text": " \nThe Republic of Colombia is situated largely in the north-west of South America, with some territories falling within the boundaries of Central America. It is bordered to the north-west by Panama; to the east by Brazil and Venezuela; to the south by Ecuador and Peru; and it shares maritime limits with Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti.\nColombia has a land size of and it is the 25th largest nation in the world and the fourth-largest country in South America (after Brazil, Argentina, and Peru). Colombia's population is not evenly distributed, and most of the people live in the mountainous western portion of the country as well as along the northern coastline; the highest number live in or near the capital city of Bogot\u00e1. The southern and eastern portions of the country are sparsely inhabited, consisting of tropical rainforest, and inland tropical plains that contain large estates or large livestock farms, oil and gas production facilities, small farming communities, and indigenous tribes with their territories. Colombia has the 35th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nMain.\nColombia usually classifies its geography into five natural regions, from the Andes mountain range, a region shared with Ecuador, Venezuela; the Pacific Ocean coastal region, shared with Panama and Ecuador; the Caribbean Sea coastal region, shared with Venezuela and Panama; the \"Llanos\" (plains), shared with Venezuela; to the Amazon Rainforest region shared with Venezuela, Brazil, Peru and Ecuador. Colombia is one of only two South American countries that have coastline on both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, the other being Chile.\n\"The World Factbook\" does not differentiate between the Amazon region of Colombia (predominantly jungle) and the Orinoquia region of Colombia (predominantly plains). It suggests dividing the country into four geographic regions: the Andean highlands, consisting of the three Andean ranges and intervening valley lowlands; the Caribbean lowlands coastal region; the Pacific lowlands coastal region, separated from the Caribbean lowlands by swamps at the base of the Isthmus of Panama; and eastern Colombia, the great plain that lies to the east of the Andes Mountains.\nThe chief western mountain range, the Cordillera Occidental, is a moderately high range with peaks reaching up to about (4,670 m). The Cauca River Valley, an important agricultural region with several large cities on its borders, separates the Cordillera Occidental from the massive Cordillera Central. Several snow-clad volcanoes in the Cordillera Central have summits that rise above . The valley of the slow-flowing and muddy Magdalena River, a major transportation artery, separates the Cordillera Central from the main eastern range, the Cordillera Oriental. The peaks of the Cordillera Oriental are moderately high. This range differs from Colombia's other mountain ranges in that it contains several large basins. In the east, the sparsely populated, flat to gently rolling eastern lowlands called \"llanos\" cover almost 60 percent of the country's total land area.\nThis cross section of the republic does not include two of Colombia's regions: the Caribbean coastal lowlands and the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, both in the northern part of the country. The lowlands in the west are mostly swampy; the reed-filled marshes of the area are called \"ci\u00e9nagas\" by the people of Colombia. The Guajira Peninsula in the east is semiarid and is occupied primarily by indigenous peoples. The Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta is a spectacular triangular snowcapped block of rock that towers over the eastern part of this lowland. Here can be found the highest peak of the country, named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m).\nAndean region.\nNear the Ecuadorian frontier, the Andes Mountains divide into three distinct, roughly parallel chains, called cordilleras, that extend northeastward almost to the Caribbean Sea. Altitudes reach more than , and mountain peaks are permanently covered with snow. The elevated basins and plateaus of these ranges have a moderate climate that provides pleasant living conditions and in many places enables farmers to harvest twice a year. Torrential rivers on the slopes of the mountains produce a large hydroelectric power potential and add their volume to the navigable rivers in the valleys. In the late 1980s, approximately 78 percent of the country's population lived in the Andean highlands.\nThe Cordillera Occidental in the west, the Cordillera Central in the center, and the Cordillera Oriental in the east have different characteristics. Geologically, the Cordillera Occidental and the Cordillera Central form the western and eastern sides of a massive crystalline arch that extends from the Caribbean lowlands to the southern border of Ecuador. The Cordillera Oriental, however, is composed of folded stratified rocks overlying a crystalline core.\nThe Cordillera Occidental is relatively low and is the least populated of the three cordilleras. Summits are only about above sea level and do not have permanent snows. Few passes exist, although one that is about above sea level provides the major city of Cali with an outlet to the Pacific Ocean. The relatively low elevation of the cordillera permits dense vegetation, which on the western slopes is truly tropical.\nThe Cordillera Occidental is separated from the Cordillera Central by the deep rift of the Cauca Valley. The R\u00edo Cauca rises within of the border with Ecuador and flows through some of the best farmland in the country. After the two cordilleras converge, the Cauca Valley becomes a deep gorge reaching to the Caribbean lowlands.\nThe Cordillera Central is the loftiest of the mountain systems. Its crystalline rocks form a towering wall dotted with snow-covered volcanoes that is long. There are no plateaus in this range and no passes under . The highest peak in this range, the Nevado del Huila, reaches above sea level. The second highest peak is a volcano, Nevado del Ruiz, which erupted violently on November 13, 1985. Toward its northern end, this cordillera separates into several branches that descend toward the Caribbean coast.\nBetween the Cordillera Central and the Cordillera Oriental flows the Magdalena River. This river rises near a point some north of the border with Ecuador, where the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central diverge. Its spacious drainage area is fed by numerous mountain torrents originating high in the snowfields. The Magdalena River is generally navigable from the Caribbean Sea as far as the town of Neiva, deep in the interior, but it is interrupted midway by rapids. The valley floor is very deep; nearly from the river's mouth the elevation is no more than about .\nIn the Cordillera Oriental, at elevations between , three large fertile basins and a number of small ones provide suitable areas for settlement and intensive economic production. In the basin of Cundinamarca, where the Spanish encountered the regional Chibcha Indians, the European invaders established the town of Santa Fe de Bogot\u00e1 (present-day Bogot\u00e1) at an elevation of above sea level.\nTo the north of Bogot\u00e1, in the densely populated basins of Chiquinquir\u00e1 and Boyac\u00e1, are fertile fields, rich mines, and large industrial establishments that produce much of the national wealth. Still farther north, where the Cordillera Oriental makes an abrupt turn to the northwest near the border with Venezuela, the Sierra Nevada de Cocuy, the highest point of this range, rises to above sea level. In the department of Santander, the valleys on the western slopes are more spacious, and agriculture is intensive in the area around Bucaramanga. The northernmost region of the range around C\u00facuta is so rugged that historically it has been easier for residents here to maintain communications and transportation with Venezuela than with the adjacent parts of Colombia.\nThe basic plantation of Colombia is grassy and is near the equator which allows many tropical-like plants.\nCaribbean region.\nThe Caribbean lowlands consist of all of Colombia north of an imaginary line extending northeastward from the Golfo de Urab\u00e1 to the Venezuelan frontier at the northern extremity of the Cordillera Oriental. The semiarid Guajira Peninsula and Guajira\u2013Barranquilla xeric scrub, in the extreme north, bear little resemblance to the rest of the region. In the southern part rises the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, an isolated mountain system with peaks reaching heights over and slopes generally too steep for cultivation.\nThe Caribbean lowlands region is in roughly the shape of a triangle, the longest side of which is the coastline. Most of the country's commerce moves through the cities of Cartagena, Barranquilla, Santa Marta, and the other ports located along this important coast. Inland from these cities are swamps, hidden streams, and shallow lakes that support banana and cotton plantations for major commodity crops, countless small farms, and, in higher places, cattle ranches.\nThe city of Cartagena is a petrochemical, seaport (#1 in the country), and tourist city (#1 in the country). Santa Marta is also a seaport and tourist city but it is smaller scale city in comparison. Barranquilla is located some from the Caribbean coastline but it is a more developed city, with a greater number of industries and commercial places, widely known for its skilled workers in producing all forms of metalwork and accomplishing construction. Its inhabitants have the highest education level of the region. The city is famous as the starting point and focus of the region and the country's development: it was the first city in the nation to install and use telephones, public lighting, air mail, planes, and industrial works.\nThe Caribbean region merges next to and is connected with the Andean highlands through the two great river valleys. After the Andean highlands, it is the second-most important region in terms of economic activity. Approximately 17% of the country's population lived in this region in the late 1980s.\nThe region also includes the peninsular archipelago of San Andres Island and the Insular Territories of Colombia, which are disputed in part by Nicaragua. However, the Colombian Navy protects such territories with the use of force when necessary to avoid foreign invasion. The islands are fortified with two important bases for defense and custom controls. These were formerly used for research of classified projects with civilian assistance; the local universities often conduct research in the areas of oceanography and marine biology but also in the fields of biochemistry, genetics and immunology. Colombia is known for its advances in medical fields in experimental surgery, breast implant development, or prosthetics, and immunology. These facilities serve as containment and secure experimentation labs to complement those in Barranquilla and other undisclosed locations within the coast territories.\nThe Insular Region is considered by some as a geopolitical region of Colombia. It comprises the areas outside the continental territories of Colombia and includes the San Andr\u00e9s y Providencia Department in the Caribbean Sea and the Malpelo and Gorgona islands in the Pacific Ocean. Its subregions include other groups of islands:\nPacific region.\nThe western third of the country is the most geographically complex. Starting at the shore of the Pacific Ocean in the west and moving eastward at a latitude of 5 degrees north, a diverse sequence of features is encountered. In the extreme west are the very narrow and discontinuous Pacific coastal lowlands, which are backed by the Serran\u00eda de Baud\u00f3, the lowest and narrowest of Colombia's mountain ranges. Next is the broad region of the R\u00edo Atrato/R\u00edo San Juan lowland.\nIn 1855, William Kennish, an engineer and veteran of the British Royal Navy, who had immigrated to the United States and was working for a New York City firm, studied the area and proposed an inter-oceanic river aqueduct and tunnel to connect the Rio Atrato, with its mouth at the Atlantic Ocean, with tributaries and through a tunnel and aqueduct through Nerqua Pass, to flow into Bah\u00eda Humboldt at the Pacific Ocean.\nThis was his alternative to the canal that was eventually built further west on the isthmus of what became Panama after it gained independence in the early 20th century. Although the US sent an expedition to explore Kennish's proposal, the concept was not developed at the time. Colombia refused a later US offer to build a canal. After independence, in 1903 Panama made a treaty with the US to support construction of the Panama Canal. Colombia occupies most of the Andes mountain range northern extremity, sharing a bit with Venezuela; the range splits into three branches between the Colombia-Ecuador border.\nIn the 1980s, only three percent of all Colombians resided in the Pacific lowlands, a region of jungle and swamp with considerable but little-exploited potential in minerals and other resources. Later in the 20th century, it was threatened by mining-related deforestation, as gold mining proceeded by both major companies and artisan miners. Buenaventura is the only port of any size on the coast. To the east, the Pacific lowlands are bounded by the Cordillera Occidental, from which numerous streams run. Most of the streams flow westward to the Pacific, but the largest, the navigable R\u00edo Atrato, flows northward to the Golfo de Urab\u00e1. Its river settlements have access to the major Atlantic ports and consequently are commercially related primarily to the Caribbean lowlands hinterland. To the west of the R\u00edo Atrato rises the Serran\u00eda de Baud\u00f3, an isolated chain of low mountains that occupies a large part of the region. Its highest elevation is less than 1,800 meters, and its vegetation resembles that of the surrounding tropical forest.\nThe Atrato Swamp, in Choc\u00f3 Department adjoining the border with Panama, is a deep muck sixty-five kilometers in width. For years it has challenged engineers seeking to complete the Pan-American Highway. This stretch, near Turbo, where the highway is interrupted, is known as the Tap\u00f3n del Choc\u00f3 (Chocon Plug).\nA second major transportation project in Choc\u00f3 Department has been proposed. A second inter-oceanic canal would be constructed by dredging the R\u00edo Atrato and tributary streams and digging short access canals. Completion of either of these projects would do much to transform this region, although it could have devastating consequences on the fragile, tropical forest environment.\nOrinoqu\u00eda region.\nThe area east of the Andes includes about 699,300 square kilometers or three-fifths of the country's total area, but Colombians view it almost as an alien land. The entire area, known as the eastern plains, was home to only two percent of the country's population in the late 1980s. The Spanish term for plains (\"llanos\") can be applied only to the open plains in the northern part, particularly the Piedmont areas near the Cordillera Oriental, where extensive cattle raising is practiced.\nThe region is unbroken by highlands except in Meta Department, where the Serran\u00eda de la Macarena, an outlier of the Andes has unique vegetation and wildlife believed to be reminiscent of those that once existed throughout the Andes.\nAmazon region.\nMany of the numerous large rivers of eastern Colombia are navigable. The R\u00edo Guaviare and the streams to its north flow eastward and drain into the basin of the R\u00edo Orinoco, a river that crosses into Venezuela and flows into the Atlantic Ocean. Those south of the R\u00edo Guaviare flows into the Amazon Basin. The R\u00edo Guaviare divides eastern Colombia into the llanos subregion in the north and the tropical rainforest, or selva, subregion in the south.\nClimate.\nThe striking variety in temperature and precipitation results principally from differences in elevation. Temperatures range from very hot at sea level to relatively cold at higher elevations but vary little with the season. At Bogot\u00e1, for example, the average annual temperature is , and the difference between the average of the coldest and the warmest months is less than 1\u00a0\u00b0C (1.8\u00a0\u00b0F). More significant, however, is the daily variation in temperature, from at night to during the day.\nColombians customarily describe their country in terms of the climatic zones: the area under in elevation is called the hot zone (tierra caliente), elevations between are the temperate zone (tierra templada), and elevations from to about constitute the cold zone (tierra fr\u00eda). The upper limit of the cold zone marks the tree line and the approximate limit of human habitation. The treeless regions adjacent to the cold zone and extending to approximately are high, bleak areas (usually referred to as the p\u00e1ramos), above which begins the area of permanent snow (nevado).\nAbout 86% of the country's total area lies in the hot zone. Included in the hot zone and interrupting the temperate area of the Andean highlands are the long and narrow extension of the Magdalena Valley and a small extension in the Cauca Valley. Temperatures, depending on elevation, vary between , and there are alternating dry and wet seasons corresponding to summer and winter, respectively. Breezes on the Caribbean coast, however, reduce both heat and precipitation.\nRainfall in the hot zone is heaviest in the Pacific lowlands and in parts of eastern Colombia, where rain is almost a daily occurrence and rain forests predominate. Precipitation exceeds annually in most of the Pacific lowlands, making this one of the wettest regions in the world. The highest average annual precipitation in the world is estimated to be in Lloro, Colombia, with . In eastern Colombia, it decreases from in portions of the Andean Piedmont to eastward. Extensive areas of the Caribbean interior are permanently flooded, more because of poor drainage than because of the moderately heavy precipitation during the rainy season from May through October.\nThe temperate zone covers about 8% of the country. This zone includes the lower slopes of the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central and most of the intermontane valleys. The important cities of Medell\u00edn () and Cali () are located in this zone, where rainfall is moderate and the mean annual temperature varies between , depending on the elevation. In the higher elevations of this zone, farmers benefit from two wet and two dry seasons each year; January through March and July through September are the dry seasons.\nThe cold or cool zone constitutes about 6% of the total area, including some of the most densely populated plateaus and terraces of the Colombian Andes; this zone supports about one fourth of the country's total population. The mean temperature ranges between , and the wet seasons occur in April and May and from September to December, as in the high elevations of the temperate zone.\nPrecipitation is moderate to heavy in most parts of the country; the heavier rainfall occurs in the low-lying hot zone. Considerable variations occur because of local conditions that affect wind currents, however, and areas on the leeward side of the Guajira Peninsula receive generally light rainfall; the annual rainfall of recorded at the Uribia station there is the lowest in Colombia. Considerable year-to-year variations have been recorded, and Colombia sometimes experiences droughts.\nColombia's geographic and climatic variations have combined to produce relatively well-defined \"ethnocultural\" groups among different regions of the country: the Coste\u00f1o from the Caribbean coast; the Caucano in the Cauca region and the Pacific coast; the Antioque\u00f1o in Antioquia, Caldas, Risaralda, and Valle del Cauca departments; the Tolimense in Tolima and Huila departments; the Cundiboyacense in the interior departments of Cundinamarca and Boyac\u00e1 in the Cordillera Oriental; the Santandereano in Norte de Santander and Santander departments; and the Llanero in the eastern plains. Each group has distinctive characteristics, accents, customs, social patterns, and forms of cultural adaptation to climate and topography that differentiates it from other groups. Even with rapid urbanization and modernization, regionalism and regional identification continued to be important reference points, although they were somewhat less prominent in the 1980s than in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.\nColombia's proximity to the equator influences its climates. The lowland areas are continuously hot. Altitude affects temperature greatly. Temperatures decrease about for every increase in altitude above sea level. Rainfall varies by location in Colombia, tending to increase as one travels southward. This is especially true in the eastern lowlands. For example, rainfall in parts of the Guajira Peninsula seldom exceeds per year. Colombia's rainy southeast, however, is often drenched by more than of rain per year. Rainfall in most of the rest of the country runs between these two extremes.\nVegetation.\nAltitude affects not only temperature, but also vegetation. In fact, altitude is one of the most important influences on vegetation patterns in Colombia. The mountainous parts of the country can be divided into several vegetation zones according to altitude, although the altitude limits of each zone may vary somewhat depending on the latitude.\nThe \"tierra caliente\" (hot land), below , is the zone of tropical crops such as bananas. The tierra templada (temperate land), extending from an altitude of , is the zone of coffee and maize. Wheat and potatoes dominate in the \"tierra fr\u00eda\" (cold land), at altitudes from . In the \"zona forestada\" (forested zone), which is located between , many of the trees have been cut for firewood. Treeless pastures dominate the p\u00e1ramos, or alpine grasslands, at altitudes of . Above , where temperatures are below freezing, is the \"tierra helada\", a zone of permanent snow and ice.\nVegetation also responds to rainfall patterns. A scrub woodland of scattered trees and bushes dominates the semiarid northeast. To the south, savannah (tropical grassland) vegetation covers the Colombian portion of the llanos. The rainy areas in the southeast are blanketed by tropical rainforest. In the mountains, the spotty patterns of precipitation in alpine areas complicate vegetation patterns. The rainy side of a mountain may be lush and green, while the other side, in the rain shadow, may be parched.\nRelief.\nThe Andean range is located in Colombia from the southwest (Ecuador border) toward the northeast (Venezuela border) and is divided in the Colombian Massif (\"Macizo Colombiano\") in three ranges (East Andes, Central Andes and West Andes) that form two long valleys, Magdalena and Cauca follow by the rivers of the same name.\nThe eastern half of Colombia, comprising more than half its territory, is plain and composed by savanna and rainforest, crossed by rivers belonging to the Amazon and Orinoco basins. The northern part, called the Llanos, is a savanna region, mostly in the Orinoco basin (therefore called also Orinoqu\u00eda). The southern part is covered by the Amazon rain forest and belongs mostly to the Amazon basin. It is usually called Amazon\u00eda.\nAt the north and west of the Andes range there are some coastal plains. The Caribbean plains at the north and the Pacific plains at the west.\nA recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 553km\u00b2 of tidal flats in Colombia, making it the 46th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nColombian Pacific Plains are among the most rainy parts in the world, chiefly at the north (Choc\u00f3).\nThe highest mountain in Colombia is not in the Andes but in the Caribbean plain: Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta with its highest points named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m) and Pico Simon Bolivar (same elevation). Other mountains in the Caribbean plain include the Montes de Mar\u00eda and the Serran\u00eda de San Lucas.\nIn the Pacific Plains there are other mountain formations, chiefly the Serran\u00eda del Dari\u00e9n and the Serran\u00eda del Baud\u00f3.\nIn the eastern Region, there is the Serran\u00eda de la Macarena and there are formations belonging to the Guyana Shield.\nNatural resources.\nThe natural resources of Colombia are varied and extensive with most of its territory and oceans still unexplored. Colombia has one of the largest open pit coal mines in the world in the region of Cerrejon in the Guajira Peninsula. It also has oil rigs and natural gas extraction in the eastern plains. Colombia is the main producer of emeralds and an important participant in gold, silver, iron, salt, platinum, petroleum, nickel, copper, hydropower and uranium extraction.\nEnvironmental issues.\nThe main environmental issues affecting Colombia are deforestation; soil and water quality damage from overuse of pesticides; air pollution, especially in Bogota, from vehicle emissions and other main cities. The collateral damaged produced by attacks against oil pipeline infrastructure by rebel guerrillas in the Colombian armed conflict has produced long term damage to the environment. The armed groups also deforest large areas to cultivate illegal crops and open unauthorized highways in protected areas.\nExtreme points.\nSnowfields and glaciers in Colombia are limited to the highest peaks and ranges in the Cordillera Central and Cordillera Oriental and above the elevation on the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The total area of snowfields and glaciers was estimated to be about 104 square kilometers in the early 1970s.\nHistorical, geographical, and pictorial records point toward a consistent and progressive depletion of ice-and-snow masses in the Colombian Andes since the end of the \"Little Ice Age\" in the late 1800s. Many glaciers have disappeared during the 20th century, and others are expected to disappear in the coming decades.\nFacts.\nLand size: \ntotal: \nLand boundaries: \ntotal: 6,672\u00a0km\nCoastline: \n3,208\u00a0km (Caribbean Sea 1,760\u00a0km, North Pacific Ocean 1,448\u00a0km)\nExclusive Economic Zone: \ntotal: \nClimate: \ntropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in highlands\nTerrain: \nflat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes Mountains, eastern lowland plains\nElevation extremes: \nlowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m \nhighest point: Pico Cristobal Colon 5,975 m \nnote: nearby Pico Simon Bolivar also has the same elevation\nNatural resources: \npetroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel, gold, copper, emeralds, hydropower\nLand use: \narable land: 1.43% \npermanent crops: 1.68% \nother: 96.89% (2012)\nIrrigated land: \n10,870\u00a0km2 (2011)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n2,132\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\ntotal: 12.65\u00a0km3 (55%/4%/41%)\nper capita: 308 m3/yr (2010)\nNatural hazards: \nhighlands subject to volcanic eruptions; occasional earthquakes; periodic droughts\nEnvironment - international agreements: \nparty to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands \nsigned, but not ratified: Law of the Sea\nHydrology.\nColombia has four main drainage systems: the Pacific drain, the Caribbean drain, the Orinoco Basin and the Amazon Basin.\nThe Orinoco and Amazon Rivers mark limits with Colombia to Venezuela and Peru respectively."}
{"id": "5838", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5838", "title": "Politics of Colombia", "text": " \nThe politics of Colombia take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Colombia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is carried out by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of congress, the Senate and the House of Representatives of Colombia. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nConstitutional reforms.\nColombia's present constitution, enacted on July 5, 1991, strengthened the administration of justice with the provision for introduction of an adversarial system, which ultimately entirely replaced the existing Napoleonic Code. Other significant reforms under the new constitution include civil divorce, dual nationality, a vice president's election, and departmental governors' election. Additionally, the constitution expanded citizens' fundamental rights, including the right of \"tutela,\" which allows individuals to request immediate court action if they feel their constitutional rights are being violated and if no other legal recourse is available.\nThe national government has separate executive, legislative, and judicial branches.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected for a single four-year term. Between 2005 and 2015, the president could be re-elected for a second term. The 1991 constitution reestablished the position of vice president, who is elected on the same ticket as the president. By law, the vice president will succeed in the event of the president's resignation, illness, or death.\nSince 2015, the president is barred from running for reelection, even for a nonconsecutive term.\nLegislative branch.\nColombia's bicameral Congress consists of a 108-member Senate of Colombia and a 172-member Chamber of Representatives of Colombia. Senators are elected on the basis of a nationwide ballot, while representatives are elected in multi member districts co-located within the 32 national departments. The country's capital is a separate capital district and elects its own representatives. Members may be re-elected indefinitely, and, in contrast to the previous system, there are no alternate congressmen. Congress meets twice a year, and the president has the power to call it into special session when needed.\nPolitical parties and elections.\n2018 Legislative Election.\nSenate.\n&lt;!-- text that was here before removing was:"}
{"id": "5839", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5839", "title": "Economy of Colombia", "text": "The economy of Colombia is the fourth largest in Latin America as measured by gross domestic product and the third-largest economy in South America. Throughout most of the 20th century, Colombia was Latin America's 4th and 3rd largest economy when measured by nominal GDP, real GDP, GDP (PPP), and real GDP at chained PPPs. Between 2012 and 2014, it became the third largest in Latin America by nominal GDP. As of 2024, the GDP (PPP) per capita has increased to over US$19,000, and real gross domestic product at chained PPPs increased from US$250 billion in 1990 to over US$1 trillion in 2024. Poverty levels were as high as 65% in 1990, but decreased to under 30% by 2014, and 27% by 2018. They decreased by an average of 1.35% per year since 1990.\nPetroleum is Colombia's main export, representing over 45% of Colombia's exports. Manufacturing represents nearly 12% of Colombia's exports and grows at a rate of over 10% a year. Colombia has the fastest growing information technology industry in the world, and has the longest fibre optic network in Latin America. Colombia also has one of the largest shipbuilding industries in the world outside Asia.\nModern industries like shipbuilding, electronics, automobile, tourism, construction, and mining grew dramatically during the 2000s and 2010s. However, most of Colombia's exports are still commodity-based. Colombia is Latin America's 2nd-largest producer of domestically made electronics and appliances, following Mexico. Colombia had the fastest-growing major economy in the Western world in 2014, behind only China worldwide.\nSince the early 2010s, the Colombian government has shown interest in exporting modern Colombian pop culture to the world (which includes video games, music, films, television shows, fashion, cosmetics, and food) as a way of diversifying the economy and entirely changing the image of Colombia. This has inspired a national campaign similar to the Korean Wave. Colombia is only behind Mexico in cultural exports and is already a regional leader in cosmetic and beauty exports.\nWealth is poorly distributed and Colombia is among the most unequal societies in the world, with a Gini index of approximately 0.\u031f6. For example, according to the World Bank, in 2010, the richest 20% of the population owned 60.2% of the wealth and the poorest 20% only 3%, and 15.8% of Colombians lived on less than $2 a day. In 2021, more than 54% of Colombian families are food insecure and more than 560,000 children under the age of five are chronically undernourished.\nThe informal economy is estimated at 47% in 2020. There is no welfare state in Colombia, which has almost no unemployment or pension insurance system. As a result, only one million elderly people have pensions (and five million are without) and social assistance is very low. Many people in their 70s and 80s are forced to continue working or beg. The country is said to be the most unequal in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).\nHistory.\n16th\u201319th centuries.\nEuropean explorers reached what is now Colombian territory as early as 1510 in Santa Mar\u00eda Antigua del Dari\u00e9n (in present-day Choc\u00f3 department). For the next couple of decades Colombia, and South America in general, remained largely unexplored. From 1533 to 1600, Europeans began expeditions into the interior of current Colombia. The in of these expeditions was mainly to conquer new lands and exploit village resources. Legends of El Dorado that reached Spaniard explorers continued to fuel exploration and raiding of Indian villages.\nIn the 17th century, Spanish conquerors explored Colombia and made the first settlements, and this was the beginning of Colombia's modern economic history. Major conquistadors from this period were Pedro de Heredia, Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada, Sebasti\u00e1n de Belalcazar, and Nikolaus Federmann.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, the colonial settlements in Colombia served purposes of extraction of precious metals and other natural resources, and later slavery trade. This economic arrangement left the Colony with little room for building solid institutionality for economic development. The main non-extractive institutions emerging in this centuries were the fortified port of Cartagena and the Viceroyalty of New Granada. Cartagena developed military defenses mainly out of necessity from frequently having to deal with pirate attacks. A primitive form of colonial administration was organized in Santa f\u00e9 de Bogot\u00e1 with the Viceroyalty of New Granada, especially under the tenure of Jos\u00e9 Sol\u00eds Folch de Cardona (1753\u20131761), who conducted a census and built roads, bridges and aqueducts.\nFollowing the Thousand Days' War (1899\u20131902), Colombia experienced a coffee boom that catapulted the country into the modern period, bringing the attendant benefits of transportation, particularly railroads, communications infrastructure, and the first major attempts at manufacturing.\n20th century.\nColombia's consistently sound economic policies and aggressive promotion of free trade agreements in recent years have bolstered its ability to weather external shocks. Real GDP has grown more than 4% per year for the past three years, continuing almost a decade of strong economic performance.\nIn 1990, the administration of President C\u00e9sar Gaviria Trujillo (1990\u201394) initiated economic liberalism policies or \"apertura economica\" and this has continued since then, with tariff reductions, financial deregulation, privatization of state-owned enterprises, and adoption of a more liberal foreign exchange rate. Almost all sectors became open to foreign investment although agricultural products remained protected.\nThe original idea of his then Minister of Finance, Rudolf Homes, was that the country should import agricultural products in which it was not competitive, like maize, wheat, cotton and soybeans and export the ones in which it had an advantage, like fruits and flowers. In ten years, the sector lost 7,000\u00a0km2 to imports, with a critical impact on employment in rural areas. Still, this policy makes food cheaper for the average Colombian than it would be if agricultural trade were more restricted.\nUntil 1997, Colombia had enjoyed a fairly stable economy. The first five years of liberalization were characterized by high economic growth rates of between 4% and 5%. The Ernesto Samper administration (1994\u201398) emphasized social welfare policies which targeted Colombia's lower income population. These reforms led to higher government spending which increased the fiscal deficit and public sector debt, the financing of which required higher interest rates. An over-valued peso inherited from the previous administration was maintained.\nThe economy slowed, and by 1998 GDP growth was only 0.6%. In 1999, the country fell into its first recession since the Great Depression. The economy shrank by 4.5% with unemployment at over 20%. While unemployment remained at 20% in 2000, GDP growth recovered to 3.1%. Unemployment in 2020 has improved compared to two decades ago to 12.20%.\nThe administration of President Andr\u00e9s Pastrana Arango, when it took office on 7 August 1998, faced an economy in crisis, with the difficult internal security situation and global economic turbulence additionally inhibiting confidence. As evidence of a serious recession became clear in 1999, the government took a number of steps. It engaged in a series of controlled devaluations of the peso, followed by a decision to let it float. Colombia also entered into an agreement with the International Monetary Fund which provided a $2.7 billion guarantee (extended funds facility), while committing the government to budget discipline and structural reforms.\n21st century.\nBy early 2000 there had been the beginning of an economic recovery, with the export sector leading the way, as it enjoyed the benefit of the more competitive exchange rate, as well as strong prices for petroleum, Colombia's leading export product. Prices of coffee, the other principal export product, have been more variable.\nEconomic growth reached 3.1% during 2000 and inflation 9.0%. Inflation by 2021 has stabilized at 3.30%. Colombia's international reserves remained stable at around $8.35 billion in the year 2000 growing to $58.57 billion by 2021, and Colombia has successfully remained in international capital markets. Colombia's total foreign debt at the end of 1999 was $34.5 billion with $14.7 billion in private sector and $19.8 billion in public sector debt. Major international credit rating organizations had dropped Colombian sovereign debt below investment grade, primarily as a result of large fiscal deficits, which current policies are seeking to close. As of 2021 Colombia has recovered its investment grade rating.\nFormer president \u00c1lvaro Uribe (elected 7 August 2002) introduced several neoliberal economic reforms, including measures designed to reduce the public-sector deficit below 2.5% of GDP in 2004. The government's economic policy and controversial democratic security strategy have engendered a growing sense of confidence in the economy, particularly within the business sector, and GDP growth in 2003 was among the highest in Latin America, at over 4%. This growth rate was maintained over the next decade, averaging 4.8% from 2004 to 2014.\nAccording to figures from Dane, monetary poverty went from 37.2% in 2010 to 26.9% in 2017, which indicates a higher income for the most vulnerable households. During the Santos government, there was an inflationary period that was also a response to the strong external shock of the fall in oil prices. It was a period of contained instability, although inflation increased, no company declared bankruptcy and there was no instability in the financial system.\nThe Santos period managed an increase in GDP of 4% in 2010, which peaked in 2011 to 6.6%. Thereafter it remained at 4% in 2012, 4.9% in 2013 and 4.4% in 2014. In 2011, Colombia recovered it's BBB\u2212 investment grade, which was raised in 2013 to BBB. As a result of sustained growth, during the eight years of the Santos government, 3.5 million jobs were created, while 5.4 million people were lifted out of poverty.\nThe focus of Santos' second term was to reach a peace agreement with the FARC whose economic effects, according to assumptions, could imply a GDP growth of up to two additional percentage points. Santos' best legacy is precisely the one related to security since this will have an effect in the medium and long term in terms of investment decisions, job creation, and the beginning of a great revolution in the country's infrastructure: war prevented development in the most affected areas for centuries.\nColombia's President Iv\u00e1n Duque withdrew a controversial tax reform bill following four weeks of huge protests across the country starting 28 April 2021. In 2021, Colombia registered an increase in Gross Domestic Product of more than 10%, as a result of a rebound effect that derived from the 6.8% collapse a year earlier, caused by the economic closures decreed to stop the coronavirus pandemic. The pandemic exacerbated poverty. In 2021, official figures showed that 39% of Colombians \u2013 out of a population of 51.6 million inhabitants \u2013 were in a condition of monetary poverty. Although it shows a slight improvement compared to 2020 (42.5%), it meant a setback of at least a decade.\nThe greatest increase in the value of the debt also occurred in the Duque government, according to figures from the Bank of the Republic. Between 2020 and 2021 the balance increased by 17 billion dollars, and from 2019 to 2020 it increased by 16 billion. That figure, which corresponds to a deficit of 7.1 percent of GDP, was the debt that the Central National Government or GNC (the State without its companies or regional entities) had in 2021, according to the fiscal closing bulletin.\nIn the Duque government, specifically between May and June 2020, 66.7 percent of the country's gold reserves were sold, which went from 710.5 to 237.4 million dollars. The decision was made by the Bank of the Republic. The sale received criticism because although it was done at a time of rising prices \u2013 after five years in which this did not happen \u2013 it was before gold reached a record price.\nThe COVID-19 recession had a profound impact on Colombia\u2019s economy, with significant disruptions to GDP components, unemployment, and inflation. Household consumption, which is a key driver of the economy, saw the sharpest decline, dropping by 20% in the second quarter of 2020 due to lockdowns, income uncertainty, and limited mobility. Despite a partial recovery in Q3 2020, high unemployment (peaking at 19.9%) and ongoing uncertainties slowed the recovery of consumer spending. Investment also decreased during the pandemic, with businesses reducing capital expenditures amid uncertainty (-31.6%). Although investment exhibited a significant recovery in Q3 2020, reaching 26%, the drop in global demand for Colombia\u2019s exports\u2014particularly oil and coal\u2014influenced a slow recovery as indicated by 10% growth rate of real GDP following a 16% trough. Government spending rose in response to the pandemic, driven by fiscal stimulus and social aid programs, helping to stabilize the economy.\nThe deterioration of the labor market severely affected sectors such as retail, hospitality, and informal employment, deepening the economic contraction. Although unemployment gradually decreased to 14.75% by early 2021, it stayed significantly above the pre-pandemic levels. Inflation, on the other hand, remained low in Q1 2020, but turned into deflation for the remaining of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, signaling a significant weakened aggregate demand. Overall, Colombia\u2019s real GDP contracted by about 16% in Q2 2020, due to declines in household consumption and investment. While there were modest signs of recovery by early 2021, the combination of high unemployment and deflation continued to hinder the full economic rebound.\nOverview.\nIn the early 21st century, the Colombian economy grew in part because of austere government budgets, focused efforts to reduce public debt levels, an export-oriented growth strategy, an improved security situation in the country, and high commodity prices. Growth slowed to 1.4 percent in 2017, and then increased to 3.3 percent in 2019.\nPresident Uribe, who was in office from 2002 to 2010, examined opportunities including reforming the pension system, reducing high unemployment, achieving congressional passage of a fiscal transfers reform, and exploring for new oil or producing ethanol. Colombia's Gini coefficient, a measure of inequality, was one of the highest in South America. International and domestic financial analysts warned of the growing central government deficit, which hovered at 5% of GDP. Nonetheless, confidence in the economy grew.\nThe middle class will represent 25% of the population in 2020 according to a survey by the daily newspaper \"El Tiempo\". Official data indicate that 42.5% of the population lives below the poverty line. The social elevator is one of the slowest in the world, as it takes an average of eleven generations for a family to rise out of poverty.\nThe tax system is one of the causes of Colombia's deep social inequalities. The income tax (IRPP) is not very progressive (almost all taxpayers pay it at a rate of between 19% and 28%, and the rate rises only slightly thereafter) and is levied mainly on salaries, with other categories of income being largely underreported. Redistribution through the Colombian tax system is thus the lowest in Latin America, even though it is on average very limited.\nDevelopment of main indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132019 (with IMF staff stimtates in 2020\u20132025). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nLabor rights.\nOn 8 June 2020, the newly formed Employment Mission \"(Misi\u00f3n de Empleo)\" met for the first time to discuss labor reforms that it intended to propose to Congress. Some of these reforms had been desired for years, and others had come into starker view during the coronavirus pandemic.\nThe legal working hours are 48 hours per week. However, the informal economy accounts for almost half of the workers, who are therefore not covered by labor laws.\nAgriculture.\nColombia is one of the five largest producers in the world of coffee, avocado and palm oil, and one of the 10 largest producers in the world of sugarcane, banana, pineapple and cocoa.\nColombia produced, in 2018, 36.2 million tons of sugarcane (7th largest producer in the world), 5.8 million tons of palm oil (5th largest producer in the world), 3.7 million tons of banana (11th largest producer in the world) and 720 thousand tons of coffee (4th largest producer in the world, behind Brazil, Vietnam and Indonesia). Although its neighbor Brazil is the largest producer of coffee in the world (3.5 million tons produced in the same year), the advertising carried out by the country for decades suggests that Colombian coffee is of higher quality, which generates greater added value to the country's product. In the same year, Colombia produced 3.3 million tons of rice, 3.1 million tons of potato, 2.2 million tons of cassava, 1.3 million tons of maize, 900 thousand tons of pineapple, 670 thousand tons of onion, 527 thousand tons of tomato, 419 thousand tons of yam, 338 thousand tons of mango, 326 thousand tons of avocado, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products such as orange, tangerine, lemon, papaya, beans, carrot, coconut, watermelon etc. As of October 2024, Colombia is the tenth largest producer of cacao in the global market. It\u2019s top importers include the United States, Chile, Ecuador, and Venezuela.\nThe share of agriculture in GDP has fallen consistently since 1945, as industry and services have expanded. However, Colombia's agricultural share of GDP decreased during the 1990s by less than in many of the world's countries at a similar level of development, even though the share of coffee in GDP diminished in a dramatic way. Agriculture has nevertheless remained an important source of employment, providing a fifth of Colombia's jobs in 2006.\nAgriculture in Columbia is particularly vulnerable to climate-induced events like La Ni\u00f1a, leading to droughts and heavy rains. Soil aridity, erosion, and desertification are already pressing issues in Colombian agriculture, expected to worsen with climate change. Despite representing only 0.4 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions, 71.3 percent of Colombia's domestic emissions stem from agriculture and land use. Colombia's revised National Determined Contributions (NDCs) aim to reduce emissions by 51% by 2030, with a focus on agriculture. Strategies include reducing greenhouse gas emissions in cocoa, rice, coffee, forestry, and cattle production. The country also aims to provide agroclimatic information to 1 million producers by 2030.\nLivestock.\nIn the production of beef and chicken meat, Colombia is among the 20 largest producers in the world.\nIn Colombia, the exploitation and breeding of cattle is carried out on small farms and large farms. Black-eared white, casanare\u00f1o, coastal with horns, romosinuano, chino santandereano and hart\u00f3n del Valle, are the Colombian breeds with the highest production.\nIn 2013, livestock occupied 80% of productive land in Colombia. The livestock sector is one of the most outstanding in areas such as Caribbean Region, where seven departments have livestock as their primary vocation. Also in Antioquia, where there is the largest cattle inventory in the country, the department had that year 11% of the head of cattle in Colombia, and according to the livestock inventory, in 2012 Antioque\u00f1os counted around 2,268,000 head of cattle.\nAlso in 2013, the bovine herd in Colombia reached 20.1 million head of cattle, of which 2.5 million (12.5%) were milking cows. In addition, the country's total milk production was 13.1 million liters.\nOn the other hand, the increase in imports of pork meat, the high prices of inputs and the slowdown in the national economy, produced a crisis in the raising of pork in Colombia in 2015.\nIndustry.\nThe World Bank lists the main producing countries each year, based on the total value of production. According to the 2019 list, Colombia has the 46th most valuable industry in the world (US$35.4 billion), behind Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina, but ahead of Peru and Chile.\nManufacturing.\nDomestic appliances.\nAlthough Colombia has been producing domestic appliances since the 1930s, it wasn't until the late 1990s that Colombian corporations began exporting to neighboring countries. One of Colombia's largest producers of domestic appliances, HACEB has been producing refrigeration since 1940. Some domestic corporations include: Challenger, Kalley, HACEB, Imusa, and Landers. In 2011, Groupe SEB acquired Imusa as a form to expand to the Latin American market. Colombia also manufactures for foreign companies as well, such as Whirlpool and GE. LG has also been interested in building a plant in Colombia. Colombia is also Latin America's 3rd largest producer of appliances behind Mexico and Brazil and is growing rapidly.\nElectronics.\nColombia is a major producer of electronics in Latin America, and is South America's 2nd largest high-tech market. Colombia is also the 2nd largest producer and exporter of electronics made by domestic companies in Latin America. Since the early 2000s, major Colombian corporations began exporting aggressively to foreign markets. Some of these companies include: Challenger, PcSmart, Compumax, Colcircuirtos, and Kalley. Colombia is the first country in Latin America to manufacture a domestically made 4K television. In 2014, the Colombian Government launched a national campaign to promote IT and Electronic sectors, as well as investing in Colombia's own companies. Although innovation remains low on the global scale, the government sees heavy potential in the high tech industry and is investing heavily in education and innovation centers all across the nation. Because of this, Colombia could become a major global manufacturer of electronics and play an important role in the global high tech industry in the near future. In 2014, the Colombian government released another national campaign to help Colombian companies have a bigger share of the national market.\nConstruction.\nConstruction recentlyhas played a vital role in the economy, and is growing rapidly at almost 20% annually. As a result, Colombia is seeing a historic building boom. The Colombian government is investing heavily in transport infrastructure through a plan called \"Fourth Generation Network\". The target of the Colombian government is to build 7,000\u00a0km of roads for the 2016\u20132020 period and reduce travel times by 30% and transport costs by 20%. A toll road concession program will comprise 40 projects, and is part of a larger strategic goal to invest nearly $50bn in transport infrastructure, including: railway systems; making the Magdalena river navigable again; improving port facilities; as well as an expansion of Bogot\u00e1's airport. Long-term plans include building a national high-speed train network, to vastly improve competitiveness.\nMining and energy.\nColombia is well-endowed with minerals and energy resources. It has the largest coal reserves in Latin America, and is second to Brazil in hydroelectric potential. Estimates of petroleum reserves in 1995 were . It also possesses significant amounts of nickel, gold, silver, platinum, and emeralds.\nThe country was the 12th largest producer of coal in the world in 2018. In 2019, Colombia was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, with 791 thousand barrels / day. In mining, Colombia is the world's largest producer of emerald.\nThe discovery of of high-quality oil at the Cusiana and Cupiagua fields, about east of Bogot\u00e1, has enabled Colombia to become a net oil exporter since 1986. The Transandino pipeline transports oil from Orito in the Department of Putumayo to the Pacific port of Tumaco in the Department of Nari\u00f1o. Total crude oil production averages ; about is exported. The Pastrana government has significantly liberalized its petroleum investment policies, leading to an increase in exploration activity. Refining capacity cannot satisfy domestic demand, so some refined products, especially gasoline, must be imported. Plans for the construction of a new refinery are under development.\nWhile Colombia has vast hydroelectric potential, a prolonged drought in 1992 forced severe electricity rationing throughout the country until mid-1993. The consequences of the drought on electricity-generating capacity caused the government to commission the construction or upgrading of ten thermoelectric power plants. Half will be coal-fired, and half will be fired by natural gas. The government also has begun awarding bids for the construction of a natural gas pipeline system that will extend from the country's extensive gas fields to its major population centers. Plans call for this project to make natural gas available to millions of Colombian households by the middle of the next decade.\nAs of 2004, Colombia has become a net energy exporter, exporting electricity to Ecuador and developing connections to Peru, Venezuela and Panama to export to those markets as well. The Trans-Caribbean pipeline connecting western Venezuela to Panama through Colombia is also under construction, thanks to cooperation between presidents \u00c1lvaro Uribe of Colombia, Mart\u00edn Torrijos of Panama and Hugo Ch\u00e1vez of Venezuela. Coal is exported to Turkey.\nOil and coal account for 47% of goods exports in 2021.\nHuman rights abuses in mining zones.\nThe oil pipelines are a frequent target of extortion and bombing campaigns by the National Liberation Army (ELN) and, more recently, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The bombings, which have occurred on average once every 5 days, have caused substantial environmental damage, often in fragile rainforests and jungles, as well as causing significant loss of life. In April 1999 in Cartagena de Indias, Clinton's Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson spoke before investors from the United States, Canada and other countries. He expressed his government's willingness to use military aid to support the investment that they and their allies were going to make in Colombia, especially in strategically important sectors like mining and energy.\nIn 2001 there were 170 attacks on the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n\u2013Cove\u00f1as pipeline. The pipeline was out of operation for over 200 days of that year; the government estimates that these bombings reduced Colombia's GDP by 0.5%. The government of the United States increased military aid, in 2003, to Colombia to assist in the effort to defend the pipeline. Occidental Petroleum privately contracted mercenaries who flew Skymaster planes, from AirScan International Inc., to patrol the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline. Many of these operations used helicopters, equipment and weapons provided by the U.S. military and anti-narcotics aid programs.\nMining and natural exploitation has had environmental consequences. The region of Guajira is undergoing an accelerated desertification with the disappearances of forests, land, and water sources, due to the increase in coal production. Social consequences or lack of development in resource rich areas is common. 11 million Colombians survive on less than one dollar a day. Over 65% of these live in mining zones. There are 3.5 million children out of school, and the most critical situation is in the mining zone of Choco, Bolivar, and Sucre.\nEconomic consequences of privatization and liberal institutions have meant changes in taxation to attract foreign investment. Colombia will lose another $800 million over the next 90 years that Glencore International operates in El Cerrejon Zona Media, if the company continues to produce coal at a rate of 5 million tons/year, because of the reduction of the royalty tax from 10 to 15% to .04%. If the company, as is plausible, doubles or triples its production, the losses will be proportionally greater. The operational losses from the three large mining projects (El Cerrejon, La Loma, operated by Drummond, and Montel\u00edbano, which produces ferronickel) for Colombia to more than 12 billion. \nCoal production has grown rapidly, from 22.7 million tons in 1994 to 50.0 million tons in 2003. Over 90% of this amount was exported, making Colombia the world's sixth largest coal exporter, behind Australia, China, Indonesia, South Africa and Russia. From the mid-1980s the center of coal production was the Cerrej\u00f3n mines in the Guajira department. However, the growth in output at La Loma in neighboring Cesar Department made this area the leader in Colombian coal production since 2004. Production in other departments, including Boyac\u00e1, Cundinamarca and Norte de Santander, forms about 13% of the total. The coal industry is largely controlled by international mining companies, including a consortium of BHP, Anglo American and Glencore at Cerrej\u00f3n, and Conundrum Company at La Loma, which is undergoing a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court in Alabama for union assassinations and alleged paramilitary links.\nForeign investment.\nVarious attempts to open up the economy during the 1993-2023 period have been described by Portafolio as being \"half-hearted\". In 1990, to attract foreign investors and promote trade, an experiment from the International Monetary Fund known as \"La Apertura\" was adopted by the government, this policy was to modernize different sectors of the economy to increase the overall efficiency of production so as to bring down prices to internationally competitive levels. Although the analyses of the results are not clear, the fact is that the agricultural sector was severely impacted by this policy.\nIn 1991 and 1992, the government passed laws to stimulate foreign investment in nearly all sectors of the economy. The only activities closed to foreign direct investment are defense and national security, disposal of hazardous wastes, and real estate\u2014the last of these restrictions is intended to hinder money laundering. Colombia established a special entity\u2014Converter\u2014to assist foreigners in making investments in the country. Foreign investment flows for 1999 were $4.4 billion, down from $4.8 billion in 1998.\nMajor foreign investment projects underway include the $6 billion development of the Cusiana and Cupiagua oil fields, development of coal fields in the north of the country, and the recently concluded licensing for establishment of cellular telephone service. The United States accounted for 26.5% of the total $19.4 billion stock of non-petroleum foreign direct investment in Colombia at the end of 1998.\nOn 21 October 1995, under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), President Clinton signed an Executive Order barring U.S. entities from any commercial or financial transactions with four Colombian drug kingpins and with individuals and companies associated with the traffic in narcotics, as designated by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General. The list of designated individuals and companies is amended periodically and is maintained by the Office of Foreign Asset Control at the Department of the Treasury, tel. (202) 622-0077 (ask for Document #1900). The document also is available at the Department of Treasury website.\nColombia is the United States' fifth-largest export market in Latin America\u2014behind Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela, and Argentina\u2014and the 26th-largest market for U.S. products worldwide. The United States is Colombia's principal trading partner, with two-way trade from November 1999 through November 2000 exceeding $9.5 billion--$3.5 billion U.S. exports and $6.0 billion U.S. imports. Colombia benefits from duty-free entry\u2014for a 10-year period, through 2001\u2014for certain of its exports to the United States under the Andean Trade Preferences Act. Colombia improved protection of intellectual property rights through the adoption of three Andean Pact decisions in 1993 and 1994, but the U.S. remains concerned over deficiencies in licensing, patent regulations, and copyright protection.\nColombia is also the largest export partner of the Dutch constituent country of Aruba (39.4%).\nThe petroleum and natural gas coal mining, chemical, and manufacturing industries attract the greatest U.S. investment interest. U.S. investment accounted for 37.8% ($4.2 billion) of the total $11.2 billion in foreign direct investment at the end of 1997, excluding petroleum and portfolio investment. Worker rights and benefits in the U.S.-dominated sectors are more favorable than general working conditions. Examples include shorter-than-average working hours, higher wages, and compliance with health and safety standards above the national average.\nTertiary industries.\nThe services sector dominates Colombia's GDP, contributing 58 percent of GDP in 2007, and, given worldwide trends, its dominance will probably continue. The sector is characterized by its heterogeneity, being the largest for employment (61 percent), in both the formal and informal sectors.\nArts and music.\nSince the early 2010s, the Colombian government has shown interest in exporting modern Colombian pop culture to the world (which includes video games, music, movies, TV shows, fashion, cosmetics, and food) as a way of diversifying the economy and changing the image of Colombia. In the Hispanic world, Colombia is only behind Mexico in cultural exports at US$750 million annually, and is already a regional leader in cosmetic and beauty exports.\nTravel and tourism.\nTourism in Colombia is an important sector in the country's economy. Colombia has major attractions as a tourist destination, such as Cartagena and its historic surroundings, which are on the UNESCO World Heritage List; the insular department of San Andr\u00e9s, Providencia y Santa Catalina; Santa Marta, Cartagena and the surrounding area. Fairly recently, Bogot\u00e1, the nation's capital, has become Colombia's major tourist destination because of its improved museums and entertainment facilities and its major urban renovations, including the rehabilitation of public areas, the development of parks, and the creation of an extensive network of cycling routes. With its very rich and varied geography, which includes the Amazon and Andean regions, the llanos, the Caribbean and Pacific coasts, and the deserts of La Guajira, and its unique biodiversity, Colombia also has major potential for ecotourism.\nThe direct contribution of Travel &amp; Tourism to GDP in 2013 was COP11,974.3mn (1.7% of GDP). This is forecast to rise by 7.4% to COP12,863.4mn in 2014. This primarily reflects the economic activity generated by industries such as hotels, travel agents, airlines and other passenger transportation services (excluding commuter services). But it also includes, for example, the activities of the restaurant and leisure industries directly supported by tourists. The direct contribution of Travel &amp; Tourism to GDP is expected to grow by 4.1% pa to COP19,208.4mn (1.8% of GDP) by 2024.\nThe number of tourists in Colombia grows by over 12% every year. Colombia is projected to have over 15 million tourists by 2023.\nEco-tourism.\nEco-tourism is very promising in Colombia. Colombia has vast coastlines, mountainous areas, and tropical jungles. There are volcanoes and waterfalls as well. This makes Colombia a biodiverse country with many attractions for foreign visitors.\nThe Colombian coffee growing axis (Spanish: Eje Cafetero), also known as the Coffee Triangle (Spanish: Tri\u00e1ngulo del Caf\u00e9), is a part of the Colombian Paisa region in the rural area of Colombia, which is famous for growing and production of a majority of Colombian coffee, considered by some as the best coffee in the world. There are three departments in the area: Caldas, Quind\u00edo and Risaralda. These departments are among the smallest departments in Colombia with a total combined area of , about 1.2% of the Colombian territory. The combined population is 2,291,195 (2005 census).\nTransportation and telecommunications.\nColombia's geography, with three cordilleras of the Andes running up the country from south to north, and jungle in the Amazon and Dari\u00e9n regions, represents a major obstacle to the development of national road networks with international connections. Thus, the basic nature of the country's transportation infrastructure is not surprising. In the spirit of the 1991 constitution, in 1993 the Ministry of Public\nWorks and Transportation was reorganized and renamed the Ministry of Transportation. In 2000 the new ministry strengthened its role as the planner and regulator within the sector.\nAir transportation.\nColombia was a pioneer in promoting airlines in an effort to overcome its geographic barriers to transportation. The Colombian Company of Air Navigation, formed in 1919, was the second commercial airline in the world. It was not until the 1940s that Colombia's air transportation began growing significantly in the number of companies, passengers carried, and kilometers covered. In the early 2000s, an average of 72 percent of the passengers transported by air go to national destinations, while 28 percent travel internationally. One notable feature is that after the reforms of the beginning of the 1990s, the number of international passengers tripled by 2003. In 1993 the construction, administration, operation, and maintenance of the main airports transferred to departmental authorities and the private sector, including companies specializing in air transportation. Within this process, in 2006 the International Airport Operator (Opain), a Swiss-Colombian consortium, won the concession to manage and develop Bogot\u00e1's El Dorado International Airport. El Dorado is the largest airport in Latin America in terms of cargo traffic (33rd worldwide), with 622,145 metric tons in 2013, second in terms of traffic movements (45th worldwide) and third in terms of passengers (50th among the busiest airports in the world). In addition to El Dorado, Colombia's international airports are Palo Negro in Bucaramanga, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar in Santa Marta, Cortissoz in Barranquilla, Rafael N\u00fa\u00f1ez in Cartagena, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda C\u00f3rdova in Rionegro near Medell\u00edn, Alfonso Bonilla Arag\u00f3n in Cali, Alfredo V\u00e1squez Cobo in Leticia, Mateca\u00f1a in Pereira, Gustavo Rojas Pinilla in San Andr\u00e9s, and Camilo Daza in C\u00facuta. In 2006 Colombia was generally reported to have a total of 984 airports, of which 103 had paved runways and 883 were unpaved. The Ministry of Transportation listed 581 airports in 2007, but it may have used a different methodology for counting them.\nPoverty and inequality.\nAfter a large crisis in 1999, poverty in Colombia has had a decreasing trend. The share of Colombians below the income-based poverty line fell from 50% in 2002 to 28% in 2016. The share of Colombians below the extreme income-based poverty line fell from 18% to 9% in the same period. Multidimensional poverty fell from 30% to 18% between 2010 and 2016.&lt;ref name=\"goo.gl/Vs8gki\"&gt;goo.gl/Vs8gki&lt;/ref&gt;\nColombia has a Gini coefficient of 51.7.\nRetail.\nHypermarkets and big-box stores are losing market participation in Colombian retail.\nDebt.\nBetween 1976 and 2006, Colombia's debt doubled every 10 years: in 1976 it was about $3.6 billion, in 1986 it was $7.2 billion, in 1996 it was over $16 billion and in 2006 it was over $36 billion. Since 2006, the growth of the debt has accelerated: it reached $72 billion in 2011 and reached $124 billion in 2017, which means that in less than 10 years Colombia's foreign debt has tripled. About a quarter of Colombia's annual budget, or $20 billion, goes to pay off the public debt.\nCorruption.\nCorruption in public management in Colombia is widespread and structural in nature. This situation generates losses for the country estimated at 15 billion dollars. Colombia has not escaped the scandals involving millions of dollars in bribes from the Brazilian construction company Odebrecht, as well as the Cartagena refinery, a case of embezzlement of public funds that came to light in 2016 and involved members of the governments of \u00c1lvaro Uribe (2002\u20132010) and Juan Manuel Santos (2010\u20132018)."}
{"id": "5840", "revid": "1248925496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5840", "title": "Communications in Colombia", "text": " \nSince being liberalized in 1991, the Colombian telecommunications sector has added new services, expanded coverage, improved efficiency, and lowered costs. The sector has had the second largest (after energy) investment in infrastructure (54 percent) since 1997. However, the economic downturn between 1999 and 2002 adversely affected telecommunications. During this period, Colombia's telecommunications industry lost US$2 billion despite a profit of US$1 billion in local service. In June 2003, the government liquidated the state-owned and heavily indebted National Telecommunications Company (Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones\u2014Telecom) and replaced it with Colombia Telecomunicaciones (Colombia Telecom). The measure enabled the industry to expand rapidly, and in 2004 it constituted 2.8 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). Telef\u00f3nica of Spain acquired 50 percent plus one share of the company in 2006.\nAs a result of increasing competition, Colombia has a relatively modern telecommunications infrastructure that primarily serves larger towns and cities. Colombia's telecommunication system includes access to 8 different international Submarine cable systems, Intelsat, 11 domestic satellite Earth stations, and a nationwide microwave radio relay system.\nTelephones.\nThe country's teledensity (the density of telephone lines in a community) is relatively high for Latin America (17 percent in 2006). However, there is a steep imbalance between rural and urban areas, with some regions below 10 percent and the big cities exceeding 30 percent. Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, and Cali account for about 50 percent of telephone lines in use. By the end of 2005, the number of telephone main lines in use totaled 7,851,649. Colombia Telecom accounted for only about 31 percent of these lines; 27 other operators accounted for the rest.\nColombia's mobile market is one of the fastest-growing businesses in the country. In 1993, the first mobile phone call was made. In mid-2004 mobile telephones overtook fixed lines in service for the first time. By 2005 Colombia had the highest mobile phone density (90 percent) in Latin America, as compared with the region's average density of 70 percent. The number of mobile telephone subscribers totaled an estimated 31 million in 2007, as compared to 21.8 million in 2005 and 6.8 million in 2001.\nRadio and television.\nIn late 2004, Radio Televisi\u00f3n Nacional de Colombia (RTVC) replaced the liquidated Inravisi\u00f3n (Instituto Nacional de Radio y Televisi\u00f3n) as the government-run radio and television broadcasting service, which oversees three national television stations and five radio companies (which operate about a dozen principal networks). Colombia has about 60 television stations, including seven low-power stations. In 2000 the population had about 11.9 million television receivers in use. Of the approximately 515 radio stations, 454 are AM; 34, FM; and 27, shortwave.\nUndersea Cables.\nAs of 2016, Colombia has access to the following international Submarine cable systems: SAC/LAN, Maya-1, AMX-1, Pan Am, SAm-1, ARCOS-1, CFX-1, and PCCS. These cables land at 4 locations in the Caribbean: Barranquilla, Cartagena, Riohacha, and Tolu. One cable lands on the Pacific Ocean coast at Buenaventura, Valle del Cauca.\nInternet.\nColombia is still far behind Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina in terms of online usage. It had an estimated total of 900,000 Internet subscribers by the end of 2005, a figure that equated to 4,739,000 Internet users, or 11.5 percent of the 2005 population (10.9 per 100 inhabitants). By late 2009 39% of households had internet access Colombia had 581,877 Internet hosts in 2006. Although as many as 70 percent of Colombians accessed the Internet over their ordinary telephone lines, dial-up access is losing ground to broadband. In 2005 Colombia had 345,000 broadband subscriber lines, or one per 100 inhabitants. In 2006 the number of personal computers per 1,000 people increased to an estimated 87 per 1,000 inhabitants, a rate still below that in other large Latin American economies. The internet country code is .co."}
{"id": "5841", "revid": "1254021169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5841", "title": "Transport in Colombia", "text": " \nTransport in Colombia is regulated by the Ministry of Transport.\nRoad travel is the main means of transport; 69 percent of cargo is transported by road, as compared with 27 percent by railroad, 3 percent by internal waterways, and 1 percent by air.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples influence.\nThe indigenous peoples in Colombia used and some continue to use the waterways as the way of transportation using rafts and canoes.\nSpanish influence.\nWith the arrival of the Europeans the Spaniards brought the horses, mules and donkey (which developed into the \"Paso Fino\") used by them in ranching duties later in the Spanish colonization of the Americas. Horses contributed greatly to the transport of the Spanish conquerors and colonizers. They also introduced the wheel, and brought wooden carts and carriages to facilitate their transport. The Spaniards also developed the first roads, rudimentary and most of these in the Caribbean region. Due to the rough terrain of Colombia communications between regions was difficult and affected the effectiveness of the central government creating isolation in some regions. Maritime navigation developed locally after Spain lifted its restrictions on ports within the Spanish Empire inducing mercantilism. Spanish also transported African slaves and forcedly migrated many indigenous tribes throughout Colombia.\nPost-independence.\nWith the independence and the influences of the European Industrial Revolution the main way of transport in Colombia became the navigation mainly through the Magdalena River which connected Honda in inland Colombia, with Barranquilla by the Caribbean Sea to the trade with the United States and Europe. This also brought a large wave of immigrants from European and Middle Eastern countries. The industrialization process and transportation in Colombia were affected by the internal civil wars that surged after the independence from Spain and that continued throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.\nStandardization.\nDuring the late 19th century European and American companies introduced railways to carry to the ports the local production of raw materials intended for exports and also imports from Europe. Steam ships began carrying Colombians, immigrants and goods from Europe and the United States over the Magdalena River.\nThe Ministry of Transport was created in 1905 during the presidency of Rafael Reyes under the name of \" Ministerio de Obras P\u00fablicas y Transporte\" or Ministry of Public Works and Transport with the main function of taking care of national assets issues, including mines, oil (fuel), patents and trade marks, railways, roads, bridges, national buildings and land without landowners.\nIn the early 20th century roads and highways maintenance and construction regulations were established. Rivers were cleaned, dragged and channeled and the navigational industry was organized. The Public works districts were created, as well as the Ferrocarriles Nacionales de Colombia (National Railways of Colombia). Among other major projects developed were the aqueduct of Bogot\u00e1, La Regadera Dam and the Vitelma Water Treatment Plant. The Ministry also created the National Institute of Transit (from the Spanish \"Instituto Nacional de Tr\u00e1nsito\"), (INTRA) under the Transport and tariffs Directorate and was in charge of designing the first National roads plan with the support of many foreign multinational construction companies.\nAviation was born in Barranquilla with the creation of SCADTA in 1919 a joint venture between Colombians and Germans that delivered mail to the main cities of Colombia which later merged with SACO to form Avianca.\nInfrastructure.\nRailways.\nColombia has of rail lines, of which are gauge and of which are gauge. However, only of lines are still in use. Rail transport in Colombia remains underdeveloped. The national railroad system, once the country's main mode of transport for freight, has been neglected in favor of road development and now accounts for only about a quarter of freight transport. Passenger-rail use was suspended in 1992 resumed at the end of the 1990s, and as of 2017 it is considered abandoned (at least for long distances). Fewer than 165,000 passenger journeys were made in 1999, as compared with more than 5 million in 1972, and the figure was only 160,130 in 2005. The two still-functioning passenger trains are: one between Puerto Berr\u00edo and Garc\u00eda Cadena, and another one between Bogot\u00e1 and Zipaquir\u00e1. Short sections of railroad, mainly the Bogot\u00e1-Atlantic rim, are used to haul goods, mostly coal, to the Caribbean and Pacific ports. In 2005 a total of 27.5 million metric tons of cargo were transported by rail. Although the nation's rail network links seven of the country's 10 major cities, very little of it has been used regularly because of security concerns, lack of maintenance, and the power of the road transport union. During 2004\u20136, approximately 2,000 kilometers of the country's rail lines underwent refurbishment. This upgrade involved two main projects: the 1,484-kilometer line linking Bogot\u00e1 to the Caribbean Coast and the 499-kilometer Pacific coastal network that links the industrial city of Cali and the surrounding coffee-growing region to the port of Buenaventura.\nRoads.\nThe three main north\u2013south highways are the Caribbean, Eastern, and Central Trunk Highways (troncales). Estimates of the length of Colombia's road system in 2004 ranged from 115,000 kilometers to 145,000 kilometers, of which fewer than 15 percent were paved. However, according to 2005 data reported by the Colombian government, the road network totaled 163,000 kilometers, 68 percent of which were paved and in good condition. The increase may reflect some newly built roads. President Uribe has vowed to pave more than 2,500 kilometers of roads during his administration, and about 5,000 kilometers of new secondary roads were being built in the 2003\u20136 period. Despite serious terrain obstacles, almost three-quarters of all cross-border dry cargo is now transported by road, 105,251 metric tons in 2005.\nHighways are managed by the Colombian Ministry of Transport through the National Roads Institute. The security of the highways in Colombia is managed by the Highway Police unit of the Colombian National Police. Colombia is crossed by the Panamerican Highway.\nPorts, waterways, and merchant marine.\nSeaports handle around 80 percent of international cargo. In 2005 a total of 105,251 metric tons of cargo were transported by water. Colombia's most important ocean terminals are Barranquilla, Cartagena, and Santa Marta on the Caribbean Coast and Buenaventura and Tumaco on the Pacific Coast. Exports mostly pass through the Caribbean ports of Cartagena and Santa Marta, while 65 percent of imports arrive at the port of Buenaventura. Other important ports and harbors are Bah\u00eda de Portete, Leticia, Puerto Bol\u00edvar, San Andr\u00e9s, Santa Marta, and Turbo. Since privatization was implemented in 1993, the efficiency of port handling has increased greatly. Privatization, however, has had negative impacts as well. In Buenaventura, for example, privatization of the harbor has increased unemployment and social issues. There are plans to construct a deep-water port at Bah\u00eda Solano.\nThe main inland waterways total about 18,200 kilometers, 11,000 kilometers of which are navigable by riverboats. A well-developed and important form of transport for both cargo and passengers, inland waterways transport approximately 3.8 million metric tons of freight and more than 5.5 million passengers annually. Main inland waterways are the Magdalena\u2013Cauca River system, which is navigable for 1,500 kilometers; the Atrato, which is navigable for 687 kilometers; the Orinoco system of more than five navigable rivers, which total more than 4,000 kilometers of potential navigation (mainly through Venezuela); and the Amazonas system, which has four main rivers totaling 3,000 navigable kilometers (mainly through Brazil). The government is planning an ambitious program to more fully utilize the main rivers for transport. In addition, the navy's riverine brigade has been patrolling waterways more aggressively in order to establish safer river transport in the more remote areas in the south and east of the country.\nThe merchant marine totals 17 ships (1,000 gross registered tons or more), including four bulk, 13 cargo, one container, one liquefied gas, and three petroleum tanker ships. Colombia also has seven ships registered in other countries (Antigua and Barbuda, two; Panama, five).\nCivil Aviation.\nThe Special Administrative Unit of Civil Aeronautics is responsible of regulating and controlling the use of air space by civil aviation. The customs/immigration issues are controlled by the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS).\nColombia has well-developed air routes and an estimated total of 984 airports, 100 of which have paved runways, plus two heliports. Of the 74 main airports, 20 can accommodate jet aircraft. Two airports are more than 3,047 meters in length, nine are 2,438\u20133,047 meters, 39 are 1,524\u20132,437 meters, 38 are 914\u20131,523 meters, 12 are shorter than 914 meters, and 880 have unpaved runways. The government has been selling its stake in local airports in order to allow their privatization. The country has 40 regional airports, and the cities of Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, Cali, Barranquilla, Bucaramanga, Cartagena, C\u00facuta, Leticia, Pereira, Armenia, San Andr\u00e9s, and Santa Marta have international airports. Bogot\u00e1's El Dorado International Airport handles 550 million metric tons of cargo and 22 million passengers a year, making it the largest airport in Latin America in terms of cargo and the third largest in passenger numbers.\nUrban transport.\nUrban transport systems have been developed in Barranquilla, Bogot\u00e1, Cali, and Medell\u00edn. Traffic congestion in Bogot\u00e1 had been greatly exacerbated by a lack of rail transport; however, this problem was alleviated, to a degree, by the formation of one of the world's most expansive and highest-capacity bus rapid transit (BRT) systems\u2014known as the TransMilenio (opened 2000)\u2014and the restriction of vehicles through a daily, rotating ban on private cars (depending on plate numbers). Bogot\u00e1's BRT consists of bus and minibus services managed by both private- and public-sector enterprises.\nSince 1995, Medell\u00edn has had a modern urban railway, the Metro de Medell\u00edn, utilizing two train lines with 27 stations. The Metro also connects with the cities of Itag\u00fc\u00ed, Envigado, and Bello. An elevated gondola-cablecar system, the \"Metrocable\", opened in 2004 to improve Metro accessibility for some of the city's more isolated, dense \"barrios\". The gondola design was specifically chosen due to the mountainous geography of the city, with most of the neighborhoods served being reasonably higher in elevation from the city center. A BRT line called Transmetro began operating in 2011, with a second line added in 2013.\nOther Colombian cities have also installed BRT systems, such as Cali, with a six-line system (opened 2008), Barranquilla with two lines (opened 2010), Bucaramanga with one line (opened 2010), Cartagena with one line (opened 2015) and Pereira, with three lines (opened 2006). A future light rail line in Barranquilla is planned.\nPipelines.\nColombia has 4,350 kilometers of gas pipelines, 6,134 kilometers of oil pipelines, and 3,140 kilometers of refined-products pipelines. The country has five major oil pipelines, four of which connect with the Caribbean export terminal at Puerto Cove\u00f1as. Until at least September 2005, the United States funded efforts to help protect a major pipeline, the 769-kilometer-long Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n\u2013Puerto Cove\u00f1as pipeline, which carries about 20 percent of Colombia's oil production to Puerto Cove\u00f1as from the guerrilla-infested Arauca region in the eastern Andean foothills and Amazonian jungle. The number of attacks against pipelines began declining substantially in 2002. In 2004 there were only 17 attacks against the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n\u2013Puerto Cove\u00f1as pipeline, down from 170 in 2001. However, a bombing in February 2005 shut the pipeline for several weeks, and attacks against the electrical gird system that provides energy to the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n oilfield have continued. New oil pipeline projects with Brazil and Venezuela are underway. In addition, the already strong cross-border trade links between Colombia and Venezuela were solidified in July 2004 with an agreement to build a US$320 million natural gas pipeline between the two countries, to be completed in 2008."}
{"id": "5842", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5842", "title": "Colombia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "5843", "revid": "11442566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5843", "title": "Military Forces of Colombia", "text": "The Military Forces of Colombia () are the unified armed forces of the Republic of Colombia. They consist of the Colombian Army, the Colombian Navy and the Colombian Aerospace Force. The National Police of Colombia, although technically not part of the military, is controlled and administered by the Ministry of National Defence, and national conscription also includes service in the National Police, thus making it a \"de facto\" gendarmerie and a branch of the military. The President of Colombia is the military's commander in chief, and helps formulate defense policy through the Ministry of National Defence, which is in charge of day-to-day operations.\nThe Military Forces of Colombia have their roots in the Army of the Commoners (), which was formed on 7 August 1819 \u2013 before the establishment of the present day Colombia \u2013 to meet the demands of the Revolutionary War against the Spanish Empire. After their triumph in the war, the Army of the Commoners disbanded, and the Congress of Angostura created the Gran Colombian Army to replace it, thus establishing the first military service branch of the country.\nThe Colombian military was operationally involved in World War II and was the only Latin American country to send troops to the Korean War. Ever since the advent of the Colombian Conflict, the Colombian military has been involved in combat, pacification, counter-insurgency, and drug interdiction operations all over the country's national territory. Recently it has participated in counter-piracy efforts in the Horn of Africa under Operation Ocean Shield and Operation Atlanta.\nThe military of Colombia is the third largest in the Western Hemisphere in terms of active personnel and has the fourth largest expenditure in the Americas, behind the United States Armed Forces, the Canadian Armed Forces and the Brazilian Armed Forces respectively.\nServices.\nThe Colombian Constitution includes two overlapping definitions of what could be defined as 'armed forces' in English:\nThis is a subtle yet important distinction, both in terms of emphasizing the civil nature of the National Police, but also adapting the national police to function as a paramilitary force which can perform military duties as a result of the Colombian Conflict. This has led to some of the most important police units adopting military training and conducting special operations alongside the Colombian Army, Aerospace Force, and Navy. Therefore, the functions of the Colombian Police in practical terms are similar to those of a gendarmerie, like the Spanish Civil Guard and the Carabineros de Chile, which maintain military ranks for all police personnel.\nPersonnel.\nThe Colombian armed forces consist of: \nMilitary Forces:\nAnd, \nPublic Force strength as of April 2014.\nFunding.\nIn 2000, Colombia assigned 3.9% of its GDP to defense. By 2008 this figure had risen to 4.8%, ranking it 14th in the world. The armed forces number about 250,000 uniformed personnel: 145,000 military and 105,000 police. These figures do not include assistance personnel such as cooks, medics, mechanics, and so on. This makes the Colombian military one of the largest and most well-equipped in Latin America. Many Colombian military personnel have received military training assistance directly in Colombia and also in the United States. The United States has provided equipment and financing to the Colombian military and police through the military assistance program, foreign military sales, and the international narcotics control program, all currently united under the auspices of Plan Colombia."}
{"id": "5844", "revid": "1269302505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5844", "title": "History of Colombia", "text": "The history of Colombia includes its settlement by indigenous peoples\nand the establishment of agrarian societies, notably the Muisca Confederation, Quimbaya Civilization, and Tairona Chiefdoms. The Spanish arrived in 1499 and initiated a period of annexation and colonization, ultimately creating the Viceroyalty of New Granada, with its capital at Bogot\u00e1. Independence from Spain was won in 1819, but by 1830 the resulting \"Gran Colombia\" Federation was dissolved. What is now Colombia and Panama emerged as the Republic of New Granada. The new nation experimented with federalism as the Granadine Confederation (1858) and then the United States of Colombia (1863) before the Republic of Colombia was finally declared in 1886. A period of constant political violence ensued, and Panama seceded in 1903. Since the 1960s, the country has suffered from an asymmetric low-intensity armed conflict which escalated in the 1990s but decreased from 2005 onward. The legacy of Colombia's history has resulted in a rich cultural heritage, \nand Colombia's geographic and climatic variations have contributed to the development of strong regional identities.\nPre-Colombian.\nFrom approximately 12.000 years BP onwards, hunter-gatherer societies existed near present-day Bogot\u00e1 (at El Abra and Tequendama), and they traded with one another and with cultures living in the Magdalena River valley. Due to its location, the present territory of Colombia was a corridor of early human migration from Mesoamerica and the Caribbean to the Andes and the Amazon basin. The oldest archaeological finds are from the Pubenza archaeological site and El Totumo archaeological site in the Magdalena Valley southwest of Bogot\u00e1. These sites date from the Paleoindian period (18.000\u20138000 BCE). At Puerto Hormiga archaeological site and other sites, traces from the Archaic period in South America (~8000\u20132000 BCE) have been found. Vestiges indicate that there was also early occupation in the regions of El Abra, Tibit\u00f3 and Tequendama in Cundinamarca. The oldest pottery discovered in the Americas, found at San Jacinto archaeological site, dates to 5000\u20134000 BCE.\nIndigenous people inhabited the territory that is now Colombia by 10.500 BCE. Nomadic hunter-gatherer tribes at the El Abra and Tequendama sites near present-day Bogot\u00e1 traded with one another and with other cultures from the Magdalena River Valley.\nSerran\u00eda de la Lindosa, a mountainous region of Guaviare Department, is known for an extensive prehistoric rock art site which stretches for nearly eight miles. Some authors have argued that the site depicts now extinct animals such as horses, gomphotheres and ground sloths and that it was painted around 12,600 years ago, but other authors have argued that the drawings depict modern (including domestic) animals and were created in the last 500 years after European contact.\nBetween 5000 and 1000 BCE, hunter-gatherer tribes transitioned to agrarian societies; fixed settlements were established, and pottery appeared. Beginning in the 1st millennium BCE, groups of Amerindians including the Muisca, Quimbaya, Tairona, Calima, Zen\u00fa, Tierradentro, San Agust\u00edn, Tolima and Urab\u00e1 became skilled in farming, mining and metalcraft; and some developed the political system of \"cacicazgos\" with a pyramidal structure of power headed by caciques. The Muisca inhabited mainly the area of what is now the Departments of Boyac\u00e1 and Cundinamarca high plateau (\"Altiplano Cundiboyacense\") where they formed the Muisca Confederation. The Muisca had one of the most developed political systems (Muisca Confederation) in South America, surpassed only by the Incas. They farmed maize, potato, quinoa and cotton, and traded gold, emeralds, blankets, ceramic handicrafts, coca and especially salt with neighboring nations. The Tairona inhabited northern Colombia in the isolated Andes mountain range of Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The Quimbaya inhabited regions of the Cauca River Valley between the Western and Central Ranges. The Incas expanded their empire on the southwest part of the country. During the 1200s, Malayo-Polynesians and Native Americans in Colombia made contact, thereby spreading Native American genetics from Precolonial Colombia to some Pacific Ocean islands.\nSpanish annexation.\nPre-Columbian history.\nEuropeans first visited the territory that became Colombia in 1499 when the first expedition of Alonso de Ojeda arrived at the Cabo de la Vela. The Spanish made several attempts to settle along the north coast of today's Colombia in the early 16th century, but their first permanent settlement, at Santa Marta, dates from 1525. The Spanish commander Pedro de Heredia founded Cartagena on June 1, 1533, in the former location of the indigenous Caribbean Calamar\u00ed village. Cartagena grew rapidly, fueled first by the gold in the tombs of the Sin\u00fa Culture, and later by trade. The thirst for gold and land lured Spanish explorers to visit Chibchan-speaking areas; resulting in the Spanish conquest of the Chibchan Nations - the conquest by the Spanish monarchy of the Chibcha language-speaking nations, mainly the Muisca and Tairona who inhabited present-day Colombia, beginning the Spanish colonization of the Americas.\nThe Spanish advance inland from the Caribbean coast began independently from three different directions, under Jimen\u00e9z de Ques\u00e1da, Sebasti\u00e1n de Benalc\u00e1zar (known in Colombia as Belalc\u00e1zar) and Nikolaus Federmann. Although all three were drawn by the Indian treasures, none intended to reach Muisca territory. where they finally met.\nIn August 1538, Ques\u00e1da founded Santa Fe de Bogot\u00e1 on the site of Muisca village of Bacat\u00e1.\nIn 1549, the institution of the Spanish Royal Audiencia in Bogot\u00e1 gave that city the status of capital of New Granada, which comprised in large part what is now the territory of Colombia. As early as the 1500s however, secret anti-Spanish discontentment was already brewing for Colombians since Spain prohibited direct trade between the Viceroyalty of Peru, which included Colombia, and the Viceroyalty of New Spain, which included the Philippines, the source of Asian products like silk and porcelain which was in demand in the Americas. Illegal trade between Peruvians, Filipinos, and Mexicans continued in secret, as smuggled Asian goods ended up in C\u00f3rdoba, Colombia, the distribution center for illegal Asian imports, due to the collusion between these peoples against the authorities in Spain. They settled and traded with each other while disobeying the forced Spanish monopoly in more expensive silks and porcelain made in homeland Spain. In 1717, the Viceroyalty of New Granada was originally created, and then it was temporarily removed, to finally be reestablished in 1739. Felipe Salonga a rebel Filipino who mixed Christianity with Islam and was from the formerly Muslim kingdom Manila and who was implicated in the Tondo Conspiracy, was presumably exiled to the location of what is now the Viceroyalty of New Granada (Named after a formerly Islamic kingdom in Spain) in the Viceroyalty of Nueva Granada he fomented opposition against Spain among the oppressed Native Americas. The Viceroyalty had Santa F\u00e9 de Bogot\u00e1 as its capital. This Viceroyalty included some other provinces of northwestern South America which had previously been under the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalties of New Spain or Peru and correspond mainly to today's Venezuela, Ecuador and Panama. So, Bogot\u00e1 became one of the principal administrative centers of the Spanish possessions in the New World, along with Lima and Mexico City.\nGran Colombia: independence re-claimed.\nFrom then on, the long independence struggle was led mainly by Bol\u00edvar and Francisco de Paula Santander in neighboring Venezuela. Bol\u00edvar returned to New Granada only in 1819 after establishing himself as leader of the pro-independence forces in the Venezuelan \"llanos\". From there he led an army over the Andes and captured New Granada after a quick campaign that ended at the Battle of Boyac\u00e1 on August 7, 1819. (\"For more information. see Military career of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\".)\nThat year, the Congress of Angostura established the Republic of Gran Colombia, which included all territories under the jurisdiction of the former Viceroyalty of New Granada. Bol\u00edvar was elected the first president of Gran Colombia and Santander, vice president.\nAs the Federation of Gran Colombia was dissolved in 1830, the Department of Cundinamarca (as established in Angostura) became a new country, the Republic of New Granada.\nThe Republic: Liberal and Conservative conflict.\nIn 1863 the name of the Republic was changed officially to \"United States of Colombia,\" and in 1886 the country adopted its present name: \"Republic of Colombia\".\nTwo political parties grew out of conflicts between the followers of Bol\u00edvar and Santander and their political visions\u2014the Conservatives and the Liberals \u2013 and have since dominated Colombian politics. Bol\u00edvar's supporters, who later formed the nucleus of the Conservative Party, sought strong centralized government, alliance with the Roman Catholic Church, and a limited franchise. Santander's followers, forerunners of the Liberals, wanted a decentralized government, state rather than church control over education and other civil matters, and a broadened suffrage.\nThroughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, each party held the presidency for roughly equal periods of time. Colombia maintained a tradition of civilian government and regular, free elections. The military has seized power three times in Colombia's history: in 1830, after the dissolution of Great Colombia; again in 1854 (by General Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Melo); and from 1953 to 1957 (under General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla). Civilian rule was restored within one year in the first two instances.\nNotwithstanding the country's commitment to democratic institutions, Colombia's history has also been characterized by widespread, violent conflict. Two civil wars resulted from bitter rivalry between the Conservative and Liberal parties. The Thousand Days' War (1899\u20131902) cost an estimated 100.000 lives, and up to 300.000 people died during \"La Violencia\" of the late 1940s and 1950s, a bipartisan confrontation which erupted after the assassination of Liberal popular candidate Jorge Eli\u00e9cer Gait\u00e1n. United States activity to influence the area (especially the Panama Canal construction and control) led to a military uprising in the Isthmus Department in 1903, which resulted in the separation and independence of Panama.\nA military coup in 1953 toppled the right-wing government of Conservative Laureano G\u00f3mez and brought General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla to power. Initially, Rojas enjoyed considerable popular support, due largely to his success in reducing \"La Violencia.\" When he did not restore democratic rule and occasionally engaged in open repression, however, he was overthrown by the military in 1957 with the backing of both political parties, and a provisional government was installed.\nThe National Front regime (1958\u20131974).\nIn July 1957, former Conservative President Laureano G\u00f3mez (1950\u20131953) and former Liberal President Alberto Lleras (1945\u20131946. 1958\u20131962) issued the \"Declaration of Sitges,\" in which they proposed a \"National Front,\" whereby the Liberal and Conservative parties would govern jointly. The presidency would be determined by an alternating conservative and liberal president every 4 years for 16 years; the two parties would have parity in all other elective offices.\nThe National Front ended \"La Violencia,\" and National Front administrations attempted to institute far-reaching social and economic reforms in cooperation with the Alliance for Progress. In particular, the Liberal president Alberto Lleras Camargo (1958\u20131962) created the Colombian Institute for Agrarian Reform (INCORA), and Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966\u20131970) further developed land entitlement. In 1968 and 1969 alone, the INCORA issued more than 60.000 land titles to farmers and workers.\nIn the end, the contradictions between each successive Liberal and Conservative administration made the results decidedly mixed. Despite the progress in certain sectors, many social and political injustices continued.\nThe National Front system itself eventually began to be seen as a form of political repression by dissidents and even many mainstream voters, and many protesters were victimized during this period. Especially after what was later confirmed as the fraudulent election of Conservative candidate Misael Pastrana in 1970, which resulted in the defeat of the relatively populist candidate and former president (dictator) Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. The M-19 guerrilla movement, \"Movimiento 19 de Abril\" (19 April Movement), would eventually be founded in part as a response to this particular event. The FARC was formed in 1964 by Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez and other Marxist\u2013Leninist supporters after a military attack on the community of Marquetalia.\nAlthough the system established by the Sitges agreement was phased out by 1974, the 1886 Colombian constitution \u2014 in effect until 1991\u2014required that the losing political party be given adequate and equitable participation in the government which, according to many observers and later analysis, eventually resulted in some increase in corruption and legal relaxation. The current 1991 constitution does not have that requirement, but subsequent administrations have tended to include members of opposition parties.\nPost-National Front.\nFrom 1974 until 1982, different presidential administrations chose to focus on ending the persistent insurgencies that sought to undermine Colombia's traditional political system. Both groups claimed to represent the poor and weak against the rich and powerful classes of the country, demanding the completion of true land and political reform from an openly Communist perspective.\nBy 1974, another challenge to the state's authority and legitimacy had come from 19th of April Movement (M-19), a mostly urban guerrilla group founded in response to an alleged electoral fraud during the final National Front election of Misael Pastrana Borrero (1970\u20131974) and the defeat of former dictator Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. Initially, the M-19 attracted a degree of attention and sympathy from mainstream Colombians that the FARC and National Liberation Army (ELN) had found largely elusive earlier due to extravagant and daring operations, such as stealing a sword that had belonged to Colombia's Independence hero Simon Bol\u00edvar. At the same time, its larger profile soon made it the focus of the state's counterinsurgency efforts.\nThe ELN guerrilla had been seriously crippled by military operations in the region of Anor\u00ed by 1974, but it managed to reconstitute itself and escape destruction, in part due to the administration of Alfonso L\u00f3pez Michelsen (1974\u20131978) allowing it to escape encirclement, hoping to initiate a peace process with the group.\nBy 1982, the perceived passivity of the FARC, together with the relative success of the government's efforts against the M-19 and ELN, enabled the administration of the Liberal Party's Julio C\u00e9sar Turbay (1978\u20131982) to lift a state-of-siege decree that had been in effect, on and off, for most of the previous 30 years. Under the latest such decree, president Turbay had implemented security policies that, though of some military value against the M-19 in particular, were considered highly questionable both inside and outside Colombian circles due to numerous accusations of military human rights abuses against suspects and captured guerrillas.\nCitizen exhaustion due to the conflict's newfound intensity led to the election of president Belisario Betancur (1982\u20131986), a Conservative who won 47% of the popular vote, directed peace feelers at all the insurgents, and negotiated a 1984 cease-fire with the FARC and M-19 after a 1982 release of many guerrillas imprisoned during the previous effort to overpower them. The ELN rejected entering any negotiation and continued to recover itself through the use of extortions and threats, in particular against foreign oil companies of European and U.S. origin.\nAs these events were developing, the growing illegal drug trade and its consequences were also increasingly becoming a matter of widespread importance to all participants in the Colombian conflict. Guerrillas and newly wealthy drug lords had mutually uneven relations, and thus numerous incidents occurred between them. Eventually, the kidnapping of drug cartel family members by guerrillas led to the creation of the 1981 \"Muerte a Secuestradores\" (MAS) death squad (\"Death to Kidnappers\"). Pressure from the U.S. government and critical sectors of Colombian society was met with further violence, as the Medell\u00edn Cartel and its hitmen bribed or murdered numerous public officials, politicians and others who stood in its way by supporting the implementation of extradition of Colombian nationals to the U.S. Victims of cartel violence included Justice Minister Rodrigo Lara, whose assassination in 1984 made the Betancur administration begin to directly oppose the drug lords.\nThe first negotiated cease-fire with the M-19 ended when the guerrillas resumed fighting in 1985, claiming that the cease-fire had not been fully respected by official security forces, saying that several of its members had suffered threats and assaults, and also questioning the government's real willingness to implement any accords. The Betancur administration, in turn, questioned the M-19's actions and its commitment to the peace process, as it continued to advance high-profile negotiations with the FARC, which led to the creation of the Patriotic Union (Colombia) (UP), a legal and non-clandestine political organization.\nOn November 6, 1985, the M-19 stormed the Colombian Palace of Justice and held the Supreme Court magistrates hostage, intending to put president Betancur on trial. In the ensuing crossfire that followed the military's reaction, scores of people lost their lives, as did most of the guerrillas, including several high-ranking operatives. Both sides blamed each other for the outcome.\nMeanwhile, individual FARC members initially joined the UP leadership in representation of the guerrilla command, though most of the guerrilla's chiefs and militiamen did not demobilize nor disarm, as that was not a requirement of the process at that point in time. Tension soon significantly increased as both sides began to accuse each other of not respecting the cease-fire. Political violence against FARC and UP members (including presidential candidate Jaime Pardo) was blamed on drug lords and also on members of the security forces (to a much lesser degree on the argued inaction of Betancur administration). Members of the government and security authorities increasingly accused the FARC of continuing to recruit guerrillas. as well as kidnapping, extorting and politically intimidating voters even as the UP was already participating in politics.\nThe Virgilio Barco (1986\u20131990) administration, in addition to continuing to handle the difficulties of the complex negotiations with the guerrillas, also inherited a particularly chaotic confrontation against the drug lords, who were engaged in a campaign of terrorism and murder in response to government moves in favor of their extradition overseas. The UP also suffered an increasing number of losses during this term (including the assassination of presidential candidate Bernardo Jaramillo), which stemmed both from private proto-paramilitary organizations, increasingly powerful drug lords and a number of would-be paramilitary-sympathizers within the armed forces.\nPost-1990.\nFollowing administrations had to contend with the guerrillas, paramilitaries, narcotics traffickers and the violence and corruption that they all perpetuated, both through force and negotiation. Narcoterrorists assassinated three presidential candidates before C\u00e9sar Gaviria was elected in 1990. Since the death of Medell\u00edn cartel leader Pablo Escobar in a police shootout in December 1993, indiscriminate acts of violence associated with that organization have abated as the \"cartels\" have broken up into multiple smaller and often-competing trafficking organizations. Nevertheless, violence continues as these drug organizations resort to violence as part of their operations but also to protest government policies, including extradition.\nThe M-19 and several smaller guerrilla groups were successfully incorporated into a peace process as the 1980s ended and the 1990s began, which culminated in the elections for a Constituent Assembly of Colombia that would write a new constitution, which took effect in 1991. The new Constitution brought about a considerable number of institutional and legal reforms based on principles that the delegates considered as more modern, humanist, democratic and politically open than those in the 1886 constitution. Practical results were mixed and mingled emerged (such as the debate surrounding the constitutional prohibition of extradition, which later was reversed), but together with the reincorporation of some of the guerrilla groups to the legal political framework, the new Constitution inaugurated an era that was both a continuation and a gradual, but significant, departure from what had come before.\nContacts with the FARC, which had irregularly continued despite the generalized de facto interruptions of the ceasefire and the official 1987 break from negotiations, were temporarily cut off in 1990 under the presidency of C\u00e9sar Gaviria (1990\u20131994). The Colombian Army's assault on the FARC's \"Casa Verde\" sanctuary at La Uribe, Meta, followed by a FARC offensive that sought to undermine the deliberations of the Constitutional Assembly, began to highlight a significant break in the uneven negotiations carried over from the previous decade.\nPresident Ernesto Samper assumed office in August 1994. However, a political crisis relating to large-scale contributions from drug traffickers to Samper's presidential campaign diverted attention from governance programs, thus slowing, and in many cases, halting progress on the nation's domestic reform agenda. The military also suffered several setbacks in its fight against the guerrillas when several of its rural bases began to be overrun and a record number of soldiers and officers were taken prisoner by the FARC (which since 1982 was attempting to implement a more \"conventional\" style of warfare. seeking to eventually defeat the military in the field).\nOn August 7, 1998, Andr\u00e9s Pastrana was sworn in as the President of Colombia. A member of the Conservative Party, Pastrana defeated Liberal Party candidate Horacio Serpa in a run-off election marked by high voter turnout and little political unrest. The new president's program was based on a commitment to bring about a peaceful resolution of Colombia's longstanding civil conflict and to cooperate fully with the United States to combat the trafficking of illegal drugs.\nWhile early initiatives in the Colombian peace process gave reason for optimism, the Pastrana administration also has had to combat high unemployment and other economic problems, such as the fiscal deficit and the impact of global financial instability on Colombia. During his administration, unemployment has risen to over 20%. Additionally, the growing severity of countrywide guerrilla attacks by the FARC and ELN. and smaller movements, as well as the growth of drug production, corruption and the spread of even more violent paramilitary groups such as the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) has made it difficult to solve the country's problems.\nAlthough the FARC and ELN accepted participation in the peace process, they did not make explicit commitments to end the conflict. The FARC suspended talks in November 2000, to protest what it called \"paramilitary terrorism\" but returned to the negotiating table in February 2001 following 2 days of meetings between President Pastrana and FARC leader Manuel Marulanda. The Colombian Government and ELN in early 2001 continued discussions aimed at opening a formal peace process.\nFrom 2004 and on.\nBy 2004, the security situation of Colombia had shown some measure of an improvement, and the economy, while still fragile, had also shown some positive signs. On the other hand, relatively little had been accomplished in structurally solving most of the country's other grave problems, in part due to legislative and political conflicts between the administration and the Colombian Congress (including those over the controversial 2006 project to give President \u00c1lvaro Uribe the right to be re-elected), and a relative lack of freely allocated funds and credits. In October 2006, Uribe was re-elected by a landslide.\nSome critical observers consider in retrospect that Uribe's policies, while admittedly reducing crime and guerrilla activity, were too slanted in favor of a military solution to Colombia's internal war, neglecting grave social and human rights concerns to a certain extent. They hoped that Uribe's government would make serious efforts towards improving the human rights situation inside the country, protecting civilians and reducing any abuses committed by the armed forces.\nUribe's supporters in turn believed that increased military action was a necessary prelude to any serious negotiation attempt with the guerrillas and that the increased security situation would help the government, in the long term, to focus more actively on reducing most wide-scale abuses and human rights violations on the part of both the armed groups and any rogue security forces that might have links to the paramilitaries. In short, these supporters maintained that the security situation needed to be stabilized in favor of the government before any other social concerns could take precedence. In February 2010, the constitutional court blocked President Alvaro Uribe from seeking re-election again. Uribe left the presidency in 2010.\nIn 2010 Juan Manuel Santos was elected president; he was supported by ex-president Uribe, and he owed his election mainly through having won over former Uribe supporters. But two years after winning the presidential election, Santos (to widespread surprise) began peace talks with FARC. which took place in Havana. Re-elected in 2014, Santos revived an important infrastructure program, which had been planned during the Uribe administration. Focused mainly on the provision of national highways, the program was led by former vice-president Germ\u00e1n Vargas Lleras.\nIn 2015, Colombia's Congress limited presidency to single term, preventing the president from seeking re-election.\nTalks between the government and the guerrillas resulted in the announcement of a peace agreement. However, a referendum to ratify the deal was unsuccessful. Afterward, the Colombian government and the FARC signed a revised peace deal in November 2016, which the Colombian congress approved. In 2016, President Santos was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The Government began a process of attention and comprehensive reparation for victims of conflict. Colombia under President Santos showed some progress in the struggle to defend human rights, as expressed by HRW. A Special Jurisdiction of Peace was created to investigate, clarify, prosecute and punish serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international humanitarian law which occurred during the armed conflict and to satisfy victims' right to justice. During his visit to Colombia, Pope Francis paid tribute to the victims of the conflict.\nIn May 2018, Ivan Duque, the candidate of the conservative Centro Democr\u00e1tico (Democratic Centre), won the presidential election. On 7 August 2018, he was sworn in as the new President of Colombia.\nColombia's relations with Venezuela have fluctuated due to the ideological differences between both governments. Colombia has offered humanitarian support with food and medicines to mitigate the shortage of supplies in Venezuela. Colombia's Foreign Ministry said that all efforts to resolve Venezuela's crisis should be peaceful. Colombia proposed the idea of the Sustainable Development Goals and a final document was adopted by the United Nations. In February 2019, Venezuelan president Nicol\u00e1s Maduro cut diplomatic relations with Colombia after Colombian President Ivan Duque helped Venezuelan opposition politicians deliver humanitarian aid to their country. Colombia recognized Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaido as the country's legitimate president. In January 2020, Colombia rejected Maduro's proposal that the two countries restore diplomatic relations.\nThe 19 June 2022 election run-off vote ended in a win for former guerrilla Gustavo Petro, taking 50.47% of the vote compared to 47.27% of right-wing Rodolfo Hern\u00e1ndez. The single-term limit for the country's presidency prevented president Iv\u00e1n Duque from seeking re-election. Petro became the country's first leftist president-elect. On 7 August 2022, he was sworn in."}
{"id": "5845", "revid": "1272214791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5845", "title": "Foreign relations of Colombia", "text": "Colombia seeks diplomatic and commercial relations with all countries, regardless of their ideologies or political or economic systems. For this reason, the Colombian economy is quite open, relying on international trade and following guidelines given by international law.\nSince 2008, Colombia's Ministry of Trade and Commerce has either reached or strengthened Bilateral Trade Agreements with South Korea, Japan and China building stronger commerce interchange and development in the Pacific Rim.\nRegional relations have also vastly improved under the Santos Administration (2010\u20132018). Issues however remain regarding spillover of the FARC leftist-terrorist group, being chased out of hiding in rural areas of Colombia and finding safe havens in non-monitored areas of bordering states. The FARC numbers have significantly diminished in the last decade, to an estimated 5,000\u20137,000. And while joint military collaboration has steadily increased with the bordering countries of Brazil, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela, there have been tensions between Colombia and Ecuador regarding the issue. In 2002, the Ecuadorian government closed its main border crossing with Colombia, restricting its hours of operation. Ecuador continues to voice its concerns over an influx of \u00e9migr\u00e9s stemming from guerilla activity at its borders. Evidence has since emerged however, suggesting that a significant number of the FARC's foot soldiers in and around the Colombia\u2013Ecuador border consist of Ecuadorian \u00e9migr\u00e9s who joined the leftist terrorist group out of need. Returning Ecuadorian \u00e9migr\u00e9s have faced re-entry restrictions.\nIn 2012, relations with Nicaragua and Venezuela were tested over territorial island disputes. Bilateral committees are negotiating the dispute with Venezuela over waters in the Gulf of Venezuela.\nBackground.\nIn 1969, Colombia formed what is now the Andean Community along with Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, and Peru (Venezuela joined in 1973, and Chile left in 1976).\nIn the 1980s, Colombia broadened its bilateral and multilateral relations, joining the Contadora Group, the Group of Eight (now the Rio Group), and the Non-Aligned Movement, which it chaired from 1994 until September 1998. In addition, it has signed free trade agreements with Chile, Mexico, and Venezuela.\nColombia has traditionally played an active role in the United Nations and the Organization of American States and in their subsidiary agencies. Former President C\u00e9sar Gaviria became Secretary General of the OAS in September 1994 and was reelected in 1999. Colombia was a participant in the December 1994 and April 1998 Summits of the Americas and followed up on initiatives developed at the summit by hosting two post-summit, ministerial-level meetings on trade and science and technology.\nColombia regularly participates in international fora, including CICAD, the Organization of American States' body on money laundering, chemical controls, and drug abuse prevention. Although the Colombian Government ratified the 1988 UN Convention on Narcotics in 1994\u2014the last of the Andean governments to do so\u2014it took important reservations, notably to the anti-money-laundering measures, asset forfeiture and confiscation provisions, maritime interdiction, and extradition clauses. Colombia subsequently withdrew some of its reservations, most notably a reservation on extradition.\nInternational relations.\nDisputes \u2013 international.\nMaritime boundary dispute with Venezuela in the Gulf of Venezuela; territorial disputes with Nicaragua over Archipelago de San Andr\u00e9s y Providencia and Quita Sue\u00f1o Bank. The United States disputes sovereignty with Colombia over the Serranilla Bank and the Bajo Nuevo Bank. Quita Sue\u00f1o Bank is claimed by the United States to be a submerged reef, and thus does not recognize the sovereignty of any nation over the bank.\nMembership of international organizations.\nThe major organizations in which Colombia is a member include: the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, Andean Pact, Caribbean Development Bank Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Group of 3, Group of 11, Group of 24, Group of 77, Inter-American Development Bank, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Chamber of Commerce, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol), International Development Association, International Finance Corporation, International Fund for Agricultural Development, International Labour Organization, International Maritime Organization, International Maritime Satellite Organization, International Monetary Fund (IMF), International Olympic Committee, International Organization for Migration, International Organization for Standardization, International Telecommunication Union, International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, International Trade Union Confederation, Latin American Economic System, Latin American Integration Association, Non-Aligned Movement, Organization of American States (OAS), Permanent Court of Arbitration, Rio Group, United Nations (UN), UN Conference on Trade and Development, UNESCO, UN Industrial Development Organization, UN Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, Universal Postal Union, World Confederation of Labour, World Federation of Trade Unions, World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization, World Meteorological Organization, World Tourism Organization, and World Trade Organization. An OAS observer has monitored the government's peace process with the paramilitaries, lending the negotiations much-needed international credibility. The United States helps Colombia secure favorable treatment from the IMF.\nMajor international treaties.\nRegional treaties include the Andean Pact, now known as the Andean Community, which also includes Bolivia, Ecuador, and Peru, the bodies and institutions making up the Andean Integration System (AIS). Colombia has signed free-trade agreements with Chile, Mexico, and Venezuela.\nIts recent trade agreements with Korea, China and Japan, have focused on economic and technical cooperation between those nations. Within the regional Caribbean Community and Common Market (Caricom), Colombia has also deepened economic and medical science research collaboration agreements. Colombia has also signed and ratified 105 international treaties or agreements relating to the protection of the environment. These include the Antarctic Treaty and Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and conventions on Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, and Wetlands. It has signed, but not ratified, the Antarctic-Environmental Protocol and conventions on Law of the Sea and Marine Dumping. Colombia also has signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Tlatelolco Treaty. By 1975 signatories to the 1974 Declaration of Ayacucho, of which Colombia was one, had decided on limitations to nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons.\nGaining all 186 votes, Colombia served on the U.N. Security Council from 2011 to 2012 representing Latin American and the Caribbean.\nColombia is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States-military (as covered under Article 98).\nDomestic politics and foreign policy.\nInternational Relations scholars long emphasized international constraints, and particularly Colombia's relationship with the United States, as central to its foreign policy. In terms of foreign policy process, presidents have broad constitutional authorities, in consultation with their foreign ministers. However, since the 2000s, the influence of other domestic actors in Colombian foreign policy-making has increased. Long, Bitar, and Jim\u00e9nez-Pe\u00f1a examine the role of the Colombian Constitutional Court, congressional politics, social movements, and electoral challengers. They find that Colombian institutions permit increasing challenges to presidential authority, and that in important cases Colombian presidents have been forced to drop their preferred foreign policies.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Colombia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nEurope.\nUnder the Uribe administration, Colombia's relations with the European Union (EU) have been cordial. Representatives of the EU have been critical of Colombia's antiguerrilla and antidrug strategies in several respects. The EU is particularly concerned about the potential for increased human rights abuses within Colombia at the hands of both government forces and illegal armed groups, and it has continued to distance itself from Plan Colombia. The EU is in favor of a negotiated solution to the nation's internal conflict. EU aid to Colombia has mainly consisted of social, economic and development investments.\nIn 2004, the EU as an entity did not offer unrestricted support for the Uribe government's peace initiative with paramilitaries, citing concerns over the possible lack of a credible and comprehensive peace strategy and its application, but it did approve US$2 million in aid for the process. Individual EU members such Sweden, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands also provided limited support on their own.\nTransnational issues.\nNarcotics and terrorism.\nBy the 1990s, Colombia had become the world's leading supplier of refined cocaine and a growing source for heroin. More than 90% of the cocaine that entered in the 1990s the United States was produced, processed, or transshipped in Colombia. The cultivation of coca dropped between 1995 and 1999 from 3,020 to , primarily in areas where government control was more active.\nDespite the death of Medell\u00edn cartel drug kingpin Pablo Escobar in 1993 and the arrests of major Cali cartel leaders in 1995 and 1996, Colombian drug cartels remain among the most sophisticated criminal organizations in the world, controlling cocaine processing, international wholesale distribution chains, and markets. In 1999 Colombian police arrested over 30 narcotraffickers, most of them extraditable, in \"Operation Millennium\" involving extensive international cooperation. More arrests were made in a following \"Operation Millennium II.\"\nColombia is engaged in a broad range of narcotics control activities. Through aerial spraying of herbicide and manual eradication, Colombia has attempted to keep coca, opium poppy, and cannabis cultivation from expanding. The government has committed itself to the eradication of all illicit crops, interdiction of drug shipments, and financial controls to prevent money laundering. Alternative development programs were introduced in 1999.\nCorruption and intimidation by traffickers complicate the drug-control efforts of the institutions of government. Colombia passed revised criminal procedures code in 1993 that permits traffickers to surrender and negotiate lenient sentences in return for cooperating with prosecutors. In December 1996 and February 1997, however, the Colombian Congress passed legislation to toughen sentencing, asset forfeiture, and money-laundering penalties.\nIn November 1997, the Colombian Congress amended the constitution to permit the extradition of Colombian nationals, albeit not retroactively. In late 1999, President Pastrana authorized the first extradition in almost 10 years of a Colombian trafficker to stand trial for U.S. crimes. Three such extraditions to the United States have taken place, the most recent in August 2000, with cases against others pending in Colombian courts. Under the Pastrana administration, Plan Colombia was developed and implemented with U.S. backing.\nDuring the presidency of \u00c1lvaro Uribe, the government applied more military pressure on the FARC and other outlawed groups. After the offensive, many security indicators improved. Colombia achieved a great decrease in cocaine production, leading White House drug czar R. Gil Kerlikowske to announce that Colombia is no longer the world's biggest producer of cocaine.\nIn addition to the challenge posed to the United States by Colombian drug trafficking, illegal Colombian immigrants in the United States are an issue in Colombia-U.S. relations. According to figures from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Colombia is the fourth-leading source country of illegal immigration to the United States. According to its estimates, the number of illegal Colombian residents in the United States almost tripled from 51,000 in 1990 to 141,000 in 2000. According to the US Census Bureau, the number of authorized Colombian immigrants in the United States in 2006 was 801,363.\nColombia rejected threats of the United States of America after the threat of Donald Trump to decertify the country as a partner in counter-narcotics efforts."}
{"id": "5846", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5846", "title": "Geography of the Czech Republic", "text": " \nThe Czech Republic is a landlocked country in Central Europe. It is bordered by Germany to the west, Austria to the south, Slovakia to the east and Poland to the north. It consists mostly of low hills and plateaus surrounded along the borders by low mountains. Two areas of lowlands follow the Elbe river and the Morava river. About a third of the area of the Czech Republic is covered by forests.\nThe Czech Republic also possesses Moldauhafen, a 30,000 m2 enclave in the middle of Hamburg docks in Germany, which was awarded to Czechoslovakia by Article 363 of the Treaty of Versailles to allow the landlocked country a place where goods transported down river could be transferred to seagoing ships. This territory reverts to Germany in 2028.\nPhysical geography.\nClimate.\nThe Czech Republic's climate is temperate, transitional between an oceanic climate and a continental climate. The summers are rather cool and dry, with average temperatures in most areas around 20\u00a0\u00b0C, the winters are fairly mild and wet with temperatures averaging around 0\u00a0\u00b0C in most areas. The relative humidity varies between 60% and 80%.\nGeology.\nMost of the area of the Czech Republic belongs to the geographically stable Bohemian Massif. Only an area of the Western Carpathians in the east of the country is younger, lifted during the Tertiary. Igneous rocks make up the base of the Bohemian Massif. Sedimentary rocks are mostly found in the north-eastern part of Bohemia with significant areas of sandstone. Among the metamorphic rocks, the most commonly found is Gneiss.\nMountains.\nThe most notable mountain ranges in the Czech Republic are all found along the borders of the country. In Bohemia it is the Bohemian Forest and Ore Mountains, both bordering Germany. Then the long region of Sudetes with several mountains ranges, including Giant Mountains with Sn\u011b\u017eka \u2013 the highest peak of the Czech Republic. The last major mountain range is the Moravian-Silesian Beskids in the east.\nRivers.\nThere are four major rivers in the Czech Republic. The Elbe (locally \"Labe\") flows from the Giant Mountains in the north east of Bohemia to the west and then through northern Germany all the way to the North Sea. The Morava River drains most of Moravia and flows to the south into the Danube and ultimately to the Black Sea. The Oder starts in the Moravian Silesia and flows north through Poland into the Baltic Sea. The fourth major river is the Vltava, which is the longest river of the Czech Republic and drains the southern part of Bohemia before flowing into the Elbe at M\u011bln\u00edk.\nBodies of water.\nNatural occurring bodies of water are rather scarce; most of the significant bodies of water are man-made ponds and reservoirs. The largest pond is the Ro\u017emberk Pond, which is one of the system of fish ponds built in the 16th century around T\u0159ebo\u0148. The largest reservoir by area covered is the Lipno Reservoir (4,870 ha), built in the 1950s and the largest reservoir by volume is Orl\u00edk Reservoir (716 million m3), built around the same time. The largest and deepest natural lake is \u010cern\u00e9 jezero (18.4 ha).\nHuman geography.\nPopulation geography.\nThe population of the Czech Republic is estimated to be around 10.6 million. The highest population density is in the larger metropolitan area of Ostrava and of course in the area around the capital of Prague. The lowest population density is in the Czech-German and Czech-Austrian borderlands, mostly as a lasting result of the expulsion of Germans from Czechoslovakia after the World War II.\nPolitical geography.\nThe Czech Republic is divided into thirteen regions and one capital city with regional status. The older administrative units of seventy-six districts are still recognized and remain the seats of various branches of state administration. Historically, the Czech Republic can be split into three regions: Bohemia in the west, Moravia in the east and Czech Silesia in the north east.\nIndustry and agriculture.\nAreas affected the most by heavy industry are the Sokolov Basin and the Most Basin in the north-west of the Czech Republic. The extensive deposits of brown coal in those areas are mostly used for electricity production. It is estimated, that almost 40% of all electric power produced in the Czech Republic comes from burning brown coal mined in these areas. Plant agriculture is focused around the lowlands surrounding the Elbe and the Morava. Around 34% of the country is covered by forests and approximately 37% of land is arable. The estimated area of irrigated land is 385\u00a0km2, and freshwater withdrawal per capita is around 164 m3 every year."}
{"id": "5848", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5848", "title": "Politics of the Czech Republic", "text": " \nThe Czech Republic is a unitary parliamentary republic, in which the president is the head of state and the prime minister is the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the Government of the Czech Republic, which reports to the Chamber of Deputies. The legislature is exercised by the Parliament. The Czech Parliament is bicameral: the upper house of the Parliament is the Senate, and the lower house is the Chamber of Deputies. The Senate consists of 81 members who are elected for six years. The Chamber of Deputies consists of 200 members who are elected for four years. The judiciary system is topped by the trio of the Constitutional Court, Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court.\nThe highest legal document is the Constitution of the Czech Republic, complemented by constitutional laws and the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. The current constitution went in effect on 1 January 1993, after the dissolution of Czechoslovakia.\nThe Czech Republic has a multi-party system. Between 1993 and 2013, the two largest political parties were the centre-left Czech Social Democratic Party (\u010cSSD) and centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS). This changed in early 2014, with the rise of a new major political party ANO 2011, which has since led two cabinets.\n According to the V-Dem Democracy indices the Czech Republic was 2023 the 16th most electoral democratic country in the world.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is the head of state, and the prime minister is the head of government. The majority of executive power is given to the Cabinet, which consists of the prime minister, deputy prime ministers and ministers (usually heads of the ministries).\nPresident.\nThe president of the Czech Republic is elected by a direct vote for five years. They can only serve for two terms. The president is a formal head of state with limited executive powers specified in the articles 54 to 66 of the Constitution:\nThe president is also the commander in chief of the Armed Forces and ratifies all domestic laws and international agreements.\nCabinet.\nThe Cabinet is the supreme executive body in the Czech Republic. It makes its decisions as a body. It is held responsible by the Chamber of Deputies. The president appoints every new prime minister, who then chooses the ministers. All ministers of the Cabinet need to be approved by the president and within thirty days after the presidential approval they must ask the Chamber of Deputies for a vote of confidence.\nPrime minister.\nThe prime minister is the head of government. The prime minister organizes the work of the Cabinet, presides over it and acts in its name. The prime minister sets the agenda for most foreign and domestic policies but has to obtain the president's approval to hire or dismiss any other member of the Cabinet.\nMinisters.\nMinisters are any member of the Cabinet who are not the prime minister. They are usually the head of a ministry, but this is not required. A ministry \u2013 sometimes called government department \u2013 is a governmental organisation that manages a specific sector of public administration. The number of ministries varies depending on the particular Cabinet and is managed by the Competence Law. As of 2021, the Czech Republic had 13 ministers and 14 ministries.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament (\"Parlament\" in Czech) consists of two houses. The lower house is the Chamber of Deputies, and the upper house is the Senate.\nChamber of Deputies.\nThe Chamber of Deputies ( in Czech) has 200 members, elected for four-year terms by proportional representation with a 5% election threshold. The Chamber of Deputies elections happen every four years, unless the reigning Cabinet prematurely loses the Chamber of Deputies' support. Candidates for every political party participating in the elections are split among 14 electoral districts, which are identical to the country's administrative regions. A citizen must be at least 21 years old to be eligible for candidacy.\nThe Chamber of Deputies was formerly known as the Czech National Council. It has the same powers and responsibilities as the now-defunct Federal Assembly of the Czechoslovakia.\nSenate.\nThe Senate (\"Sen\u00e1t\" in Czech) has 81 members, each elected for a six-year term. Senate elections happen every two years and only a third of the seats is contested each time. All of the 81 Senate electoral districts are designed to contain roughly the same number of voters. The Senate elections use a two-round system, when the two most successful candidates from the first round face each other again in the second round usually a week later. Only citizens who have reached the age of 40 are eligible for candidacy. The senate's function is to be a stabilizing force and its influence is significantly lower than that of the Chamber of Deputies.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Czech court system recognizes four categories of courts and the Constitutional Court, which stands outside of the court system.\nConstitutional Court.\nThe Constitutional Court's main purpose is to protect people's constitutional rights and freedoms. The decisions of the court are final, cannot be overturned and are considered a source of law. The court is composed of 15 justices who are named for a renewable period of 10 years by the president and approved by the Senate. Its functionality is similar to that of the Supreme Court of the United States.\nSupreme courts.\nThere are two supreme courts in the court system of the Czech Republic \u2013 the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court. Both reside in Brno.\nSupreme Court.\nThe Supreme Court of the Czech Republic is the court of highest appeal for almost all legal cases heard in the Czech Republic. The justices of the Supreme Court analyze and evaluate legally effective decisions of lower courts. They unify the Czech judicature.\nSupreme Administrative Court.\nThe Supreme Administrative Court of the Czech Republic protects people from unlawful decisions and procedures of the state authorities. It examines objections to elections and has the authority to ban or suspend the activity of political parties. It resolves competence disputes between governmental organizations and also serves as disciplinary court for other members of the judiciary.\nHigh courts.\nThere are two high courts in the Czech Republic \u2013 one in Prague and one in Olomouc . They serve as courts of appeal to Regional Courts in cases, where the Regional Court acted as a court of first instance. Presidents of the high courts are appointed by the president for seven years. The vice-presidents are appointed by the minister of justice and also serve a seven-year term. A justice is required by the law to have at least eight years of experience before becoming a member of a High Court.\nRegional courts.\nRegional courts serve mainly as the courts of appeal to district courts and also as the only instance of administrative courts besides the Supreme Administrative Court. However, they can also act as courts of first instance in cases of more severe criminal charges, disputes between corporations or disputes over intellectual property. There are eight regional courts in the Czech Republic: in Brno, Ostrava, Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9, \u00dast\u00ed nad Labem, Plze\u0148, \u010cesk\u00e9 Bud\u011bjovice and two in Prague.\nDistrict courts.\nDistrict courts serve as the courts of first instance in almost all civil or criminal proceedings. There is a total of 86 district courts in the Czech Republic. Notaries and executors are appointed by the minister of justice to their jurisdictions.\nRegional government.\nThe Czech Republic is divided in 14 administrative regions, including one for the capital of Prague. The older system of 73 administrative districts (\"okresy\" in Czech) and 4 municipalities was abandoned in 1999 in an administrative reform. Each of the regions has a regional council with a varied number of regional councilors and a president of the regional cabinet (\"hejtman\" in Czech) as its formal head. The capital of Prague is the only exception to this, as the City Council acts both as regional and municipal governing body and is led by a mayor. Regional councilors are elected for four-year terms similarly to deputies in the Chamber of Deputies. All adults eligible to vote are also eligible to be a candidate to a regional council.\nComposition of the Senate.\nFor the current composition of the Chamber of Deputies of the Czech Republic, see List of MPs elected in the 2017 Czech legislative election.\nRecent political developments.\nFrom 1991, the Czech Republic, originally as part of Czechoslovakia and since 1993 in its own right, has been a member of the Visegr\u00e1d Group and from 1995, the OECD. The Czech Republic joined NATO on 12 March 1999 and the European Union on 1 May 2004. On 21 December 2007 the Czech Republic joined the Schengen Area.\nUntil 2017, either the Czech Social Democratic Party or the Civic Democratic Party led the governments of the Czech Republic. In October 2017, populist movement ANO 2011, led by the country's second-richest man, Andrej Babi\u0161, won the elections with three times more votes than its closest rival, the centre-right Civic Democrats. In December 2017, Czech President Milo\u0161 Zeman appointed Andrej Babi\u0161 as the new prime minister.\nOn 28 November 2021, Czech President Milo\u0161 Zeman appointed opposition leader Petr Fiala as the country's new prime minister. The centre-right coalition Spolu (meaning Together) won tightly contested legislative elections in October 2021 against Prime Minister Andrej Babi\u0161 and his right-wing populist ANO party. Babi\u0161 had sought re-election after four years in power. In January 2023, Former NATO general Petr Pavel won the election runoff over Andrej Babi\u0161 to succeed Milo\u0161 Zeman as the fourth president of the Czech Republic.\nExternal links.\nGovernment"}
{"id": "5849", "revid": "48129973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5849", "title": "Economy of the Czech Republic", "text": "The economy of the Czech Republic is a developed export-oriented social market economy based in services, manufacturing, and innovation that maintains a high-income welfare state and the European social model. The Czech Republic participates in the European Single Market as a member of the European Union, and is therefore a part of the economy of the European Union. It uses its own currency, the Czech koruna, instead of the euro. It is a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The Czech Republic ranks 16th in inequality-adjusted human development and 24th in World Bank Human Capital Index, ahead of countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom or France. It was described by \"The Guardian\" as \"one of Europe's most flourishing economies\".\nThe industry sector accounts for 37% of the economy, while services account for 61% and agriculture for 2%. The principal industries are high tech engineering, electronics and machine-building, steel production, transportation equipment (automotive, rail and aerospace industry), chemicals, advanced materials and pharmaceuticals. The major services are research and development, ICT and software development, nanotechnology and life sciences. Its main agricultural products are cereals, vegetable oils and hops.\n the Czech GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is $50,961 and 698,706 Czech crowns ($31,368) at nominal value. the unemployment rate in the Czech Republic was the lowest in the EU at 2.6%, and the poverty rate is the second lowest of OECD members, following Denmark. The Czech Republic ranks 21st in the Index of Economic Freedom (ranked behind Chile), 30th in the Global Innovation Index (ranked behind UAE), 32nd in the Global Competitiveness Report, 41st in the ease of doing business index and 25th in the Global Enabling Trade Report (ranked behind Canada). The largest trading partner for both export and import is Germany, followed by other members of the EU. The Czech Republic has a highly diverse economy that ranks 7th in the 2019 Economic Complexity Index.\nHistory.\nFrom industrialisation to communism (1800-1989).\nThe Czech lands were among the first industrialized countries in continental Europe during the German Confederation era. The Czech industrial tradition dates back to the 19th century, when the Lands of the Bohemian Crown were the economic and industrial heartland of the Austrian Empire and later the Austrian side of Austria-Hungary. The Czech lands produced a majority (about 70%) of all industrial goods in the Empire, some of which were almost monopolistic. The Czechoslovak crown was introduced in April 1919. Introduced at a 1:1 ratio to the Austro-Hungarian currency, it became one of the most stable currencies in Europe. It is only a widespread myth among Czechs that the First Republic belonged to the 10 most developed economies of the world. Yet the Czech part (without Slovakia interwar and Transcarpathia) had a similar GDP in the 1920s to Germany and Belgium, which was higher than that of the crisis-struck Austrian First Republic.\nThe consequences of the 1938 Munich Agreement and subsequent occupation were disastrous for the economy. After the occupation and forced subordination of the economy to German economic interests, the crown was officially pegged to the mark at a ratio of 1:10, even though the unofficial exchange rate was 1 to 6-7 and Germans immediately started buying Czech goods in large quantities.\nIn accordance with Stalin's development policy of planned interdependence, all the economies of the socialist countries were tightly linked to that of the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia was the most prosperous country in the Eastern Bloc, however it continued to lag further behind the rest of the developed world. With the disintegration of the communist economic alliance in 1991, Czech manufacturers lost their traditional markets among former communist countries in the east.\nToday, this heritage is both an asset and a liability. The Czech Republic has a well-educated population and a densely developed infrastructure.\n1989\u20131995.\nThe \"Velvet Revolution\" in 1989, offered a chance for profound and sustained political and economic reform. Signs of economic resurgence began to appear in the wake of the shock therapy that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) labelled the \"big bang\" of January 1991. Since then, consistent liberalization and astute economic management has led to the removal of 95% of all price controls, low unemployment, a positive balance of payments position, a stable exchange rate, a shift of exports from former communist economic bloc markets to Western Europe, and relatively low foreign debt. Inflation has been higher than in some other countries \u2013 mostly in the 10% range \u2013 and the government has run consistent modest budget deficits.\nTwo government priorities have been strict fiscal policies and creating a good climate for incoming investment in the republic. Following a series of currency devaluations, the crown has remained stable in relation to the US dollar. The Czech crown became fully convertible for most business purposes in late 1995.\nIn order to stimulate the economy and attract foreign partners, the government has revamped the legal and administrative structure governing investment. With the breakup of the Soviet Union, the country, till that point highly dependent on exports to the USSR, had to make a radical shift in economic outlook: away from the East, and towards the West. This necessitated the restructuring of existing banking and telecommunications facilities, as well as adjusting commercial laws and practices to fit Western standards. Further minimizing reliance on a single major partner, successive Czech governments have welcomed U.S. investment (amongst others) as a counterbalance to the strong economic influence of Western European partners, especially of their powerful neighbour, Germany. Although foreign direct investment (FDI) runs in uneven cycles, with a 12.9% share of total FDI between 1990 and March 1998, the U.S. was the third-largest foreign investor in the Czech economy, behind Germany and the Netherlands.\nThe country boasts a flourishing consumer production sector and has privatized most state-owned heavy industries through the voucher privatization system. Under the system, every citizen was given the opportunity to buy, for a moderate price, a book of vouchers that represents potential shares in any state-owned company. The voucher holders could then invest their vouchers, increasing the capital base of the chosen company, and creating a nation of citizen share-holders. This is in contrast to Russian privatization, which consisted of sales of communal assets to private companies rather than share-transfer to citizens. The effect of this policy has been dramatic. Under communism, state ownership of businesses was estimated to be 97%. Privatization through restitution of real estate to the former owners was largely completed in 1992. By 1998, more than 80% of enterprises were in private hands. Now completed, the program has made Czechs, who own shares of each of the Czech companies, one of the highest per-capita share owners in the world. \n1995\u20132000.\nThe country's economic transformation was far from complete. Political and financial crises in 1997 shattered the Czech Republic's image as one of the most stable and prosperous of post-Communist states. Delays in enterprise restructuring and failure to develop a well-functioning capital market played major roles in Czech economic troubles, which culminated in a currency crisis in May. The formerly pegged currency was forced into a floating system as investors sold their Korunas faster than the government could buy them. This followed a worldwide trend to divest from developing countries that year. Investors also worried the republic's economic transformation was far from complete. Another complicating factor was the current account deficit, which reached nearly 8% of GDP.\nIn response to the crisis, two austerity packages were introduced later in the spring (called vernacularly \"The Packages\"), which cut government spending by 2.5% of GDP. Growth dropped to 0.3% in 1997, \u22122.3% in 1998, and \u22120.5% in 1999. The government established a restructuring agency in 1999 and launched a revitalization program \u2013 to spur the sale of firms to foreign companies. Key priorities included accelerating legislative convergence with EU norms, restructuring enterprises, and privatising banks and utilities. The economy, fueled by increased export growth and investment, was expected to recover by 2000.\n2000\u20132005.\nGrowth in 2000\u201305 was supported by exports to the EU, primarily to Germany, and a strong recovery of foreign and domestic investment. Domestic demand is playing an ever more important role in underpinning growth as interest rates drop and the availability of credit cards and mortgages increases. Current account deficits of around 5% of GDP are beginning to decline as demand for Czech products in the European Union increases. Inflation is under control. Recent accession to the EU gives further impetus and direction to structural reform. In early 2004 the government passed increases in the Value Added Tax (VAT) and tightened eligibility for social benefits with the intention to bring the public finance gap down to 4% of GDP by 2006, but more difficult pension and healthcare reforms will have to wait until after the next elections. Privatization of the state-owned telecommunications firm \u010cesk\u00fd Telecom took place in 2005. Intensified restructuring among large enterprises, improvements in the financial sector, and effective use of available EU funds should strengthen output growth.\n2005\u20132010.\nGrowth continued in the first years of the EU membership. The credit portion of the 2007\u20132008 financial crisis did not affect the Czech Republic much, mostly due to its stable banking sector which has learned its lessons during a smaller crisis in the late 1990s and became much more cautious. As a fraction of the GDP, the Czech public debt is among the smallest ones in Central and Eastern Europe. Moreover, unlike many other post-communist countries, an overwhelming majority of the household debt \u2013 over 99% \u2013 is denominated in the local Czech currency. That's why the country wasn't affected by the shrunken money supply in the U.S. dollars.\nHowever, as a large exporter, the economy was sensitive to the decrease of the demand in Germany and other trading partners. In the middle of 2009, the annual drop of the GDP for 2009 was estimated around 3% or 4.3%, a relatively modest decrease. The impact of the economic crisis may have been limited by the existence of the national currency that temporarily weakened in H1 of 2009, simplifying the life of the exporters.\n2010\u20132015.\nDue to the Great Recession, Czech Republic was in stagnation or decreasing of GDP. Some commenters and economists criticising fiscally conservative policy of Petr Ne\u010das' right-wing government, especially criticising ex-minister of finance, Miroslav Kalousek. Miroslav Kalousek in a 2008 interview, as minister of finance in the center-right government of Mirek Topol\u00e1nek, said \"Czech Republic will not suffer by financial crisis\". In September 2008, Miroslav Kalousek formed state budget with projection of 5% GDP increase in 2009. In 2009 and 2010, Czech Republic suffered strong economical crisis and GDP decreased by 4,5%. From 2009 to 2012, Czech Republic suffered highest state budget deficits in history of independent Czech Republic. From 2008 to 2012, the public debt of Czech Republic increased by 18,9%. Most decrease of industrial output was in construction industry (-25% in 2009, -15,5% in 2013). From 4Q 2009 to 1Q 2013, GDP decreased by 7,8%.\nIn 2012, Czech government increased VAT. Basic VAT was increased from 20% in 2012 to 21% in 2013 and reduced VAT increased from 14% to 15% in 2013. Small enterprises sales decreased by 21% from 2012 to 2013 as result of increasing VAT. Patria.cz predicting sales stagnation and mild increase in 2013.\nAnother problem is foreign trade. The Czech Republic is considered an export economy (the Czech Republic has strong machinery and automobile industries), however in 2013, foreign trade rapidly decreased which led to many other problems and increase of state budget deficit. In 2013, Czech National Bank, central bank, implemented controversial monetary step. To increase export and employment, CNB wilfully deflated Czech Crown (CZK), which inflation increased from 0.2% in November 2013, to 1.3% in 1Q 2014.\nIn 2014, GDP in the Czech Republic increased by 2% and is predicted to increase by 2.7% in 2015. In 2015, Czech Republic's economy grew by 4,2% and it's the fastest growing economy in the European Union. On 29 May 2015, it was announced that growth of the Czech economy has increased from calculated 3,9% to 4,2%.\n2015\u2013present.\nIn August 2015, Czech GDP growth was 4.4%, making the Czech economy the highest growing in Europe. On 9 November 2015, unemployment in the Czech Republic was at 5.9%, the lowest number since February 2009. Dividends worth CZK 289 billion were paid to the foreign owners of Czech companies in 2016.\nAdoption of Euro and EU funds.\nSince its accession to the European Union in 2004, the Czech Republic has adopted the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union and it is bound by the Treaty of Accession 2003 to adopt the Euro currency in the future.\nAlthough the Czech Republic is economically well positioned to adopt the euro, following the European debt crisis there has been considerable opposition among the public adoption of the euro currency. There is no target date by the government for joining the ERM II or adopting the euro. The cabinet that was formed following the 2017 legislative election did not plan to proceed with euro adoption within its term, and this policy was continued by the succeeding cabinet formed after the 2021 election. However, by the start of 2024, President Petr Pavel called on the government to take concrete steps in adopting the euro.\nThe Czech Republic also receives \u20ac24.2bn between 2014 and 2020 from the European Structural and Investment Funds, however, this sum does not outweigh the amount of capital outflow of profits of foreign owned firms from the Czech Republic into other EU members, at which the funds are aimed to compensate for.\nPublic policy.\nSocial policy in the Czech Republic addresses issues such as healthcare, education, social welfare, housing and pensions. The government provides social assistance and benefits to vulnerable groups, including the elderly, disabled, and unemployed. These social safety nets help protect individuals and families against income loss and social risks.\nThe Czech Republic has elements of the European social model in its welfare system and social policies. However, there are some aspect, where the Czech Republic differs from the model.\nThe Czech Republic provides universal access to healthcare, and healthcare services are predominantly financed through compulsory health insurance contributions. The country has a well-developed healthcare system that aims to provide essential medical care to all citizens.\nThe Czech Republic has labor market regulations in place to protect workers' rights, ensure fair wages, and promote job security. However, labor market flexibility has increased in recent years, and the country has undertaken labor market reforms to enhance competitiveness.\nAs of 2016, the Czech Republic has the second lowest poverty rate of OECD members only behind Denmark. The Czech healthcare system ranks 13th in the 2016 Euro health consumer index.\nPrague Stock Exchange.\nThe Czech economy also includes its capital market. In the case of the Czech Republic, it is the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE). (PSE). The Prague Stock Exchange is governed by the Capital Market Business Act and the stock exchange rules it sets itself. All of its activities are controlled by the Czech National Bank. The Vienna Stock Exchange is the majority shareholder of the Prague Stock Exchange.\nThe Prague Stock Exchange has four main markets:\nThe largest issue traded on the Prague Stock Exchange is the energy company \u010cEZ. The main activity of \u010cEZ is the sale of electricity, mainly generated from its own sources, and the related provision of support services to the electricity system. Other large issues on the Prague Stock Exchange's Prime Market include banking houses - Komer\u010dn\u00ed banka, MONETA Money Bank and the dual listing of the Austrian company Erste Group Bank, under which the local bank \u010cesk\u00e1 spo\u0159itelna falls; as well as Colt CZ Group focusing mainly on the production of firearms (traded on the Prague Stock Exchange from 2020).\nFrom the Standard market, the largest issue is Philip Morris \u010cR, the largest manufacturer and seller of tobacco products in the Czech Republic. On the START market, we find, for example, e-commerce companies Bezvavlasy and Pilulka L\u00e9k\u00e1rny, leather manufacturer and processor KARO Leather or urban furniture manufacturer mmcit\u00e9.\nEnergy.\nIn Czech Republic energy production is diverse, with a mix of nuclear, coal, natural gas, and renewable sources. Nuclear power plays a significant role, while efforts to increase renewable usage are underway. The country aims to balance energy security, environmental concerns and sustainability in its energy policies. National objectives are to cut gas emissions by 40 percent by 2030 (compared with 1990) and to construct one nuclear reactor at the current Dukovany NPP site by late 2030s.\nThe Czech energy sector is largely built around two large nuclear plants and several smaller conventional coal power plants. Nuclear and coal power plants provide primarily baseload power at a high level of utilization, while gas fired units, reservoir hydro and pumped storage provide flexible generation. Recent rises in costs of carbon credits have made coal power plants almost financially inviable.\u00a0\nin 2022, Czech gross electricity production reached 78.8 terawatt-hours (TWh), while domestic consumption was around 60.4 TWh. The Czech energy mix was made up of 53.60 percent fossil fuels (47.50 percent lignite, 5.86 percent natural gas, etc.), 40.95 percent nuclear power, and 5.46 percent renewables (3.34 percent biomass, 1.47 percent solar, 0.63 percent water, etc.). The first green hydrogen electrolyzer powered by solar energy in the Czech Republic started in May 2023 with production capacity of about 100 kilograms per day / 8,000 kilograms of green hydrogen per year.\u00a0\u00a0\nWhile the goal of EU funds is to support a sustainable low-carbon-emission economy and ensure energy security by utilizing alternative energies, the Czech approach is different. As described in the State Energy Policy, the future Czech energy mix will be primarily based on nuclear power with a goal of reaching 50 percent of the energy supply. Due to EU regulations, the share of coal energy will decrease but be largely replaced by both one (and possibly more) large nuclear reactors. The deployment of a series of small modular reactors is also under consideration by the Czechs. The share of alternative energies will grow but its potential for becoming the backbone of the energy sector is unclear.\nStatistical indicators.\nDevelopment of main indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 2% is in green.\nBackground.\n\"From the CIA World Factbook 2017\"\nGDP (pp.): $353.9 billion (2016)\nGDP (nom.): $195.3 billion (2016)\nGDP Growth: 2.6% (2016)\nGDP per capita (pp.): $33,500 (2016)\nGDP per capita (nom.): $18,487 (2016)\nGDP by sector:\n\"Agriculture:\" 2.5%\n\"Industry:\" 37.5%\n\"Services:\" 60% (2016)\nInflation: 0.7% (2016)\nLabour Force: 5.427 million (2017)\nUnemployment: 2,3% (September 2018)\nIndustrial production growth rate: 3.5% (2016)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share: (2015)\nPublic Debt: 34.2% GDP (2018)\nTrade and finance.\nExports: $136.1 billion\n\"Export goods:\" machinery and transport equipment, raw materials, fuel, chemicals (2018)\nImports: $122.8 billion\n\"Import goods:\" machinery and transport equipment, raw materials and fuels, chemicals (2018)\nCurrent Account balance: $2.216 billion (2018)\nExport partners: Germany 32.4%, Slovakia 8.4%, Poland 5.8%, UK 5.2%, France 5.2%, Italy 4.3%, Austria 4.2% (2016)\nImport partners: Germany 30.6%, Poland 9.6%, China 7.5%, Slovakia 6.3%, Netherlands 5.3%, Italy 4.1% (2016)\nReserves: $85.73 billion (31 December 2016)\nForeign Direct Investment: $139.6 billion (31 December 2016)\nCzech Investment Abroad: $43.09 billion (31 December 2016)\nExternal debt: $138 billion (31 December 2016)\nValue of Publicly Traded Shares: $44.5 billion (31 December 2016)\nExchange rates:\nIT and Telecommunications.\nHouseholds with access to fixed and mobile telephone access\nIndividuals with mobile telephone access\nBroadband penetration rate\nIndividuals using computer and internet\nCompanies.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Czech Republic is Services with 295,538 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate and Wholesale Trade with 189,308 and 95,142 companies respectively."}
{"id": "5850", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5850", "title": "Telecommunications in the Czech Republic", "text": " \nThere are telecommunications in the Czech Republic.\nOffice.\nThere is a Czech Telecommunication Office (Czech: \u010cesk\u00fd Telekomunika\u010dn\u00ed \u00da\u0159ad) called CTU.\nCompanies.\nTelecom companies have included \u010cesk\u00e9 Radiokomunikace, O2 Czech Republic (formerly Telefonica O2 Czech Republic), Vodafone Czech Republic (formerly Oskar Mobil a.s.), CETIN, CS Link, Eurotel,\u00a0Skylink and Telekom Austria Czech Republic.\nTelephones.\nThe number of main line telephones in use was 3,741,492 in 1998, 3.869 million in 2000, 3.626 million in 2003, 2.888 million in 2006, and 1,294,806 in 2021. The number of mobile cellular phones was 965,476 in 1998, 4.346 million in 2000, 9.708 million in 2003, and 13.075 million in 2007.\nCopper subscriber systems have been improved with Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) equipment to accommodate Internet and other digital signals. Trunk systems include fibre-optic cable and microwave radio relay.\nTelevision.\nThere were 3,428,817 televisions in December 1999 and 3,405,834 televisions in December 2000. There were 150 television broadcast stations and 1,434 repeaters in 2000.\nRadio.\nThere were 3,173,856 radios in December 1999, and 3,159,134 radios in December 2000. In 2000, the radio broadcast stations were AM 31, FM 304 and shortwave 17. In 1999, they were AM 21, FM 199 and shortwave 1.\nInternet.\nThe number of internet users was 2.69 million in 2001, 5.1 million in 2005, 4.4 million in 2007 and 7.6 million in 2012. There were 35 Internet Service Providers in 1999, and more than three hundred in 2000.\nThe internet country code is .cz."}
{"id": "5851", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5851", "title": "Transport in the Czech Republic", "text": " \nTransport in the Czech Republic relies on several main modes, including transport by road, rail, water and air.\nRailways.\nThe Czech Republic has a total railway length of which makes it a country with the second highest rail density in the world. The vast majority () is standard gauge. Electrified railways generally have voltages of 3 kV DC or 25 kV AC. of track is narrow gauge. The most prominent Czech railway company is the state-owned \u010cesk\u00e9 dr\u00e1hy (\u010cD) (English: \"Czech Railways\"). Prague has an underground rapid transit system, the Prague Metro. In addition, the cities of Brno, Liberec, Most, Olomouc, Ostrava, Plze\u0148, and Prague have tram systems.\nRoads.\nThe Czech Republic has, in total, of roads. It has of motorways. In the 1980s and 1990s there was a significant increase in passenger transport on the roads in the Czech Republic, which was associated with a sharp increase in the accident rate. Between 2007 and 2013, the death rate fell in every year, with a record low of 583 deaths in 2013, compared with the 1994 high of 1,473 casualties. Despite this however, the fatality rate per head of population is moderately high, comparable to the United States.\nHighways.\nThere are 2 main categories of roads forming the main network: Motorways and Highways. These roads are managed by the state-owned Directorate of Highways and Motorways of the Czech Republic \u2013 \u0158SD, established in 1997. Among the first modern motorways in the Czech Republic was the motorway from Prague to the Slovak border through Brno whose construction was started on May 2, 1939.\nMotorways are dual carriageways with tolls and a speed limit of 130 km/h.\nHighways can be single and dual carriageway with a speed limit of 90 km/h (dual carriageways are commonly signposted as Roads for motorcars with a speed limit of 110 km/h).\n\u0158SD currently manages and maintains 1,369\u00a0km of motorways (\"d\u00e1lnice\").\nWaterways.\nThe Vltava is the country's longest river, at 430\u00a0km. 358\u00a0km of the Elbe (Labe), which totals 1154\u00a0km, is also present in the country. An artificial waterway, nowadays used for recreation, is the Ba\u0165a Canal.\nPorts and harbours.\nD\u011b\u010d\u00edn, M\u011bln\u00edk, Prague, \u00dast\u00ed nad Labem, Moldauhafen in Hamburg (no longer operational, will be handed over to Germany in 2028)\nAirports.\nIn 2006, the Czech Republic had a total 121 airports. 46 of these airports had paved runways while 75 had unpaved runways. The largest and busiest airport in the Czech Republic is V\u00e1clav Havel Airport Prague, opened in 1937. Other international airports include Brno-Tu\u0159any Airport, Karlovy Vary Airport, Ostrava Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek Airport, Pardubice Airport, Kunovice Airport and Public domestic and private international airport is for example Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 Airport.\nTotal: 46 (2007) \nTotal: 75 (2007) \nHeliports.\n2 (2006)"}
{"id": "5852", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5852", "title": "Czech Republic/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "5853", "revid": "12337052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5853", "title": "Army of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Czech Armed Forces (), also known as the Czech Army, is the military service responsible for the defence of the Czech Republic as part of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic () alongside the Military Office of the President of the Republic and the Castle Guard. The army consists of the General Staff, the Land Forces, the Air Force and support units.\nCzech Army's main historical legacy and inspiration stems from the 15th century Hussite militia, which is credited with numerous warfare advancements, including introduction of firearms to field battles as well as the wagon fort strategy, called \"vozov\u00e1 hradba\" in Czech. Modern history precedes the 1918 Czechoslovak declaration of independence with formal establishment of the Czechoslovak Legion fighting on the side of the Entente powers during the WW1. Following the Munich Agreement, the country was occupied by Nazi Germany and the Army was reconstituted in exile, fighting on the side of Allies of World War II in the European as well as Mediterranean and Middle East theatre. After the 1948 Communist Coup, the Czechoslovak People's Army with over 200,000 active personnel and some 4,500 tanks formed one of the pillars of the Warsaw Pact military alliance.\nFollowing the Velvet Revolution and dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the Czech Republic joined NATO in 1999. The conscription was abolished in 2004, leading to transformation into a modern professional army inspired mostly by the British Armed Forces and USMC example. Today, the Czech Army has around 30.000 professional personnel and 4.900 members of active reserves. Additionally, any citizen can voluntarily join a five-week basic training without becoming a soldier or join advanced shooting training with their privately owned firearms and become a member of militia-style Designated Reserves.\nA law adopted in June 2023 stipulates that the military expenditures shall not be lower than 2% of country's GDP, starting from 2024.\nHistory.\nCzech lands.\nThe military history of the Czech people dates back to the Middle Ages and the creation of the Duchy of Bohemia and the Kingdom of Bohemia. During the Hussite Wars, Jan \u017di\u017eka became a military leader of such skill and eminence that the Hussite legacy became an important and lasting part of the Czech military traditions. The contemporary Czech Army derives its legacy from the proto-Protestant Hussite Army, with many of today's units bearing names in honour of Hussite Army personalities or formations.\nWhen the World War I broke out, the Czech Crown lands were part of the Austria-Hungary and the colonised Czech population had to serve in its army. From 1914, on the background of attempts to attain independence, various units composed of Czech nationals (with up to 10% of Slovak nationals), mainly POWs, were established, fighting as part of the French, Italian and Russian forces against the Entente powers. Beginning in 1916, these Czechoslovak Legions gained increasingly independent status. Following the 1918 Czechoslovak declaration of independence, the newly established Czechoslovak Army derived its legacy primarily from these legions rather than from the Austrian Habsburg Imperial Army.\nOfficial military names since 1918:\nCzechoslovakia.\nThe Czechoslovak Armed Forces were originally formed on 30 June 1918 when 6,000 members of the Czechoslovak Legion in France, which had been established in 1914, took oath and received a battle banner in Darney, France, thus preceding the official declaration of Czechoslovak independence by four months. There were also 50 000 legion soldiers in Russia at that time. The military achievements of the Czechoslovak legions on the French, Italian and especially Russian front became one of the main arguments that the Czechoslovak pro-independence leaders, especially for T. G. Masaryk in America, could use to gain the support for the country's independence by the Allies of World War I.\nIn 1938, servicemen of the Czechoslovak Army and the State Defense Guard fought in an undeclared border war against the German-backed Sudetendeutsches Freikorps as well as Polish and Hungarian paramilitary forces. As a result of the Munich Agreement, areas heavily populated by ethnic German speaking people were incorporated into the Third Reich and military-aged men living there were subject to being drafted into the Wehrmacht. In 1939, after the Slovak State proclaimed its independence and the remainder of Carpathian Ruthenia was occupied and annexed by Hungary, the German occupation of the Czech Lands followed and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia was proclaimed after the negotiations with Emil H\u00e1cha. The Protectorate's government possessed its own armed force, the Government Army (6,500 men), tasked with public security and rearguard duties. On the other side of the conflict, a number of Czechoslovak units and formations served with the Polish Army (Czechoslovak Legion), the French Army, the Royal Air Force, the British Army (the 1st Czechoslovak Armoured Brigade), and the Red Army (I Corps). Four Czech and Slovak-manned RAF squadrons were transferred to Czechoslovak control in late 1945.\nFrom 1954 until 1989, the Army was known as the Czechoslovak People's Army (\u010cSLA). Although the \u010cSLA, as formed in 1945, included both Soviet- and British-equipped/trained expatriate troops, the \"Western\" soldiers had been purged from the \u010cSLA after 1948 when the communists took power. The \u010cSLA offered no resistance to the invasion mounted by the Soviets in 1968 in reaction to the \"Prague Spring\", and was extensively reorganized by the Soviets following the re-imposition of communist rule in Prague.\nOf the approximately 201,000 personnel on active duty in the \u010cSLA in 1987, about 145,000, or about 72 percent, served in the ground forces (commonly referred to as the army). About 100,000 of these were conscripts. There were two military districts, Western and Eastern. A 1989 listing of forces shows two Czechoslovak armies in the west, the 1st Army at P\u0159\u00edbram with one tank division and three motor rifle divisions, the 4th Army at P\u00edsek with two tank divisions and two motor rifle divisions. In the Eastern Military District, there were two tank divisions, the 13th and 14th, with a supervisory headquarters at Tren\u010d\u00edn in the Slovak part of the country.\nDuring the Cold War, the \u010cSLA was equipped primarily with Soviet arms, although certain arms like the OT-64 SKOT armored personnel carrier, the L-29 \"Delf\u00edn\" and L-39 \"Albatros\" aircraft, the P-27 \"Panc\u00e9\u0159ovka\" antitank rocket launcher, the vz. 58 assault rifle or the Uk vz. 59 machine gun were of Czechoslovak design.\nAfter the fall of communism during the Velvet Revolution in 1989, the Czechoslovak People's Army was renamed back to the Czechoslovak Army and was completely transformed as well.\nAfter 1992 (dissolution of Czechoslovakia).\nThe Army of the Czech Republic was formed after the Czechoslovak Armed Forces split after the 31 December 1992 peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia. Czech forces stood at 90,000 in 1993. They were reduced to around 65,000 in 11 combat brigades and the Air Force in 1997, to 63,601 in 1999, and to 35,000 in 2005. At the same time, the forces were modernized and reoriented towards a defensive posture. In 2004, the army transformed itself into a fully professional organization and compulsory military service was abolished. The Army maintains an active reserve.\nThe Czech Republic is a member of the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. In March 1999, the Czech Republic joined NATO. Since 1990, the ACR and the Czech Armed Forces have contributed to numerous peacekeeping and humanitarian operations, including IFOR, SFOR, and EUFOR Althea in Bosnia, Desert Shield/Desert Storm, Afghanistan, Kosovo, Albania, Turkey, Pakistan and with the Coalition forces in Iraq.\nCurrent deployments (2019):\nStructure.\nMany of the duties of the President of the Czech Republic can be said to be ceremonial to one degree or another, especially since the President has relatively few powers independent of the will of the Prime Minister. One of those is the status as commander in chief of the military; no part of these duties can take place but through the assent of the Prime Minister. In matters of war, he is in every sense merely a figurehead, since the Constitution gives all substantive constitutional authority over the use of the armed forces to the Parliament. In fact, the only specific thing the constitution allows the President to do with respect to the military is to appoint its generalsbut even this must be done with the signature of the Prime Minister.\nStructure of the Czech Armed Forces consists of two main parts and other commands:\nActive reserves.\nActive Reserve (in Czech \"Aktivn\u00ed z\u00e1loha\") is a part of the otherwise professional Army of the Czech Republic. This service was created to allow the participation of citizens with a positive attitude to the military.\nA volunteer needs either to have completed the compulsory military service (which ended in 2004) or to attend 6 week training. Then the reservists have to serve up to three weeks a year and can be called up to serve two weeks during a non-military crisis. They are not intended to serve abroad, but individuals may volunteer to do so. The Reserve presents itself on events like BAHNA, a military show.\nEach of the active duty brigades or regiments have their own active reserve subordinate units that train with the same equipment as the professional soldiers and is part of the organisational structure usually as a 4th company in a battalion.\nThe Territorial Command is responsible for the active reserves and have direct control of the 14 infantry companies that belong to regional military commands in each of the 13 regions and capital city Prague.\nEquipment.\nThe Army of the Czech Republic, to a large extent, currently uses equipment dating back to the times of the Warsaw Pact. During the Cold War, Czechoslovakia was a major supplier of tanks, armoured personnel carriers, military trucks and trainer aircraft \u2013 the bulk of military exports went to its Comecon partners. Replacement of aging or obsolete equipment, or making it at least compliant with NATO standards, is urgently required. Modernization plans include acquisition of new multi-role helicopters, transport aircraft, infantry fighting vehicles, air defence radars and missiles. If possible, the Czech Ministry of Defence selects products that are manufactured or co-produced in the Czech Republic. This includes firearms of the \u010cesk\u00e1 zbrojovka Uhersk\u00fd Brod, namely the CZ 75 pistol, CZ Scorpion Evo 3 submachine gun, and CZ 805 BREN and BREN 2 assault rifles. Moreover, the Czech Army is equipped with about 3,000 T810 and T815 vehicles of various modifications produced by the Czech Tatra Trucks company. Tatra Defence Vehicle factory ensures licensed production of Pandur II and Titus armoured vehicles. Aircraft such as the Aero L-39 Albatros, Aero L-159 Alca and Let L-410 Turbolet have been produced domestically as well.\nAt the beginning of 2019, the Czech Ministry of Defence announced its modernization program, consisting of acquiring 210 new modern IFVs as a replacement for the aging BVP-2. MoD approached four manufacturers: BAE Systems (CV90), GDELS (ASCOD), Rheinmetall (Lynx) and PSM (Puma). The cost of the program is expected to exceed 50 billion CZK.\nIn May 2022 the Czech Ministry of Defence announced it will get 15 Leopards 2A4 from Germany as an exchange for Czech tanks that will be given to Ukraine to help defend against Russian invasion and will purchase up to 50 modern 2A7+ variants later.\nUniforms.\nDifferent types of Czech Army uniforms:"}
{"id": "5855", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5855", "title": "Foreign relations of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Czech Republic is a Central European country, a member of the European Union, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the United Nations (and all of its main specialized agencies and boards). It entertains diplomatic relations with 191 countries of the world, around half of which maintain a resident embassy in the Czech capital city, Prague.\nDuring the years 1948\u20131989, the foreign policy of Czechoslovakia had followed that of the Soviet Union. Since the revolution and the subsequent mutually-agreed peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the Czechs have made reintegration with Western institutions their chief foreign policy objective. This goal was rapidly met with great success, as the nation joined NATO in 1999 and the European Union in 2004, and held the Presidency of the European Union during the first half of 2009.\nInternational disputes.\nLiechtenstein.\nThroughout the past decades, Liechtenstein continuously claimed restitution for , or an area roughly ten times the size of Liechtenstein, of land currently located in the Czech Republic. The land was partially confiscated from the Liechtenstein family in 1918 with the rest of the property being confiscated in 1945 after the expulsion of Germans and confiscation of German property. The Czech Republic insisted that it could not acknowledge or be responsible for claims going back to before February 1948, when the Communists had seized power.\nAs a result, Liechtenstein did not diplomatically recognize the existence of the Czech Republic as a new state (and, for that matter, also that of the Slovak Republic) until 2009.\nIn July 2009, the Prince of Liechtenstein announced he was resigning to the previous unsuccessful claims to property located in the Czech Republic, and on 13 July 2009, after politically recognizing one another, the Czech Republic and Liechtenstein formally established diplomatic relations.\nPlacement of US National Missile Defense base.\nIn February 2007, the US started formal negotiations with Czech Republic and Poland concerning construction of missile shield installations in those countries for a Ground-based Midcourse Defense System. Government of the Czech Republic agrees (while 67% Czechs disagree and only about 22% support it) to host a missile defense radar on its territory while a base of missile interceptors is supposed to be built in Poland. The objective is reportedly to protect another parts of US National Missile Defense from long-range missile strikes from Iran and North Korea, but Czech PM Mirek Topol\u00e1nek said the main reason is to avoid Russian influence and strengthen ties to US.\nThe main government supporter Alexandr Vondra, Deputy Prime Minister for European affairs, used to be an ambassador to the USA. More problematic is that between 2004 and 2006 he was an executive director of a lobbying company Dutko Worldwide Prague. Dutko's and its strategic partner AMI Communications (PR company) customers are Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Nortrop Grumman, which are largest contractors for NMD development. AMI Communications also received (without a formal selection procedure) a government contract to persuade Czechs to support US radar base.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Czechia maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nEurope.\n! style=\"width: 10em\" | Country\n! Formal relations began\n! Notes\nThe multi-national Communist armed forces' sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. All member countries, with the exception of the People's Republic of Albania and the Socialist Republic of Romania participated in the invasion. Albania formally withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in 1968 over the matter.\nBoth countries are full members of the European Union. They share of common border, which can be crossed anywhere without border control due to the Schengen Agreement.\nDiplomatic relations between Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia were established on 27 September 1920, they were severed on 1 June 1939 and were restored on 10 October 1945. On 23 December 1992 Bulgaria recognised the Czech Republic and established diplomatic relations with it at the level of embassies as of 1 January 1993. \nSee Czech Republic\u2013France relations"}
{"id": "5856", "revid": "32", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5856", "title": "Czech Republic/Sacrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "5857", "revid": "45346956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5857", "title": "Climbing", "text": "Climbing is the activity of using one's hands, feet, or other parts of the body to ascend a steep topographical object that can range from the world's tallest mountains (e.g. the eight thousanders) to small boulders. Climbing is done for locomotion, sporting recreation, for competition, and is also done in trades that rely on ascension, such as construction and military operations. Climbing is done indoors and outdoors, on natural surfaces (e.g. rock climbing and ice climbing), and on artificial surfaces (e.g. climbing walls and climbing gyms)\nThe sport of climbing evolved by climbers making first ascents of new types of climbing routes, using new climbing techniques, at ever-increasing grades of difficulty, with ever-improving pieces of climbing equipment. Guides and guidebooks were an important element in developing the popularity of the sport in the natural environment. Early pioneers included Walter Bonatti, Riccardo Cassin, Hermann Buhl, and Gaston R\u00e9buffat, who were followed by and Reinhold Messner and Doug Scott, and later by Mick Fowler and Marko Prezelj, and Ueli Steck. Since the 1980s, the development of the safer format of bolted sport climbing, the wider availability of artificial climbing walls and climbing gyms, and the development of competition climbing, increased the popularity of rock climbing as a sport, and led to the emergence of professional rock climbers, such as Wolfgang G\u00fcllich, Alexander Huber, Chris Sharma, Adam Ondra, Lynn Hill, Catherine Destivelle, and Janja Garnbret.\nClimbing became an Olympic sport for the first time in the 2021 Olympic Games in Tokyo (see Sport climbing at the 2020 Summer Olympics) in that format that included competition lead climbing, competition bouldering, and competition speed climbing disciplines; competition ice climbing is not yet an Olympic sport.\nRock-based.\nRock climbing can trace its origins to the late 19th-century, and has since developed into several main sub-disciplines. Single-pitch and multi-pitch (and big wall) climbing, can be performed in varying styles (including aid, sport, traditional, free solo, and top-roping), while the standalone discipline of bouldering (or boulder climbing) is by definition performed in a free solo format.\nCompetition-based.\nCompetition climbing (sometimes confusingly called \"sport climbing\"), is a regulated sport of 'competitive rock climbing' that originated in the 1980s, and which is done as indoor climbing on artificial climbing walls. The IFSC is the governing body for competition rock-climbing worldwide and is recognized by the IOC and GAISF and is a member of the International World Games Association (IWGA). Competition climbing has three parts:\nCompetition ice climbing is a regulated sport of 'competitive ice climbing' that originated in the early 2000s, and which is done on outdoor or indoor climbing on artificial ice climbing walls that consist of ice and dry surfaces. The UIAA is the governing body for competition ice climbing worldwide and their events include a lead ice climbing discipline and a speed ice climbing discipline. Competition ice climbing is not as yet an Olympic Sport.\nIn film.\nClimbing has been the subject of both narrative and documentary films. Notable climbing films include \"Touching the Void\" (2003), \"Everest\" (2015), \"Meru\" (2015), \"The Dawn Wall\" (2015), \"Free Solo\" (2018), \"\" (2021), and \"The Alpinist\" (2021). The Reel Rock Film Tour is a traveling film festival that exclusively screens climbing and adventure films, and includes the \"Reel Rock\" climbing film series."}
