{"id": "2032", "revid": "1265808621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2032", "title": "Acting", "text": "Acting is an activity in which a story is told by means of its enactment by an actor who adopts a character\u2014in theatre, television, film, radio, or any other medium that makes use of the mimetic mode.\nActing involves a broad range of skills, including a well-developed imagination, emotional facility, physical expressivity, vocal projection, clarity of speech, and the ability to interpret drama. Acting also demands an ability to employ dialects, accents, improvisation, observation and emulation, mime, and stage combat. Many actors train at length in specialist programs or colleges to develop these skills. The vast majority of professional actors have gone through extensive training. Actors and actresses will often have many instructors and teachers for a full range of training involving singing, scene-work, audition techniques, and acting for camera.\nMost early sources in the West that examine the art of acting (, \"hypokrisis\") discuss it as part of rhetoric.\nHistory.\nOne of the first known actors was an ancient Greek called Thespis of Icaria in Athens. Writing two centuries after the event, Aristotle in his \"Poetics\" () suggests that Thespis stepped out of the dithyrambic chorus and addressed it as a separate character. Before Thespis, the chorus narrated (for example, \"Dionysus did this, Dionysus said\"). When Thespis stepped out from the chorus, he spoke as if he were the character (for example, \"I am Dionysus, I did this\"). To distinguish between these different modes of storytelling\u2014enactment and narration\u2014Aristotle uses the terms \"mimesis\" (via enactment) and \"diegesis\" (via narration). From the Greek actor Thespis' name derives the word \"thespian\".\nTraining.\nConservatories and drama schools typically offer two- to four-year training on all aspects of acting. Universities mostly offer three- to four-year programs, in which a student is often able to choose to focus on acting, whilst continuing to learn about other aspects of theatre. Schools vary in their approach, but in North America the most popular method taught derives from the 'system' of Konstantin Stanislavski, which was developed and popularised in America as method acting by Lee Strasberg, Stella Adler, Sanford Meisner, and others.\nOther approaches may include a more physically based orientation, such as that promoted by theatre practitioners as diverse as Anne Bogart, Jacques Lecoq, Jerzy Grotowski, or Vsevolod Meyerhold. Classes may also include psychotechnique, mask work, physical theatre, improvisation, and acting for camera.\nRegardless of a school's approach, students should expect intensive training in textual interpretation, voice, and movement. Applications to drama programmes and conservatories usually involve extensive auditions. Anybody over the age of 18 can usually apply. Training may also start at a very young age. Acting classes and professional schools targeted at under-18s are widespread. These classes introduce young actors to different aspects of acting and theatre, including scene study.\nIncreased training and exposure to public speaking allows people to maintain a calmer and more relaxed physiology. Measuring a public speaker's heart rate is perhaps one of the easiest ways to assess changes in stress, as heart rate increases with anxiety. As actors increase their performances, heart rate and other signs of stress may decrease. This is very important in training actors, as adaptive strategies gained from increased exposure to public speaking can regulate implicit and explicit anxiety. By attending an institution that specializes in acting, the increased opportunity to act will lead to a more relaxed physiology and a decrease in stress and its effects on the body. These effects can range from hormonal to cognitive health that can impact quality of life and performance.\nImprovisation.\nSome classical forms of acting involve a substantial element of improvised performance. Most notable is its use by the troupes of the \"commedia dell'arte\", a form of masked comedy that originated in Italy.\nImprovisation as an approach to acting formed an important part of the Russian theatre practitioner Konstantin Stanislavski's 'system' of actor training, which he developed from the 1910s onwards. Late in 1910, the playwright Maxim Gorky invited Stanislavski to join him in Capri, where they discussed training and Stanislavski's emerging \"grammar\" of acting. Inspired by a popular theatre performance in Naples that utilised the techniques of the \"commedia dell'arte\", Gorky suggested that they form a company, modelled on the medieval strolling players, in which a playwright and group of young actors would devise new plays together by means of improvisation. Stanislavski would develop this use of improvisation in his work with his First Studio of the Moscow Art Theatre. Stanislavski's use was extended further in the approaches to acting developed by his students, Michael Chekhov and Maria Knebel.\nIn the United Kingdom, the use of improvisation was pioneered by Joan Littlewood from the 1930s onwards and, later, by Keith Johnstone and Clive Barker. In the United States, it was promoted by Viola Spolin, after working with Neva Boyd at a Hull House in Chicago, Illinois (Spolin was Boyd's student from 1924 to 1927). Like the British practitioners, Spolin felt that playing games was a useful means of training actors and helped to improve an actor's performance. With improvisation, she argued, people may find expressive freedom, since they do not know how an improvised situation will turn out. Improvisation demands an open mind in order to maintain spontaneity, rather than pre-planning a response. A character is created by the actor, often without reference to a dramatic text, and a drama is developed out of the spontaneous interactions with other actors. This approach to creating new drama has been developed most substantially by the British filmmaker Mike Leigh, in films such as \"Secrets &amp; Lies\" (1996), \"Vera Drake\" (2004), \"Another Year\" (2010), and \"Mr. Turner\" (2014).\nImprovisation is also used to cover up if an actor or actress makes a mistake.\nPhysiological effects.\nActing in front of an audience many times can cause \"stage fright\", a form of stress in which someone becomes anxious in front of an audience. This is common among actors, especially new actors, and can cause symptoms such as increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, and sweating.\nIn a 2017 study on American university students, actors of various experience levels all showed similarly elevated heart rates throughout their performances; this agrees with previous studies on professional and amateur actors' heart rates. While all actors experienced stress, causing elevated heart rate, the more experienced actors displayed less heart rate variability than the less experienced actors in the same play. The more experienced actors experienced less stress while performing, and therefore had a smaller degree of variability than the less experienced, more stressed actors. The more experienced an actor is, the more stable their heart rate will be while performing, but will still experience elevated heart rates.\nSemiotics.\nThe semiotics of acting involves a study of the ways in which aspects of a performance come to operate for its audience as signs. This process largely involves the production of meaning, whereby elements of an actor's performance acquire significance, both within the broader context of the dramatic action and in the relations each establishes with the real world.\nFollowing the ideas proposed by the Surrealist theorist Antonin Artaud, however, it may also be possible to understand communication with an audience that occurs 'beneath' significance and meaning (which the semiotician F\u00e9lix Guattari described as a process involving the transmission of \"a-signifying signs\"). In his \"The Theatre and its Double\" (1938), Artaud compared this interaction to the way in which a snake charmer communicates with a snake, a process which he identified as \"mimesis\"\u2014the same term that Aristotle in his \"Poetics\" () used to describe the mode in which drama communicates its story, by virtue of its embodiment by the actor enacting it, as distinct from \"diegesis\", or the way in which a narrator may describe it. These \"vibrations\" passing from the actor to the audience may not necessarily precipitate into significant elements as such (that is, consciously perceived \"meanings\"), but rather may operate by means of the circulation of \"affects\".\nThe approach to acting adopted by other theatre practitioners involve varying degrees of concern with the semiotics of acting. Konstantin Stanislavski, for example, addresses the ways in which an actor, building on what he calls the \"experiencing\" of a role, should also shape and adjust a performance in order to support the overall significance of the drama\u2014a process that he calls establishing the \"perspective of the role\". The semiotics of acting plays a far more central role in Bertolt Brecht's epic theatre, in which an actor is concerned to bring out clearly the socio historical significance of behaviour and action by means of specific performance choices\u2014a process that he describes as establishing the \"not/but\" element in a performed physical \"\"gestus\" within context of the play's overall \"Fabel\"\". Eugenio Barba argues that actors ought not to concern themselves with the significance of their performance behaviour; this aspect is the responsibility, he claims, of the director, who weaves the signifying elements of an actor's performance into the director's dramaturgical \"montage\".\nThe theatre semiotician Patrice Pavis, alluding to the contrast between Stanislavski's 'system' and Brecht's demonstrating performer\u2014and, beyond that, to Denis Diderot's foundational essay on the art of acting, \"Paradox of the Actor\" (\u201378)\u2014argues that:\nElements of a semiotics of acting include the actor's gestures, facial expressions, intonation and other vocal qualities, rhythm, and the ways in which these aspects of an individual performance relate to the drama and the theatrical event (or film, television programme, or radio broadcast, each of which involves different semiotic systems) considered as a whole. A semiotics of acting recognises that all forms of acting involve conventions and codes by means of which performance behaviour acquires significance\u2014including those approaches, such as Stanislvaski's or the closely related method acting developed in the United States, that offer themselves as \"a natural kind of acting that can do without conventions and be received as self-evident and universal.\" Pavis goes on to argue that:\nThe conventions that govern acting in general are related to structured forms of play, which involve, in each specific experience, \"rules of the game.\" This aspect was first explored by Johan Huizinga (in \"Homo Ludens\", 1938) and Roger Caillois (in \"Man, Play and Games\", 1958). Caillois, for example, distinguishes four aspects of play relevant to acting: \"mimesis\" (simulation), \"agon\" (conflict or competition), \"alea\" (chance), and \"ilinx\" (vertigo, or \"vertiginous psychological situations\" involving the spectator's identification or catharsis). This connection with play as an activity was first proposed by Aristotle in his \"Poetics\", in which he defines the desire to imitate in play as an essential part of being human and our first means of learning as children:\nThis connection with play also informed the words used in English (as was the analogous case in many other European languages) for drama: the word \"play\" or \"game\" (translating the Anglo-Saxon \"pl\u00e8ga\" or Latin \"ludus\") was the standard term used until William Shakespeare's time for a dramatic entertainment\u2014just as its creator was a \"play-maker\" rather than a \"dramatist\", the person acting was known as a \"player\", and, when in the Elizabethan era specific buildings for acting were built, they were known as \"play-houses\" rather than \"theatres.\"\nResumes and auditions.\nActors and actresses need to make a resume when applying for roles. The acting resume is very different from a normal resume; it is generally shorter, with lists instead of paragraphs, and it should have a head shot on the back. Sometimes, a resume also contains a short 30-second to 1-minute reel displaying the actor's abilities, so that the casting director can see previous performances, if any. An actor's resume should list projects they have acted in before, such as plays, movies, or shows, as well as special skills and their contact information.\nAuditioning is the act of performing either a monologue or sides (lines for one character) as sent by the casting director. Auditioning entails showing the actor's skills to present themselves as a different person; it may be as brief as two minutes. For theater auditions it can be longer than two minutes, or they may perform more than one monologue, as each casting director can have different requirements for actors. Actors should go to auditions dressed for the part, to make it easier for the casting director to visualize them as the character. For television or film they will have to undergo more than one audition. Oftentimes actors are called into another audition at the last minute, and are sent the sides either that morning or the night before. Auditioning can be a stressful part of acting, especially if one has not been trained to audition.\nRehearsal.\nRehearsal is a process in which actors prepare and practice a performance together with directors and technical staff. Some actors continue to rehearse a scene throughout the run of a show in order to keep the scene fresh in their minds and exciting for the audience.\nAudience.\nA critical audience with evaluative spectators is known to induce stress on actors during performance. While public performances cause extremely high stress levels in actors (more so amateur ones), the stress actually improves the performance, supporting the idea of \"positive stress in challenging situations.\"\nHeart rate.\nDepending on what an actor is doing, their heart rate will vary. This is the body's way of responding to stress. Prior to a show, one will see an increase in heart rate due to anxiety. While performing an actor has an increased sense of exposure which will increase performance anxiety and the associated physiological arousal, such as heart rate. Heart rates increases more during shows compared to rehearsals because of the increased pressure, which is due to the fact that a performance has a potentially greater impact on an actors career. After the show a decrease in the heart rate due to the conclusion of the stress inducing activity can be seen. Often the heart rate will return to normal after the show or performance is done; however, during the applause after the performance there is a rapid spike in heart rate. This can be seen not only in actors but also with public speaking and musicians.\nStress.\nThere is a correlation between heart-rate and stress when actors' are performing in front of an audience. Actors claim that having an audience has no change in their stress level, but as soon as they come on stage their heart-rate rises quickly before they speak their first lines. A 2017 study measuring actors' heart-rate during performance showed that individual heart-rates rose right before the performance began. Length of monologues, experience levels, and actions done on stage were important factors in the study. Heart-rate drops significantly at the end of a monologue, big action scene, or performance.\nActing has been shown to be an effective tool for reducing stress created by social anxiety."}
{"id": "2037", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2037", "title": "Delian League", "text": "The Delian League was a confederacy of Greek city-states, numbering between 150 and 330, founded in 478 BC under the leadership (hegemony) of Athens, whose purpose was to continue fighting the Persian Empire after the Greek victory in the Battle of Plataea at the end of the Second Persian invasion of Greece. The League functioned as a dual \u2013offensive and defensive\u2013 alliance (\"symmachia\") of autonomous states, similar to its rival association, the Peloponnesian League. The League's modern name derives from its official meeting place, the island of Delos, where congresses were held within the sanctuary of the Temple of Apollo; contemporary authors referred to the organization simply as \"the Athenians and their Allies\".\nWhile Sparta excelled as Greece's greatest power on land, Athens turned to the seas becoming the dominant naval power of the Greek world. Following Sparta's withdrawal from the conflict with Persia, Athens took the lead of the Hellenic alliance accompanied by several states around the Aegean and the Anatolian coast. The Delian League was formed as an anti-Persian defensive association of equal city-states seeking protection under Athens, as the latter wished to extend its support towards the Ionian Greek colonies of Anatolia. By the mid-fifth century BC, the alliance had developed into a naval imperial power, called the Athenian Empire, where Athens established complete dominion and the allies became increasingly less autonomous. The alliance held an assembly of representatives in order to shape its policy, while the members swore an oath of loyalty to the coalition. The Delian League successfully accomplished its principal strategic goal by decisively expelling the remaining Persian forces from the Aegean. As a result, Persia would cease to pose a major threat to Greece for the following fifty years.\nFrom its inception, Athens became the League's biggest source of military power, while more and more allies preferred to pay the dues in cash. Athens began to use the League's funds for its own purposes, like the reinforcement of its naval supremacy, which led to conflicts between the city and its less powerful allies, at times culminating in rebellions, like that of Thasos in 465 BC. The League's treasury initially stood in Delos until, in a symbolic gesture, Pericles moved it to Athens in 454 BC. By 431 BC, the threat that the League presented to Spartan hegemony combined with Athens's heavy-handed control of the Delian League prompted the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War; the League was dissolved upon the war's conclusion in 404 BC under the direction of Lysander, the Spartan commander. Witnessing Sparta's growing hegemony in the first half of the 4th century BC, Athens went on to partly revive the alliance, this time called the Second Athenian League, reestablishing its naval dominance in the eastern Mediterranean.\nBackground.\nThe Greco-Persian Wars had their roots in the conquest of the Greek cities of Asia Minor, and particularly Ionia, by the Achaemenid Persian Empire of Cyrus the Great shortly after 550 BC. The Persians found the Ionians difficult to rule, eventually settling for sponsoring a tyrant in each Ionian city. While Greek states had in the past often been ruled by tyrants, this form of government was on the decline. By 500 BC, Ionia appears to have been ripe for rebellion against these Persian clients. The simmering tension finally broke into open revolt due to the actions of the tyrant of Miletus, Aristagoras. Attempting to save himself after a disastrous Persian-sponsored expedition in 499 BC, Aristagoras chose to declare Miletus a democracy. This triggered similar revolutions across Ionia, extending to Doris and Aeolis, beginning the Ionian Revolt.\nThe Greek states of Athens and Eretria allowed themselves to be drawn into this conflict by Aristagoras, and during their only campaigning season (498 BC) they contributed to the capture and burning of the Persian regional capital of Sardis. After this, the Ionian revolt carried on (without further outside aid) for a further five years, until it was finally completely crushed by the Persians. However, in a decision of great historic significance, the Persian king Darius the Great decided that, despite having subdued the revolt, there remained the unfinished business of exacting punishment on Athens and Eretria for supporting the revolt. The Ionian revolt had severely threatened the stability of Darius's empire, and the states of mainland Greece would continue to threaten that stability unless dealt with. Darius thus began to contemplate the complete conquest of Greece, beginning with the destruction of Athens and Eretria.\nIn the next two decades, there would be two Persian invasions of Greece, occasioning, thanks to Greek historians, some of the most famous battles in history. During the first invasion, Thrace, Macedon and the Aegean Islands were added to the Persian Empire, and Eretria was duly destroyed. However, the invasion ended in 490 BC with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon. After this invasion, Darius died, and responsibility for the war passed to his son Xerxes I.\nXerxes then personally led a second Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC, taking an enormous (although oft-exaggerated) army and navy to Greece. Those Greeks who chose to resist (the 'Allies') were defeated in the twin simultaneous battles of Thermopylae on land and Artemisium at sea. All of Greece except the Peloponnesus thus having fallen into Persian hands, the Persians then seeking to destroy the Allied navy once and for all, suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Salamis. The following year, 479 BC, the Allies assembled the largest Greek army yet seen and defeated the Persian invasion force at the Battle of Plataea, ending the invasion and the threat to Greece.\nThe Allied fleet defeated the remnants of the Persian fleet in the Battle of Mycale near the island of Samos\u2014on the same day as Plataea, according to tradition. This action marks the end of the Persian invasion, and the beginning of the next phase in the Greco-Persian wars, the Greek counterattack. After Mycale, the Greek cities of Asia Minor again revolted, with the Persians now powerless to stop them. The Allied fleet then sailed to the Thracian Chersonese, still held by the Persians, and besieged and captured the town of Sestos. The following year, 478 BC, the Allies sent a force to capture the city of Byzantion (modern day Istanbul). The siege was successful, but the behaviour of the Spartan general Pausanias alienated many of the Allies, and resulted in Pausanias's recall.\nFormation.\nAfter Byzantion, Sparta was eager to end its involvement in the war. The Spartans greatly feared the rise of the Athenians as a challenge to their power. Additionally, the Spartans were of the view that, with the liberation of mainland Greece, and the Greek cities of Asia Minor, the war's purpose had already been achieved. There was also perhaps a feeling that establishing long-term security for the Asian Greeks would prove impossible. In the aftermath of Mycale, the Spartan king Leotychidas had proposed transplanting all the Greeks from Asia Minor to Europe as the only method of permanently freeing them from Persian dominion.\nXanthippus, the Athenian commander at Mycale, had furiously rejected this; the Ionian cities had been Athenian colonies, and the Athenians, if no one else, would protect the Ionians. This marked the point at which the leadership of the Greek alliance effectively passed to the Athenians. With the Spartan withdrawal after Byzantion, the leadership of the Athenians became explicit.\nThe loose alliance of city states which had fought against Xerxes's invasion had been dominated by Sparta and the Peloponnesian league. With the withdrawal of these states, a congress was called on the holy island of Delos to institute a new alliance to continue the fight against the Persians; hence the modern designation \"Delian League\". According to Thucydides, the official aim of the League was to \"avenge the wrongs they suffered by ravaging the territory of the king.\"\nIn reality, this goal was divided into three main efforts\u2014to prepare for future invasion, to seek revenge against Persia, and to organize a means of dividing spoils of war. The members were given a choice of either offering armed forces or paying a tax to the joint treasury; most states chose the tax. League members swore to have the same friends and enemies, and dropped ingots of iron into the sea to symbolize the permanence of their alliance. The Athenian politician Aristides would spend the rest of his life occupied in the affairs of the alliance, dying (according to Plutarch) a few years later in Pontus, whilst determining what the tax of new members was to be.\nMembers.\nThe Delian League, also known as the Athenian Empire, was a collection of Greek city-states largely based around the Aegean Sea which operated under the hegemony of Athens. This alliance initially served the purpose of coordinating a united Greek front against a perceived looming Persian threat against the Ionian city-states which bordered it. The members of the Delian League were made to swear an oath of loyalty to the league and contributed mostly monetarily but in some instances donated ships or other forces. It was also the case that many democratic members of the League owed their freedom from oligarchic or tyrannical rule to Athens. Because of this, Athens gained an overwhelming advantage in the voting system conducted by relying on the support of democratic city-states Athens had helped into being. By 454 Athens moved the treasury of the Delian League from the Island of Delos to the Parthenon in Athens. Benefitting greatly from the influx of cash coming out of the 150-330 members, Athens used the money to reinforce its own naval supremacy and used the remaining funds to embellish the city with art and architecture. In order to maintain the new synoecism, Athens began using its greatly expanded military to enforce membership in the League. City-states who wished to leave the alliance were punished by Athens with force such as Mytilene and Melos. No longer considered her allies, Athens eventually began to refer to the members of the Delian League as \"all the cities Athens rules.\" Athens also extended its authority over members of the League through judicial decisions. Synoecism under the Athenian Empire was enforced by resolving matters of and between states in Athens by courts composed of Athenian citizens and enforcing those decisions through the Athenian military.\nComposition and expansion.\nIn the first ten years of the league's existence, Cimon/Kimon forced Karystos in Euboea to join the league, conquered the island of Skyros and sent Athenian colonists there.\nOver time, especially with the suppression of rebellions, Athens exercised hegemony over the rest of the league. Thucydides describes how Athens's control over the League grew:\n Of all the causes of defection, that connected with arrears of tribute and vessels, and with failure of service, was the chief; for the Athenians were very severe and exacting, and made themselves offensive by applying the screw of necessity to men who were not used to and in fact not disposed for any continuous labor. In some other respects the Athenians were not the old popular rulers they had been at first; and if they had more than their fair share of service, it was correspondingly easy for them to reduce any that tried to leave the confederacy. The Athenians also arranged for the other members of the league to pay its share of the expense in money instead of in ships and men, and for this the subject city-states had themselves to blame, their wish to get out of giving service making most leave their homes. Thus while Athens was increasing her navy with the funds they contributed, a revolt always found itself without enough resources or experienced leaders for war.\nRebellion.\nNaxos.\nThe first member of the league to attempt to secede was the island of Naxos in c. 471 BC. After being defeated, Naxos is believed (based on similar, later revolts) to have been forced to tear down its walls along with losing its fleet and vote in the League.\nThasos.\nIn 465 BC, Athens founded the colony of Amphipolis on the Strymon river. Thasos, a member of the League, saw her interests in the mines of Mt. Pangaion threatened and defected from the League to Persia. She called to Sparta for assistance but was denied, as Sparta was facing the largest helot revolt in its history.\nAfter more than two years of siege, Thasos surrendered to the Athenian leader Aristides and was forced back into the league. As a result, the fortification walls of Thasos were torn down, and they had to pay yearly tribute and fines. Additionally, their land, naval ships, and the mines of Thasos were confiscated by Athens. The siege of Thasos marks the transformation of the Delian league from an alliance into, in the words of Thucydides, a hegemony.\nPolicies of the League.\nIn 461 BC, Cimon was ostracized and was succeeded in his influence by democrats such as Ephialtes and Pericles. This signaled a complete change in Athenian foreign policy, neglecting the alliance with the Spartans and instead allying with her enemies, Argos and Thessaly. Megara deserted the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League and allied herself with Athens, allowing construction of a double line of walls across the Isthmus of Corinth and protecting Athens from attack from that quarter. Roughly a decade earlier, due to encouragement from influential speaker Themistocles, the Athenians had also constructed the Long Walls connecting their city to the Piraeus, its port, making it effectively invulnerable to attack by land.\nIn 454 BC, the Athenian general Pericles moved the Delian League's treasury from Delos to Athens, allegedly to keep it safe from Persia. However, Plutarch indicates that many of Pericles's rivals viewed the transfer to Athens as usurping monetary resources to fund elaborate building projects. Athens also switched from accepting ships, men and weapons as dues from league members, to only accepting money.\nThe new treasury established in Athens was used for many purposes, not all relating to the defence of members of the league. It was from tribute paid to the league that Pericles set to building the Parthenon on the Acropolis, replacing an older temple, as well as many other non-defense related expenditures. The Delian League was turning from an alliance into an empire.\nWars against Persia.\nWar with the Persians continued. In 460 BC, Egypt revolted under local leaders the Hellenes called Inaros and Amyrtaeus, who requested aid from Athens. Pericles led 250 ships, intended to attack Cyprus, to their aid because it would further damage Persia. After four years, however, the Egyptian rebellion was defeated by the Achaemenid general Megabyzus, who captured the greater part of the Athenian forces. In fact, according to Isocrates, the Athenians and their allies lost some 20,000 men in the expedition, while modern estimates place the figure at 50,000 men and 250 ships including reinforcements. The remainder escaped to Cyrene and thence returned home.\nThis was the Athenians' main (public) reason for moving the treasury of the League from Delos to Athens, further consolidating their control over the League. The Persians followed up their victory by sending a fleet to re-establish their control over Cyprus, and 200 ships were sent out to counter them under Cimon, who returned from ostracism in 451 BC. He died during the blockade of Citium, though the fleet won a double victory by land and sea over the Persians off Salamis, Cyprus.\nThis battle was the last major one fought against the Persians. Many writers report that a peace treaty, known as the Peace of Callias, was formalized in 450 BC, but some writers believe that the treaty was a myth created later to inflate the stature of Athens. However, an understanding was definitely reached, enabling the Athenians to focus their attention on events in Greece proper.\nWars in Greece.\nSoon, war with the Peloponnesians broke out. In 458 BC, the Athenians blockaded the island of Aegina, and simultaneously defended Megara from the Corinthians by sending out an army composed of those too young or old for regular military service. The following year, Sparta sent an army into Boeotia, reviving the power of Thebes in order to help hold the Athenians in check. Their return was blocked, and they resolved to march on Athens, where the Long Walls were not yet completed, winning a victory at the Battle of Tanagra. All this accomplished, however, was to allow them to return home via the Megarid. Two months later, the Athenians under Myronides invaded Boeotia, and winning the Battle of Oenophyta gained control of the whole country except Thebes.\nReverses followed peace with Persia in 449 BC. The Battle of Coronea, in 447 BC, led to the abandonment of Boeotia. Euboea and Megara revolted, and while the former was restored to its status as a tributary ally, the latter was a permanent loss. The Delian and Peloponnesian Leagues signed a peace treaty, which was set to endure for thirty years. It only lasted until 431 BC, when the Peloponnesian War broke out.\nThose who revolted unsuccessfully during the war saw the example made of the Mytilenians, the principal people on Lesbos. After an unsuccessful revolt, the Athenians ordered the death of the entire male population. After some thought, they rescinded this order, and only put to death the leading 1000 ringleaders of the revolt, and redistributed the land of the entire island to Athenian shareholders, who were sent out to reside on Lesbos.\nThis type of treatment was not reserved solely for those who revolted. Thucydides documents the example of Melos, a small island, neutral in the war, though founded by Spartans. The Melians were offered a choice to join the Athenians, or be conquered. Choosing to resist, their town was besieged and conquered; the males were put to death and the women sold into slavery (see Melian dialogue).\nAthenian Empire (454\u2013404 BC).\nBy 454 BC, the Delian League could be fairly characterised as an Athenian Empire; a key event of 454 BC was the moving of the treasury of the Delian League from Delos to Athens. This is often seen as a key marker of the transition from alliance to empire, but while it is significant, it is important to view the period as a whole when considering the development of Athenian imperialism, and not to focus on a single event as being the main contributor to it. At the start of the Peloponnesian War, only Chios and Lesbos were left to contribute ships, and these states were by now far too weak to secede without support. Lesbos tried to revolt first, and failed completely. Chios, the most powerful of the original members of the Delian League save Athens, was the last to revolt, and in the aftermath of the Syracusan Expedition enjoyed success for several years, inspiring all of Ionia to revolt. Athens was nonetheless eventually able to suppress these revolts.\nTo further strengthen Athens's grip on its empire, Pericles in 450 BC began a policy of establishing \"kleruchiai\"\u2014quasi-colonies that remained tied to Athens and which served as garrisons to maintain control of the League's vast territory. Furthermore, Pericles employed a number of offices to maintain Athens' empire: \"proxenoi\", who fostered good relations between Athens and League members; \"episkopoi\" and \"archontes\", who oversaw the collection of tribute; and \"hellenotamiai\", who received the tribute on Athens' behalf.\nAthens's empire was not very stable and after 27 years of war, the Spartans, aided by the Persians and Athenian internal strife, were able to defeat it. However, it did not remain defeated for long. The Second Athenian League, a maritime self-defense league, was founded in 377 BC and was led by Athens. The Athenians would never recover the full extent of their power, and their enemies were now far stronger and more varied."}
{"id": "2038", "revid": "39934507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2038", "title": "August Horch", "text": "August Horch (12 October 1868 \u2013 3 February 1951) was a German engineer and automobile pioneer, the founder of the manufacturing giant that eventually became Audi.\nBeginnings.\nHorch was born in Winningen, Rhenish Prussia. His initial trade was as a blacksmith, and then was educated at (Mittweida Technical College). After receiving a degree in engineering, he worked in shipbuilding. Horch worked for Karl Benz from 1896, before founding \"A. Horch &amp; Co.\" in November 1899, in Ehrenfeld, Cologne, Germany.\nManufacturing.\nThe first Horch automobile was built in 1901. The company moved to Reichenbach in 1902 and Zwickau in 1904. Horch left the company in 1909 after a dispute, and set up in competition in Zwickau. His new firm was initially called \"Horch Automobil-Werke GmbH\", but following a legal dispute over the \"Horch\" name, he decided to make another automobile company. (The court decided that \"Horch\" was a registered trademark on behalf of August's former partners and August was not entitled to use it any more). Consequently, Horch named his new company \"Audi Automobilwerke GmbH\" in 1910, \"Audi\" being the Latinization of Horch.\nPost Audi.\nHorch left Audi in 1920 and went to Berlin and took various jobs. He published his autobiography, \"I Built Cars ()\" in 1937. He also served on the board of Auto Union, the successor to Audi Automobilwerke GmbH he had founded. Horch remained an honorary executive at Auto Union during and after its reincorporation in Ingolstadt, Bavaria in the late 1940s until his death in 1951, ultimately not living to see the later resurrection of his Audi brand a decade later under the ownership of Volkswagen.\nHe was an honorary citizen of Zwickau and had a street named for his Audi cars in both Zwickau and his birthplace Winningen. He was made an honorary professor at Braunschweig University of Technology. There is an \"August Horchstrasse\" (August Horch Street) at Audi's main manufacturing plant in Ingolstadt."}
{"id": "2039", "revid": "10962546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2039", "title": "Avionics", "text": "Avionics (a portmanteau of \"aviation\" and \"electronics\") are the electronic systems used on aircraft. Avionic systems include communications, navigation, the display and management of multiple systems, and the hundreds of systems that are fitted to aircraft to perform individual functions. These can be as simple as a searchlight for a police helicopter or as complicated as the tactical system for an airborne early warning platform.\nHistory.\nThe term \"avionics\" was coined in 1949 by Philip J. Klass, senior editor at \"Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology\" magazine as a portmanteau of \"aviation electronics\".\nRadio communication was first used in aircraft just prior to World War I. The first airborne radios were in zeppelins, but the military sparked development of light radio sets that could be carried by heavier-than-air craft, so that aerial reconnaissance biplanes could report their observations immediately in case they were shot down. The first experimental radio transmission from an airplane was conducted by the U.S. Navy in August 1910. The first aircraft radios transmitted by radiotelegraphy. They required a two-seat aircraft with a second crewman who operated a telegraph key to spell out messages in Morse code. During World War I, AM voice two way radio sets were made possible in 1917 (see TM (triode)) by the development of the triode vacuum tube, which were simple enough that the pilot in a single seat aircraft could use it while flying.\nRadar, the central technology used today in aircraft navigation and air traffic control, was developed by several nations, mainly in secret, as an air defense system in the 1930s during the runup to World War\u00a0II. Many modern avionics have their origins in World War\u00a0II wartime developments. For example, autopilot systems that are commonplace today began as specialized systems to help bomber planes fly steadily enough to hit precision targets from high altitudes. Britain's 1940 decision to share its radar technology with its U.S. ally, particularly the magnetron vacuum tube, in the famous Tizard Mission, significantly shortened the war. Modern avionics is a substantial portion of military aircraft spending. Aircraft like the F-15E and the now retired F-14 have roughly 20 percent of their budget spent on avionics. Most modern helicopters now have budget splits of 60/40 in favour of avionics.\nThe civilian market has also seen a growth in cost of avionics. Flight control systems (fly-by-wire) and new navigation needs brought on by tighter airspaces, have pushed up development costs. The major change has been the recent boom in consumer flying. As more people begin to use planes as their primary method of transportation, more elaborate methods of controlling aircraft safely in these high restrictive airspaces have been invented.\nModern avionics.\nAvionics plays a heavy role in modernization initiatives like the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Next Generation Air Transportation System project in the United States and the Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) initiative in Europe. The Joint Planning and Development Office put forth a roadmap for avionics in six areas:\nMarket.\nThe Aircraft Electronics Association reports $1.73 billion avionics sales for the first three quarters of 2017 in business and general aviation, a 4.1% yearly improvement: 73.5% came from North America, forward-fit represented 42.3% while 57.7% were retrofits as the U.S. deadline of January 1, 2020 for mandatory ADS-B out approach.\nAircraft avionics.\nThe cockpit or, in larger aircraft, under the cockpit of an aircraft or in a movable nosecone, is a typical location for avionic bay equipment, including control, monitoring, communication, navigation, weather, and anti-collision systems. The majority of aircraft power their avionics using 14- or 28\u2011volt DC electrical systems; however, larger, more sophisticated aircraft (such as airliners or military combat aircraft) have AC systems operating at 115 volts 400\u00a0Hz, AC. There are several major vendors of flight avionics, including The Boeing Company, Panasonic Avionics Corporation, Honeywell (which now owns Bendix/King), Universal Avionics Systems Corporation, Rockwell Collins (now Collins Aerospace), Thales Group, GE Aviation Systems, Garmin, Raytheon, Parker Hannifin, UTC Aerospace Systems (now Collins Aerospace), Selex ES (now Leonardo), Shadin Avionics, and Avidyne Corporation.\nInternational standards for avionics equipment are prepared by the Airlines Electronic Engineering Committee (AEEC) and published by ARINC.\nAvionics Installation.\nAvionics installation is a critical aspect of modern aviation, ensuring that aircraft are equipped with the necessary electronic systems for safe and efficient operation. These systems encompass a wide range of functions, including communication, navigation, monitoring, flight control, and weather detection. Avionics installations are performed on all types of aircraft, from small general aviation planes to large commercial jets and military aircraft.\nInstallation Process.\nThe installation of avionics requires a combination of technical expertise, precision, and adherence to stringent regulatory standards. The process typically involves:\nRegulatory Standards.\nAvionics installation is governed by strict regulatory frameworks to ensure the safety and reliability of aircraft systems. In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) sets the standards for avionics installations. These include guidelines for:\nAdvancements in Avionics Technology.\nThe field of avionics has seen rapid technological advancements in recent years, leading to more integrated and automated systems. Key trends include:\nCommunications.\nCommunications connect the flight deck to the ground and the flight deck to the passengers. On\u2011board communications are provided by public-address systems and aircraft intercoms.\nThe VHF aviation communication system works on the airband of 118.000\u00a0MHz to 136.975\u00a0MHz. Each channel is spaced from the adjacent ones by 8.33\u00a0kHz in Europe, 25\u00a0kHz elsewhere. VHF is also used for line of sight communication such as aircraft-to-aircraft and aircraft-to-ATC. Amplitude modulation (AM) is used, and the conversation is performed in simplex mode. Aircraft communication can also take place using HF (especially for trans-oceanic flights) or satellite communication.\nNavigation.\nAir navigation is the determination of position and direction on or above the surface of the Earth. Avionics can use satellite navigation systems (such as GPS and WAAS), inertial navigation system (INS), ground-based radio navigation systems (such as VOR or LORAN), or any combination thereof. Some navigation systems such as GPS calculate the position automatically and display it to the flight crew on moving map displays. Older ground-based Navigation systems such as VOR or LORAN requires a pilot or navigator to plot the intersection of signals on a paper map to determine an aircraft's location; modern systems calculate the position automatically and display it to the flight crew on moving map displays.\nMonitoring.\nThe first hints of glass cockpits emerged in the 1970s when flight-worthy cathode-ray tube (CRT) screens began to replace electromechanical displays, gauges and instruments. A \"glass\" cockpit refers to the use of computer monitors instead of gauges and other analog displays. Aircraft were getting progressively more displays, dials and information dashboards that eventually competed for space and pilot attention. In the 1970s, the average aircraft had more than 100 cockpit instruments and controls.\nGlass cockpits started to come into being with the Gulfstream G\u2011IV private jet in 1985. One of the key challenges in glass cockpits is to balance how much control is automated and how much the pilot should do manually. Generally they try to automate flight operations while keeping the pilot constantly informed.\nAircraft flight-control system.\nAircraft have means of automatically controlling flight. Autopilot was first invented by Lawrence Sperry during World War\u00a0I to fly bomber planes steady enough to hit accurate targets from 25,000 feet. When it was first adopted by the U.S.\u00a0military, a Honeywell engineer sat in the back seat with bolt cutters to disconnect the autopilot in case of emergency. Nowadays most commercial planes are equipped with aircraft flight control systems in order to reduce pilot error and workload at landing or takeoff.\nThe first simple commercial auto-pilots were used to control heading and altitude and had limited authority on things like thrust and flight control surfaces. In helicopters, auto-stabilization was used in a similar way. The first systems were electromechanical. The advent of fly-by-wire and electro-actuated flight surfaces (rather than the traditional hydraulic) has increased safety. As with displays and instruments, critical devices that were electro-mechanical had a finite life. With safety critical systems, the software is very strictly tested.\nFuel Systems.\nFuel Quantity Indication System (FQIS) monitors the amount of fuel aboard. Using various sensors, such as capacitance tubes, temperature sensors, densitometers &amp; level sensors, the FQIS computer calculates the mass of fuel remaining on board.\nFuel Control and Monitoring System (FCMS) reports fuel remaining on board in a similar manner, but, by controlling pumps &amp; valves, also manages fuel transfers around various tanks.\nCollision-avoidance systems.\nTo supplement air traffic control, most large transport aircraft and many smaller ones use a traffic alert and collision avoidance system (TCAS), which can detect the location of nearby aircraft, and provide instructions for avoiding a midair collision. Smaller aircraft may use simpler traffic alerting systems such as TPAS, which are passive (they do not actively interrogate the transponders of other aircraft) and do not provide advisories for conflict resolution.\nTo help avoid controlled flight into terrain (CFIT), aircraft use systems such as ground-proximity warning systems (GPWS), which use radar altimeters as a key element. One of the major weaknesses of GPWS is the lack of \"look-ahead\" information, because it only provides altitude above terrain \"look-down\". In order to overcome this weakness, modern aircraft use a terrain awareness warning system (TAWS).\nFlight recorders.\nCommercial aircraft cockpit data recorders, commonly known as \"black boxes\", store flight information and audio from the cockpit. They are often recovered from an aircraft after a crash to determine control settings and other parameters during the incident.\nWeather systems.\nWeather systems such as weather radar (typically Arinc\u00a0708 on commercial aircraft) and lightning detectors are important for aircraft flying at night or in instrument meteorological conditions, where it is not possible for pilots to see the weather ahead. Heavy precipitation (as sensed by radar) or severe turbulence (as sensed by lightning activity) are both indications of strong convective activity and severe turbulence, and weather systems allow pilots to deviate around these areas.\nLightning detectors like the Stormscope or Strikefinder have become inexpensive enough that they are practical for light aircraft. In addition to radar and lightning detection, observations and extended radar pictures (such as NEXRAD) are now available through satellite data connections, allowing pilots to see weather conditions far beyond the range of their own in-flight systems. Modern displays allow weather information to be integrated with moving maps, terrain, and traffic onto a single screen, greatly simplifying navigation.\nModern weather systems also include wind shear and turbulence detection and terrain and traffic warning systems. In\u2011plane weather avionics are especially popular in Africa, India, and other countries where air-travel is a growing market, but ground support is not as well developed.\nAircraft management systems.\nThere has been a progression towards centralized control of the multiple complex systems fitted to aircraft, including engine monitoring and management. Health and usage monitoring systems (HUMS) are integrated with aircraft management computers to give maintainers early warnings of parts that will need replacement.\nThe integrated modular avionics concept proposes an integrated architecture with application software portable across an assembly of common hardware modules. It has been used in fourth generation jet fighters and the latest generation of airliners.\nMission or tactical avionics.\nMilitary aircraft have been designed either to deliver a weapon or to be the eyes and ears of other weapon systems. The vast array of sensors available to the military is used for whatever tactical means required. As with aircraft management, the bigger sensor platforms (like the E\u20113D, JSTARS, ASTOR, Nimrod MRA4, Merlin HM Mk 1) have mission-management computers.\nPolice and EMS aircraft also carry sophisticated tactical sensors.\nMilitary communications.\nWhile aircraft communications provide the backbone for safe flight, the tactical systems are designed to withstand the rigors of the battle field. UHF, VHF Tactical (30\u201388\u00a0MHz) and SatCom systems combined with ECCM methods, and cryptography secure the communications. Data links such as Link 11, 16, 22 and BOWMAN, JTRS and even TETRA provide the means of transmitting data (such as images, targeting information etc.).\nRadar.\nAirborne radar was one of the first tactical sensors. The benefit of altitude providing range has meant a significant focus on airborne radar technologies. Radars include airborne early warning (AEW), anti-submarine warfare (ASW), and even weather radar (Arinc 708) and ground tracking/proximity radar.\nThe military uses radar in fast jets to help pilots fly at low levels. While the civil market has had weather radar for a while, there are strict rules about using it to navigate the aircraft.\nSonar.\nDipping sonar fitted to a range of military helicopters allows the helicopter to protect shipping assets from submarines or surface threats. Maritime support aircraft can drop active and passive sonar devices (sonobuoys) and these are also used to determine the location of enemy submarines.\nElectro-optics.\nElectro-optic systems include devices such as the head-up display (HUD), forward looking infrared (FLIR), infrared search and track and other passive infrared devices (Passive infrared sensor). These are all used to provide imagery and information to the flight crew. This imagery is used for everything from search and rescue to navigational aids and target acquisition.\nESM/DAS.\nElectronic support measures and defensive aids systems are used extensively to gather information about threats or possible threats. They can be used to launch devices (in some cases automatically) to counter direct threats against the aircraft. They are also used to determine the state of a threat and identify it.\nAircraft networks.\nThe avionics systems in military, commercial and advanced models of civilian aircraft are interconnected using an avionics databus. Common avionics databus protocols, with their primary application, include:"}
{"id": "2041", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2041", "title": "Ares", "text": "Ares (; , \"\u00c1r\u0113s\" ) is the Greek god of war and courage. He is one of the Twelve Olympians, and the son of Zeus and Hera. The Greeks were ambivalent towards him. He embodies the physical valor necessary for success in war but can also personify sheer brutality and bloodlust, in contrast to his sister Athena, whose martial functions include military strategy and generalship. An association with Ares endows places, objects, and other deities with a savage, dangerous, or militarized quality.\nAlthough Ares' name shows his origins as Mycenaean, his reputation for savagery was thought by some to reflect his likely origins as a Thracian deity. Some cities in Greece and several in Asia Minor held annual festivals to bind and detain him as their protector. In parts of Asia Minor, he was an oracular deity. Still further away from Greece, the Scythians were said to ritually kill one in a hundred prisoners of war as an offering to their equivalent of Ares. The later belief that ancient Spartans had offered human sacrifice to Ares may owe more to mythical prehistory, misunderstandings, and reputation than to reality.\nThough there are many literary allusions to Ares' love affairs and children, he has a limited role in Greek mythology. When he does appear, he is often humiliated. In the Trojan War, Aphrodite, protector of Troy, persuades Ares to take the Trojans' side. The Trojans lose, while Ares' sister Athena helps the Greeks to victory. Most famously, when the craftsman-god Hephaestus discovers his wife Aphrodite is having an affair with Ares, he traps the lovers in a net and exposes them to the ridicule of the other gods.\nAres' nearest counterpart in Roman religion is Mars, who was given a more important and dignified place in ancient Roman religion as ancestral protector of the Roman people and state. During the Hellenization of Latin literature, the myths of Ares were reinterpreted by Roman writers under the name of Mars, and in later Western art and literature, the mythology of the two figures became virtually indistinguishable.\nNames.\nThe etymology of the name \"Ares\" is traditionally connected with the Greek word (\"ar\u0113\"), the Ionic form of the Doric (\"ara\"), \"bane, ruin, curse, imprecation\". Walter Burkert notes that \"Ares is apparently an ancient abstract noun meaning throng of battle, war.\" R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a Pre-Greek origin of the name. The earliest attested form of the name is the Mycenaean Greek , \"a-re\", written in the Linear B syllabic script.\nThe adjectival epithet, \"Areios\" (\"warlike\") was frequently appended to the names of other gods when they took on a warrior aspect or became involved in warfare: \"Zeus Areios\", \"Athena Areia\", even Aphrodite Areia (\"Aphrodite within Ares\" or \"feminine Ares\"), who was warlike, fully armoured and armed, partnered with Athena in Sparta, and represented at Kythira's temple to Aphrodite Urania.\nIn the \"Iliad\", the word \"ares\" is used as a common noun synonymous with \"battle.\"\nIn the Classical period, Ares is given the epithet Enyalios, which seems to appear on the Mycenaean KN V 52 tablet as , \"e-nu-wa-ri-jo\". Enyalios was sometimes identified with Ares and sometimes differentiated from him as another war god with separate cult, even in the same town; Burkert describes them as \"doubles almost\".\nCult.\nIn mainland Greece and the Peloponnese, only a few places are known to have had a formal temple and cult of Ares. Pausanias (2nd century AD) notes an altar to Ares at Olympia, and the moving of a Temple of Ares to the Athenian agora during the reign of Augustus, essentially rededicating it (2 AD) as a Roman temple to the Augustan Mars Ultor. The Areopagus (\"mount of Ares\"), a natural rock outcrop in Athens, some distance from the Acropolis, was supposedly where Ares was tried and acquitted by the gods for his revenge-killing of Poseidon's son, Halirrhothius, who had raped Ares' daughter Alcippe. Its name was used for the court that met there, mostly to investigate and try potential cases of treason.\nNumismatist M. Jessop Price states that Ares \"typified the traditional Spartan character\", but had no important cult in Sparta; and he never occurs on Spartan coins. Pausanias gives two examples of his cult, both of them conjointly with or \"within\" a warlike Aphrodite, on the Spartan acropolis. Gonzalez observes, in his 2005 survey of Ares' cults in Asia Minor, that cults to Ares on the Greek mainland may have been more common than some sources assert. Wars between Greek states were endemic; war and warriors provided Ares's tribute, and fed his insatiable appetite for battle.\nAres' attributes are instruments of war: a helmet, shield, and sword or spear. Libanius \"makes the apple sacred to Ares\", but \"offers no further comment\", nor connections to any aetiological myth. Apples are one of Aphrodites' sacred or symbolic fruits. Littlewood follows Artemidorus claim that to dream of sour apples presages conflict, and lists Ares alongside Eris and the mythological \"Apples of Discord\".\nChained statues.\nGods were immortal but could be bound and restrained, both in mythic narrative and in cult practice. There was an archaic Spartan statue of Ares in chains in the temple of Enyalios (sometimes regarded as the son of Ares, sometimes as Ares himself), which Pausanias claimed meant that the spirit of war and victory was to be kept in the city. The Spartans are known to have ritually bound the images of other deities, including Aphrodite and Artemis (cf Ares and Aphrodite bound by Hephaestus), and in other places there were chained statues of Artemis and Dionysos.\nStatues of Ares in chains are described in the instructions given by an oracle of the late Hellenistic era to various cities of Pamphylia (in Anatolia) including Syedra, Lycia and Cilicia, places almost perpetually under threat from pirates. Each was told to set up a statue of \"bloody, man-slaying Ares\" and provide it with an annual festival in which it was ritually bound with iron fetters (\"by Dike and Hermes\") as if a supplicant for justice, put on trial and offered sacrifice. The oracle promises that \"thus will he become a peaceful deity for you, once he has driven the enemy horde far from your country, and he will give rise to prosperity much prayed for.\" This Ares \"karpodotes\" (\"giver of Fruits\") is well attested in Lycia and Pisidia.\nSacrifices.\nLike most Greek deities, Ares was given animal sacrifice; in Sparta, after battle, he was given an ox for a victory by stratagem, or a rooster for victory through onslaught. The usual recipient of sacrifice before battle was Athena. Reports of historic human sacrifice to Ares in an obscure rite known as the \"Hekatomphonia\" represent a very long-standing error, repeated through several centuries and well into the modern era. The \"hekatomphonia\" was an animal sacrifice to Zeus; it could be offered by any warrior who had personally slain one hundred of the enemy. Pausanias reports that in Sparta, each company of youths sacrificed a puppy to Enyalios before engaging in a hand-to-hand \"fight without rules\" at the Phoebaeum. The chthonic night-time sacrifice of a dog to Enyalios became assimilated to the cult of Ares. Porphyry claims, without detail, that Apollodorus of Athens (circa second century BC) says the Spartans made human sacrifices to Ares, but this may be a reference to mythic pre-history.\nThrace and Scythia.\nA Thracian god identified by Herodotus ( \u2013 ) as Ares, through \"interpretatio Graeca\", was one of three otherwise unnamed deities that Thracian commoners were said to worship. Herodotus recognises and names the other two as \"Dionysus\" and \"Artemis\", and claims that the Thracian aristocracy exclusively worshiped \"Hermes\". In Herodotus' \"Histories\", the Scythians worship an indigenous form of Greek Ares, who is otherwise unnamed, but ranked beneath Tabiti (whom Herodotus claims as a form of Hestia), Api and Papaios in Scythia's divine hierarchy. His cult object was an iron sword. The \"Scythian Ares\" was offered blood-sacrifices (or ritual killings) of cattle, horses and \"one in every hundred human war-captives\", whose blood was used to douse the sword. Statues, and complex platform-altars made of heaped brushwood were devoted to him. This sword-cult, or one very similar, is said to have persisted among the Alans. Some have posited that the \"Sword of Mars\" in later European history alludes to the Huns having adopted Ares.\nAsia Minor.\nIn some parts of Asia Minor, Ares was a prominent oracular deity, something not found in any Hellennic cult to Ares or Roman cult to Mars. Ares was linked in some regions or polities with a local god or cultic hero, and recognised as a higher, more prestigious deity than in mainland Greece. His cults in southern Asia Minor are attested from the 5th century BC and well into the later Roman Imperial era, at 29 different sites, and on over 70 local coin issues. He is sometimes represented on coinage of the region by the \"Helmet of Ares\" or carrying a spear and a shield, or as a fully armed warrior, sometimes accompanied by a female deity. In what is now western Turkey, the Hellenistic city of Metropolis built a monumental temple to Ares as the city's protector, not before the 3rd century BC. It is now lost, but the names of some of its priests and priestesses survive, along with the temple's likely depictions on coins of the province.\nCrete.\nA sanctuary of Aphrodite was established at Sta Lenika, on Crete, between the cities of Lato and Olus, possibly during the Geometric period. It was rebuilt in the late 2nd century BC as a double-sanctuary to Ares and Aphrodite. Inscriptions record disputes over the ownership of the sanctuary. The names of Ares and Aphrodite appear as witness to sworn oaths, and there is a Victory thanks-offering to Aphrodite, whom Millington believes had capacity as a \"warrior-protector acting in the realm of Ares\". There were cultic links between the Sta Lenika sanctuary, Knossos and other Cretan states, and perhaps with Argos on the mainland. While the Greek literary and artistic record from both the Archaic and Classical eras connects Ares and Aphrodite as complementary companions and ideal though adulterous lovers, their cult pairing and Aphrodite as warrior-protector is localised to Crete.\nAksum.\nIn Africa, Ma\u1e25rem, the principal god of the kings of Aksum prior to the 4th century AD, was invoked as Ares in Greek inscriptions. The anonymous king who commissioned the Monumentum Adulitanum in the late 2nd or early 3rd century refers to \"my greatest god, Ares, who also begat me, through whom I brought under my sway [various peoples]\". The monumental throne celebrating the king's conquests was itself dedicated to Ares. In the early 4th century, the last pagan king of Aksum, Ezana, referred to \"the one who brought me forth, the invincible Ares\".\nCharacterisation.\nAres was one of the Twelve Olympians in the archaic tradition represented by the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey.\" In Greek literature, Ares often represents the physical or violent and untamed aspect of war and is the personification of sheer brutality and bloodlust (\"overwhelming, insatiable in battle, destructive, and man-slaughtering\", as Burkert puts it), in contrast to his sister, the armored Athena, whose functions as a goddess of intelligence include military strategy and generalship. An association with Ares endows places and objects with a savage, dangerous, or militarized quality; but when Ares does appear in myths, he typically faces humiliation.\nIn the Iliad, Zeus expresses a recurring Greek revulsion toward the god when Ares returns wounded and complaining from the battlefield at Troy:\nThis ambivalence is expressed also in the Greeks' association of Ares with the Thracians, whom they regarded as a barbarous and warlike people. Thrace was considered to be Ares's birthplace and his refuge after the affair with Aphrodite was exposed to the general mockery of the other gods.\nA late-6th-century BC funerary inscription from Attica emphasizes the consequences of coming under Ares's sway:\nMythology.\nBirth.\nHe is one of the Twelve Olympians, and the son of Zeus and Hera.\nArgonautica.\nIn the \"Argonautica\", the \"Golden Fleece\" hangs in a grove sacred to Ares, until its theft by Jason. The Birds of Ares (\"Ornithes Areioi\") drop feather darts in defense of the Amazons' shrine to Ares, as father of their queen, on a coastal island in the Black Sea.\nFounding of Thebes.\nAres plays a central role in the founding myth of Thebes, as the progenitor of the water-dragon slain by Cadmus. The dragon's teeth were sown into the ground as if a crop and sprang up as the fully armored autochthonic Spartoi. Cadmus placed himself in the god's service for eight years to atone for killing the dragon. To further propitiate Ares, Cadmus married Harmonia, a daughter of Ares's union with Aphrodite. In this way, Cadmus harmonized all strife and founded the city of Thebes. In reality, Thebes came to dominate Boeotia's great and fertile plain, which in both history and myth was a battleground for competing polities. According to Plutarch, the plain was anciently described as \"The dancing-floor of Ares\".\nAphrodite.\nIn Homer's \"Odyssey\", in the tale sung by the bard in the hall of Alcinous, the Sun-god Helios once spied Ares and Aphrodite having sex secretly in the hall of Hephaestus, her husband. Helios reported the incident to Hephaestus. Contriving to catch the illicit couple in the act, Hephaestus fashioned a finely-knitted and nearly invisible net with which to snare them. At the appropriate time, this net was sprung, and trapped Ares and Aphrodite locked in very private embrace.\nBut Hephaestus was not satisfied with his revenge, so he invited the Olympian gods and goddesses to view the unfortunate pair. For the sake of modesty, the goddesses demurred, but the male gods went to witness the sight. Some commented on the beauty of Aphrodite, others remarked that they would eagerly trade places with Ares, but all who were present mocked the two. Once the couple was released, the embarrassed Ares returned to his homeland, Thrace, and Aphrodite went to Paphos.\nIn a much later interpolated detail, Ares put the young soldier Alectryon, who was Ares companion in drinking and even love-making, by his door to warn them of Helios's arrival as Helios would tell Hephaestus of Aphrodite's infidelity if the two were discovered, but Alectryon fell asleep on guard duty. Helios discovered the two and alerted Hephaestus. The furious Ares turned the sleepy Alectryon into a rooster which now always announces the arrival of the sun in the morning, as a way of apologizing to Ares.\nThe Chorus of Aeschylus' \"Suppliants\" (written 463 BC) refers to Ares as Aphrodite's \"mortal-destroying bedfellow\". In the \"Illiad\", Ares helps the Trojans because of his affection for their divine protector, Aphrodite; she thus redirects his innate destructive savagery to her own purposes.\nGiants.\nIn one archaic myth, related only in the \"Iliad\" by the goddess Dione to her daughter Aphrodite, two chthonic giants, the Aloadae, named Otus and Ephialtes, bound Ares in chains and imprisoned him in a bronze urn, where he remained for thirteen months, a lunar year. \"And that would have been the end of Ares and his appetite for war, if the beautiful Eriboea, the young giants' stepmother, had not told Hermes what they had done,\" she related. In this, [Burkert] suspects \"a festival of licence which is unleashed in the thirteenth month.\" Ares was held screaming and howling in the urn until Hermes rescued him, and Artemis tricked the Aloadae into slaying each other. In Nonnus's \"Dionysiaca\", in the war between Cronus and Zeus, Ares killed an unnamed giant son of Echidna who was allied with Cronus, and described as spitting \"horrible poison\" and having \"snaky\" feet. \nIn the 2nd century AD \"Metamorphoses\" of Antoninus Liberalis, when the monstrous Typhon attacked Olympus the gods transformed into animals and fled to Egypt; Ares changed into a fish, the Lepidotus (sacred to the Egyptian war-god Anhur). Liberalis's koine Greek text is a \"completely inartistic\" epitome of Nicander's now lost \"Heteroeumena\" (2nd century BC).\n\"Iliad\".\nIn Homer's \"Iliad\", Ares has no fixed allegiance. He promises Athena and Hera that he will fight for the Achaeans but Aphrodite persuades him to side with the Trojans. During the war, Diomedes fights Hector and sees Ares fighting on the Trojans' side. Diomedes calls for his soldiers to withdraw. Zeus grants Athena permission to drive Ares from the battlefield. Encouraged by Hera and Athena, Diomedes thrusts with his spear at Ares. Athena drives the spear home, and all sides tremble at Ares's cries. Ares flees to Mount Olympus, forcing the Trojans to fall back. Ares overhears that his son Ascalaphus has been killed and wants to change sides again, rejoining the Achaeans for vengeance, disregarding Zeus's order that no Olympian should join the battle. Athena stops him. Later, when Zeus allows the gods to fight in the war again, Ares attacks Athena to avenge his previous injury. Athena overpowers him by striking him with a boulder.\nAttendants.\nDeimos (\"Terror\" or \"Dread\") and Phobos (\"Fear\") are Ares' companions in war, and according to Hesiod, are also his children by Aphrodite. Eris, the goddess of discord, or Enyo, the goddess of war, bloodshed, and violence, was considered the sister and companion of the violent Ares. In at least one tradition, Enyalius, rather than another name for Ares, was his son by Enyo.\nAres may also be accompanied by Kydoimos, the daemon of the din of battle; the Makhai (\"Battles\"); the \"Hysminai\" (\"Acts of manslaughter\"); Polemos, a minor spirit of war, or only an epithet of Ares, since it has no specific dominion; and Polemos's daughter, Alala, the goddess or personification of the Greek war-cry, whose name Ares uses as his own war-cry. Ares's sister Hebe (\"Youth\") also draws baths for him.\nAccording to Pausanias, local inhabitants of Therapne, Sparta, recognized Thero, \"feral, savage,\" as a nurse of Ares.\nOffspring and affairs.\nThough Ares plays a relatively limited role in Greek mythology as represented in literary narratives, his numerous love affairs and abundant offspring are often alluded to.\nThe union of Ares and Aphrodite created the gods Eros, Anteros, Phobos, Deimos, and Harmonia. Other versions include Alcippe as one of his daughters.\nCycnus (\u039a\u03cd\u03ba\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) of Macedonia was a son of Ares who tried to build a temple to his father with the skulls and bones of guests and travellers. Heracles fought him and, in one account, killed him. In another account, Ares fought his son's killer but Zeus parted the combatants with a thunderbolt.\nAres had a romantic liaison with Eos, the goddess of the dawn. Aphrodite discovered them, and in anger she cursed Eos with insatiable lust for men.\nBy a woman named Teirene he had a daughter named Thrassa, who in turn had a daughter named Polyphonte. Polyphonte was cursed by Aphrodite to love and mate with a bear, producing two sons, Agrius and Oreius, who were hubristic toward the gods and had a habit of eating their guests. Zeus sent Hermes to punish them, and he chose to chop off their hands and feet. Since Polyphonte was descended from him, Ares stopped Hermes, and the two brothers came into an agreement to turn Polyphonte's family into birds instead. Oreius became an eagle owl, Agrius a vulture, and Polyphonte a strix, possibly a small owl, certainly a portent of war; Polyphonte's servant prayed not to become a bird of evil omen and Ares and Hermes fulfilled her wish by choosing the woodpecker for her, a good omen for hunters.\nList of offspring and their mothers.\nSometimes poets and dramatists recounted ancient traditions, which varied, and sometimes they invented new details; later scholiasts might draw on either or simply guess. Thus while Phobos and Deimos were regularly described as offspring of Ares, others listed here such as Meleager, Sinope and Solymus were sometimes said to be children of Ares and sometimes given other fathers.\nThe following is a list of Ares' offspring, by various mothers. Beside each offspring, the earliest source to record the parentage is given, along with the century to which the source dates.\nMars.\nThe nearest counterpart of Ares among the Roman gods is Mars, a son of Jupiter and Juno, pre-eminent among the Roman army's military gods but originally an agricultural deity. As a father of Romulus, Rome's legendary founder, Mars was given an important and dignified place in ancient Roman religion, as a guardian deity of the entire Roman state and its people. Under the influence of Greek culture, Mars was identified with Ares, but the character and dignity of the two deities differed fundamentally. Mars was represented as a means to secure peace, and he was a father \"(pater)\" of the Roman people. In one tradition, he fathered Romulus and Remus through his rape of Rhea Silvia. In another, his lover, the goddess Venus, gave birth to Aeneas, the Trojan prince and refugee who \"founded\" Rome several generations before Romulus.\nIn the Hellenization of Latin literature, the myths of Ares were reinterpreted by Roman writers under the name of Mars. Greek writers under Roman rule also recorded cult practices and beliefs pertaining to Mars under the name of Ares. Thus in the classical tradition of later Western art and literature, the mythology of the two figures later became virtually indistinguishable.\nRenaissance and later depictions.\nIn Renaissance and Neoclassical works of art, Ares's symbols are a spear and helmet, his animal is a dog, and his bird is the vulture. In literary works of these eras, Ares is replaced by the Roman Mars, a romantic emblem of manly valor rather than the cruel and blood-thirsty god of Greek mythology."}
{"id": "2042", "revid": "41509783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2042", "title": "Alexander Grothendieck", "text": "Alexander Grothendieck, later Alexandre Grothendieck in French (; ; ; 28 March 1928\u00a0\u2013 13 November 2014), was a German-born French mathematician who became the leading figure in the creation of modern algebraic geometry. His research extended the scope of the field and added elements of commutative algebra, homological algebra, sheaf theory, and category theory to its foundations, while his so-called \"relative\" perspective led to revolutionary advances in many areas of pure mathematics. He is considered by many to be the greatest mathematician of the twentieth century.\nGrothendieck began his productive and public career as a mathematician in 1949. In 1958, he was appointed a research professor at the Institut des hautes \u00e9tudes scientifiques (IH\u00c9S) and remained there until 1970, when, driven by personal and political convictions, he left following a dispute over military funding. He received the Fields Medal in 1966 for advances in algebraic geometry, homological algebra, and K-theory. He later became professor at the University of Montpellier and, while still producing relevant mathematical work, he withdrew from the mathematical community and devoted himself to political and religious pursuits (first Buddhism and later, a more Catholic Christian vision). In 1991, he moved to the French village of Lasserre in the Pyrenees, where he lived in seclusion, still working on mathematics and his philosophical and religious thoughts until his death in 2014.\nLife.\nFamily and childhood.\nGrothendieck was born in Berlin to anarchist parents. His father, Alexander \"Sascha\" Schapiro (also known as Alexander Tanaroff), had Hasidic Jewish roots and had been imprisoned in Russia before moving to Germany in 1922, while his mother, Johanna \"Hanka\" Grothendieck, came from a Protestant German family in Hamburg and worked as a journalist. As teenagers, both of his parents had broken away from their early backgrounds. At the time of his birth, Grothendieck's mother was married to the journalist Johannes Raddatz and initially, his birth name was recorded as \"Alexander Raddatz.\" That marriage was dissolved in 1929 and Schapiro acknowledged his paternity, but never married Hanka Grothendieck. Grothendieck had a maternal sibling, his half sister Maidi.\nGrothendieck lived with his parents in Berlin until the end of 1933, when his father moved to Paris to evade Nazism. His mother followed soon thereafter. Grothendieck was left in the care of Wilhelm Heydorn, a Lutheran pastor and teacher in Hamburg. According to Winfried Scharlau, during this time, his parents took part in the Spanish Civil War as non-combatant auxiliaries. However, others state that Schapiro fought in the anarchist militia.\nWorld War II.\nIn May 1939, Grothendieck was put on a train in Hamburg for France. Shortly afterward his father was interned in Le Vernet. He and his mother were then interned in various camps from 1940 to 1942 as \"undesirable dangerous foreigners.\" The first camp was the Rieucros Camp, where his mother contracted the tuberculosis that would eventually cause her death in 1957. While there, Grothendieck managed to attend the local school, at Mendel. Once, he managed to escape from the camp, intending to assassinate Hitler. Later, his mother Hanka was transferred to the Gurs internment camp for the remainder of World War II. Grothendieck was permitted to live separated from his mother.\nIn the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, he was sheltered and hidden in local boarding houses or pensions, although he occasionally had to seek refuge in the woods during Nazi raids, surviving at times without food or water for several days.\nHis father was arrested under the Vichy anti-Jewish legislation, and sent to the Drancy internment camp, and then handed over by the French Vichy government to the Germans to be sent to be murdered at the Auschwitz concentration camp in 1942.\nIn Le Chambon, Grothendieck attended the Coll\u00e8ge C\u00e9venol (now known as the Le Coll\u00e8ge-Lyc\u00e9e C\u00e9venol International), a unique secondary school founded in 1938 by local Protestant pacifists and anti-war activists. Many of the refugee children hidden in Le Chambon attended Coll\u00e8ge C\u00e9venol, and it was at this school that Grothendieck apparently first became fascinated with mathematics.\nIn 1990, for risking their lives to rescue Jews, the entire village was recognized as \"Righteous Among the Nations\".\nStudies and contact with research mathematics.\nAfter the war, the young Grothendieck studied mathematics in France, initially at the University of Montpellier where at first he did not perform well, failing such classes as astronomy. Working on his own, he rediscovered the Lebesgue measure. After three years of increasingly independent studies there, he went to continue his studies in Paris in 1948.\nInitially, Grothendieck attended Henri Cartan's Seminar at , but he lacked the necessary background to follow the high-powered seminar. On the advice of Cartan and Andr\u00e9 Weil, he moved to the University of Nancy where two leading experts were working on Grothendieck's area of interest, topological vector spaces: Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Laurent Schwartz. The latter had recently won a Fields Medal. Dieudonn\u00e9 and Schwartz showed the new student their latest paper \"La dualit\u00e9 dans les espaces () et ()\"; it ended with a list of 14 open questions, relevant for locally convex spaces. Grothendieck introduced new mathematical methods that enabled him to solve all of these problems within a few months.\nIn Nancy, he wrote his dissertation under those two professors on functional analysis, from 1950 to 1953. At this time he was a leading expert in the theory of topological vector spaces. In 1953 he moved to the University of S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil, where he immigrated by means of a Nansen passport, given that he had refused to take French nationality (as that would have entailed military service against his convictions). He stayed in S\u00e3o Paulo (apart from a lengthy visit in France from October 1953 to March 1954) until the end of 1954. His published work from the time spent in Brazil is still in the theory of topological vector spaces; it is there that he completed his last major work on that topic (on \"metric\" theory of Banach spaces).\nGrothendieck moved to Lawrence, Kansas at the beginning of 1955, and there he set his old subject aside in order to work in algebraic topology and homological algebra, and increasingly in algebraic geometry. It was in Lawrence that Grothendieck developed his theory of abelian categories and the reformulation of sheaf cohomology based on them, leading to the very influential \"T\u00f4hoku paper\".\nIn 1957 he was invited to visit Harvard University by Oscar Zariski, but the offer fell through when he refused to sign a pledge promising not to work to overthrow the United States government\u2014a refusal which, he was warned, threatened to land him in prison. The prospect of prison did not worry him, so long as he could have access to books.\nComparing Grothendieck during his Nancy years to the -trained students at that time (Pierre Samuel, Roger Godement, Ren\u00e9 Thom, Jacques Dixmier, Jean Cerf, Yvonne Bruhat, Jean-Pierre Serre, and Bernard Malgrange), Leila Schneps said:\n His first works on topological vector spaces in 1953 have been successfully applied to physics and computer science, culminating in a relation between Grothendieck inequality and the Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen paradox in quantum physics.\nIH\u00c9S years.\nIn 1958, Grothendieck was installed at the Institut des hautes \u00e9tudes scientifiques (IH\u00c9S), a new privately funded research institute that, in effect, had been created for Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Grothendieck. Grothendieck attracted attention by an intense and highly productive activity of seminars there (\"de facto\" working groups drafting into foundational work some of the ablest French and other mathematicians of the younger generation). Grothendieck practically ceased publication of papers through the conventional, learned journal route. However, he was able to play a dominant role in mathematics for approximately a decade, gathering a strong school.\nOfficially during this time, he had as students Michel Demazure (who worked on SGA3, on group schemes), (relative schemes and classifying topos), Luc Illusie (cotangent complex), Michel Raynaud, Mich\u00e8le Raynaud, Jean-Louis Verdier (co-founder of the derived category theory), and Pierre Deligne. Collaborators on the SGA projects also included Michael Artin (\u00e9tale cohomology), Nick Katz (monodromy theory, and Lefschetz pencils). Jean Giraud worked out torsor theory extensions of nonabelian cohomology there as well. Many others such as David Mumford, Robin Hartshorne, Barry Mazur and C.P. Ramanujam were also involved.\n\"Golden Age\".\nAlexander Grothendieck's work during what is described as the \"Golden Age\" period at the IH\u00c9S established several unifying themes in algebraic geometry, number theory, topology, category theory, and complex analysis. His first (pre-IH\u00c9S) discovery in algebraic geometry was the Grothendieck\u2013Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, a generalisation of the Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem proved algebraically; in this context he also introduced K-theory. Then, following the programme he outlined in his talk at the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians, he introduced the theory of schemes, developing it in detail in his \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"EGA\") and providing the new more flexible and general foundations for algebraic geometry that has been adopted in the field since that time. He went on to introduce the \u00e9tale cohomology theory of schemes, providing the key tools for proving the Weil conjectures, as well as crystalline cohomology and algebraic de Rham cohomology to complement it. Closely linked to these cohomology theories, he originated topos theory as a generalisation of topology (relevant also in categorical logic). He also provided, by means of a categorical Galois theory, an algebraic definition of fundamental groups of schemes giving birth to the now famous \u00e9tale fundamental group and he then conjectured the existence of a further generalization of it, which is now known as the fundamental group scheme. As a framework for his coherent duality theory, he also introduced derived categories, which were further developed by Verdier.\nThe results of his work on these and other topics were published in the \"EGA\" and in less polished form in the notes of the \"S\u00e9minaire de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"SGA\") that he directed at the IH\u00c9S.\nPolitical activism.\nGrothendieck's political views were radical and pacifistic. He strongly opposed both United States intervention in Vietnam and Soviet military expansionism. To protest against the Vietnam War, he gave lectures on category theory in the forests surrounding Hanoi while the city was being bombed. In 1966, he had declined to attend the International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM) in Moscow, where he was to receive the Fields Medal. He retired from scientific life around 1970 after he had found out that IH\u00c9S was partly funded by the military. He returned to academia a few years later as a professor at the University of Montpellier.\nWhile the issue of military funding was perhaps the most obvious explanation for Grothendieck's departure from the IH\u00c9S, those who knew him say that the causes of the rupture ran more deeply. Pierre Cartier, a \"visiteur de longue dur\u00e9e\" (\"long-term guest\") at the IH\u00c9S, wrote a piece about Grothendieck for a special volume published on the occasion of the IH\u00c9S's fortieth anniversary. In that publication, Cartier notes that as the son of an antimilitary anarchist and one who grew up among the disenfranchised, Grothendieck always had a deep compassion for the poor and the downtrodden. As Cartier puts it, Grothendieck came to find Bures-sur-Yvette as \"une cage dor\u00e9e\" (\"a gilded cage\"). While Grothendieck was at the IH\u00c9S, opposition to the Vietnam War was heating up, and Cartier suggests that this also reinforced Grothendieck's distaste at having become a mandarin of the scientific world. In addition, after several years at the IH\u00c9S, Grothendieck seemed to cast about for new intellectual interests. By the late 1960s, he had started to become interested in scientific areas outside mathematics. David Ruelle, a physicist who joined the IH\u00c9S faculty in 1964, said that Grothendieck came to talk to him a few times about physics. Biology interested Grothendieck much more than physics, and he organized some seminars on biological topics.\nIn 1970, Grothendieck, with two other mathematicians, Claude Chevalley and Pierre Samuel, created a political group entitled \"Survivre\"\u2014the name later changed to \"Survivre et vivre\". The group published a bulletin and was dedicated to antimilitary and ecological issues. It also developed strong criticism of the indiscriminate use of science and technology. Grothendieck devoted the next three years to this group and served as the main editor of its bulletin.\nAlthough Grothendieck continued with mathematical enquiries, his standard mathematical career mostly ended when he left the IH\u00c9S. After leaving the IH\u00c9S, Grothendieck became a temporary professor at Coll\u00e8ge de France for two years. He then became a professor at the University of Montpellier, where he became increasingly estranged from the mathematical community. He formally retired in 1988, a few years after having accepted a research position at the CNRS.\nManuscripts written in the 1980s.\nWhile not publishing mathematical research in conventional ways during the 1980s, he produced several influential manuscripts with limited distribution, with both mathematical and biographical content.\nProduced during 1980 and 1981, \"La Longue Marche \u00e0 travers la th\u00e9orie de Galois\" (\"The Long March Through Galois Theory\") is a 1600-page handwritten manuscript containing many of the ideas that led to the \"Esquisse d'un programme\". It also includes a study of Teichm\u00fcller theory.\nIn 1983, stimulated by correspondence with Ronald Brown and Tim Porter at Bangor University, Grothendieck wrote a 600-page manuscript entitled \"Pursuing Stacks\". It began with a letter addressed to Daniel Quillen. This letter and successive parts were distributed from Bangor (see External links below). Within these, in an informal, diary-like manner, Grothendieck explained and developed his ideas on the relationship between algebraic homotopy theory and algebraic geometry and prospects for a noncommutative theory of stacks. The manuscript, which is being edited for publication by G. Maltsiniotis, later led to another of his monumental works, \"Les D\u00e9rivateurs\". Written in 1991, this latter opus of approximately 2000 pages, further developed the homotopical ideas begun in \"Pursuing Stacks\". Much of this work anticipated the subsequent development during the mid-1990s of the motivic homotopy theory of Fabien Morel and Vladimir Voevodsky.\nIn 1984, Grothendieck wrote the proposal \"Esquisse d'un Programme\" (\"Sketch of a Programme\") for a position at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). It describes new ideas for studying the moduli space of complex curves. Although Grothendieck never published his work in this area, the proposal inspired other mathematicians to work in the area by becoming the source of dessin d'enfant theory and anabelian geometry. Later, it was published in two-volumes and entitled \"Geometric Galois Actions\" (Cambridge University Press, 1997).\nDuring this period, Grothendieck also gave his consent to publishing some of his drafts for EGA on Bertini-type theorems (\"EGA\"\u00a0V, published in Ulam Quarterly in 1992\u20131993 and later made available on the Grothendieck Circle web site in 2004).\nIn the extensive autobiographical work, \"R\u00e9coltes et Semailles\" ('Harvests and Sowings', 1986), Grothendieck describes his approach to mathematics and his experiences in the mathematical community, a community that initially accepted him in an open and welcoming manner, but which he progressively perceived to be governed by competition and status. He complains about what he saw as the \"burial\" of his work and betrayal by his former students and colleagues after he had left the community. \"R\u00e9coltes et Semailles\" was finally published in 2022 by Gallimard and, thanks to French science historian Alain Herreman, is also available on the Internet. An English translation by Leila Schneps will be published by MIT Press in 2025. A partial English translation can be found on the Internet. A Japanese translation of the whole book in four volumes was completed by Tsuji Yuichi (1938\u20132002), a friend of Grothendieck from the \"Survivre\" period. The first three volumes (corresponding to Parts 0 to III of the book) were published between 1989 and 1993, while the fourth volume (Part IV) was completed and, although unpublished, copies of it as a typed manuscript are circulated. Grothendieck helped with the translation and wrote a preface for it, in which he called Tsuji his \"first true collaborator\". Parts of \"R\u00e9coltes et Semailles\" have been translated into Spanish, as well as into a Russian translation that was published in Moscow.\nIn 1988, Grothendieck declined the Crafoord Prize with an open letter to the media. He wrote that he and other established mathematicians had no need for additional financial support and criticized what he saw as the declining ethics of the scientific community that was characterized by outright scientific theft that he believed had become commonplace and tolerated. The letter also expressed his belief that totally unforeseen events before the end of the century would lead to an unprecedented collapse of civilization. Grothendieck added however that his views were \"in no way meant as a criticism of the Royal Academy's aims in the administration of its funds\" and he added, \"I regret the inconvenience that my refusal to accept the Crafoord prize may have caused you and the Royal Academy.\"\n\"La Clef des Songes\", a 315-page manuscript written in 1987, is Grothendieck's account of how his consideration of the source of dreams led him to conclude that a deity exists. As part of the notes to this manuscript, Grothendieck described the life and the work of 18 \"mutants\", people whom he admired as visionaries far ahead of their time and heralding a new age. The only mathematician on his list was Bernhard Riemann. Influenced by the Catholic mystic Marthe Robin who was claimed to have survived on the Holy Eucharist alone, Grothendieck almost starved himself to death in 1988. His growing preoccupation with spiritual matters was also evident in a letter entitled \"Lettre de la Bonne Nouvelle\" sent to 250 friends in January 1990. In it, he described his encounters with a deity and announced that a \"New Age\" would commence on 14 October 1996.\nThe \"Grothendieck Festschrift\", published in 1990, was a three-volume collection of research papers to mark his sixtieth birthday in 1988.\nMore than 20,000 pages of Grothendieck's mathematical and other writings are held at the University of Montpellier and remain unpublished. They have been digitized for preservation and are freely available in open access through the Institut Montpelli\u00e9rain Alexander Grothendieck portal.\nRetirement into reclusion and death.\nIn 1991, Grothendieck moved to a new address that he did not share with his previous contacts in the mathematical community. Very few people visited him afterward. Local villagers helped sustain him with a more varied diet after he tried to live on a staple of dandelion soup. At some point, Leila Schneps and located him, then carried on a brief correspondence. Thus they became among \"the last members of the mathematical establishment to come into contact with him\". After his death, it was revealed that he lived alone in a house in Lasserre, Ari\u00e8ge, a small village at the foot of the Pyrenees.\nIn January 2010, Grothendieck wrote the letter entitled \"D\u00e9claration d'intention de non-publication\" to Luc Illusie, claiming that all materials published in his absence had been published without his permission. He asked that none of his work be reproduced in whole or in part and that copies of this work be removed from libraries. He characterized a website devoted to his work as \"an abomination\". His dictate may have been reversed in 2010.\nIn September 2014, almost totally deaf and blind, he asked a neighbour to buy him a revolver so he could kill himself. On 13 November 2014, aged 86, Grothendieck died in the hospital of Saint-Lizier or Saint-Girons, Ari\u00e8ge.\nCitizenship.\nGrothendieck was born in Weimar Germany. In 1938, aged ten, he moved to France as a refugee. Records of his nationality were destroyed in the fall of Nazi Germany in 1945 and he did not apply for French citizenship after the war. Thus, he became a stateless person for at least the majority of his working life and he traveled on a Nansen passport. Part of his reluctance to hold French nationality is attributed to not wishing to serve in the French military, particularly due to the Algerian War (1954\u201362). He eventually applied for French citizenship in the early 1980s, after he was well past the age that would have required him to do military service.\nFamily.\nGrothendieck was very close to his mother, to whom he dedicated his dissertation. She died in 1957 from tuberculosis that she contracted in camps for displaced persons.\nHe had five children: a son with his landlady during his time in Nancy; three children, Johanna (1959), Alexander (1961), and Mathieu (1965) with his wife Mireille Dufour; and one child with Justine Skalba, with whom he lived in a commune in the early 1970s.\nMathematical work.\nGrothendieck's early mathematical work was in functional analysis. Between 1949 and 1953 he worked on his doctoral thesis in this subject at Nancy, supervised by Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 and Laurent Schwartz. His key contributions include topological tensor products of topological vector spaces, the theory of nuclear spaces as foundational for Schwartz distributions, and the application of Lp spaces in studying linear maps between topological vector spaces. In a few years, he had become a leading authority on this area of functional analysis\u2014to the extent that Dieudonn\u00e9 compares his impact in this field to that of Banach.\nIt is, however, in algebraic geometry and related fields where Grothendieck did his most important and influential work. From approximately 1955 he started to work on sheaf theory and homological algebra, producing the influential \"T\u00f4hoku paper\" (\"Sur quelques points d'alg\u00e8bre homologique\", published in the Tohoku Mathematical Journal in 1957) where he introduced abelian categories and applied their theory to show that sheaf cohomology may be defined as certain derived functors in this context.\nHomological methods and sheaf theory had already been introduced in algebraic geometry by Jean-Pierre Serre and others, after sheaves had been defined by Jean Leray. Grothendieck took them to a higher level of abstraction and turned them into a key organising principle of his theory. He shifted attention from the study of individual varieties to his \"relative point of view\" (pairs of varieties related by a morphism), allowing a broad generalization of many classical theorems. The first major application was the relative version of Serre's theorem showing that the cohomology of a coherent sheaf on a complete variety is finite-dimensional; Grothendieck's theorem shows that the higher direct images of coherent sheaves under a proper map are coherent; this reduces to Serre's theorem over a one-point space.\nIn 1956, he applied the same thinking to the Riemann\u2013Roch theorem, which recently had been generalized to any dimension by Hirzebruch. The Grothendieck\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem was announced by Grothendieck at the initial Mathematische Arbeitstagung in Bonn, in 1957. It appeared in print in a paper written by Armand Borel with Serre. This result was his first work in algebraic geometry. Grothendieck went on to plan and execute a programme for rebuilding the foundations of algebraic geometry, which at the time were in a state of flux and under discussion in Claude Chevalley's seminar. He outlined his programme in his talk at the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians.\nHis foundational work on algebraic geometry is at a higher level of abstraction than all prior versions. He adapted the use of non-closed generic points, which led to the theory of schemes. Grothendieck also pioneered the systematic use of nilpotents. As 'functions' these can take only the value 0, but they carry infinitesimal information, in purely algebraic settings. His \"theory of schemes\" has become established as the best universal foundation for this field, because of its expressiveness as well as its technical depth. In that setting one can use birational geometry, techniques from number theory, Galois theory, commutative algebra, and close analogues of the methods of algebraic topology, all in an integrated way.\nGrothendieck is noted for his mastery of abstract approaches to mathematics and his perfectionism in matters of formulation and presentation. Relatively little of his work after 1960 was published by the conventional route of the learned journal, circulating initially in duplicated volumes of seminar notes; his influence was to a considerable extent personal. His influence spilled over into many other branches of mathematics, for example the contemporary theory of D-modules. Although lauded as \"the Einstein of mathematics\", his work also provoked adverse reactions, with many mathematicians seeking out more concrete areas and problems.\n\"EGA\", \"SGA\", \"FGA\".\nThe bulk of Grothendieck's published work is collected in the monumental, yet incomplete, \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"EGA\") and \"S\u00e9minaire de g\u00e9om\u00e9trie alg\u00e9brique\" (\"SGA\"). The collection \"Fondements de la G\u00e9ometrie Alg\u00e9brique\" (\"FGA\"), which gathers together talks given in the S\u00e9minaire Bourbaki, also contains important material.\nGrothendieck's work includes the invention of the \u00e9tale and l-adic cohomology theories, which explain an observation made by Andr\u00e9 Weil that argued for a connection between the topological characteristics of a variety and its diophantine (number theoretic) properties. For example, the number of solutions of an equation over a finite field reflects the topological nature of its solutions over the complex numbers. Weil had realized that to prove such a connection, one needed a new cohomology theory, but neither he nor any other expert saw how to accomplish this until such a theory was expressed by Grothendieck.\nThis program culminated in the proofs of the Weil conjectures, the last of which was settled by Grothendieck's student Pierre Deligne in the early 1970s after Grothendieck had largely withdrawn from mathematics.\nMajor mathematical contributions.\nIn Grothendieck's retrospective \"R\u00e9coltes et Semailles\", he identified twelve of his contributions that he believed qualified as \"great ideas\". In chronological order, they are:\nHere the term \"yoga\" denotes a kind of \"meta-theory\" that may be used heuristically; Michel Raynaud writes the other terms \"Ariadne's thread\" and \"philosophy\" as effective equivalents.\nGrothendieck wrote that, of these themes, the largest in scope was topoi, as they synthesized algebraic geometry, topology, and arithmetic. The theme that had been most extensively developed was schemes, which were the framework \"par excellence\" for eight of the other themes (all but 1, 5, and 12). Grothendieck wrote that the first and last themes, topological tensor products and regular configurations, were of more modest size than the others. Topological tensor products had played the role of a tool rather than of a source of inspiration for further developments; but he expected that regular configurations could not be exhausted within the lifetime of a mathematician who devoted oneself to it. He believed that the deepest themes were motives, anabelian geometry, and Galois\u2013Teichm\u00fcller theory.\nInfluence.\nGrothendieck is considered by many to be the greatest mathematician of the twentieth century. In an obituary David Mumford and John Tate wrote:\nAlthough mathematics became more and more abstract and general throughout the 20th century, it was Alexander Grothendieck who was the greatest master of this trend. His unique skill was to eliminate all unnecessary hypotheses and burrow into an area so deeply that its inner patterns on the most abstract level revealed themselves\u2013and then, like a magician, show how the solution of old problems fell out in straightforward ways now that their real nature had been revealed.\nBy the 1970s, Grothendieck's work was seen as influential, not only in algebraic geometry and the allied fields of sheaf theory and homological algebra, but influenced logic, in the field of categorical logic.\nAccording to mathematician Ravi Vakil, \"Whole fields of mathematics speak the language that he set up. We live in this big structure that he built. We take it for granted\u2014the architect is gone\". In the same article, Colin McLarty said, \"Lots of people today live in Grothendieck's house, unaware that it's Grothendieck's house.\"\nGeometry.\nGrothendieck approached algebraic geometry by clarifying the foundations of the field, and by developing mathematical tools intended to prove a number of notable conjectures. Algebraic geometry has traditionally meant the understanding of geometric objects, such as algebraic curves and surfaces, through the study of the algebraic equations for those objects. Properties of algebraic equations are in turn studied using the techniques of ring theory. In this approach, the properties of a geometric object are related to the properties of an associated ring. The space (e.g., real, complex, or projective) in which the object is defined, is extrinsic to the object, while the ring is intrinsic.\nGrothendieck laid a new foundation for algebraic geometry by making intrinsic spaces (\"spectra\") and associated rings the primary objects of study. To that end, he developed the theory of schemes that informally can be thought of as topological spaces on which a commutative ring is associated to every open subset of the space. Schemes have become the basic objects of study for practitioners of modern algebraic geometry. Their use as a foundation allowed geometry to absorb technical advances from other fields.\nHis generalization of the classical Riemann\u2013Roch theorem related topological properties of complex algebraic curves to their algebraic structure and now bears his name, being called \"the Grothendieck\u2013Hirzebruch\u2013Riemann\u2013Roch theorem\". The tools he developed to prove this theorem started the study of algebraic and topological K-theory, which explores the topological properties of objects by associating them with rings. After direct contact with Grothendieck's ideas at the Bonn Arbeitstagung, topological K-theory was founded by Michael Atiyah and Friedrich Hirzebruch.\nCohomology theories.\nGrothendieck's construction of new cohomology theories, which use algebraic techniques to study topological objects, has influenced the development of algebraic number theory, algebraic topology, and representation theory. As part of this project, his creation of topos theory, a category-theoretic generalization of point-set topology, has influenced the fields of set theory and mathematical logic.\nThe Weil conjectures were formulated in the later 1940s as a set of mathematical problems in arithmetic geometry. They describe properties of analytic invariants, called local zeta functions, of the number of points on an algebraic curve or variety of higher dimension. Grothendieck's discovery of the \u2113-adic \u00e9tale cohomology, the first example of a Weil cohomology theory, opened the way for a proof of the Weil conjectures, ultimately completed in the 1970s by his student Pierre Deligne. Grothendieck's large-scale approach has been called a \"visionary program\". The \u2113-adic cohomology then became a fundamental tool for number theorists, with applications to the Langlands program.\nGrothendieck's conjectural theory of motives was intended to be the \"\u2113-adic\" theory but without the choice of \"\u2113\", a prime number. It did not provide the intended route to the Weil conjectures, but has been behind modern developments in algebraic K-theory, motivic homotopy theory, and motivic integration. This theory, Daniel Quillen's work, and Grothendieck's theory of Chern classes, are considered the background to the theory of algebraic cobordism, another algebraic analogue of topological ideas.\nCategory theory.\nGrothendieck's emphasis on the role of universal properties across varied mathematical structures brought category theory into the mainstream as an organizing principle for mathematics in general. Among its uses, category theory creates a common language for describing similar structures and techniques seen in many different mathematical systems. His notion of abelian category is now the basic object of study in homological algebra. The emergence of a separate mathematical discipline of category theory has been attributed to Grothendieck's influence, although unintentional.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Colonel L\u00e1grimas\" (\"Colonel Tears\" in English), a novel by Puerto Rican\u2013Costa Rican writer Carlos Fonseca is about Grothendieck.\nThe Benjam\u00edn Labatut book \"When We Cease to Understand the World\" dedicates one chapter to the work and life of Grothendieck, introducing his story by reference to the Japanese mathematician Shinichi Mochizuki. The book is a lightly fictionalized account of the world of scientific inquiry and was a finalist for the National Book Award.\nIn Cormac McCarthy's \"The Passenger\" and its sequel \"Stella Maris\", a main character is a student of Grothendieck's.\nThe \"Istituto Grothendieck\" has been created in his honor."}
{"id": "2043", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2043", "title": "Hostility towards America", "text": ""}
{"id": "2047", "revid": "13440071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2047", "title": "Alcoholics Anonymous", "text": "Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is a global, peer-led mutual-aid fellowship focused on an abstinence-based recovery model from alcoholism through its spiritually inclined twelve-step program. The organization adheres to Twelve Traditions that emphasize anonymity, the absence of a hierarchical structure, and principles of being free to all, non-promotional, non-professional, unaffiliated, non-denominational, and apolitical. , AA reported a presence in approximately 180 countries with an estimated membership of nearly two million individuals\u201473% of whom reside in the United States and Canada.\nAA traces its origins to a 1935 meeting between Bill Wilson (commonly referred to as Bill W.) and Dr. Bob Smith (Dr. Bob), two individuals seeking to address their shared struggles with alcoholism. Their collaboration, influenced by the Christian revivalist Oxford Group, evolved into a mutual support group that eventually became AA. In 1939, the fellowship published \"Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How More than One Hundred Men Have Recovered from Alcoholism\"\",\" colloquially known as the \"Big Book.\" This publication introduced the twelve-step program and provided the basis for the organization's name. Later editions of the book expanded its subtitle to reflect the inclusion of \"\"Thousands of Men and Women\".\"\nThe Twelve Steps outline a suggested program of ongoing drug rehabilitation and self-improvement. A key component involves seeking alignment or divining with a personally defined concept of \"God as we understood Him.\" The steps begin with an acknowledgment of powerlessness over alcohol and the unmanageability of life due to alcoholism. Subsequent steps emphasize rigorous honesty, including the completion of a \"searching and fearless moral inventory,\" acknowledgment of \"character defects,\" sharing the inventory with a trusted person, making amends to individuals harmed, and engaging in regular prayer or meditation to seek \"conscious contact with God\" and guidance in following divine will. The final step, the 12th, focuses on maintaining the principles of recovery, sharing the message with other alcoholics, and participating in \"12th Step work,\" such as peer sponsorship, organizing meetings, and outreach to institutions like hospitals and prisons.\nAA meetings differ in format, with variations including personal storytelling, readings from the Big Book, and open discussions. While certain meetings may cater to specific demographic groups, attendance is generally open to anyone with a desire to stop drinking. The organization is self-supporting through member donations and literature sales. Its operations follow an \"inverted pyramid\" structure, allowing local groups significant autonomy. AA does not accept external funding or contributions. \nEmpirical evidence supports AA's efficacy. A 2020 Cochrane review found that manualized AA and Twelve-Step Facilitation (TSF) therapy demonstrated higher rates of continuous abstinence compared to alternative treatments, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy, with added healthcare cost savings over time.\nCriticism of AA has addressed various aspects of its program and operations. Concerns have been raised about its overall success rate, the perceived religious nature of its approach, and allegations of cult-like elements. Additional critiques include reports of \"thirteenth-stepping,\" where senior members engage romantically with newer members, and legal challenges related to safety and the religious content of court-mandated participation in AA programs.\nHistory.\nHazard's search for treatment.\nRowland Hazard\u2019s journey from Carl Jung\u2019s psychiatric treatment to spiritual conversion through the Oxford Group played a pivotal role in shaping the foundations of Alcoholics Anonymous, influencing its principles of recovery. In 1926, Hazard went to Zurich, Switzerland, to seek treatment for alcoholism with psychiatrist Carl Jung. When Hazard ended treatment with Jung after about a year, and came back to the US, he soon resumed drinking, and returned to Jung in Zurich for further treatment. Jung told Hazard that his case was nearly hopeless (as with other alcoholics) and that his only hope might be a \"spiritual conversion\" with a \"religious group\".\nHazard's spiritual conversion &amp; involvement with Oxford Group.\nBack in America, Hazard went to the Oxford Group, whose teachings were eventually the source of such AA concepts as \"meetings\" and \"sharing\" (public confession), making \"restitution\", \"rigorous honesty\" and \"surrendering one's will and life to God's care\". Hazard underwent a spiritual conversion\" with the help of the Group and began to experience the liberation from drink he was seeking. He became converted to a lifetime of sobriety while on a train ride from New York to Detroit after reading \"For Sinners Only\" by Oxford Group member AJ Russell. Members of the group introduced Hazard to Ebby Thacher. Hazard brought Thacher to the Calvary Rescue Mission, led by Oxford Group leader Sam Shoemaker.\nBill W. &amp; his spiritual awakening.\nIn keeping with the Oxford Group teaching that a new convert must win other converts to preserve his own conversion experience, Thacher contacted his old friend Bill Wilson, whom he knew had a drinking problem. Thacher approached Wilson saying that he had \"got religion\", was sober, and that Wilson could do the same if he set aside objections and instead formed a personal idea of God, \"another power\" or \"higher power\".Feeling a \"kinship of common suffering\", Wilson attended his first group gathering, although he was drunk. Within days, Wilson admitted himself to the Charles B. Towns Hospital after drinking four beers on the way\u2014the last alcohol he ever drank. Under the care of Dr. William Duncan Silkworth (an early benefactor of AA), Wilson's detox included the deliriant belladonna. At the hospital, a despairing Wilson experienced a bright flash of light, which he felt to be God revealing himself.\nFounding of AA.\nWilson's early efforts and influence of the Oxford Group.\nFollowing his hospital discharge, Wilson joined the Oxford Group and tried to recruit other alcoholics to the group. These early efforts to help others kept him sober, but were ineffective in getting anyone else to join the group and get sober. Dr. Silkworth suggested that Wilson place less stress on religion (as required by The Oxford Group) and more on the science of treating alcoholism. Bill W. would later write: \"The early AA got its ideas of self-examination, acknowledgment of character defects, restitution for harm done, and working with others straight from the Oxford Group and directly from Sam Shoemaker, their former leader in America, and from nowhere else.\" According to Mercadante, however, the AA concept of \"powerlessness over alcohol\" departs significantly from Oxford Group belief. In AA, alcoholism cannot be cured, and the Oxford Group stressed the possibility of complete victory over sin.\nBeginnings of AA in Akron, Ohio.\nIn 1935, AA began in Akron, Ohio, as the outcome of a meeting between Bill W., and Dr. Bob, an Akron surgeon. Wilson's first success came during a business trip to Akron, Ohio, where he was introduced to Dr. Robert Smith, a surgeon, who was unable to stay sober. Dr. Bob's participation in the Oxford Group had not been enough to enable him to stop drinking. \nBill W. explained that alcoholism affects the mind, emotions, and body, a concept he learned from Dr. Silkworth at Towns Hospital in New York, where he had been a patient multiple times. Convinced by Bill's insights, Dr. Bob soon achieved sobriety and never drank again, marking the inception of A.A., on 10 June 1935. Bill W. and Dr. Bob started working with alcoholics at Akron's City Hospital. One patient, who soon achieved sobriety, joined them. Together, the three men formed the foundation of what would later become Alcoholics Anonymous, although the name \"Alcoholics Anonymous\" had not yet been adopted. \nIn late 1935, a new group of alcoholics began forming in New York, followed by another in Cleveland in 1939. Over the course of four years, these three initial groups helped around 100 people achieve sobriety. In early 1939, the Fellowship published its foundational text, \"Alcoholics Anonymous\", which outlined A.A.\u2019s philosophy and introduced the Twelve Steps. This book also included case histories of thirty individuals who had achieved recovery, marking a significant milestone in A.A.'s development. The Twelve Steps were influenced by the Oxford Group's 6 steps and various readings, including William James's \"The Varieties of Religious Experience\".\nThe first female member, Florence Rankin, joined AA in March 1937, and the first non-Protestant member, a Roman Catholic, joined in 1939. The first black AA group commenced in 1945 in Washington D.C., and was founded by Jim S., an African-American physician from Virginia.\nThe first meeting outside of the Oxford Group was held at Dr. Bob's house with 80 members in attendance. Dr. Bob began the meeting in his dining room by identifying himself as an alcoholic, put his foot on the dining room table and read the \"Sermon on the Mount\" from the Gospel of Matthew. \nThe Alcoholic Foundation.\nIn 1938, Dr. Bob and Bill created The Alcoholic Foundation in New York, bringing in friends of John D. Rockefeller, Jr. as board members. Although they sought to raise significant funds, Rockefeller advised that large contributions might jeopardize the Fellowship. The foundation opened a small office in New York, primarily funded by A.A. members, to handle inquiries and distribute the Alcoholics Anonymous book. In 1940, Rockefeller organized a dinner to promote A.A., which further increased the number of inquiries. The office became effective. Each request received a personal reply and a pamphlet, enhancing interest in the book. Consequently, many new groups were established, and by the end of 1940, A.A. membership had grown to 2,000.\nMedia coverage leads to expansion.\nIn 1939, media coverage, particularly from \"The Cleveland Plain Dealer\", generated a surge of interest and requests for help. The Cleveland group, although small, successfully assisted many alcoholics, quickly growing from twenty to around 500 members. A subsequent article in \"Liberty\" magazine resulted in a flood of requests for assistance, further expanding A.A.'s reach. In 1941 \"The Saturday Evening Post\" published an article about AA, sparking a surge in inquires, and AA membership tripled over the next year. Interviews on American radio and favorable articles in US magazines led to increased big book sales and membership.\nAs the growing Fellowship faced disputes over structure, purpose, authority, and publicity, Wilson began promoting the Twelve Traditions. Bill W. first introduced his ideas on the Twelve Traditions in an April 1946 article for \"The Grapevine\", titled \u201cTwelve Suggested Points for A.A. Tradition.\u201d Recognizing the need for guidance as A.A. expanded, he aimed to preserve the organization's unity and purpose. Bill described the input he received as a \"welter of exciting and fearsome experience,\" which greatly influenced the development of the Traditions. From December 1947 to November 1948, \"The Grapevine\" published the Traditions individually, and in 1950, the First International Convention in Cleveland officially adopted them.\nCreation of General Service Conference (GSC).\nIn 1951, A.A.'s New York office expanded its activities, including public relations, support for new groups, services to hospitals and prisons, and cooperation with agencies in the field of alcoholism. The headquarters also published standard A.A. literature and oversaw translations, while the \"AA Grapevine\" gained substantial circulation. Despite these essential services, they were managed by a disconnected board of trustees, primarily linked to Bill and Dr. Bob.\nRecognizing the need for accountability, delegates from across the U.S. and Canada were convened, leading to the first meeting of the A.A. General Service Conference in 1951. This successful gathering established direct oversight of A.A.'s trusteeship by the Fellowship itself, ensuring the organization's future governance. At the 1955 conference in St. Louis, Missouri, Wilson relinquished stewardship of AA to the General Service Conference, as AA had grown to millions of members internationally.\nInternational expansion.\nThe World Service Meeting (WSM), established in 1969, is a biennial international forum where AA delegates from around the world exchange ideas and experiences on carrying the message of recovery. Held in various global cities, the WSM focuses on sharing strategies to help alcoholics in different countries and languages.\nToday, A.A. is present in approximately 180 nations worldwide. By 2018, AA had 2,087,840 members and 120,300 AA groups worldwide. There are AA meetings in Beijing, China.\nIn July 2024, AA launched its first UK-wide advertising campaign with a unique approach\u2014no logos, phone numbers, or links\u2014focusing on subtle messaging like \"You Are not Alone\" and \"Alcohol isn't the Answer.\" The campaign, created by The Raised Eyebrow Society, aims to attract people struggling with alcohol without violating AA's principles of anonymity and non-promotion.\nAA will celebrate its 100th anniversary meeting in Indianapolis, Indiana in 2035. The international convention is anticipated to attract tens of thousands of attendees to the Indiana Convention Center and Lucas Oil Stadium.\nAA literature.\nAlcoholics Anonymous publishes several books, reports, pamphlets, and other media, including a periodical known as the \"AA Grapevine\". Two books are used primarily: \"Alcoholics Anonymous\" (the \"Big Book\") and, expounding on the big book in regard to its subject, \"Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions.\" As with all AA literature, the texts are freely available on AA.org. \nBig Book.\nIn 1939, Wilson and other members wrote the book initially titled \"Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of How More than One Hundred Men Have Recovered from Alcoholism\", from which AA drew its name. Informally known as \"The Big Book.\" The second edition of the Big Book was released in 1955, the third in 1976, and the fourth in 2001. The first part of the book, which details the program, has remained largely intact since the 1939 edition, with minor statistical updates and edits. The second part contains personal stories that are updated with every edition to reflect current AA membership, resulting in earlier stories being removedthese were published separately in 2003 in the book \"Experience, Strength, and Hope\".\nThe Big Book suggests a twelve-step program in which members admit that they are powerless over alcohol and need help from a \"higher power\". It offers guidance and strength through prayer and meditation from God or a higher power of their own understanding; take a moral inventory with care to include resentments; list and become ready to remove character defects; list and make amends to those harmed; continue to take a moral inventory, pray, meditate, and try to help other alcoholics recover. The second half of the book, \"Personal Stories\" (subject to additions, removal, and retitling in subsequent editions), is made of AA members' redemptive autobiographical sketches.\nIllness and allergy terminology.\nAA's Big Book calls alcoholism \"an illness which only a spiritual experience will conquer.\" Ernest Kurtz says this is \"The closest the book Alcoholics Anonymous comes to a definition of alcoholism.\" Somewhat divergently in his introduction to The Big Book, non-member and early benefactor William Silkworth said those unable to moderate their drinking suffer from an allergy. In presenting the doctor's postulate, AA said \"The doctor's theory that we have an allergy to alcohol interests us. As laymen, our opinion as to its soundness may, of course, mean little. But as ex-problem drinkers, we can say that his explanation makes good sense. It explains many things for which we cannot otherwise account.\" AA later acknowledged that \"alcoholism is not a true allergy, the experts now inform us.\"\n\"Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions\".\nThe \"Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions\" is a book published in 1953 that serves as a key text for AA. Written by AA co-founder Bill W., it provides detailed explanations of the Twelve Steps and the Twelve Traditions. The book is commonly used in AA meetings and individual study, offering a framework for understanding the organization's approach to recovery and community. The story of Eddie Rickenbacker \"and his courageous company\" appears in the book. It pertains to when his plane crashed in the Pacific and is used in the closing remarks of Tradition One: \"Our common welfare should come first; personal recovery depends upon A.A. unity.\"\n\"Grapevine\".\n\"The Grapevine\", established in June 1944 by six AA members in New York, became AA's national journal by 1945 and later its international journal. Supported by Bill W., the magazine featured first-person stories, AA news, and discussions on key topics like women in AA and veterans returning from war. \nInitially intended as a resource for alcoholics worldwide, the Grapevine evolved into a unifying publication for the AA community, chronicling the Fellowship's growth, including the creation of the General Service Structure and publication of later editions of the Big Book. The Twelve Traditions were introduced to AA by Bill W. in April 1946 through an article titled \"Twelve Suggested Points for A.A. Tradition.\" The AA Preamble, inspired by the Foreword of the book \"Alcoholics Anonymous\", was written by one of the Grapevine's early editors Tom. Y. and first appeared in the June 1947 issue. In 1986, it was reaffirmed as AA's international journal by the General Service Conference.\nThe AA program.\nTwelve steps.\nAA's program extends beyond abstaining from alcohol. Its goal is to effect enough change in the alcoholic's thinking \"to bring about recovery from alcoholism\" through \"an entire psychic change,\" or spiritual awakening. A spiritual awakening is meant to be achieved by taking the Twelve Steps, and sobriety is furthered by volunteering for AA and regular AA meeting attendance or contact with AA members.\nTaking AA's 12 steps are a \u201csuggested\u201d, but not required, \u201cprogram of recovery\u201d\u2014also called a \u201cspiritual solution\u201d. They start with members admitting to being \u201cpowerless over alcohol\u201d (which the Big Book calls an \u201cIllness\u201d or \u201cmalady\u201d, but never a \u201cdisease\u2019\u2019), and out of control\u2014for which on going divining and following the will an unspecified 'higher power' (\u201cGod, as we understood Him\u201d) could restore them to \u201csanity\u201d. In the steps members acknowledge and make amends and seek to correct personal character defects aided by their higher power for guidance. Those \u201chaving achieved a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps\u201d are suggested to carry AA's message to other alcoholics. This is often done through meetings of AA groups as well as with members taking on sponsees, although the Big Book makes no mention of the latter term. While taking care to avoid becoming affiliated, some AA members perform outreach to hospitals, treatment centers and correctional facilities. \nSponsorship.\nMembers are encouraged to find an experienced fellow alcoholic, called a sponsor, to help them understand and follow the AA program. The sponsor should preferably have experienced all twelve of the steps, be the same sex as the sponsored person, and refrain from imposing personal views on the sponsored person. Following the helper therapy principle, sponsors in AA may benefit from their relationship with their charges, as \"helping behaviors\" correlate with increased abstinence and lower probabilities of binge drinking.\nTwelve Traditions.\nThe Twelve Traditions provide essential guidelines\u2014not rules\u2014that help A.A. groups navigate their relationships both internally and with the outside world. These traditions ensure that membership is open to anyone seeking to stop drinking, with no dues or fees required. These Traditions foster an altruistic, unaffiliated, non-coercive, and non-hierarchical organization, limiting A.A.'s mission to helping alcoholics at a non-professional level while avoiding publicity. To prioritize recovery, the traditions discourage hierarchies, dogma, public controversies, property acquisition, and outside contributions. Members are advised against using A.A. for personal gain or public prestige, and anonymity is emphasized, particularly in media, with no prescribed consequences for breaches.\nMeetings.\nOverview.\nAA meetings serve as a space where individuals discuss recovery from alcoholism, with flexibility in how meetings are conducted. While AA offers pamphlets suggesting formats, groups have the autonomy to organize their meetings according to their preferences, as long as their decisions do not impact other groups or AA as a whole. Despite cultural differences influencing certain rituals, many elements of AA meetings remain consistent worldwide.\nTypes.\nAA meetings encompass a variety of formats, each designed to serve different needs. Open meetings are accessible to anyone, including non-alcoholics who can attend as observers. In contrast, closed meetings are reserved for individuals who identify as having a desire to stop drinking, a declaration that cannot be questioned by other members. Speaker meetings feature one or more members who share their personal stories of recovery, fostering connection and understanding among participants.\nBig Book meetings focus on reading and discussing passages from AA's foundational text, while sharing meetings provide an open platform for members to speak freely and share their experiences, with or without a predetermined topic. AA meetings are gatherings where recovery from alcoholism is discussed. One perspective sees them as \"quasi-ritualized therapeutic sessions run by and for, alcoholics\". \nIn recent years, online meetings have become popular, allowing members to connect virtually through platforms like Zoom and What's App. Offline or in-person meetings, often referred to as \u201cbrick and mortar\u201d meetings, take place in physical locations, and some groups even host hybrid meetings, enabling participants to attend either in person or virtually.\nInclusivity &amp; language accessibility.\nInclusivity is a core principle of AA meetings, which welcome all alcoholics, though some are tailored to specific demographics such as gender, age, profession, or cultural background. Since the mid-1970s, several 'agnostic' or 'no-prayer' AA groups have begun across the US, Canada, and other parts of the world, which hold meetings that adhere to a tradition allowing alcoholics to freely express their doubts or disbelief that spirituality will help their recovery, and these meetings forgo the use of opening or closing prayers. \nMeetings in the United States are held in a variety of languages including Armenian, English, Farsi, Finnish, French, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Spanish.\nDonations and contributions.\nAt some point during the meeting a basket is passed around for voluntary contributions. AA's 7th tradition requires that groups be \"self-supporting, declining outside contributions\".\nSerenity prayer.\nThe Serenity Prayer is commonly used in AA meetings as a tool for reflection and guidance. It was called the AA prayer in the 1940s. Often recited at meetings, it emphasizes the concepts of acceptance, courage, and wisdom, which align with the principles of the AA program. The prayer encourages individuals to accept things they cannot change, to find the courage to make changes where possible, and to seek the wisdom to distinguish between the two. \nSobriety anniversaries and coins.\nSobriety coins, also known as sobriety chips, are tokens given to members of AA to signify the duration of their sobriety. While the chip system is common, it is not universally adopted across all AA groups. The tradition began with Sister Ignatia in Akron, Ohio who distributed medallions to newly released patients as reminders to avoid drinking. The actual sobriety chip as known today is believed to have originated in 1942 in Indianapolis, gaining popularity as various AA groups adopted the practice. Typically, different colored chips represent milestones of sobriety within the first year, with tokens awarded for 24 hours, 30 days, 60 days, 90 days, and beyond, culminating in a bronze chip for one year of sobriety. \nAA members celebrate Founders Day on the weekend closest to June 10, marking the anniversary of the organization with thousands of attendees engaging in tours of historical sites, sharing recovery stories, and participating in related activities in Akron, Ohio. \nOrganization and finances.\nStructure and governance.\nAA describes itself as \"not organized in the formal or political sense\" and has been referred to as a \"benign anarchy,\" borrowing a phrase from anarchy theorist Peter Kropotkin. The Twelve Traditions guide the functioning of individual AA groups, while the Twelve Concepts for World Service outline how the organization operates on a global scale. Each AA group is self-governing, with AA World Services acting only in an advisory capacity. This \"inverted pyramid\" style of governance has been key to the organization's resilience and adaptability. In Ireland, Shane Butler noted that AA's lack of top-level leadership might make it seem unsustainable, but its structure has proven extremely robust since its establishment there in 1946.\nAA's 21-member Board of Trustees includes seven \"nonalcoholic friends of the fellowship,\" though the organization is primarily served and run by alcoholics. Members who accept service positions, termed \"trusted servants,\" hold these roles for limited terms, typically ranging from three months to two years, depending on the position and group vote. This approach ensures regular rotation and participation from a broad spectrum of members, maintaining AA's commitment to shared responsibility and leadership.\nFinancial structure.\nAA is entirely self-supporting, relying on voluntary contributions from its members to cover expenses. Contributions to the General Service Office (GSO) are limited to $5,000 per member per year. In addition to these contributions, more than 50% of AA's income comes from the sale of AA literature, such as books and pamphlets. This practice aligns with AA's Seventh Tradition, which emphasizes financial independence by not accepting donations from outside individuals or organizations. The Central Office is also fully self-supporting through the sale of literature and member contributions.\nEmployment and service roles.\nThe Eighth Tradition permits AA to employ \"special workers\" for roles that require specific expertise or full-time responsibilities, such as administrative tasks. However, these paid roles do not involve working directly with alcoholics in need of help, a function known as the \"12th Step.\" Calls from alcoholics seeking assistance are always passed on to sober AA members who have volunteered to handle them, ensuring the program remains grounded in its peer-to-peer support model.\nOrganizational operations.\nThe AA Central Office coordinates activities such as printing literature, responding to public inquiries, and organizing conferences. It operates independently but ensures alignment with the core principles of the organization. Other International General Service Offices\u2014such as those in Australia, Costa Rica, and Russia\u2014function independently of AA World Services in New York, reflecting AA's decentralized and autonomous structure.\nHospitals &amp; institutions.\nMany AA meetings take place in treatment facilities. Carrying the message of AA into hospitals was how the co-founders of AA first remained sober. They discovered great value in working with alcoholics who are still suffering, and that even if the alcoholic they were working with did not stay sober, they did. Bill Wilson wrote, \"Practical experience shows that nothing will so much insure immunity from drinking as intensive work with other alcoholics\". Bill Wilson visited Towns Hospital in New York City in an attempt to help the alcoholics who were patients there in 1934. At St. Thomas Hospital in Akron, Ohio, Smith worked with still more alcoholics. In 1939, a New York mental institution, Rockland State Hospital, was one of the first institutions to allow AA hospital groups. Service to corrections and treatment facilities used to be combined until the General Service Conference, in 1977, voted to dissolve its Institutions Committee and form two separate committees, one for treatment facilities, and one for correctional facilities.\nIn the United States and Canada, AA meetings are held in hundreds of correctional facilities. The AA General Service Office has published a workbook with detailed recommendations for methods of approaching correctional-facility officials with the intent of developing an in-prison AA program. In addition, AA publishes a variety of pamphlets specifically for the incarcerated alcoholic. Additionally, the AA General Service Office provides a pamphlet with guidelines for members working with incarcerated alcoholics.\nDemographics.\n2014 membership survey.\nAA's New York General Service Office survey of over 6,000 members in Canada and the United States concluded that, in North America, AA members who responded to the survey were 62% male and 38% female. The survey found that 89% of AA members were white. Average member sobriety is slightly under 10 years with 36% sober more than ten years, 13% sober from five to ten years, 24% sober from one to five years, and 27% sober less than one year. Before coming to AA, 63% of members received some type of treatment or counseling, such as medical, psychological, or spiritual. After coming to AA, 59% received outside treatment or counseling. Of those members, 84% said that outside help played an important part in their recovery.\nThe same survey showed that AA received 32% of its membership from other members, another 32% from treatment facilities, 30% were self-motivated to attend AA, 12% of its membership from court-ordered attendance, and only 1% of AA members decided to join based on information obtained from the Internet. People taking the survey were allowed to select multiple answers for what motivated them to join AA.\nDiversity.\nA 2024 study found that Black, Hispanic, and younger adults are less likely to attend AA meetings compared to white and older adults, with these disparities remaining consistent over time.\nEffectiveness of AA.\nMeasuring.\nSeveral metrics are used to evaluate the success of AA including abstinence, reduced drinking intensity, reduced alcohol-related consequences, addiction severity, and healthcare costs. Because of the anonymous and voluntary nature of AA meetings, it has been difficult to perform random trials with them. However, environmental and quasi-experiment studies suggest that AA can help alcoholics make positive changes. Until recently, ethical and operational issues had prevented robust randomized controlled trials from being conducted comparing 12-step programs directly to other approaches. \nReviews and studies.\nLong-term recovery effectiveness.\nThere have been numerous studies on the effectiveness of AA. A 2006 study by Rudolf H. Moos and Bernice S. Moos saw a 67% success rate 16 years later for the 24.9% of alcoholics who ended up, on their own, undergoing a lot of AA treatment. However, this may be influenced by self-selection bias. Project MATCH, a 1990s multi-site study, found AA to be more effective than no treatment. Other studies link increased AA attendance with higher spirituality and reduced alcohol consumption.\nComparative effectiveness and cost effectiveness.\nA 2020 systematic review indicated that manualized AA and Twelve-Step Facilitation (TSF) therapy yields more healthcare cost savings and leads to higher continuous abstinence rates. A longitudinal study suggests that LifeRing and SMART Recovery fared worse than AA across several outcomes, however, the effects are insignificant when controlling for the baseline alcohol goal of total abstinence. More recent studies employing randomized and blinded trials have shown 12-step programs provide similar benefit compared to motivational enhancement therapy (MET) and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), and were more effective in producing continuous abstinence and remission compared to these approaches.\nPatterns of engagement and disengagement.\nThe 2001\u20132002 National Epidemiological Survey on Alcoholism and Related Conditions (NESARC) found that 3.4% of respondents had attended a 12-step meeting. Of those, 988 had ceased attending, 348 continued attending, and 105 were newcomers. These figures help to understand engagement and disengagement patterns within AA.\nCochrane Review.\nA 2020 Cochrane review concluded that AA is more effective than other treatments, such as MET and CBT, in terms of abstinence rates. It also noted similar success in reducing drinking and alcohol-related problems, though this conclusion was based on moderate-certainty evidence. The review found that AA participation via AA twelve step facilitation (AA/TSF) had sustained remission rates 20-60% above other well-established treatments. Additionally, 4 of the 5 economic studies in the review found that AA/TSF lowered healthcare costs considerably.\nCriticism of Cochrane Review.\nNick Heather, an addiction researcher, critiqued the review, arguing it may have a sample bias and that it failed to measure outcomes like quality of life or alcohol dependence, which are important for evaluating recovery.&lt;ref name=\"pmidhttps://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16856072/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The authors responded, stating their review showed AA is at least as effective as other treatments and more cost-effective. The authors also noted the lack of quality-of-life measures was due to the limitations of the reviewed studies.\nMechanisms of Recovery.\nAlthough AA claims that spirituality is the primary mechanism for achieving change and recovery, there is growing evidence that suggests this is only true for a minority of AA attendees with a high addiction severity. Instead, AA's beneficial effects are carried predominantly by social, cognitive and affective mechanisms. However, atheist and agnostic people are less likely to initiate and sustain AA attendance in comparison to spiritual and religious people.\nCriticism.\nThe effectiveness of AA, compared to other methods and treatments, has been challenged over the years. Lance Dodes, in \"The Sober Truth\", claims only five to eight percent of the people who go to one or more AA meetings achieve sobriety. Dodes opposes the idea that a social network is needed to overcome substance abuse. Dodes' assertion that AA is ineffective has been criticized. Some other experts claim that the book's conclusion that \"[12-step] approaches are almost completely ineffective and even harmful in treating substance use disorders\" is wrong. In a 2015 article for \"The Atlantic\", Gabrielle Glaser criticized the dominance of AA in the treatment of addiction in the United States, citing Dodes's figures and a 2006 Cochrane report, to claim AA had a low success rate. In the past, others have criticized 12-step programs as pseudoscientific Her figures and assertions, however were criticized by other experts.\nPhilosophical and sociological dimensions.\nAA shares the view that acceptance of one's inherent limitations is critical to finding one's proper place among other humans and God. Such ideas are described as \"Counter-Enlightenment\" because they are contrary to the Enlightenment's ideal that humans have the capacity to make their lives and societies a heaven on Earth using their own power and reason. \nAfter evaluating AA's literature and observing AA meetings for sixteen months, sociologists David R. Rudy and Arthur L. Greil found that for an AA member to remain sober, a high level of commitment is necessary. This commitment is facilitated by a change in the member's worldview. They argue that to help members stay sober, AA must provide an all-encompassing worldview while creating and sustaining an atmosphere of transcendence in the organization. To be all-encompassing, AA's ideology emphasizes tolerance rather than a narrow religious worldview that may make the organization unpalatable to potential members and thereby limit its effectiveness. AA's emphasis on the spiritual nature of its program, however, is necessary to institutionalize a feeling of transcendence. A tension results from the risk that the necessity of transcendence, if taken too literally, would compromise AA's efforts to maintain a broad appeal. As this tension is an integral part of AA, Rudy and Greil argue that AA is best described as a \"quasi-religious organization\".\nCriticism and controversy.\nZoombombing.\nZoombombing emerged as a significant challenge for AA meetings during the COVID-19 pandemic, when many groups moved online. Disruptive individuals often infiltrated these virtual meetings, harassing participants and sharing inappropriate content. Some AA members experienced racial hatred. This intrusion undermined the safe, supportive environment essential for recovery, raising concerns about privacy and security. In response, AA groups and Zoom implemented stricter access controls and guidelines to protect participants and maintain a welcoming atmosphere for those seeking help.\nDisease model.\nThough AA usually avoids the term \"disease\", 1973 conference-approved literature said \"we had the disease of alcoholism\", while \"Living Sober\", published in 1975, contains several references to alcoholism as a disease, including a chapter urging the reader to \"Remember that alcoholism is an incurable, progressive, fatal disease.\" Regardless of official positions, since AA's inception, most members have believed alcoholism to be a disease. Its association with AA, as well as a good deal of its broader acceptance, stems from many members propagating it.\nBill Wilson explained in 1960 why AA had refrained from using the term \"disease\":\n13th-step and sexual advances.\n\"Thirteenth-stepping\" is a term used to describe a predatory behavior in AA where some individuals exploit vulnerable members for sexual relationships. This can involve unwanted advances and harassment, often targeting newer members who may be more susceptible due to their recovery status.\nIn 2003, a study in the \"Journal of Addiction Nursing\" sampled 55 women in AA and found that 35% of these women had experienced a \"pass\" and 29% had felt seduced at least once in AA settings. This has also happened with new male members who received guidance from older female AA members pursuing sexual company. The authors suggest that both men and women must be prepared for this behavior or find male or female-only groups. \nResponse.\nAs of 2010, women-only meetings are a very prevalent part of AA culture, and AA has become more welcoming for women. AA's pamphlet on sponsorship suggests that men be sponsored by men and women be sponsored by women. AA also has a safety flier which states that \"Unwanted sexual advances and predatory behaviors are in conflict with carrying the A.A. message of recovery.\"\nCriticism of culture.\nStanton Peele argued that some AA groups apply the disease model to all problem drinkers, whether or not they are \"full-blown\" alcoholics. Along with Nancy Shute, Peele has advocated that besides AA, other options should be readily available to those problem drinkers who can manage their drinking with the right treatment. The Big Book says \"moderate drinkers\" and \"a certain type of hard drinker\" can stop or moderate their drinking. The Big Book suggests no program for these drinkers, but instead seeks to help drinkers without \"power of choice in drink.\"\nIn 1983, a review stated that the AA program's focus on admission of having a problem increases deviant stigma and strips members of their previous cultural identity, replacing it with the deviant identity. A 1985 study based on observations of AA meetings warned of detrimental iatrogenic effects of the twelve-step philosophy and concluded that AA uses many methods that are also used by cults. A later review disagreed, stating that AA's program bore little resemblance to religious cult practices. In 2014, George Eman Vaillant published a paper making the case that Alcoholics Anonymous is not a cult.\nSpirituality.\nSome have criticized 12-step programs as \"a cult that relies on God as the mechanism of action\" and as \"overly theistic and outdated\". Others have cited the necessity of a \"higher power\" (an \"HP\") in formal AA as creating dependence on outside factors rather than internal efficacy. Gabrielle Glaser criticized 12-step programs for being \"faith-based\", but 12-step programs allow for a very wide diversity of spiritual beliefs, and there are a growing number of secular 12-step meetings.\nSecular meetings in Toronto controversy.\nReception to secular 12 step meetings from within AA has been mixed. In 2011, secular meetings in Toronto, where the 12 steps were altered to remove references to God and prayer, were delisted from the Toronto AA online and print directories, effectively removing them from the network of meetings. They appealed this decision, but were rejected, leading to a complaint to the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario. The Toronto co-ordinating body, the Greater Toronto Area Intergroup of Alcoholics Anonymous, argued both that as a special interest group they have the right to restrict its membership, and that a belief in God is a requirement for groups in Toronto. Mediation between the two groups resulted in the delisted groups being listed again, however the secular groups would be required to not alter the 12 steps.\nLawsuits and court rulings.\nPrivileged communication.\nIn the Fifth Step, AA members typically reveal their own past misconduct to their sponsors. US courts have not extended the status of privileged communication, such as physician-patient privilege or clergy\u2013penitent privilege, to communications between an AA member and their sponsor.\nCourt rulings on mandatory attendance.\nUnited States courts have ruled that inmates, parolees, and probationers cannot be ordered to attend AA. Though AA itself was not deemed a religion, it was ruled that it contained \"enough\" religious components (variously described in \"Griffin v. Coughlin\" below as, inter alia, \"religion\", \"religious activity\", \"religious exercise\") to make coerced attendance at AA meetings a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the constitution. In 2007, the Ninth Circuit of the U.S. Court of Appeals stated that a parolee who was ordered to attend AA had standing to sue his parole office.\nFamily lawsuit.\nThe family of Karla Mendez, who was murdered in 2011 by a man she met at an AA meeting, filed a civil lawsuit in 2012 against AA asserting AA had a \"reckless disregard for, and deliberate indifference...to the safety and security of victims attending AA meetings who are repeatedly preyed upon at those meetings by financial, violent, and sexual predators...\". The lawsuit against AA was dismissed in 2016.\nBig Book manuscript case.\nIn May 2017, Alcoholics Anonymous World Services Inc. filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court of the State of New York seeking the return of the original manuscript of the Big Book from its then-owner. AAWS claimed that the manuscript had been given to them as a gift in 1979. This action was criticized by many members of Alcoholics Anonymous since they didn't want their parent organization engaged in lawsuits. Alcoholics Anonymous World Services Inc. asked the court to voluntarily discontinue the action in November 2017.\nNotable people who have attended AA.\nWhile AA emphasizes personal anonymity, many notable individuals have publicly acknowledged their participation in the program for various lengths of time. \nBrad Pitt has openly discussed his sobriety journey, including his participation in Alcoholics Anonymous for a period of time, despite some criticism from some people in AA regarding its anonymity guidelines. Roger Ebert was a member of AA and had written some blog entries on the subject. Eminem has posted pictures of AA Sobriety coins. Anthony Hopkins has credited AA with saving him and marked 48 years of sobriety in 2023. Others who have attended AA include James K. Baxter, Art Carney, Bonnie Raitt, Mychal Judge, Moby, Hank Azaria, Matthew Perry, Jim Irsay, Demi Lovato, Elton John, Tom Waits, Capers Williamson, among others."}
{"id": "2049", "revid": "524544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2049", "title": "Alpha compositing", "text": "In computer graphics, alpha compositing or alpha blending is the process of combining one image with a background to create the appearance of partial or full transparency. It is often useful to render picture elements (pixels) in separate passes or layers and then combine the resulting 2D images into a single, final image called the composite. Compositing is used extensively in film when combining computer-rendered image elements with live footage. Alpha blending is also used in 2D computer graphics to put rasterized foreground elements over a background.\nIn order to combine the picture elements of the images correctly, it is necessary to keep an associated \"matte\" for each element in addition to its color. This matte layer contains the coverage information\u2014the shape of the geometry being drawn\u2014making it possible to distinguish between parts of the image where something was drawn and parts that are empty.\nAlthough the most basic operation of combining two images is to put one over the other, there are many operations, or blend modes, that are used.\nHistory.\nThe concept of an alpha channel was introduced by Alvy Ray Smith and Ed Catmull in the late 1970s at the New York Institute of Technology Computer Graphics Lab. Bruce A. Wallace derived the same straight over operator based on a physical reflectance/transmittance model in 1981. A 1984 paper by Thomas Porter and Tom Duff introduced premultiplied alpha using a geometrical approach.\nThe use of the term \"alpha\" is explained by Smith as follows: \"We called it that because of the classic linear interpolation formula formula_1 that uses the Greek letter formula_2 (alpha) to control the amount of interpolation between, in this case, two images A and B\". That is, when compositing image A atop image B, the value of formula_2 in the formula is taken directly from A's alpha channel.\nDescription.\nIn a 2D image a color combination is stored for each picture element (pixel), often a combination of red, green and blue (RGB). When alpha compositing is in use, each pixel has an additional numeric value stored in its alpha channel, with a value ranging from 0 to 1. A value of 0 means that the pixel is fully transparent and the color in the pixel beneath will show through. A value of 1 means that the pixel is fully opaque.\nWith the existence of an alpha channel, it is possible to express compositing image operations using a \"compositing algebra\". For example, given two images \"A\" and \"B\", the most common compositing operation is to combine the images so that \"A\" appears in the foreground and \"B\" appears in the background. This can be expressed as \"A\" over \"B\". In addition to over, Porter and Duff defined the compositing operators in, held out by (the phrase refers to holdout matting and is usually abbreviated out), atop, and xor (and the reverse operators rover, rin, rout, and ratop) from a consideration of choices in blending the colors of two pixels when their coverage is, conceptually, overlaid orthogonally:\nAs an example, the over operator can be accomplished by applying the following formula to each pixel:\nHere formula_5, formula_6 and formula_7 stand for the color components of the pixels in the result of the \"over\", image A, and image B respectively, applied to each color channel (red/green/blue) individually, whereas formula_8, formula_9 and formula_10 are the alpha values of the respective pixels.\nThe over operator is, in effect, the normal painting operation (see Painter's algorithm). The in and out operators are the alpha compositing equivalent of clipping. The two use only the alpha channel of the second image and ignore the color components. In addition, plus defines additive blending.\nStraight versus premultiplied.\nIf an alpha channel is used in an image, there are two common representations that are available: straight (unassociated) alpha and premultiplied (associated) alpha.\nComparison.\nThe most significant advantage of premultiplied alpha is that it allows for correct blending, interpolation, and filtering. Ordinary interpolation without premultiplied alpha leads to RGB information leaking out of fully transparent (A=0) regions, even though this RGB information is ideally invisible. When interpolating or filtering images with abrupt borders between transparent and opaque regions, this can result in borders of colors that were not visible in the original image. Errors also occur in areas of semitransparency because the RGB components are not correctly weighted, giving incorrectly high weighting to the color of the more transparent (lower alpha) pixels.\nPremultiplied alpha may also be used to allow regions of regular alpha blending (e.g. smoke) and regions with additive blending mode (e.g. flame and glitter effects) to be encoded within the same image. This is represented by an RGBA triplet that express emission with no occlusion, such as (0.4, 0.3, 0.2, 0.0).\nAnother advantage of premultiplied alpha is performance; in certain situations, it can reduce the number of multiplication operations (e.g. if the image is used many times during later compositing). The Porter\u2013Duff operations have a simple form only in premultiplied alpha. Some rendering pipelines expose a \"straight alpha\" API surface, but converts them into premultiplied alpha for performance.\nOne disadvantage of premultiplied alpha is that it can reduce the available relative precision in the RGB values when using integer or fixed-point representation for the color components. This may cause a noticeable loss of quality if the color information is later brightened or if the alpha channel is removed. In practice, this is not usually noticeable because during typical composition operations, such as OVER, the influence of the low-precision color information in low-alpha areas on the final output image (after composition) is correspondingly reduced. This loss of precision also makes premultiplied images easier to compress using certain compression schemes, as they do not record the color variations hidden inside transparent regions, and can allocate fewer bits to encode low-alpha areas. The same \u201climitations\u201d of lower quantisation bit depths such as 8 bit per channel are also present in imagery without alpha, and this argument is problematic as a result.\nExamples.\nAssuming that the pixel color is expressed using \"straight\" (non-premultiplied) RGBA tuples, a pixel value of (0, 0.7, 0, 0.5) implies a pixel that has 70% of the maximum green intensity and 50% opacity. If the color were fully green, its RGBA would be (0, 1, 0, 0.5). However, if this pixel uses premultiplied alpha, all of the RGB values (0, 0.7, 0) are multiplied, or scaled for occlusion, by the alpha value 0.5, which is appended to yield (0, 0.35, 0, 0.5). In this case, the 0.35 value for the G channel actually indicates 70% green emission intensity (with 50% occlusion). A pure green emission would be encoded as (0, 0.5, 0, 0.5). Knowing whether a file uses straight or premultiplied alpha is essential to correctly process or composite it, as a different calculation is required.\nEmission with no occlusion cannot be represented in straight alpha. No conversion is available in this case.\nImage formats supporting alpha channels.\nThe most popular image formats that support the alpha channel are PNG and TIFF. GIF supports alpha channels, but is considered to be inefficient when it comes to file size. Support for alpha channels is present in some video codecs, such as Animation and Apple ProRes 4444 of the QuickTime format, or in the Techsmith multi-format codec.\nThe file format BMP generally does not support this channel; however, in different formats such as 32-bit (888\u20138) or 16-bit (444\u20134) it is possible to save the alpha channel, although not all systems or programs are able to read it: it is exploited mainly in some video games or particular applications; specific programs have also been created for the creation of these BMPs.\nGamma correction.\nThe RGB values of typical digital images do not directly correspond to the physical light intensities, but are rather compressed by a gamma correction function:\nThis transformation better utilizes the limited number of bits in the encoded image by choosing formula_14 that better matches the non-linear human perception of luminance.\nAccordingly, computer programs that deal with such images must decode the RGB values into a linear space (by undoing the gamma-compression), blend the linear light intensities, and re-apply the gamma compression to the result:\nWhen combined with premultiplied alpha, pre-multiplication is done in linear space, prior to gamma compression. This results in the following formula:\nNote that the alpha channel may or may not undergo gamma-correction, even when the color channels do.\nOther transparency methods.\nAlthough used for similar purposes, transparent colors and image masks do not permit the smooth blending of the superimposed image pixels with those of the background (only whole image pixels or whole background pixels allowed).\nA similar effect can be achieved with a 1-bit alpha channel, as found in the 16-bit RGBA high color mode of the Truevision TGA image file format and related TARGA and AT-Vista/NU-Vista display adapters' high color graphic mode. This mode devotes 5 bits for every primary RGB color (15-bit RGB) plus a remaining bit as the \"alpha channel\".\nDithering can be used to simulate partial occlusion where only 1-bit alpha is available.\nFor some applications, a single alpha channel is not sufficient: a stained-glass window, for instance, requires a separate transparency channel for each RGB channel to model the red, green and blue transparency separately. More alpha channels can be added for accurate spectral color filtration applications.\nSome order-independent transparency methods replace the over operator with a commutative approximation."}
{"id": "2050", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2050", "title": "Archaeologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "2051", "revid": "45911552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2051", "title": "Anarchist", "text": ""}
{"id": "2052", "revid": "160367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2052", "title": "Array (data structure)", "text": "In computer science, an array is a data structure consisting of a collection of \"elements\" (values or variables), of same memory size, each identified by at least one \"array index\" or \"key\". An array is stored such that the position of each element can be computed from its index tuple by a mathematical formula. The simplest type of data structure is a linear array, also called a one-dimensional array.\nFor example, an array of ten 32-bit (4-byte) integer variables, with indices 0 through 9, may be stored as ten words at memory addresses 2000, 2004, 2008, ..., 2036, (in hexadecimal: codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, ..., codice_4) so that the element with index \"i\" has the address 2000 + (\"i\" \u00d7 4).\nThe memory address of the first element of an array is called first address, foundation address, or base address.\nBecause the mathematical concept of a matrix can be represented as a two-dimensional grid, two-dimensional arrays are also sometimes called \"matrices\". In some cases the term \"vector\" is used in computing to refer to an array, although tuples rather than vectors are the more mathematically correct equivalent. Tables are often implemented in the form of arrays, especially lookup tables; the word \"table\" is sometimes used as a synonym of array.\nArrays are among the oldest and most important data structures, and are used by almost every program. They are also used to implement many other data structures, such as lists and strings. They effectively exploit the addressing logic of computers. In most modern computers and many external storage devices, the memory is a one-dimensional array of words, whose indices are their addresses. Processors, especially vector processors, are often optimized for array operations.\nArrays are useful mostly because the element indices can be computed at run time. Among other things, this feature allows a single iterative statement to process arbitrarily many elements of an array. For that reason, the elements of an array data structure are required to have the same size and should use the same data representation. The set of valid index tuples and the addresses of the elements (and hence the element addressing formula) are usually, but not always, fixed while the array is in use.\nThe term \"array\" may also refer to an array data type, a kind of data type provided by most high-level programming languages that consists of a collection of values or variables that can be selected by one or more indices computed at run-time. Array types are often implemented by array structures; however, in some languages they may be implemented by hash tables, linked lists, search trees, or other data structures.\nThe term is also used, especially in the description of algorithms, to mean associative array or \"abstract array\", a theoretical computer science model (an abstract data type or ADT) intended to capture the essential properties of arrays.\nHistory.\nThe first digital computers used machine-language programming to set up and access array structures for data tables, vector and matrix computations, and for many other purposes. John von Neumann wrote the first array-sorting program (merge sort) in 1945, during the building of the first stored-program computer. Array indexing was originally done by self-modifying code, and later using index registers and indirect addressing. Some mainframes designed in the 1960s, such as the Burroughs B5000 and its successors, used memory segmentation to perform index-bounds checking in hardware.\nAssembly languages generally have no special support for arrays, other than what the machine itself provides. The earliest high-level programming languages, including FORTRAN (1957), Lisp (1958), COBOL (1960), and ALGOL 60 (1960), had support for multi-dimensional arrays, and so has C (1972). In C++ (1983), class templates exist for multi-dimensional arrays whose dimension is fixed at runtime as well as for runtime-flexible arrays.\nApplications.\nArrays are used to implement mathematical vectors and matrices, as well as other kinds of rectangular tables. Many databases, small and large, consist of (or include) one-dimensional arrays whose elements are records.\nArrays are used to implement other data structures, such as lists, heaps, hash tables, deques, queues, stacks, strings, and VLists. Array-based implementations of other data structures are frequently simple and space-efficient (implicit data structures), requiring little space overhead, but may have poor space complexity, particularly when modified, compared to tree-based data structures (compare a sorted array to a search tree).\nOne or more large arrays are sometimes used to emulate in-program dynamic memory allocation, particularly memory pool allocation. Historically, this has sometimes been the only way to allocate \"dynamic memory\" portably.\nArrays can be used to determine partial or complete control flow in programs, as a compact alternative to (otherwise repetitive) multiple codice_5 statements. They are known in this context as control tables and are used in conjunction with a purpose-built interpreter whose control flow is altered according to values contained in the array. The array may contain subroutine pointers (or relative subroutine numbers that can be acted upon by SWITCH statements) that direct the path of the execution.\nElement identifier and addressing formulas.\nWhen data objects are stored in an array, individual objects are selected by an index that is usually a non-negative scalar integer. Indexes are also called subscripts. An index \"maps\" the array value to a stored object.\nThere are three ways in which the elements of an array can be indexed:\nUsing zero based indexing is the design choice of many influential programming languages, including C, Java and Lisp. This leads to simpler implementation where the subscript refers to an offset from the starting position of an array, so the first element has an offset of zero.\nArrays can have multiple dimensions, thus it is not uncommon to access an array using multiple indices. For example, a two-dimensional array codice_6 with three rows and four columns might provide access to the element at the 2nd row and 4th column by the expression codice_7 in the case of a zero-based indexing system. Thus two indices are used for a two-dimensional array, three for a three-dimensional array, and \"n\" for an \"n\"-dimensional array.\nThe number of indices needed to specify an element is called the dimension, dimensionality, or rank of the array.\nIn standard arrays, each index is restricted to a certain range of consecutive integers (or consecutive values of some enumerated type), and the address of an element is computed by a \"linear\" formula on the indices.\nOne-dimensional arrays.\nA one-dimensional array (or single dimension array) is a type of linear array. Accessing its elements involves a single subscript which can either represent a row or column index.\nAs an example consider the C declaration codice_8 which declares a one-dimensional array of ten integers. Here, the array can store ten elements of type codice_9 . This array has indices starting from zero through nine. For example, the expressions codice_10 and codice_11 are the first and last elements respectively.\nFor a vector with linear addressing, the element with index \"i\" is located at the address , where \"B\" is a fixed \"base address\" and \"c\" a fixed constant, sometimes called the \"address increment\" or \"stride\".\nIf the valid element indices begin at 0, the constant \"B\" is simply the address of the first element of the array. For this reason, the C programming language specifies that array indices always begin at 0; and many programmers will call that element \"zeroth\" rather than \"first\".\nHowever, one can choose the index of the first element by an appropriate choice of the base address \"B\". For example, if the array has five elements, indexed 1 through 5, and the base address \"B\" is replaced by , then the indices of those same elements will be 31 to 35. If the numbering does not start at 0, the constant \"B\" may not be the address of any element.\nMultidimensional arrays.\nFor a multidimensional array, the element with indices \"i\",\"j\" would have address \"B\" + \"c\" \u00b7 \"i\" + \"d\" \u00b7 \"j\", where the coefficients \"c\" and \"d\" are the \"row\" and \"column address increments\", respectively.\nMore generally, in a \"k\"-dimensional array, the address of an element with indices \"i\"1, \"i\"2, ..., \"i\"\"k\" is\nFor example: int a[2][3];\nThis means that array a has 2 rows and 3 columns, and the array is of integer type. Here we can store 6 elements they will be stored linearly but starting from first row linear then continuing with second row. The above array will be stored as a11, a12, a13, a21, a22, a23.\nThis formula requires only \"k\" multiplications and \"k\" additions, for any array that can fit in memory. Moreover, if any coefficient is a fixed power of 2, the multiplication can be replaced by bit shifting.\nThe coefficients \"c\"\"k\" must be chosen so that every valid index tuple maps to the address of a distinct element.\nIf the minimum legal value for every index is 0, then \"B\" is the address of the element whose indices are all zero. As in the one-dimensional case, the element indices may be changed by changing the base address \"B\". Thus, if a two-dimensional array has rows and columns indexed from 1 to 10 and 1 to 20, respectively, then replacing \"B\" by will cause them to be renumbered from 0 through 9 and 4 through 23, respectively. Taking advantage of this feature, some languages (like FORTRAN 77) specify that array indices begin at 1, as in mathematical tradition while other languages (like Fortran 90, Pascal and Algol) let the user choose the minimum value for each index.\nDope vectors.\nThe addressing formula is completely defined by the dimension \"d\", the base address \"B\", and the increments \"c\"1, \"c\"2, ..., \"c\"\"k\". It is often useful to pack these parameters into a record called the array's descriptor, stride vector, or dope vector. The size of each element, and the minimum and maximum values allowed for each index may also be included in the dope vector. The dope vector is a complete handle for the array, and is a convenient way to pass arrays as arguments to procedures. Many useful array slicing operations (such as selecting a sub-array, swapping indices, or reversing the direction of the indices) can be performed very efficiently by manipulating the dope vector.\nCompact layouts.\nOften the coefficients are chosen so that the elements occupy a contiguous area of memory. However, that is not necessary. Even if arrays are always created with contiguous elements, some array slicing operations may create non-contiguous sub-arrays from them.\nThere are two systematic compact layouts for a two-dimensional array. For example, consider the matrix\nIn the row-major order layout (adopted by C for statically declared arrays), the elements in each row are stored in consecutive positions and all of the elements of a row have a lower address than any of the elements of a consecutive row:\nIn column-major order (traditionally used by Fortran), the elements in each column are consecutive in memory and all of the elements of a column have a lower address than any of the elements of a consecutive column:\nFor arrays with three or more indices, \"row major order\" puts in consecutive positions any two elements whose index tuples differ only by one in the \"last\" index. \"Column major order\" is analogous with respect to the \"first\" index.\nIn systems which use processor cache or virtual memory, scanning an array is much faster if successive elements are stored in consecutive positions in memory, rather than sparsely scattered. This is known as spatial locality, which is a type of locality of reference. Many algorithms that use multidimensional arrays will scan them in a predictable order. A programmer (or a sophisticated compiler) may use this information to choose between row- or column-major layout for each array. For example, when computing the product \"A\"\u00b7\"B\" of two matrices, it would be best to have \"A\" stored in row-major order, and \"B\" in column-major order.\nResizing.\nStatic arrays have a size that is fixed when they are created and consequently do not allow elements to be inserted or removed. However, by allocating a new array and copying the contents of the old array to it, it is possible to effectively implement a \"dynamic\" version of an array; see dynamic array. If this operation is done infrequently, insertions at the end of the array require only amortized constant time.\nSome array data structures do not reallocate storage, but do store a count of the number of elements of the array in use, called the count or size. This effectively makes the array a dynamic array with a fixed maximum size or capacity; Pascal strings are examples of this.\nNon-linear formulas.\nMore complicated (non-linear) formulas are occasionally used. For a compact two-dimensional triangular array, for instance, the addressing formula is a polynomial of degree 2.\nEfficiency.\nBoth \"store\" and \"select\" take (deterministic worst case) constant time. Arrays take linear (O(\"n\")) space in the number of elements \"n\" that they hold.\nIn an array with element size \"k\" and on a machine with a cache line size of B bytes, iterating through an array of \"n\" elements requires the minimum of ceiling(\"nk\"/B) cache misses, because its elements occupy contiguous memory locations. This is roughly a factor of B/\"k\" better than the number of cache misses needed to access \"n\" elements at random memory locations. As a consequence, sequential iteration over an array is noticeably faster in practice than iteration over many other data structures, a property called locality of reference (this does \"not\" mean however, that using a perfect hash or trivial hash within the same (local) array, will not be even faster - and achievable in constant time). Libraries provide low-level optimized facilities for copying ranges of memory (such as memcpy) which can be used to move contiguous blocks of array elements significantly faster than can be achieved through individual element access. The speedup of such optimized routines varies by array element size, architecture, and implementation.\nMemory-wise, arrays are compact data structures with no per-element overhead. There may be a per-array overhead (e.g., to store index bounds) but this is language-dependent. It can also happen that elements stored in an array require \"less\" memory than the same elements stored in individual variables, because several array elements can be stored in a single word; such arrays are often called \"packed\" arrays. An extreme (but commonly used) case is the bit array, where every bit represents a single element. A single octet can thus hold up to 256 different combinations of up to 8 different conditions, in the most compact form.\nArray accesses with statically predictable access patterns are a major source of data parallelism.\nComparison with other data structures.\nDynamic arrays or growable arrays are similar to arrays but add the ability to insert and delete elements; adding and deleting at the end is particularly efficient. However, they reserve linear (\u0398(\"n\")) additional storage, whereas arrays do not reserve additional storage.\nAssociative arrays provide a mechanism for array-like functionality without huge storage overheads when the index values are sparse. For example, an array that contains values only at indexes 1 and 2 billion may benefit from using such a structure. Specialized associative arrays with integer keys include Patricia tries, Judy arrays, and van Emde Boas trees.\nBalanced trees require O(log \"n\") time for indexed access, but also permit inserting or deleting elements in O(log \"n\") time, whereas growable arrays require linear (\u0398(\"n\")) time to insert or delete elements at an arbitrary position.\nLinked lists allow constant time removal and insertion in the middle but take linear time for indexed access. Their memory use is typically worse than arrays, but is still linear.\nAn Iliffe vector is an alternative to a multidimensional array structure. It uses a one-dimensional array of references to arrays of one dimension less. For two dimensions, in particular, this alternative structure would be a vector of pointers to vectors, one for each row(pointer on c or c++). Thus an element in row \"i\" and column \"j\" of an array \"A\" would be accessed by double indexing (\"A\"[\"i\"][\"j\"] in typical notation). This alternative structure allows jagged arrays, where each row may have a different size\u2014or, in general, where the valid range of each index depends on the values of all preceding indices. It also saves one multiplication (by the column address increment) replacing it by a bit shift (to index the vector of row pointers) and one extra memory access (fetching the row address), which may be worthwhile in some architectures.\nDimension.\nThe \"dimension\" of an array is the number of indices needed to select an element. Thus, if the array is seen as a function on a set of possible index combinations, it is the dimension of the space of which its domain is a discrete subset. Thus a one-dimensional array is a list of data, a two-dimensional array is a rectangle of data, a three-dimensional array a block of data, etc.\nThis should not be confused with the dimension of the set of all matrices with a given domain, that is, the number of elements in the array. For example, an array with 5 rows and 4 columns is two-dimensional, but such matrices form a 20-dimensional space. Similarly, a three-dimensional vector can be represented by a one-dimensional array of size three."}
{"id": "2053", "revid": "43067996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2053", "title": "Advance Australia Fair", "text": "\"Advance Australia Fair\" is the national anthem of Australia. Written by Scottish-born Australian composer Peter Dodds McCormick, the song was first performed as a patriotic song in Australia in 1878. It replaced \"God Save the Queen\" as the official national anthem by the Whitlam government in 1974, following an indicative opinion survey. The subsequent Fraser government reinstated \"God Save the Queen\" as the national anthem in January 1976 alongside three other \"national songs\": \"Advance Australia Fair\", \"Waltzing Matilda\" and \"Song of Australia\". Later in 1977 a plebiscite to choose the \"national song\" preferred \"Advance Australia Fair\". This was subsequently proclaimed the national anthem in 1984 by the Hawke government. \"God Save the Queen\" became the royal anthem (later \"God Save the King\" on the accession of King Charles III), and is used at public engagements attended by the King or members of the royal family.\nThe lyrics of the 1984 version of \"Advance Australia Fair\" were significantly modified from McCormick's original, only retaining a now gender neutral version of the first verse and using a second verse first sung in 1901 at Federation. In January 2021, the official lyrics were changed once again, in recognition of the long habitation of Indigenous Australians. \nHistory.\nOrigin.\n\"Advance Australia Fair\" was published in early December 1878 by Scottish-born Australian composer Peter Dodds McCormick (1833\u20131916) under the pen-name \"Amicus\" (which means in Latin). It was first sung by Andrew Fairfax, accompanied by a concert band conducted by McCormick, at a function of the Highland Society of New South Wales in Sydney on 30 November 1878 (Saint Andrew's Day). The song gained in popularity and an amended version was sung by a choir of around 10,000 at the inauguration of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901. In 1907, the Australian Government awarded McCormick \u00a3100 for his composition.\nIn a letter to R.B. Fuller dated 1 August 1913, McCormick described the circumstances that inspired him to write \"Advance Australia Fair\" to be sung by a large choir with band accompaniment. McCormick had attended a concert at Sydney's Exhibition Building where various national anthems were played.\nThe earliest known sound recording of \"Advance Australia Fair\" appears in \"The Landing of the Australian Troops in Egypt\" (), a short commercial recording dramatizing the arrival of Australian troops in Egypt en route to Gallipoli.\nBefore its adoption as Australia's national anthem, \"Advance Australia Fair\" had considerable use elsewhere. For example, Australia's national broadcaster, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, used it to announce its radio news bulletins from 1942 to 1952. It was also frequently played at the start or end of official functions. Towards the end of World War II it was one of three songs played in certain picture theatres, along with \"God Save the King\" and the US national anthem, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\".\nAdoption by the Whitlam government.\nFollowing the collapse of British power and influence after World War II, Australia was forced to abandon its previous conception of itself as a loyal member of a wider global British community. The impetus for the creation of a new identity was described by Donald Horne as \"new nationalism\" in 1968. A Gallup poll indicated in 1972 that 72% of Australians now supported a new nationally distinct anthem, up from 38% in 1968. The newly elected Whitlam government of 1972 made central the elevation of distinctively Australian symbols. In this vein, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam announced in his 1973 Australia Day address that\nWhitlam also announced that a competition for a new anthem would be held by the Australian Council for the Arts with entrants accepted for both music and lyrics. However, despite around the 2500 entries received for lyrics and 1300 for music, the Council for the Arts could only produce a shortlist of 6 lyrics and no music, reduced from the 12 originally requested. The lyrics selected were \"We'll Keep the Faith\", \"Advance, Australia\", \"Song of Australia\" and three untitled verses. These were widely denounced by artists and the media, with A D Hope calling them \"hopeless\", James McAuley calling them \"hopelessly bad\" and \"The Australian\" describing the choices as \"between the unbearable and the unforgivable\". One of the judges David Williamson responded to the criticism stating \"if you think these are bad, you should have seen the rest of the 2500 or so we rejected\".\nMany artists commentated on the difficulty of creating a national anthem in the 1970s, with Richard Meale stating that \"we had missed the boat\" and writer Bob Ellis stating that \"You've got to leave out all the gum trees and wallabies, and you can't talk about defending the country against yellow hordes, so there's not much to talk about except an independent stance and belated pride in ourselves. Anything else would embarrass the audience.\" Ultimately, the government did not include any of the new entries in the final vote, with the poll only including \"Advance Australia Fair\", \"Waltzing Matilda\" and \"The Song of Australia\". This \"indicative plebiscite\" polled 60,000 people (0.05% of Australians at the time) nationally.\n\"Advance Australia Fair\" was chosen by 51.4% of respondents and, on 9 April 1974, Whitlam announced in parliament that it was the national anthem, to be used on all occasions except those of a specifically regal nature. The choice came under attack almost immediately, with an editorial noting that \"For Australians, the only consolation is that there will be very few occasions when the words are sung,\" and the Anglican Dean of Sydney commenting \"This second-rate secular song is completely inappropriate for use in churches.\" Officials in four states said that Advance Australia Fair would not be played at official functions and that \"God Save the Queen\" would not be replaced, with Sir Harry Budd of New South Wales saying that the lyrics \"are foolish and banal and their sentiments ridiculous\".\nDuring the 1975 election campaign following the dismissal of Whitlam by Sir John Kerr, David Combe proposed that the song be played at the start of the Labor Party's official campaign launch on 24 November 1975 at Festival Hall, Melbourne. Whitlam's speechwriter Graham Freudenberg rejected this idea because, among other reasons, the status of the anthem at that point was still tentative.\nReversion by the Fraser government.\nOn 22 January 1976 the Fraser government reinstated \"God Save the Queen\" as the national anthem for use at royal and vice-regal events, but otherwise provided a choice between \"God Save the Queen\", \"Advance Australia Fair\", \"Song of Australia\" or \"Waltzing Matilda\" for civilian functions. The choice of four different national anthems was mocked, with \"The Age\" declaring the new anthem as \"God Save Australia's Fair Matilda\". His government made plans to conduct a national poll to find a song for use on ceremonial occasions when it was desired to mark a separate Australian identity, whilst maintaining \"God Save The Queen\" as the national anthem. This was conducted as a plebiscite to choose the National Song, held as an optional additional question in the 1977 referendum on various issues. Despite both Fraser and Whitlam advocating a vote for \"Waltzing Matilda\", \"Advance Australia Fair\" was the winner with 43.29% of the vote, defeating the three alternatives, \"Waltzing Matilda\" (28.28%), \"The Song of Australia\" (9.65%) and the existing national anthem, \"God Save the Queen\" (18.78%).\nRe-adoption by the Hawke government.\n\"Advance Australia Fair\", with modified lyrics and reduced to two verses (see development of lyrics), was adopted as the Australian national anthem by the Labor government of Bob Hawke, coming into effect on 19 April 1984. At the same time, \"God Save the King/Queen\" became known as the royal anthem, and continues to be played alongside the Australian national anthem at public engagements in Australia that are attended by the King or any other members of the Royal Family.\nEven though any personal copyright of Peter Dodds McCormick's original lyrics has expired, as he died in 1916, the Commonwealth of Australia claims copyright on the official lyrics and particular arrangements of music. Non-commercial use of the anthem is permitted without case-by-case permission, but the Commonwealth government requires permission for commercial use.\nThe orchestral arrangement of \"Advance Australia Fair\" that is now regularly played for Australian victories at international sporting medal ceremonies, and at the openings of major domestic sporting, cultural and community events, is by Tommy Tycho, an immigrant from Hungary. It was commissioned by ABC Music in 1984 and then televised by Channel 10 in 1986 in their Australia Day broadcast, featuring Julie Anthony as the soloist.\nLyrics.\nThe lyrics of \"Advance Australia Fair\", as modified by the National Australia Day Council, were officially adopted in April 1984. The lyrics were updated on 1 January 2021 in an attempt to recognise the legacy of Indigenous Australians, with the word \"one\" in the second line replacing the previous \"young\". The lyrics are now as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;\"&gt;I\nAustralians all let us rejoice,\nFor we are one and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil,\nOur home is girt by sea;\nOur land abounds in Nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia fair!\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia fair!&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;II\nBeneath our radiant Southern Cross,\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make this Commonwealth of ours\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor those who've come across the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo advance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance Australia fair!&lt;/poem&gt;\nDevelopment of lyrics.\nSince the original lyrics were written in 1878, there have been several changes, in some cases with the intent of altering the anthem's political focus especially in regard to gender neutrality and Indigenous Australians. Some of these have been minor while others have significantly altered the song. The original song was four verses long. For its 1984 adoption as the national anthem, the song was cut from the four verses to two. The first verse was kept largely as the 1878 original, except for the change in the first line from \" let us rejoice\" to \" let us rejoice\". The second, third and fourth verses of the original were dropped, in favour of a modified version of the new third verse which was sung at Federation in 1901.\nThe lyrics published in the second edition (1879) were as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;\"&gt;I\nAustralia's sons let us rejoice,\nFor we are young and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil,\nOur home is girt by sea; \nOur land abounds in nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains let us sing,\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;II\nWhen gallant Cook from Albion sail'd,\nTo trace wide oceans o'er,\nTrue British courage bore him on,\nTil he landed on our shore.\nThen here he raised Old England's flag,\nThe standard of the brave;\n\"With all her faults we love her still\"\n\"Britannia rules the wave.\"\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;\"&gt;III\nWhile other nations of the globe\nBehold us from afar,\nWe'll rise to high renown and shine\nLike our glorious southern star;\nFrom England soil and Fatherland,\nScotia and Erin fair,\nLet all combine with heart and hand\nTo advance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance, Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;IV\nShould foreign foe e'er sight our coast,\nOr dare a foot to land,\nWe'll rouse to arms like sires of yore,\nTo guard our native strand;\nBritannia then shall surely know,\nThough oceans roll between,\nHer sons in fair Australia's land\nStill keep their courage green.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance Australia fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe 1901 Federation version of the third verse was originally sung as:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;III\nBeneath our radiant Southern Cross,\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make our youthful Commonwealth,\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor loyal sons beyond the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo advance Australia fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing\nAdvance Australia fair!&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe lyrics of \"Advance Australia Fair\", as modified by the National Australia Day Council and officially adopted on 19 April 1984, were as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;I\nAustralians all let us rejoice,\nFor we are young and free;\nWe've golden soil and wealth for toil;\nOur home is girt by sea;\nOur land abounds in nature's gifts\nOf beauty rich and rare;\nIn history's page, let every stage\nAdvance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\n&lt;poem style=\"float:left; margin-left: 1em;&gt;II\nBeneath our radiant Southern Cross\nWe'll toil with hearts and hands;\nTo make this Commonwealth of ours\nRenowned of all the lands;\nFor those who've come across the seas\nWe've boundless plains to share;\nWith courage let us all combine\nTo Advance Australia Fair.\nIn joyful strains then let us sing,\nAdvance Australia Fair.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThese lyrics were updated on 1 January 2021 to the current version, in which \"young\" in the second line is replaced with \"one\" to reflect the pre-colonial presence of Indigenous Australians, who have lived in Australia much longer than Europeans.\nCriticism.\nGeneral criticism.\nIn May 1976, after reinstating \"God Save the Queen\", Fraser advised the Australian Olympic Federation to use \"Waltzing Matilda\" as the national anthem for the forthcoming Montreal Olympic Games. Fraser responded to criticism of \"Waltzing Matilda\" compared with \"Advance Australia Fair\", and countered, \"in the second verse... we find these words, 'Britannia rules the waves'.\" \nThe fourth line of the anthem, \"our home is girt by sea\", has been criticised for using the so-called archaic word \"girt\". Additionally, the lyrics and melody of the Australian national anthem have been criticised in some quarters as being dull and unendearing to the Australian people. National Party senator Sandy Macdonald said in 2001 that \"'Advance Australia Fair' is so boring that the nation risks singing itself to sleep, with boring music and words impossible to understand\".\nCraig Emerson of the Australian Labor Party has critiqued the anthem, and former MP Peter Slipper has said that Australia should consider another anthem. In 2011, former Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett called for \"I Am Australian\" to become Australia's national anthem, while former Australian Labor Party leader Kim Beazley defended it, stating: the current \"National Anthem is not contradictory to an Australian republic\".\nRecognition of Indigenous Australians.\nThe song has been criticised for failing to represent or acknowledge Australia's Indigenous peoples and aspects of the country's colonial past, leading to modification. The lyrics have been accused of celebrating British colonisation and perpetuating the concept of \"terra nullius;\" the now-changed second line of the anthem (\"for we are young and free\") was criticised in particular for ignoring the long history of Indigenous Australians. It has also been suggested that the word \"fair\" celebrates the \"civilising\" mission of British colonists.\nSince about 2015, public debate about the anthem has increased. Boxer Anthony Mundine stated in 2013, 2017 and 2018 that he would not stand for the anthem, prompting organisers not to play it before his fights. In September 2018 a 9-year-old Brisbane girl was disciplined by her school after refusing to stand for the national anthem; her actions were applauded by some public commenters, and criticised by others. In 2019, several National Rugby League football players decided not to sing the anthem before the first match of the State of Origin series and before the Indigenous All-Stars series with New Zealand; NRL coach and celebrated former player Mal Meninga supported the protesting players and called for a referendum on the subject.\nSeveral alternative versions of \"Advance Australia Fair\" have been proposed to address the alleged exclusion of Indigenous Australians. Judith Durham of The Seekers and Mutti Mutti musician Kutcha Edwards released their alternative lyrics in 2009, replacing \"for we are young and free\" with the opening lines \"Australians let us stand as one, upon this sacred land\". In 2015, Aboriginal Australian soprano Deborah Cheetham declined an invitation to sing the anthem at the 2015 AFL grand final after the AFL turned down her request to replace the words \"for we are young and free\" with \"in peace and harmony\". She has advocated for the lyrics being rewritten and endorsed Durham and Edwards' alternative version.\nIn 2017 the Recognition in Anthem Project was established and began work on a new version, with lyrics written by poet and former Victorian Supreme Court judge Peter Vickery following consultation with Indigenous communities and others. Vickery's proposed lyrics replaced \"we are young and free\" with \"we are one and free\" in the first verse, deleted the second and added two new ones; the second verse acknowledging Indigenous history, immigration and calls for unity and respect, and the third adapting lines from the official second verse. It was debuted at the Desert Song Festival in Alice Springs by an Aboriginal choir. Former prime minister Bob Hawke endorsed Vickery's alternative lyrics in 2018. In 2017, the federal government under then prime minister Malcolm Turnbull granted permission for Vickery's lyrics to be sung at certain occasions as a \"patriotic song\", but said that before making any official change to the anthem, \"The Government would need to be convinced of a sufficient groundswell of support in the wider community\".\nIn November 2020, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian proposed changing one word in the opening couplet, from \"we are young and free\" to \"we are one and free\", to acknowledge Australia's Indigenous history. The proposal was supported by the federal Minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, and in December 2020 Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that he would be advising the governor-general to proclaim the change, to take effect on 1 January 2021. The new wording was highlighted in the No case of the official referendum pamphlet of the Voice to Parliament referendum to support arguments against purported \"divisive\" constitutional changes.\nDharawal lyrics.\nLyrics for the anthem have been written twice in the Dharug language, an Australian Aboriginal language spoken around Sydney by the Dharawal people.\nA first version was first performed in July 2010, at a Rugby League State of Origin match in Sydney, though there was some opposition:\nIn December 2020, another setting, in Dharug, followed by the anthem in English, was sung before a Rugby Union international between Australia and Argentina:\nOther unofficial variants.\nIn 2011, about fifty different Christian schools from different denominations came under criticism for singing an unofficial version of the song written by the Sri Lankan immigrant Ruth Ponniah in 1988. The song replaced the official second verse of \"Advance Australia Fair\" with lyrics that were Christian in nature.\nMinister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth Peter Garrett and chief executive of the National Australia Day Council Warren Pearson admonished the schools for modifying the lyrics of the anthem, and the Australian Parents Council and the Federation of Parents and Citizens' Association of NSW called for a ban on the modified song. Stephen O'Doherty, chief executive of Christian Schools Australia, defended the use of the lyrics in response."}
{"id": "2058", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2058", "title": "Atheists", "text": ""}
{"id": "2061", "revid": "18066332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2061", "title": "Automatic number announcement circuit", "text": "An automatic number announcement circuit (ANAC) is a component of a central office of a telephone company that provides a service to installation and service technicians to determine the telephone number of a telephone line. The facility has a telephone number that may be called to listen to an automatic announcement that includes the caller's telephone number. The ANAC facility is useful primarily during the installation of landline telephones to quickly identify one of multiple wire pairs in a bundle or at a termination point.\nOperation.\nBy connecting a test telephone set, a technician calls the local telephone number of the automatic number announcement service. This call is connected to equipment at the central office that uses automatic equipment to announce the telephone number of the line calling in. The main purpose of this system is to allow telephone company technicians to identify the telephone line they are connected to.\nAutomatic number announcement systems are based on automatic number identification. They are intended for use by phone company technicians, the ANAC system bypasses customer features, such as unlisted numbers, caller ID blocking, and outgoing call blocking. Installers of multi-line business services where outgoing calls from all lines display the company's main number on call display can use ANAC to identify a specific line in the system, even if CID displays every line as \"line one\".\nMost ANAC systems are provider-specific in each wire center, while others are regional or state-/province- or area-code-wide. No official lists of ANAC numbers are published, as telephone companies guard against abuse that would interfere with availability for installers.\nExchange prefixes for testing.\nThe North American Numbering Plan reserves the exchange (\"central office\") prefixes \"958\" and \"959\" for plant testing purposes. Code 959 with three or four additional digits is dedicated for access to office test lines in local exchange carrier and interoffice carrier central offices. The specifications define several test features for line conditions, such as quiet line and busy line, and test tones transmitted to callers. Telephone numbers are assigned for ring back to test the ringer when installing telephone sets, milliwatt tone (a number simply answers with a continuous test tone) and a loop around (which connects a call to another inbound call to the same or another test number).\nANAC services are typically installed in the \"958\" range, which is intended for communications between central offices. In some area codes, multiple additional prefixes may be reserved for test purposes. Many area codes reserved 999; 320 was also formerly reserved in Bell Canada territory.\nOther carrier-specific North American test numbers include 555-XXXX numbers (such as 555\u20130311 on Rogers Communications in Canada) or vertical service codes, such as *99 on Cablevision/Optimum Voice in the United States. MCI Inc. (United States) provides ANI information by dialing 800-444-4444.\nTelephone numbers.\nPlant testing telephone numbers are carrier-specific, there is no comprehensive list of telephone numbers for ANAC services. In some communities, test numbers change relatively often. In others, a major incumbent carrier might assign a single number which provides test functions on its network across an entire numbering plan area, throughout an entire province or state, or system-wide.\nSome telecommunication carriers maintain toll-free numbers for ANAC facilities. Some national toll-free numbers provide automatic number identification by speaking the telephone number of the caller, but these are not intended for use in identifying the customer's own phone number. They are used for the agent in a call center to confirm the telephone a customer is calling from, so that the customer's account information can be displayed as a \"screen pop\" for the next available customer service representative."}
{"id": "2062", "revid": "10147601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2062", "title": "Amerigo Vespucci", "text": "Amerigo Vespucci ( , ; 9 March 1454 \u2013 22 February 1512) was an Italian explorer and navigator from the Republic of Florence for whom \"America\" is named.\nVespucci participated in at least two voyages of the Age of Discovery between 1497 and 1504, first on behalf of Spain (14991500) and then for Portugal (15011502). In 1503 and 1505, two booklets were published under his name containing colourful descriptions of these explorations and other voyages. Both publications were extremely popular and widely read throughout much of Europe. Historians still dispute the authorship and veracity of these accounts, but they were instrumental in raising awareness of the discoveries and enhancing the reputation of Vespucci as an explorer and navigator.\nVespucci claimed to have understood in 1501 that Brazil was part of a fourth continent unknown to Europeans, which he called the \"New World\". The claim inspired cartographer Martin Waldseem\u00fcller to recognize Vespucci's accomplishments in 1507 by applying the Latinized form \"America\" to a map showing the New World. Other cartographers followed suit, securing the tradition of marking the name \"America\" on maps of the newly discovered continents.\nIt is unknown whether Vespucci was ever aware of these honours. In 1505, he was made a subject of Castile by royal decree, and he was appointed to the position of \"piloto mayor\" (master navigator) for Spain's \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" (House of Trade) in Seville in 1508, a post which he held until his death in 1512.\nBiography.\nVespucci was born on 9 March 1454 in Florence, a wealthy Italian city-state and a center of Renaissance art and learning, in the suburb of Peretola.\nFamily and education.\nAmerigo Vespucci was the third son of Nastagio Vespucci, a Florentine notary for the Money-Changers Guild, and Lisa di Giovanni Mini. The family resided in the District of Santa Lucia d'Ognissanti along with other families of the Vespucci clan. Earlier generations of Vespucci had funded a family chapel in the Ognissanti church, and the nearby Hospital of San Giovanni di Dio was founded by Simone di Piero Vespucci in 1380. Vespucci's immediate family was not especially prosperous but they were politically well-connected. Amerigo's grandfather, also named Amerigo Vespucci, served a total of 36 years as the chancellor of the Florentine government, known as the \"Signoria\"; and Nastagio also served in the \"Signoria\" and in other guild offices. More importantly, the Vespuccis had good relations with Lorenzo de' Medici, the powerful de facto ruler of Florence.\nAmerigo's two older brothers, Antonio and Girolamo, were sent to the University of Pisa for their education; Antonio followed his father to become a notary, while Girolamo entered the Church and joined the Knights Hospitaller in Rhodes. Amerigo's career path seemed less certain; instead of following his brothers to the university, he remained in Florence and was tutored by his uncle, Giorgio Antonio Vespucci, a Dominican friar in the monastery of San Marco. Fortunately for Amerigo, his uncle was one of the most celebrated humanist scholars in Florence at the time and provided him with a broad education in literature, philosophy, rhetoric, and Latin. He was also introduced to geography and astronomy, subjects that played an essential part in his career. Amerigo's later writings demonstrated a familiarity with the work of the classic Greek cosmographers, Ptolemy and Strabo, and the more recent work of Florentine astronomer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli.\nEarly career.\nIn 1478, Guido Antonio Vespucci, Amerigo's other uncle, led a Florentine diplomatic mission to Paris and invited his younger cousin, Amerigo Vespucci, to join him. Amerigo's role is not clear, but it was likely as an attache or private secretary. Along the way they had business in Bologna, Milan, and Lyon. Their objective in Paris was to obtain French support for Florence's war with Naples. Louis XI was noncommittal and the diplomatic mission returned to Florence in 1481 with little to show for their efforts.\nAfter his return from Paris, Amerigo worked for a time with his father and continued his studies in science. In 1482, when his father died, Amerigo went to work for Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, head of a junior branch of the Medici family. Although Amerigo was twelve years older, they had been schoolmates under the tutelage of Giorgio Antonio Vespucci. Amerigo served first as a household manager and then gradually took on increasing responsibilities, handling various business dealings for the family both at home and abroad. Meanwhile, he continued to show an interest in geography, at one point buying an expensive map made by the master cartographer Gabriel de Vallseca.\nSeville.\nIn 1488, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco became dissatisfied with his Seville business agent, Tomasso Capponi. He dispatched Vespucci to investigate the situation and provide an assessment of a suggested replacement, Florentine merchant Gianotto Berardi. Vespucci's findings have been lost but Capponi returned to Florence around this time and Berardi took over the Medici business in Seville. In addition to managing Medici's trade in Seville, Berardi had his own business in African slavery and ship chandlery.\nBy 1492 Vespucci had settled permanently in Seville. His motivations for leaving Florence are unclear; he continued to transact some business on behalf of his Medici patrons but more and more he became involved with Berardi's other activities, most notably his support of Christopher Columbus's voyages. Berardi invested half a million \"maravedis\" in Columbus's first voyage, and he won a potentially lucrative contract to provision Columbus's large second fleet. However, profits proved to be elusive. In 1495, Berardi signed a contract with the crown to send 12 resupply ships to Hispaniola but then died unexpectedly in December without completing the terms of the contract.\nVespucci was the executor of Berardi's will, collecting debts and paying outstanding obligations for the firm. Afterwards he was left owing 140,000 \"maravedis\". He continued to provision ships bound for the West Indies, but his opportunities were diminishing; Columbus's expeditions were not providing the hoped-for profits, and his patron, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco Medici, was using other Florentine agents for his business in Seville.\nSometime after he settled in Seville, Vespucci married a Spanish woman, Maria Cerezo. Very little is known about her; Vespucci's will refers to her as the daughter of celebrated military leader Gonzalo Fern\u00e1ndez de C\u00f3rdoba. Historian Fern\u00e1ndez-Armesto speculates that she may have been Gonzalo's illegitimate offspring and a connection that would have been very useful to Vespucci. She was an active participant in his business and held power of attorney for Vespucci when he was away.\nVoyages and alleged voyages.\nThe evidence for Vespucci's voyages of exploration consists almost entirely of a handful of letters written by him or attributed to him. Historians have differed sharply on the authorship, accuracy and veracity of these documents. Consequently, opinions also vary widely regarding the number of voyages undertaken, their routes, and Vespucci's roles and accomplishments. Starting in the late 1490s Vespucci participated in two voyages to the New World that are relatively well-documented in the historical record. Two others have been alleged but the evidence is more problematic. Traditionally, Vespucci's voyages are referred to as the \"first\" through \"fourth\", even by historians who dismiss one or more of the trips.\nAlleged voyage of 14971498.\nA letter, addressed to Florentine official Piero Soderini, dated 1504 and published the following year, purports to be an account by Vespucci of a voyage to the New World, departing from Spain on 10 May 1497, and returning on 15 October 1498. This is perhaps the most controversial of Vespucci's voyages, as this letter is the only known record of its occurrence, and many historians doubt that it took place as described. Some question the authorship and accuracy of the letter and consider it to be a forgery. Others point to the inconsistencies in the narrative of the voyage, particularly the alleged course, starting near Honduras and proceeding northwest for 870 leagues (about )\u2014a course that would have taken them across Mexico to the Pacific Ocean.\nCertain earlier historians, including contemporary Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, suspected that Vespucci incorporated observations from a later voyage into a fictitious account of this supposed first one, so as to gain primacy over Columbus and position himself as the first European explorer to encounter the mainland. Others, including scholar Alberto Magnaghi, have suggested that the Soderini letter was not written by Vespucci at all, but rather by an unknown author who had access to the navigator's private letters to Lorenzo de' Medici about his 1499 and 1501 expeditions to the Americas, which make no mention of a 1497 voyage. The Soderini letter is one of two attributed to Vespucci that were edited and widely circulated during his lifetime.\nVoyage of 14991500.\nIn 1499, Vespucci joined an expedition licensed by Spain and led by Alonso de Ojeda as fleet commander and Juan de la Cosa as chief navigator. Their intention was to explore the coast of a new landmass found by Columbus on his third voyage and in particular investigate a rich source of pearls that Columbus had reported. Vespucci and his backers financed two of the four ships in the small fleet. His role on the voyage is not clear. Writing later about his experience, Vespucci gave the impression that he had a leadership role, but that is unlikely, due to his inexperience. Instead, he may have served as a commercial representative on behalf of the fleet's investors. Years later, Ojeda recalled that \"Morigo Vespuche\" was one of his pilots on the expedition.\nThe vessels left Spain on 18 May 1499 and stopped first in the Canary Islands before reaching South America somewhere near present-day Suriname or French Guiana. From there the fleet split up: Ojeda proceeded northwest toward modern Venezuela with two ships, while the other pair headed south with Vespucci aboard. The only record of the southbound journey comes from Vespucci himself. He assumed they were on the coast of Asia and hoped by heading south they would, according to the Greek geographer Ptolemy, round the unidentified \"Cape of Cattigara\" and reach the Indian Ocean. They passed two huge rivers (the Amazon and the Para) which poured freshwater out to sea. They continued south for another 40 leagues (about ) before encountering a very strong adverse current which they could not overcome. Forced to turn around, the ships headed north, retracing their course to the original landfall. From there Vespucci continued up the South American coast to the Gulf of Paria and along the shore of what is now Venezuela. At some point they may have rejoined Ojeda but the evidence is unclear. In the late summer, they decided to head north for the Spanish colony at Hispaniola in the West Indies to resupply and repair their ships before heading home. After Hispaniola they made a brief slave raid in the Bahamas, capturing 232 Lucayans, and then returned to Spain.\nVoyage of 15011502.\nIn 1501, Manuel I of Portugal commissioned an expedition to investigate a landmass far to the west in the Atlantic Ocean encountered unexpectedly by a wayward Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral on his voyage around Africa to India. That land would eventually become present-day Brazil. The king wanted to know the extent of this new discovery and determine where it lay in relation to the line established by the Treaty of Tordesillas. Any land that lay to the east of the line could be claimed by Portugal. Vespucci's reputation as an explorer and presumed navigator had already reached Portugal, and he was hired by the king to serve as pilot under the command of Gon\u00e7alo Coelho.\nCoelho's fleet of three ships left Lisbon in May 1501. Before crossing the Atlantic they resupplied at Cape Verde, where they encountered Cabral on his way home from his voyage to India. This was the same expedition that had found Brazil on its outward-bound journey the previous year. Coelho left Cape Verde in June, and from this point Vespucci's account is the only surviving record of their explorations. On 17 August 1501 the expedition reached Brazil at a latitude of about 6\u00b0 south. Upon landing it encountered a hostile band of natives who killed and ate one of its crewmen. Sailing south along the coast they found friendlier natives and were able to engage in some minor trading. At 23\u00b0 S they found a bay which they named Rio de Janeiro because it was 1 January 1502. On 13 February 1502, they left the coast to return home. Vespucci estimated their latitude at 32\u00b0 S but experts now estimate they were closer to 25\u00b0 S. Their homeward journey is unclear since Vespucci left a confusing record of astronomical observations and distances travelled.\nAlleged voyage of 15031504.\nIn 1503, Vespucci may have participated in a second expedition for the Portuguese crown, again exploring the east coast of Brazil. There is evidence that a voyage was led by Coelho at about this time but no independent confirmation that Vespucci took part. The only source for this last voyage is the Soderini letter; but several modern scholars dispute Vespucci's authorship of that letter and it is uncertain whether Vespucci undertook this trip. There are also difficulties with the reported dates and details in the account of this voyage.\nReturn to Seville.\nBy early 1505, Vespucci was back in Seville. His reputation as an explorer and navigator continued to grow and his recent service in Portugal did not seem to damage his standing with King Ferdinand. On the contrary, the king was likely interested in learning about the possibility of a western passage to India. In February, he was summoned by the king to consult on matters of navigation. During the next few months he received payments from the crown for his services and in April he was declared by royal proclamation a citizen of Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nFrom 1505 until his death in 1512, Vespucci remained in service to the Spanish crown. He continued his work as a chandler, supplying ships bound for the Indies. He was also hired to captain a ship as part of a fleet bound for the \"spice islands\" but the planned voyage never took place. In March 1508, he was named chief pilot for the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" or House of Commerce which served as a central trading house for Spain's overseas possessions. He was paid an annual salary of 50,000 \"maravedis\" with an extra 25,000 for expenses. In his new role, Vespucci was responsible for ensuring that ships' pilots were adequately trained and licensed before sailing to the New World. He was also charged with compiling a \"model map\", the \"Padr\u00f3n Real\", based on input from pilots who were obligated to share what they learned after each voyage.\nVespucci wrote his will in April 1511. He left most of his modest estate, including five household slaves, to his wife. His clothes, books, and navigational equipment were left to his nephew Giovanni Vespucci. He requested to be buried in a Franciscan habit in his wife's family tomb. Vespucci died on 22 February 1512.\nUpon his death, Vespucci's wife was awarded an annual pension of 10,000 \"maravedis\" to be deducted from the salary of the successor chief pilot. His nephew Giovanni was hired into the \"Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n\" where he spent his subsequent years spying on behalf of the Florentine state.\nNaming of America.\nVespucci's voyages became widely known in Europe after two accounts attributed to him were published between 1503 and 1505. The Soderini letter (1505) came to the attention of a group of humanist scholars studying geography in Saint-Di\u00e9, a small French town in the Duchy of Lorraine. Led by Walter Lud, the academy included Matthias Ringmann and Martin Waldseem\u00fcller. In 1506, they obtained a French translation of the Soderini letter as well as a Portuguese maritime map that detailed the coast of lands recently discovered in the western Atlantic. They surmised that this was the \"new world\" or the \"antipodes\" hypothesized by classical writers. The Soderini letter gave Vespucci credit for discovery of this new continent and implied that the Portuguese map was based on his explorations.\nIn April 1507, Ringmann and Waldseem\u00fcller published their \"Introduction to Cosmography\" with an accompanying world map. The \"Introduction\" was written in Latin and included a Latin translation of the Soderini letter. In a preface to the \"Letter\", Ringmann wrote \nA thousand copies of the world map were printed with the title \"Universal Geography According to the Tradition of Ptolemy and the Contributions of Amerigo Vespucci and Others\". It was decorated with prominent portraits of Ptolemy and Vespucci and, for the first time, the name America was applied to a map of the New World.\nThe \"Introduction\" and map were a great success and four editions were printed in the first year alone. The map was widely used in universities and was influential among cartographers who admired the craftsmanship that went into its creation. In the following years, other maps were printed that often incorporated the name America. In 1538, Gerardus Mercator used America to name both the North and South continents on his influential map. By this point the tradition of marking the name \"America\" on maps of the New World was secure.\nIn 1513 Waldseem\u00fcller published a new map with the New World labelled \"Terra Incognita\" instead of \"America\", and the accompanying text names Columbus as discoverer. Many supporters of Columbus felt that Vespucci had stolen an honour that rightfully belonged to Columbus. Most historians now believe that Vespucci was unaware of Waldseem\u00fcller's map before his death in 1512 and many assert that he was not even the author of the Soderini letter.\nVespucci letters.\nKnowledge of Vespucci's voyages relies almost entirely on a handful of letters written by him or attributed to him. Two of these letters were published during his lifetime and received widespread attention throughout Europe. Several scholars now believe that Vespucci did not write the two published letters in the form in which they circulated during his lifetime. They suggest that they were fabrications based in part on genuine Vespucci letters.\nThe remaining documents were unpublished manuscripts; handwritten letters uncovered by researchers more than 250 years after Vespucci's death. After years of controversy, the authenticity of the three complete letters was convincingly demonstrated by Alberto Magnaghi in 1924. Most historians now accept them as the work of Vespucci but aspects of the accounts are still disputed.\nHistoriography.\nVespucci has been called \"the most enigmatic and controversial figure in early American history\". The debate has become known among historians as the \"Vespucci question\". How many voyages did he make? What was his role on the voyages and what did he learn? The evidence relies almost entirely on a handful of letters attributed to him. Many historians have analysed these documents and have arrived at contradictory conclusions.\nIn 1515, Sebastian Cabot became one of the first to question Vespucci's accomplishments and express doubts about his 1497 voyage. Later, Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas argued that Vespucci was a liar and stole the credit that was due Columbus. By 1600, most regarded Vespucci as an impostor and not worthy of his honours and fame. In 1839, Alexander von Humboldt after careful consideration asserted the 1497 voyage was impossible but accepted the two Portuguese-sponsored voyages. Humboldt also called into question the assertion that Vespucci recognized that he had encountered a new continent. According to Humboldt, Vespucci (and Columbus) died in the belief that they had reached the eastern edge of Asia. Vespucci's reputation was perhaps at its lowest in 1856 when Ralph Waldo Emerson called Vespucci a \"thief\" and \"pickle dealer\" from Seville who managed to get \"half the world baptized with his dishonest name\".\nOpinions began to shift somewhat after 1857 when Brazilian historian Francisco Adolfo de Varnhagen wrote that everything in the Soderini letter was true. Other historians followed in support of Vespucci including John Fiske and Henry Harrisse.\nIn 1924, Alberto Magnaghi published the results of his exhaustive review of Vespucci's writings and relevant cartography. He denied Vespucci's authorship of the 1503 \"Mundus Novus\" and the 1505 Letter to Soderini, the only two texts published during his lifetime. He suggested that the Soderini letter was not written by Vespucci, but was cobbled together by unscrupulous Florentine publishers who combined several accounts \u2013 some from Vespucci, others from elsewhere. Magnaghi determined that the manuscript letters were authentic and based on them he was the first to propose that only the second and third voyages were true, and the first and fourth voyages (only found in the Soderini letter) were fabrications. While Magnaghi has been one of the chief proponents of a two-voyage narrative, Roberto Levellier was an influential Argentinian historian who endorsed the authenticity of all Vespucci's letters and proposed the most extensive itinerary for his four voyages.\nOther modern historians and popular writers have taken varying positions on Vespucci's letters and voyages, espousing two, three, or four voyages and supporting or denying the authenticity of his two printed letters. Most authors believe that the three manuscript letters are authentic while the first voyage as described in the Soderini letter draws the most criticism and disbelief.\nA two-voyage thesis was accepted and popularized by Frederick J. Pohl (1944), and rejected by Germ\u00e1n Arciniegas (1955), who posited that all four voyages were truthful. Luciano Formisiano (1992) also rejects the Magnaghi thesis (acknowledging that publishers probably tampered with Vespucci's writings) and declares all four voyages genuine, but differs from Arciniegas in details (particularly the first voyage). Samuel Morison (1974) flatly rejected the first voyage but was noncommittal about the two published letters. Felipe Fern\u00e1ndez-Armesto (2007) calls the authenticity question \"inconclusive\" and hypothesizes that the first voyage was probably another version of the second; the third is unassailable, and the fourth is probably true.\nLegacy.\nVespucci's historical importance may rest more with his letters (whether or not he wrote them all) than his discoveries. Burckhardt cites the naming of America after him as an example of the immense role of the Italian literature of the time in determining historical memory. Within a few years of the publication of his two letters, the European public became aware of the newly discovered continents of the Americas. According to Vespucci:"}
{"id": "2063", "revid": "10190671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2063", "title": "Aristide Maillol", "text": "Aristide Joseph Bonaventure Maillol (; December 8, 1861\u00a0\u2013 September 27, 1944) was a French sculptor, painter, and printmaker.\nHe began his career as a painter and developed an early interest in the decorative arts. He became primarily interested in sculpture from his early 40s. Maillol was one of the most famous sculptors of his time. His work inspired artists such as Picasso, Henri Matisse and Henry Moore.\nBiography.\nMaillol was born in Banyuls-sur-Mer, Roussillon. He decided at an early age to become a painter, and moved to Paris in 1881 to study art. After several applications and several years of living in poverty, his enrollment in the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts was accepted in 1885, and he studied there under Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me and Alexandre Cabanel. His early paintings show the influence of his contemporaries Pierre Puvis de Chavannes and Paul Gauguin.\nGauguin encouraged his growing interest in decorative art, an interest that led Maillol to take up tapestry design. In 1893 Maillol opened a tapestry workshop in Banyuls, producing works whose high technical and aesthetic quality gained him recognition for renewing this art form in France. He began making small terracotta sculptures in 1895, and within a few years his concentration on sculpture led to the abandonment of his work in tapestry.\nIn July 1896, Maillol married Clotilde Narcis, one of his employees at his tapestry workshop. Their only son, Lucian, was born that October.\nMaillol's first major sculpture, \"A Seated Woman\", was modeled after his wife. The first version (in the Museum of Modern Art, New York) was completed in 1902, and renamed \"La M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e\". Maillol, believing that \"art does not lie in the copying of nature\", produced a second, less naturalistic version in 1905. In 1902, the art dealer Ambroise Vollard provided Maillol with his first exhibition.\nThe subject of nearly all of Maillol's mature work is the female body, treated with a classical emphasis on stable forms. The figurative style of his large bronzes is perceived as an important precursor to the greater simplifications of Henry Moore, and his serene classicism set a standard for European (and American) figure sculpture until the end of World War II.\nJosep Pla said of Maillol, \"These archaic ideas, Greek, were the great novelty Maillol brought into the tendency of modern sculpture. What you need to love from the ancients is not the antiquity, it is the sense of permanent, renewed novelty, that is due to the nature and reason.\"\nHis important public commissions include a 1912 commission for a monument to C\u00e9zanne, as well as numerous war memorials commissioned after World War I.\nMaillol served as a juror with Florence Meyer Blumenthal in awarding the Prix Blumenthal (1919\u20131954) a grant awarded to painters, sculptors, decorators, engravers, writers, and musicians.\nHe made a series of woodcut illustrations for an edition of Vergil's \"Eclogues\" published by Harry Graf Kessler in 1926\u201327. He also illustrated \"Daphnis and Chloe\" by Longus (1937) and \"Chansons pour elle\" by Paul Verlaine (1939).\nHe died in Banyuls at the age of eighty-two, in an automobile accident. While driving home during a thunderstorm, the car in which he was a passenger skidded off the road and rolled over. A large collection of Maillol's work is maintained at the Mus\u00e9e Maillol in Paris, which was established by Dina Vierny, Maillol's model and platonic companion during the last 10 years of his life. His home a few kilometers outside Banyuls, also the site of his final resting place, has been turned into a museum, the Mus\u00e9e Maillol Banyuls-sur-Mer, where a number of his works and sketches are displayed.\nThree of his bronzes grace the grand staircase of the Metropolitan Opera House in New York City: \"Summer\" (1910\u201311), \"Venus Without Arms\" (1920), and\" Kneeling Woman: Monument to Debussy\" (1950\u201355). The third, the artist's only reference to music, is a copy of an original created for the French city of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Claude Debussy's birthplace.\nNazi-looted art.\nDuring the German occupation of France, dozens of artworks by Maillol were seized by the Nazi looting organization known as the E.R.R. or Reichsleiter Rosenberg Taskforce. The Database of Art Objects at the Jeu de Paume lists thirty artworks by Maillol. The German Lost Art Foundation database lists 33 entries for Maillol. The German Historical Museum's database for artworks recovered by the Allies at the Munich Central Collecting Point has 13 items related to Maillol. Maillol's sculpture \"Head of Flora\" was found in the stash of Cornelius Gurlitt, son of Hitler's art dealer Hildebrand Gurlitt together with lithographs, drawings and paintings.\nA photograph from May 24, 1946, shows \"Six men, members of the Monuments, Fine Arts &amp; Archives section of the military, prepare Aristide Maillol's sculpture \"Baigneuse \u00e0 la draperie\", looted during World War II for transport to France. Sculpture is labeled with sign: Wiesbaden, no. 31.\"\nJewish art collectors whose artworks by Maillol were looted by Nazis include Hugo Simon, Alfred Flechtheim and many others.\nLegacy and Contemporary Influence.\nAristide Maillol's work has had a profound and enduring impact on both modern and contemporary art, particularly within the realms of sculpture, the representation of the human body, and the revival of classical forms in the 20th century. His restrained, monumental approach to the female figure influenced numerous artists, sparking discussions about form, abstraction, and the essence of sculpture itself.\nOne of Maillol's most significant contributions was his rejection of the exaggerated dynamism that characterized much of late 19th-century sculpture, notably the work of his contemporary, Auguste Rodin. Maillol's figures, with their serene and stable forms, marked a return to classical simplicity and purity. This approach resonated with artists like Henry Moore, who cited Maillol as an early influence on his own move toward abstraction and monumentality. Moore admired the way Maillol's work avoided excessive detail, allowing the essential form of the human body to take precedence. In his 1941 writings, Moore stated, \"Maillol's influence was important to me because of the calm and permanence that his figures suggest, as well as his return to classical balance and volume.\" &lt;/ref&gt;\nAdditionally, Hans Arp, a Dadaist and Surrealist artist, found inspiration in Maillol's organic forms, which he believed offered a \u201ctimeless universality.\u201d Arp's abstracted, rounded sculptures share a kinship with Maillol's pursuit of essential, elemental forms, though Arp pushed these ideas further into abstraction.\nArt historians such as Hilton Kramer and Albert Elsen have extensively discussed Maillol's unique place in modern sculpture. Kramer remarked that Maillol's works possess an \"elemental calm\" and reflect an anti-Romantic sentiment, contrasting sharply with the emotional intensity of Rodin. Elsen, in his study of Maillol's work, argued that his influence can be seen in the development of modernist sculpture, particularly through his focus on the essential harmony of form and space, a concept that paved the way for mid-century minimalism.\nIn more recent decades, Maillol's sculptures have continued to inspire contemporary artists exploring themes of memory, identity, and the body. The French-Lebanese contemporary artist Oliver Aoun incorporated Maillol's sculptures into his project \"Lisa Rediviva\" (2012), which juxtaposes classical representations of the female form with fragmented images of the Mona Lisa. Aoun's work engaged with the legacy of Western iconography, questioning the colonial and patriarchal structures embedded within these revered forms. In reinterpreting Maillol's figures, Oliver Aoun critiqued the traditional Western gaze and proposed a more inclusive dialogue around the representation of women in art.\nFurthermore, exhibitions such as the 2011 show at the Mus\u00e9e Maillol in Paris, which focused on the dialogue between Maillol and contemporary sculptors, underscore the relevance of his oeuvre in ongoing conversations about the body, space, and abstraction. Artists such as Jean-Michel Othoniel and Louise Bourgeois have also been said to engage with the themes of solidity and fluidity in ways that echo Maillol's approach to form.\nMaillol's influence persists not only in sculpture but also in broader conversations about the role of classical ideals in contemporary art, inviting ongoing re-evaluation and reinterpretation."}
{"id": "2064", "revid": "1260630524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2064", "title": "Antonio Canova", "text": "Antonio Canova (; 1 November 1757 \u2013 13 October 1822) was an Italian Neoclassical sculptor, famous for his marble sculptures. Often regarded as the greatest of the Neoclassical artists, his sculpture was inspired by the Baroque and the classical revival, and has been characterised as having avoided the melodramatics of the former, and the cold artificiality of the latter.\nLife.\nPossagno.\nIn 1757, Antonio Canova was born in the Venetian Republic city of Possagno to Pietro Canova, a stonecutter, and Angela Zardo Fantolin. In 1761, his father died. A year later, his mother remarried. As such, in 1762, he was put into the care of his paternal grandfather Pasino Canova, who was a stonemason, owner of a quarry, and was a \"sculptor who specialized in altars with statues and low reliefs in late Baroque style\". He led Antonio into the art of sculpting.\nBefore the age of ten, Canova began making models in clay, and carving marble. Indeed, at the age of nine, he executed two small shrines of Carrara marble, which are still extant. After these works, he appears to have been constantly employed under his grandfather.\nVenice.\nIn 1770, he was an apprentice for two years to Giuseppe Bernardi, who was also known as 'Torretto'. Afterwards, he was under the tutelage of Giovanni Ferrari until he began his studies at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia. At the academy, he won several prizes. During this time, he was given his first workshop within a monastery by some local monks.\nThe Senator Giovanni Falier commissioned Canova to produce statues of Orpheus and Eurydice for his garden \u2013 the Villa Falier at Asolo. The statues were begun in 1775, and both were completed by 1777. The pieces exemplify the late Rococo style. On the year of their completion, both works were exhibited for the Feast of the Ascension in Piazza San Marco. Widely praised, the works won Canova his first renown among the Venetian elite. Another Venetian who is said to have commissioned early works from Canova was the abate Filippo Farsetti, whose collection at Ca' Farsetti on the Grand Canal he frequented.\nIn 1779, Canova opened his own studio at Calle Del Traghetto at S. Maurizio. At this time, Procurator Pietro Vettor Pisani commissioned Canova's first marble statue: a depiction of Daedalus and Icarus. The statue inspired great admiration for his work at the annual art fair; Canova was paid 100 gold zecchini for the completed work. At the base of the statue, Daedalus' tools are scattered about; these tools are also an allusion to Sculpture, of which the statue is a personification. With such an intention, there is suggestion that Daedalus is a portrait of Canova's grandfather Pasino.\nRome.\nCanova arrived in Rome, on 28 December 1780. Prior to his departure, his friends had applied to the Venetian Senate for a pension. Successful in the application, the stipend allotted amounted to three hundred ducats, limited to three years.\nWhile in Rome, Canova spent time studying and sketching the works of Michelangelo.\nIn 1781, Girolamo Zulian \u2013 the Venetian ambassador to Rome \u2013 hired Canova to sculpt \"Theseus and the Minotaur\". Zulian played a fundamental role in Canova's rise to fame, turning some rooms of his palace into a studio for the artist and placing his trust in him despite Canova's early critics in Rome. The statue depicts the victorious Theseus seated on the lifeless body of a Minotaur. The initial spectators were certain that the work was a copy of a Greek original, and were shocked to learn it was a contemporary work. The highly regarded work is now in the collection of the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum, in London.\nBetween 1783 and 1785, Canova arranged, composed, and designed a funerary monument dedicated to Clement XIV for the Church of Santi Apostoli. After another two years, the work met completion in 1787. The monument secured Canova's reputation as the pre-eminent living artist.\nIn 1792, he completed another cenotaph, this time commemorating Clement XIII for St. Peter's Basilica. Canova harmonized its design with the older Baroque funerary monuments in the basilica.\nIn 1790, he began to work on a funerary monument for Titian, which was eventually abandoned by 1795. During the same year, he increased his activity as a painter. Canova was notoriously disinclined to restore sculptures. However, in 1794 he made an exception for his friend and early patron Zulian, restoring a few sculptures that Zulian had moved from Rome to Venice.\nThe following decade was extremely productive, beginning works such as \"Hercules and Lichas\", \"Cupid and Psyche\", \"Hebe\", \"Tomb of Duchess Maria Christina of Saxony-Teschen\", and \"The Penitent Magdalene\".\nIn 1797, he went to Vienna, but only a year later, in 1798, he returned to Possagno for a year.\nFrance and England.\nBy 1800, Canova was the most celebrated artist in Europe. He systematically promoted his reputation by publishing engravings of his works and having marble versions of plaster casts made in his workshop. He became so successful that he had acquired patrons from across Europe including France, England, Russia, Austria and Holland, as well as several members from different royal lineages, and prominent individuals. Among his patrons were Napoleon and his family, for whom Canova produced much work, including several depictions between 1803 and 1809. The most notable representations were that of \"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\", and \"Venus Victrix\" which was portrayal of Pauline Bonaparte.\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" had its inception after Canova was hired to make a bust of Napoleon in 1802. The statue was begun in 1803, with Napoleon requesting to be shown in a French General's uniform, Canova rejected this, insisting on an allusion to Mars, the Roman god of War. It was completed in 1806. In 1811, the statue arrived in Paris, but not installed; neither was its bronze copy in the Foro Napoleonico in Milan. In 1815, the original went to the Duke of Wellington, after his victory at Waterloo against Napoleon.\n\"Venus Victrix\" was originally conceived as a robed and recumbent sculpture of Pauline Borghese in the guise of Diana. Instead, Pauline ordered Canova to make the statue a nude Venus. The work was not intended for public viewing.\nOther works for the Napoleon family include, a bust of Napoleon, a statue of Napoleon's mother, and Marie Louise as Concordia.\nIn 1802, Canova was assigned the post of 'Inspector-General of Antiquities and Fine Art of the Papal State', a position formerly held by Raphael. One of his activities in this capacity was to pioneer the restoration of the Appian Way by restoring the tomb of Servilius Quartus. In 1808 Canova became an associated member of the Royal Institute of Sciences, Literature and Fine Arts of the Kingdom of Holland.\nIn 1814, he began his \"The Three Graces\".\nIn 1815, he was named 'Minister Plenipotentiary of the Pope,' and was tasked with recovering various works of art that were taken to Paris by Napoleon under the terms of the Treaty of Paris (1815).\nAlso in 1815, he visited London, and met with Benjamin Haydon. It was after the advice of Canova that the Elgin Marbles were acquired by the British Museum, with plaster copies sent to Florence, according to Canova's request.\nReturning to Italy.\nIn 1816, Canova returned to Rome with some of the art Napoleon had taken. He was rewarded with several marks of distinction: he was appointed President of the Accademia di San Luca, inscribed into the \"Golden Book of Roman Nobles\" by the Pope's own hands, and given the title of Marquis of Ischia, alongside an annual pension of 3,000 crowns.\nIn 1819, he commenced and completed his commissioned work \"Venus Italica\" as a replacement for the Venus de' Medici.\nAfter his 1814 proposal to build a personified statue of Religion for St. Peter's Basilica was rejected, Canova sought to build his own temple to house it. This project came to be the Tempio Canoviano. Canova designed, financed, and partly built the structure himself. The structure was to be a testament to Canova's piety. The building's design was inspired by combining the Parthenon and the Pantheon together. On 11 July 1819, Canova laid the foundation stone dressed in red Papal uniform and decorated with all his medals. It first opened in 1830, and was finally completed in 1836. After the foundation-stone of this edifice had been laid, Canova returned to Rome; but every succeeding autumn he continued to visit Possagno to direct the workmen and encourage them with rewards.\nDuring the period that intervened between commencing operations at Possagno and his death, he executed or finished some of his most striking works. Among these were the group \"Mars and Venus\", the colossal figure of Pius VI, the Piet\u00e0, the \"St John\", and a colossal bust of his friend, the Count Leopoldo Cicognara.\nIn 1820, he made a statue of George Washington for the state of North Carolina. As recommended by Thomas Jefferson, the sculptor used the marble bust of Washington by Giuseppe Ceracchi as a model. It was delivered on 24 December 1821. The statue and the North Carolina State House where it was displayed were later destroyed by fire in 1831. A plaster replica was sent by King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy in 1910, now on view at the North Carolina Museum of History. A marble copy was sculpted by Romano Vio in 1970, now on view in the rotunda of the capitol building.\nIn 1822, he journeyed to Naples, to superintend the construction of wax moulds for an equestrian statue of Ferdinand VII. The adventure was disastrous to his health, but soon became healthy enough to return to Rome. From there, he voyaged to Venice; however, on 13 October 1822, he died there at the age of 64. As he never married, the name became extinct, except through his stepbrothers' lineage of Satori-Canova.\nOn 12 October 1822, Canova instructed his brother to use his entire estate to complete the Tempio in Possagno.\nOn 25 October 1822, his body was placed in the Tempio Canoviano. His heart was interred at the Basilica di Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari in Venice, and his right hand preserved in a vase at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia.\nHis memorial service was so grand that it rivaled the ceremony that the city of Florence held for Michelangelo in 1564.\nIn 1826, Giovanni Battista Sartori sold Canova's Roman studio and took every plaster model and sculpture to Possagno, where they were installed in the gypsotheque of the Tempio Canoviano.\nWorks.\nAmong Canova's most notable works are:\n\"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" (1787).\n\"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" was commissioned in 1787 by Colonel John Campbell. It is regarded as a masterpiece of Neoclassical sculpture, but shows the mythological lovers at a moment of great emotion, characteristic of the emerging movement of Romanticism. It represents the god Cupid in the height of love and tenderness, immediately after awakening the lifeless Psyche with a kiss.\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" (1802\u20131806).\n\"Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker\" had its inception after Canova was hired to make a bust of Napoleon in 1802. The statue was begun in 1802, with Napoleon requesting to be shown in a French General's uniform, Canova rejected this, insisting on an allusion to Mars, the Roman god of War. It was completed in 1806. In 1811, the statue arrived in Paris, but not installed; neither was its bronze copy in the Foro Napoleonico in Milan. In 1815, the original went to the Duke of Wellington, after his victory at Waterloo against Napoleon and is on display at Apsley House.\n\"Perseus Triumphant\" (1804\u20131806).\n\"Perseus Triumphant\", sometimes called \"Perseus with the Head of Medusa\", was a statue commissioned by tribune Onorato Duveyriez. It depicts the Greek hero Perseus after his victory over the Gorgon Medusa.\nThe statue was based freely on the Apollo Belvedere and the Medusa Rondanini.\nNapoleon, after his 1796 Italian Campaign, took the Apollo Belvedere to Paris. In the statue's absence, Pope Pius VII acquired Canova's \"Perseus Triumphant\" and placed the work upon the \"Apollo\"'s pedestal. The statue was so successful that when the \"Apollo\" was returned, \"Perseus\" remained as a companion piece.\nOne replica of the statue was commissioned from Canova by the Polish countess Waleria Tarnowska; it's now displayed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.\nKarl Ludwig Fernow said of the statue that \"every eye must rest with pleasure on the beautiful surface, even when the mind finds its hopes of high and pure enjoyment disappointed.\"\n\"Venus Victrix\" (1805\u20131808).\n\"Venus Victrix\" ranks among the most famous of Canova's works. Originally, Canova wished the depiction to be of a robed Diana, but Pauline Borghese insisted to appear as a nude Venus. The work was not intended for public viewing.\n\"The Three Graces\" (1814\u20131817).\nJohn Russell, the 6th Duke of Bedford, commissioned a version of the now famous work. He had previously visited Canova in his studio in Rome in 1814 and had been immensely impressed by a carving of the Graces the sculptor had made for the Empress Jos\u00e9phine. When the Empress died in May of the same year he immediately offered to purchase the completed piece, but was unsuccessful as Josephine's son Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais claimed it (his son Maximilian, Duke of Leuchtenberg brought it to St. Petersburg, where it can now be found in the Hermitage Museum). Undeterred, the Duke commissioned another version for himself.\nThe sculpting process began in 1814 and was completed in 1817. Finally in 1819 it was installed at the Duke's residence in Woburn Abbey. Canova even made the trip over to England to supervise its installation, choosing for it to be displayed on a pedestal adapted from a marble plinth with a rotating top. This version is now owned jointly by the Victoria and Albert Museum and the National Galleries of Scotland, and is alternately displayed at each.\nArtistic process.\nCanova had a distinct, signature style in which he combined Greek and Roman art practices with early stirrings of romanticism to delve into a new path of Neoclassicism. Canova's sculptures fall into three categories: Heroic compositions, compositions of grace, and sepulchral monuments. In each of these, Canova's underlying artistic motivations were to challenge, if not compete, with classical statues.\nCanova refused to take in pupils and students, but would hire workers to carve the initial figure from the marble. According to art historian Giuseppe Pavanello, \"Canova's system of work concentrated on the initial idea, and on the final carving of the marble\". He had an elaborate system of comparative pointing so that the workers were able to reproduce the plaster form in the selected block of marble. These workers would leave a thin veil over the entire statue so Canova's could focus on the surface of the statue.\nWhile he worked, he had people read to him select literary and historical texts.\nLast touch.\nDuring the last quarter of the eighteenth century, it became fashionable to view art galleries at night by torchlight. Canova was an artist that leapt on the fad and displayed his works of art in his studio by candlelight. As such, Canova would begin to finalize the statue with special tools by candlelight, to soften the transitions between the various parts of the nude. After a little recarving, he began to rub the statue down with pumice stone, sometimes for periods longer than weeks or months. If that was not enough, he would use tripoli (rottenstone) and lead.\nHe then applied a now unknown chemical-composition of patina onto the flesh of the figure to lighten the skin tone. Importantly, his friends also denied any usage of acids in his process.\nCriticisms.\nConversations revolving around the justification of art as superfluous usually invoked the name of Canova. Karl Ludwig Fernow believed that Canova was not Kantian enough in his aesthetic, because emphasis seemed to have been placed on agreeableness rather than Beauty. Canova was faulted for creating works that were artificial in complexity.\nLegacy.\nAlthough the Romantic period artists buried Canova's name soon after he died, he is slowly being rediscovered. Giuseppe Pavanello wrote in 1996 that \"the importance and value of Canova's art is now recognized as holding in balance the last echo of the Ancients and the first symptom of the restless experimentation of the modern age\".\nCanova spent large parts of his fortune helping young students and sending patrons to struggling sculptors, including Sir Richard Westmacott and John Gibson.\nHe was introduced into various orders of chivalry.\nA number of his works, sketches, and writings are collected in the \"Sala Canoviana\" of the Museo Civico of Bassano del Grappa. Other works, including plaster casts are the Museo Canoviano in Asolo.\nIn 2018, a crater on Mercury was named in his honor.\nLiterary inspirations.\nTwo of Canova's works appear as engravings in \"Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book\", 1834, with poetical illustrations by Letitia Elizabeth Landon. These are of \"The Dancing Girl\" and \"Hebe\"."}
{"id": "2065", "revid": "12416903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2065", "title": "Auguste Rodin", "text": "Fran\u00e7ois Auguste Ren\u00e9 Rodin (; ; 12 November 184017 November 1917) was a French sculptor generally considered the founder of modern sculpture. He was schooled traditionally and took a craftsman-like approach to his work. Rodin possessed a unique ability to model a complex, turbulent, and deeply pocketed surface in clay. He is known for such sculptures as \"The Thinker\", \"Monument to Balzac\", \"The Kiss\", \"The Burghers of Calais\", and \"The Gates of Hell\".\nMany of Rodin's most notable sculptures were criticized, as they clashed with predominant figurative sculpture traditions in which works were decorative, formulaic, or highly thematic. Rodin's most original work departed from traditional themes of mythology and allegory. He modeled the human body with naturalism, and his sculptures celebrate individual character and physicality. Although Rodin was sensitive to the controversy surrounding his work, he refused to change his style, and his continued output brought increasing favor from the government and the artistic community.\nFrom the unexpected naturalism of Rodin's first major figure \u2013 inspired by his 1875 trip to Italy \u2013 to the unconventional memorials whose commissions he later sought, his reputation grew, and Rodin became the preeminent French sculptor of his time. By 1900, he was a world-renowned artist. Wealthy private clients sought Rodin's work after his World's Fair exhibit, and he kept company with a variety of high-profile intellectuals and artists. His student, Camille Claudel, became his associate, lover, and creative rival. Rodin's other students included Antoine Bourdelle, Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, and Charles Despiau. He married his lifelong companion, Rose Beuret, in the last year of both their lives. His sculptures suffered a decline in popularity after his death in 1917, but within a few decades his legacy solidified. Rodin remains one of the few sculptors widely known outside the visual arts community.\nBiography.\nFormative years.\nRodin was born in 1840 into a working-class family in Paris, the second child of Marie Cheffer and Jean-Baptiste Rodin, who was a police department clerk. He was largely self-educated, and began to draw at age 10. Between ages 14 and 17, he attended the \"Petite \u00c9cole\", a school specializing in art and mathematics where he studied drawing and painting. His drawing teacher Horace Lecoq de Boisbaudran believed in first developing the personality of his students so that they observed with their own eyes and drew from their recollections, and Rodin expressed appreciation for his teacher much later in life. It was at Petite \u00c9cole that he met Jules Dalou and Alphonse Legros.\nIn 1857, Rodin submitted a clay model of a companion to the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in an attempt to win entrance; he did not succeed, and two further applications were also denied. Entrance requirements were not particularly high at the \"Grande \u00c9cole\", so the rejections were considerable setbacks. Rodin's inability to gain entrance may have been due to the judges' Neoclassical tastes, while Rodin had been schooled in light, 18th-century sculpture. He left the \"Petite \u00c9cole\" in 1857 and earned a living as a craftsman and ornamenter for most of the next two decades, producing decorative objects and architectural embellishments.\nRodin's sister Maria, two years his senior, died of peritonitis in a convent in 1862, and Rodin was anguished with guilt because he had introduced her to an unfaithful suitor. He turned away from art and joined the Catholic order of the Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament as a laybrother. Saint Peter Julian Eymard, founder and head of the congregation, recognized Rodin's talent and sensed his lack of suitability for the order, so he encouraged Rodin to continue with his sculpture. Rodin returned to work as a decorator while taking classes with animal sculptor Antoine-Louis Barye. The teacher's attention to detail and his finely rendered musculature of animals in motion significantly influenced Rodin.\nIn 1864, Rodin began to live with a young seamstress named Rose Beuret (born in June 1844), with whom he stayed for the rest of his life, with varying commitment. The couple had a son named Auguste-Eug\u00e8ne Beuret (1866\u20131934). That year, Rodin offered his first sculpture for exhibition and entered the studio of Albert-Ernest Carrier-Belleuse, a successful mass producer of \"objets d'art\". Rodin worked as Carrier-Belleuse' chief assistant until 1870, designing roof decorations and staircase and doorway embellishments. With the arrival of the Franco-Prussian War, Rodin was called to serve in the French National Guard, but his service was brief due to his near-sightedness. Decorators' work had dwindled because of the war, yet Rodin needed to support his family, as poverty was a continual difficulty for him until about the age of 30. Carrier-Belleuse soon asked him to join him in Belgium, where they worked on ornamentation for the Brussels Stock Exchange.\nRodin planned to stay in Belgium a few months, but he spent the next six years outside of France. It was a pivotal time in his life. He had acquired skill and experience as a craftsman, but no one had yet seen his art, which sat in his workshop since he could not afford castings. His relationship with Carrier-Belleuse had deteriorated, but he found other employment in Brussels, displaying some works at salons, and his companion Rose soon joined him there. Having saved enough money to travel, Rodin visited Italy for two months in 1875, where he was drawn to the work of Donatello and Michelangelo. Their work had a profound effect on his artistic direction. Rodin said, \"It is Michelangelo who has freed me from academic sculpture.\" Returning to Belgium, he began work on \"The Age of Bronze\", a life-size male figure whose naturalism brought Rodin attention but led to accusations of sculptural cheatingits naturalism and scale was such that critics alleged he had cast the work from a living model. Much of Rodin's later work was explicitly larger or smaller than life, in part to demonstrate the folly of such accusations.\nArtistic independence.\nRose Beuret and Rodin returned to Paris in 1877, moving into a small flat on the Left Bank. Misfortune surrounded Rodin: his mother, who had wanted to see her son marry, was dead, and his father was blind and senile, cared for by Rodin's sister-in-law, Aunt Th\u00e9r\u00e8se. Rodin's eleven-year-old son Auguste, possibly developmentally delayed, was also in the ever-helpful Th\u00e9r\u00e8se's care. Rodin had essentially abandoned his son for six years, and would have a very limited relationship with him throughout his life. Father and son joined the couple in their flat, with Rose as caretaker. Charges of fakery surrounding \"The Age of Bronze\" continued. Rodin increasingly sought soothing female companionship in Paris, and Rose stayed in the background.\nRodin earned his living collaborating with more established sculptors on public commissions, primarily memorials and neo-baroque architectural pieces in the style of Carpeaux. In competitions for commissions he submitted models of Denis Diderot, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Lazare Carnot, all to no avail. On his own time, he worked on studies leading to the creation of his next important work, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\".\nIn 1880, Carrier-Belleuse\u00a0\u2013 then art director of the S\u00e8vres national porcelain factory\u00a0\u2013 offered Rodin a part-time position as a designer. The offer was in part a gesture of reconciliation, and Rodin accepted. That part of Rodin which appreciated 18th-century tastes was aroused, and he immersed himself in designs for vases and table ornaments that brought the factory renown across Europe.\nThe artistic community appreciated his work in this vein, and Rodin was invited to Paris Salons by such friends as writer L\u00e9on Cladel. During his early appearances at these social events, Rodin seemed shy; in his later years, as his fame grew, he displayed the loquaciousness and temperament for which he is better known. French statesman Leon Gambetta expressed a desire to meet Rodin, and the sculptor impressed him when they met at a salon. Gambetta spoke of Rodin in turn to several government ministers, likely including , the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Fine Arts, whom Rodin eventually met.\nRodin's relationship with Turquet was rewarding. Through Turquet, he won the 1880 commission to create a portal for a planned museum of decorative arts. Rodin dedicated much of the next four decades to his elaborate \"Gates of Hell\", an unfinished portal for a museum that was never built. Many of the portal's figures became sculptures in themselves, including Rodin's most famous, \"The Thinker\" and \"The Kiss\". With the museum commission came a free studio, granting Rodin a new level of artistic freedom. Soon, he stopped working at the porcelain factory in 1882; his income came from private commissions.\nIn 1883, Rodin agreed to supervise a course for sculptor Alfred Boucher in his absence, where he met the 18-year-old Camille Claudel. The two formed a passionate but stormy relationship and influenced each other artistically. Claudel inspired Rodin as a model for many of his figures, and she was a talented sculptor, assisting him on commissions as well as creating her own works. Her \"Bust of Rodin\" was displayed to critical acclaim at the 1892 Salon.\nAlthough busy with \"The Gates of Hell\", Rodin won other commissions. He pursued an opportunity to create a historical monument for the town of Calais. For a monument to French author Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Rodin was chosen in 1891. His execution of both sculptures clashed with traditional tastes and met with varying degrees of disapproval from the organizations that sponsored the commissions. Still, Rodin was gaining support from diverse sources that propelled him toward fame.\nIn 1889, the Paris Salon invited Rodin to be a judge on its artistic jury. Though Rodin's career was on the rise, Claudel and Beuret were becoming increasingly impatient with Rodin's \"double life\". Claudel and Rodin shared an atelier at a small old castle (the Ch\u00e2teau de l'Islette in the Loire), but Rodin refused to relinquish his ties to Beuret, his loyal companion during the lean years, and mother of his son. During one absence, Rodin wrote to Beuret, \"I think of how much you must have loved me to put up with my caprices...I remain, in all tenderness, your Rodin.\"\nClaudel and Rodin parted in 1898. Claudel suffered an alleged nervous breakdown several years later and was confined to an institution for 30 years by her family, until her death in 1943, despite numerous attempts by doctors to explain to her mother and brother that she was sane.\nIn 1904, Rodin was introduced to the Welsh artist, Gwen John, who modelled for him and became his lover after being introduced by Hilda Flodin. John had a fervent attachment to Rodin and would write to him thousands of times over the next ten years. As their relationship came to a close, despite his genuine feeling for her, Rodin eventually resorted to the use of conci\u00e8rges and secretaries to keep her at a distance.\nWorks.\nIn 1864, Rodin submitted his first sculpture for exhibition, \"The Man with the Broken Nose\", to the Paris Salon. The subject was an elderly neighborhood street porter. The unconventional bronze piece was not a traditional bust, but instead the head was \"broken off\" at the neck, the nose was flattened and crooked, and the back of the head was absent, having fallen off the clay model in an accident. The work emphasized texture and the emotional state of the subject; it illustrated the \"unfinishedness\" that would characterize many of Rodin's later sculptures. The Salon rejected the piece.\nEarly figures: the inspiration of Italy.\nIn Brussels, Rodin created his first full-scale work, \"The Age of Bronze\", having returned from Italy. Modeled after a Belgian soldier, the figure drew inspiration from Michelangelo's \"Dying Slave\", which Rodin had observed at the Louvre. Attempting to combine Michelangelo's mastery of the human form with his own sense of human nature, Rodin studied his model from all angles, at rest and in motion; he mounted a ladder for additional perspective, and made clay models, which he studied by candlelight. The result was a life-size, well-proportioned nude figure, posed unconventionally with his right hand atop his head, and his left arm held out at his side, forearm parallel to the body.\nIn 1877, the work debuted in Brussels and then was shown at the Paris Salon. The statue's apparent lack of a theme was troubling to critics\u00a0\u2013 commemorating neither mythology nor a noble historical event\u00a0\u2013 and it is not clear whether Rodin intended a theme. He first titled the work \"The Vanquished\", in which form the left hand held a spear, but he removed the spear because it obstructed the torso from certain angles. After two more intermediary titles, Rodin settled on \"The Age of Bronze\", suggesting the Bronze Age, and in Rodin's words, \"man arising from nature\". Later, however, Rodin said that he had had in mind \"just a simple piece of sculpture without reference to subject\".\nIts mastery of form, light, and shadow made the work look so naturalistic that Rodin was accused of \"surmoulage\"\u00a0\u2013 having taken a cast from a living model. Rodin vigorously denied the charges, writing to newspapers and having photographs taken of the model to prove how the sculpture differed. He demanded an inquiry and was eventually exonerated by a committee of sculptors. Leaving aside the false charges, the piece polarized critics. It had barely won acceptance for display at the Paris Salon, and criticism likened it to \"a statue of a sleepwalker\" and called it \"an astonishingly accurate copy of a low type\". Others rallied to defend the piece and Rodin's integrity. The government minister Turquet admired the piece, and \"The Age of Bronze\" was purchased by the state for 2,200 francs\u00a0\u2013 what it had cost Rodin to have it cast in bronze.\nA second male nude, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\", was completed in 1878. Rodin sought to avoid another charge of \"surmoulage\" by making the statue larger than life: \"St. John\" stands almost . While \"The Age of Bronze\" is statically posed, \"St. John\" gestures and seems to move toward the viewer. The effect of walking is achieved despite the figure having both feet firmly on the ground\u00a0\u2013 a technical achievement that was lost on most contemporary critics. Rodin chose this contradictory position to, in his words, \"display simultaneously...views of an object which in fact can be seen only successively\".\nDespite the title, \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\" did not have an obviously religious theme. The model, an Italian peasant who presented himself at Rodin's studio, possessed an idiosyncratic sense of movement that Rodin felt compelled to capture. Rodin thought of John the Baptist and carried that association into the title of the work. In 1880, Rodin submitted the sculpture to the Paris Salon. Critics were still mostly dismissive of his work, but the piece finished third in the Salon's sculpture category.\nRegardless of the immediate receptions of \"St. John\" and \"The Age of Bronze\", Rodin had achieved a new degree of fame. Students sought him at his studio, praising his work and scorning the charges of \"surmoulage\". The artistic community knew his name.\n\"The Gates of Hell\".\nA commission to create a portal for Paris' planned Museum of Decorative Arts was awarded to Rodin in 1880. Although the museum was never built, Rodin worked throughout his life on \"The Gates of Hell\", a monumental sculptural group depicting scenes from Dante's \"Inferno\" in high relief. Often lacking a clear conception of his major works, Rodin compensated with hard work and a striving for perfection.\nHe conceived \"The Gates\" with the \"surmoulage\" controversy still in mind: \"...I had made the \"St. John\" to refute [the charges of casting from a model], but it only partially succeeded. To prove completely that I could model from life as well as other sculptors, I determined...to make the sculpture on the door of figures smaller than life.\" Laws of composition gave way to the \"Gates\"' disordered and untamed depiction of Hell. The figures and groups in this, Rodin's meditation on the condition of man, are physically and morally isolated in their torment.\n\"The Gates of Hell\" comprised 186 figures in its final form. Many of Rodin's best-known sculptures started as designs of figures for this composition, such as \"The Thinker\", \"The Three Shades\", and \"The Kiss\", and were only later presented as separate and independent works. Other well-known works derived from \"The Gates\" are \"Ugolino\", \"Fallen Caryatid Carrying her Stone\", \"Fugit Amor\", \"She Who Was Once the Helmet-Maker's Beautiful Wife\", \"The Falling Man\", and \"The Prodigal Son\".\n\"The Thinker\".\n\"The Thinker\" (originally titled \"The Poet\", after Dante) was to become one of the best-known sculptures in the world. The original was a high bronze piece created between 1879 and 1889, designed for the \"Gates\"' lintel, from which the figure would gaze down upon Hell. While \"The Thinker\" most obviously characterizes Dante, aspects of the Biblical Adam, the mythological Prometheus, and Rodin himself have been ascribed to him. Other observers de-emphasize the apparent intellectual theme of \"The Thinker\", stressing the figure's rough physicality and the emotional tension emanating from it.\n\"The Burghers of Calais\".\nThe town of Calais had contemplated a historical monument for decades when Rodin learned of the project. He pursued the commission, interested in the medieval motif and patriotic theme. The mayor of Calais was tempted to hire Rodin on the spot upon visiting his studio, and soon the memorial was approved, with Rodin as its architect. It would commemorate the six townspeople of Calais who offered their lives to save their fellow citizens.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, the army of King Edward III besieged Calais, and Edward ordered that the town's population be killed \"en masse\". He agreed to spare them if six of the principal citizens would come to him prepared to die, bareheaded and barefooted and with ropes around their necks. When they came, he ordered that they be executed, but pardoned them when his queen, Philippa of Hainault, begged him to spare their lives. \"The Burghers of Calais\" depicts the men as they are leaving for the king's camp, carrying keys to the town's gates and citadel.\nRodin began the project in 1884, inspired by the chronicles of the siege by Jean Froissart. Though the town envisioned an allegorical, heroic piece centered on Eustache de Saint-Pierre, the eldest of the six men, Rodin conceived the sculpture as a study in the varied and complex emotions under which all six men were laboring. One year into the commission, the Calais committee was not impressed with Rodin's progress. Rodin indicated his willingness to end the project rather than change his design to meet the committee's conservative expectations, but Calais said to continue.\nIn 1889, \"The Burghers of Calais\" was first displayed to general acclaim. It is a bronze sculpture weighing , and its figures are tall. The six men portrayed do not display a united, heroic front; rather, each is isolated from his brothers, individually deliberating and struggling with his expected fate. Rodin soon proposed that the monument's high pedestal be eliminated, wanting to move the sculpture to ground level so that viewers could \"penetrate to the heart of the subject\". At ground level, the figures' positions lead the viewer around the work, and subtly suggest their common movement forward.\nThe committee was incensed by the untraditional proposal, but Rodin would not yield. In 1895, Calais succeeded in having \"Burghers\" displayed in their preferred form: the work was placed in front of a public garden on a high platform, surrounded by a cast-iron railing. Rodin had wanted it located near the town hall, where it would engage the public. Only after damage during the First World War, subsequent storage, and Rodin's death was the sculpture displayed as he had intended. It is one of Rodin's best-known and most acclaimed works.\nCommissions and controversy.\nCommissioned to create a monument to French writer Victor Hugo in 1889, Rodin dealt extensively with the subject of \"artist and muse\". Like many of Rodin's public commissions, \"Monument to Victor Hugo\" was met with resistance because it did not fit conventional expectations. Commenting on Rodin's monument to Victor Hugo, \"The Times\" in 1909 expressed that \"there is some show of reason in the complaint that [Rodin's] conceptions are sometimes unsuited to his medium, and that in such cases they overstrain his vast technical powers\". The 1897 plaster model was not cast in bronze until 1964.\nThe \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Gens des Lettres\", a Parisian organization of writers, planned a monument to French novelist Honor\u00e9 de Balzac immediately after his death in 1850. The society commissioned Rodin to create the memorial in 1891, and Rodin spent years developing the concept for his sculpture. Challenged in finding an appropriate representation of Balzac given the author's rotund physique, Rodin produced many studies: portraits, full-length figures in the nude, wearing a frock coat, or in a robe\u00a0\u2013 a replica of which Rodin had requested. The realized sculpture displays Balzac cloaked in the drapery, looking forcefully into the distance with deeply gouged features. Rodin's intent had been to show Balzac at the moment of conceiving a work\u00a0\u2013 to express courage, labor, and struggle.\nWhen \"Monument to Balzac\" was exhibited in 1898, the negative reaction was not surprising. The \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9\" rejected the work, and the press ran parodies. Criticizing the work, Morey (1918) reflected, \"there may come a time, and doubtless will come a time, when it will not seem \"outre\" to represent a great novelist as a huge comic mask crowning a bathrobe, but even at the present day this statue impresses one as slang.\" A modern critic, indeed, claims that \"Balzac\" is one of Rodin's masterpieces.\nThe monument had its supporters in Rodin's day; a manifesto defending him was signed by Monet, Debussy, and future Premier Georges Clemenceau, among many others. In the BBC series \"Civilisation\", art historian Kenneth Clark praised the monument as \"the greatest piece of sculpture of the 19th Century, perhaps, indeed, the greatest since Michelangelo.\" Rather than try to convince skeptics of the merit of the monument, Rodin repaid the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9\" his commission and moved the figure to his garden. After this experience, Rodin did not complete another public commission. Only in 1939 was \"Monument to Balzac\" cast in bronze and placed on the Boulevard du Montparnasse at the intersection with Boulevard Raspail.\nOther works.\nThe popularity of Rodin's most famous sculptures tends to obscure his total creative output. A prolific artist, he created thousands of busts, figures, and sculptural fragments over more than five decades. He painted in oils (especially in his thirties) and in watercolors. The Mus\u00e9e Rodin holds 7,000 of his drawings and prints, in chalk and charcoal, and thirteen vigorous drypoints. He also produced a single lithograph.\nPortraiture was an important component of Rodin's oeuvre, helping him to win acceptance and financial independence. His first sculpture was a bust of his father in 1860, and he produced at least 56 portraits between 1877 and his death in 1917. Early subjects included fellow sculptor Jules Dalou (1883) and companion Camille Claudel (1884).\nLater, with his reputation established, Rodin made busts of prominent contemporaries such as English politician George Wyndham (1905), Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw (1906), socialist (and former mistress of the Prince of Wales who became King Edward VII) Countess of Warwick (1908), Austrian composer Gustav Mahler (1909), former Argentine president Domingo Faustino Sarmiento and French statesman Georges Clemenceau (1911).\nHis undated drawing \"Study of a Woman Nude, Standing, Arms Raised, Hands Crossed Above Head\" is one of the works seized in 2012 from the collection of Cornelius Gurlitt.\nAesthetic.\nRodin was a naturalist, less concerned with monumental expression than with character and emotion. Departing with centuries of tradition, he turned away from the idealism of the Greeks, and the decorative beauty of the Baroque and neo-Baroque movements. His sculpture emphasized the individual and the concreteness of flesh, and suggested emotion through detailed, textured surfaces, and the interplay of light and shadow. To a greater degree than his contemporaries, Rodin believed that an individual's character was revealed by his physical features.\nRodin's talent for surface modeling allowed him to let every part of the body speak for the whole. The male's passion in \"The Thinker\" is suggested by the grip of his toes on the rock, the rigidness of his back, and the differentiation of his hands. Speaking of \"The Thinker\", Rodin illuminated his aesthetic: \"What makes my Thinker think is that he thinks not only with his brain, with his knitted brow, his distended nostrils and compressed lips, but with every muscle of his arms, back, and legs, with his clenched fist and gripping toes.\"\nSculptural fragments to Rodin were autonomous works, and he considered them the essence of his artistic statement. His fragments\u00a0\u2013 perhaps lacking arms, legs, or a head\u00a0\u2013 took sculpture further from its traditional role of portraying likenesses, and into a realm where forms existed for their own sake. Notable examples are \"The Walking Man\", \"Meditation without Arms\", and \"Iris, Messenger of the Gods\".\nRodin saw suffering and conflict as hallmarks of modern art. \"Nothing, really, is more moving than the maddened beast, dying from unfulfilled desire and asking in vain for grace to quell its passion.\" Charles Baudelaire echoed those themes and was among Rodin's favorite poets. Rodin enjoyed music, especially the opera composer Gluck, and wrote a book about French cathedrals. He owned a work by the as-yet-unrecognized Van Gogh and admired the forgotten El Greco.\nMethod.\nInstead of copying traditional academic postures, Rodin preferred his models to move naturally around his studio (despite their nakedness). The sculptor often made quick sketches in clay that were later fine-tuned, cast in plaster, and cast in bronze or carved from marble. Rodin's focus was on the handling of clay.\nGeorge Bernard Shaw sat for a portrait and gave an idea of Rodin's technique: \"While he worked, he achieved a number of miracles. At the end of the first fifteen minutes, after having given a simple idea of the human form to the block of clay, he produced by the action of his thumb a bust so living that I would have taken it away with me to relieve the sculptor of any further work.\"\nHe described the evolution of his bust over a month, passing through \"all the stages of art's evolution\": first, a \"Byzantine masterpiece\", then \"Bernini intermingled\", then an elegant Houdon. \"The hand of Rodin worked not as the hand of a sculptor works, but as the work of \"Elan Vital\". The \"Hand of God\" is his own hand.\"\nAfter he completed his work in clay, he employed highly skilled assistants to re-sculpt his compositions at larger sizes (including any of his large-scale monuments such as \"The Thinker\"), to cast the clay compositions into plaster or bronze, and to carve his marbles. Rodin's major innovation was to capitalize on such multi-staged processes of 19th century sculpture and their reliance on plaster casting.\nSince clay deteriorates rapidly if not kept wet or fired into a terra-cotta, sculptors used plaster casts as a means of securing the composition they would make from the fugitive material that is clay. This was common practice amongst Rodin's contemporaries, and sculptors would exhibit plaster casts with the hopes that they would be commissioned to have the works made in a more permanent material. Rodin, however, would have multiple plasters made and treat them as the raw material of sculpture, recombining their parts and figures into new compositions, and new names.\nAs Rodin's practice developed into the 1890s, he became more and more radical in his pursuit of fragmentation, the combination of figures at different scales, and the making of new compositions from his earlier work. A prime example of this is the bold \"The Walking Man\" (1899\u20131900), which was exhibited at his major one-person show in 1900. This is composed of two sculptures from the 1870s that Rodin found in his studio\u00a0\u2013 a broken and damaged torso that had fallen into neglect and the lower extremities of a statuette version of his 1878 \"St. John the Baptist Preaching\" he was having re-sculpted at a reduced scale.\nWithout finessing the join between upper and lower, between torso and legs, Rodin created a work that many sculptors at the time and subsequently have seen as one of his strongest and most singular works. This is despite the fact that the object conveys two different styles, exhibits two different attitudes toward finish, and lacks any attempt to hide the arbitrary fusion of these two components. It was the freedom and creativity with which Rodin used these practices\u00a0\u2013 along with his activation surfaces of sculptures through traces of his own touch and with his more open attitude toward bodily pose, sensual subject matter, and non-naturalistic surface\u00a0\u2013 that marked Rodin's re-making of traditional 19th century sculptural techniques into the prototype for modern sculpture.\nLater years (1900\u20131917).\nBy 1900, Rodin's artistic reputation was established. Gaining exposure from a pavilion of his artwork set up near the 1900 World's Fair (\"Exposition Universelle\") in Paris, he received requests to make busts of prominent people internationally, while his assistants at the atelier produced duplicates of his works. His income from portrait commissions alone totaled probably 200,000 francs a year. As Rodin's fame grew, he attracted many followers, including the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke, and authors Octave Mirbeau, Joris-Karl Huysmans, and Oscar Wilde.\nRilke stayed with Rodin in 1905 and 1906 and did administrative work for him; he would later write a laudatory monograph on the sculptor. Rodin and Beuret's modest country estate in Meudon, purchased in 1897, was a host to such guests as King Edward, dancer Isadora Duncan, and harpsichordist Wanda Landowska. A British journalist who visited the property noted in 1902 that in its complete isolation, there was \"a striking analogy between its situation and the personality of the man who lives in it\". Rodin moved to the city in 1908, renting the main floor of the H\u00f4tel Biron, an 18th-century townhouse. He left Beuret in Meudon and began an affair with the American-born Duchesse de Choiseul. From 1910, he mentored the Russian sculptor, Moissey Kogan.\nUnited States.\nWhile Rodin was beginning to be accepted in France by the time of \"The Burghers of Calais\", he had not yet conquered the American market. Because of his technique and the frankness of some of his work, he did not have an easy time selling his work to American industrialists. However, he came to know Sarah Tyson Hallowell (1846\u20131924), a curator from Chicago who visited Paris to arrange exhibitions at the large Interstate Expositions of the 1870s and 1880s. Hallowell was not only a curator but an adviser and a facilitator who was trusted by a number of prominent American collectors to suggest works for their collections, the most prominent of these being the Chicago hotelier Potter Palmer and his wife, Bertha Palmer (1849\u20131918).\nThe next opportunity for Rodin in America was the 1893 Chicago World's Fair. Hallowell wanted to help promote Rodin's work and he suggested a solo exhibition, which she wrote him was \"beaucoup moins beau que l'original\" but impossible, outside the rules. Instead, she suggested he send a number of works for her loan exhibition of French art from American collections and she told him she would list them as being part of an American collection. Rodin sent Hallowell three works, \"Cupid and Psyche\", \"Sphinx\" and \"Andromeda\". All nudes, these works provoked great controversy and were ultimately hidden behind a drape with special permission given for viewers to see them.\n\"Bust of Dalou\" and \"Burgher of Calais\" were on display in the official French pavilion at the fair and so between the works that were on display and those that were not, he was noticed. However, the works he gave Hallowell to sell found no takers, but she soon brought the controversial Quaker-born financier Charles Yerkes (1837\u20131905) into the fold and he purchased two large marbles for his Chicago manse; Yerkes was likely the first American to own a Rodin sculpture.\nOther collectors soon followed including the tastemaking Potter Palmers of Chicago and Isabella Stewart Gardner (1840\u20131924) of Boston, all arranged by Sarah Hallowell. In appreciation for her efforts at unlocking the American market, Rodin eventually presented Hallowell with a bronze, a marble and a terra cotta. When Hallowell moved to Paris in 1893, she and Rodin continued their warm friendship and correspondence, which lasted to the end of the sculptor's life. After Hallowell's death, her niece, the painter Harriet Hallowell, inherited the Rodins and after her death, the American heirs could not manage to match their value in order to export them, so they became the property of the French state.\nGreat Britain.\nAfter the start of the 20th century, Rodin was a regular visitor to Great Britain, where he developed a loyal following by the beginning of the First World War. He first visited England in 1881, where his friend, the artist Alphonse Legros, had introduced him to the poet William Ernest Henley. With his personal connections and enthusiasm for Rodin's art, Henley was most responsible for Rodin's reception in Britain. (Rodin later returned the favor by sculpting a that was used as the frontispiece to Henley's collected works and, after his death, on his monument in London.)\nThrough Henley, Rodin met Robert Louis Stevenson and Robert Browning, in whom he found further support. Encouraged by the enthusiasm of British artists, students, and high society for his art, Rodin donated a selection of his works to the nation in 1914.\nAfter the revitalization of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale des Beaux-Arts in 1890, Rodin served as the body's vice-president. In 1903, Rodin was elected president of the International Society of Painters, Sculptors, and Engravers. He replaced its former president, James Abbott McNeill Whistler, upon Whistler's death. His election to the prestigious position was largely due to the efforts of Albert Ludovici, father of English philosopher Anthony Ludovici, who was private secretary to Rodin for several months in 1906, but the two men parted company after Christmas, \"to their mutual relief.\"\nDuring his later creative years, Rodin's work turned increasingly toward the female form, and themes of more overt masculinity and femininity. He concentrated on small dance studies, and produced numerous erotic drawings, sketched in a loose way, without taking his pencil from the paper or his eyes from the model. Rodin met American dancer Isadora Duncan in 1900, attempted to seduce her, and the next year sketched studies of her and her students. In July 1906, Rodin was also enchanted by dancers from the Royal Ballet of Cambodia and produced some of his most famous drawings from the experience.\nFifty-three years into their relationship, Rodin married Rose Beuret. They married on 29 January 1917, and Beuret died two weeks later, on 16 February. Rodin was ill that year; in January, he suffered weakness from influenza, and on 16 November his physician announced that \"congestion of the lungs has caused great weakness. The patient's condition is grave.\" Rodin died the next day, age 77, at his villa in Meudon, \u00cele-de-France, on the outskirts of Paris.\nA cast of \"The Thinker\" was placed next to his tomb in Meudon; it was Rodin's wish that the figure served as his headstone and epitaph. In 1923, Marcell Tirel, Rodin's secretary, published a book alleging that Rodin's death was largely due to cold, and the fact that he had no heat at Meudon. Rodin requested permission to stay in the Hotel Biron, a museum of his works, but the director of the museum refused to let him stay there.\nLegacy.\nRodin willed to the French state his studio and the right to make casts from his plasters. Because he encouraged the edition of his sculpted work, Rodin's sculptures are represented in many public and private collections. The Mus\u00e9e Rodin was founded in 1916 and opened in 1919 at the H\u00f4tel Biron, where Rodin had lived, and it holds the largest Rodin collection, with more than 6,000 sculptures and 7,000 works on paper. The French order made him a Commander, and he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford.\nDuring his lifetime, Rodin was compared to Michelangelo, and was widely recognized as the greatest artist of the era. In the three decades following his death, his popularity waned with changing aesthetic values. Since the 1950s, Rodin's reputation has re-ascended; he is recognized as the most important sculptor of the modern era, and has been the subject of much scholarly work. The sense of incompletion offered by some of his sculpture, such as \"The Walking Man\", influenced the increasingly abstract sculptural forms of the 20th century.\nRodin restored an ancient role of sculpture\u00a0\u2013 to capture the physical and intellectual force of the human subject\u00a0\u2013 and he freed sculpture from the repetition of traditional patterns, providing the foundation for greater experimentation in the 20th century. His popularity is ascribed to his emotion-laden representations of ordinary men and women\u00a0\u2013 to his ability to find the beauty and pathos in the human animal. His most popular works, such as \"The Kiss\" and \"The Thinker\", are widely used outside the fine arts as symbols of human emotion and character. To honor Rodin's artistic legacy, the Google search engine homepage displayed a Google Doodle featuring \"The Thinker\" to celebrate his 172nd birthday on 12 November 2012.\nRodin had enormous artistic influence. A whole generation of sculptors studied in his workshop. These include Gutzon Borglum, Antoine Bourdelle, Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, Camille Claudel, Charles Despiau, Malvina Hoffman, Carl Milles, Fran\u00e7ois Pompon, Rodo, Gustav Vigeland, Clara Westhoff and Margaret Winser, even though Brancusi later rejected his legacy. Rodin also promoted the work of other sculptors, including Aristide Maillol and Ivan Me\u0161trovi\u0107 whom Rodin once called \"the greatest phenomenon amongst sculptors.\" Other sculptors whose work has been described as owing to Rodin include Joseph Csaky, Alexander Archipenko, Joseph Bernard, Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, Georg Kolbe, Wilhelm Lehmbruck, Jacques Lipchitz, Pablo Picasso, Adolfo Wildt, and Ossip Zadkine. Henry Moore acknowledged Rodin's seminal influence on his work.\nSeveral films have been made featuring Rodin as a prominent character or presence. These include \"Camille Claudel\", a 1988 film in which G\u00e9rard Depardieu portrays Rodin, \"Camille Claudel 1915\" from 2013, and \"Rodin\", a 2017 film starring Vincent Lindon as Rodin. Furthermore, the Rodin Studios artists' cooperative housing in New York City, completed in 1917 to designs by Cass Gilbert, was named after Rodin.\nForgeries.\nThe relative ease of making reproductions has also encouraged many forgeries: a survey of expert opinion placed Rodin in the top ten most-faked artists. Rodin fought against forgeries of his works as early as 1901, and since his death, many cases of organized, large-scale forgeries have been revealed. A massive forgery was discovered by French authorities in the early 1990s and led to the conviction of art dealer Guy Hain.\nTo deal with the complexity of bronze reproduction, France has promulgated several laws since 1956 which limit reproduction to twelve casts\u00a0\u2013 the maximum number that can be made from an artist's plasters and still be considered his work. As a result of this limit, \"The Burghers of Calais\", for example, is found in fourteen cities.\nIn the market for sculpture, plagued by fakes, the value of a piece increases significantly when its provenance can be established. A Rodin work with a verified history sold for US$4.8\u00a0million in 1999, and Rodin's bronze \"\u00c8ve, grand modele\u00a0\u2013 version sans rocher\" sold for $18.9\u00a0million at a 2008 Christie's auction in New York. Art critics concerned about authenticity have argued that taking a cast does not equal reproducing a Rodin sculpture\u00a0\u2013 especially given the importance of surface treatment in Rodin's work.\nA number of drawings previously attributed to Rodin are now known to have been forged by Ernest Durig."}
{"id": "2067", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2067", "title": "Ann Arbor, Michigan", "text": "Ann Arbor is a city in and the seat of government of Washtenaw County, Michigan, United States. The 2020 census recorded its population to be 123,851, making it the fifth-most populous city in Michigan. Located on the Huron River, Ann Arbor is the principal city of its metropolitan area, which encompasses all of Washtenaw County and had 372,258 residents in 2020.\nAnn Arbor was founded in 1824 by John Allen and Elisha Rumsey. It was named after the wives of the village's founders, both named Ann, and the stands of bur oak trees they found at the site of the town. The University of Michigan was established in Ann Arbor in 1837, and the city's population grew at a rapid rate in the early to mid-20th century.\nA college town, Ann Arbor is currently home to the University of Michigan, which significantly shapes the city's economy, employing about 30,000 workers which includes about 12,000 in its medical center. The city's economy is also centered on high technology, with several companies drawn to the area by the university's research and development infrastructure. The city has been a center for progressive politics as well as several social and religious movements.\nAnn Arbor is included in the Detroit-Warren-Ann Arbor combined statistical area and the Great Lakes megalopolis.\nHistory.\nBefore founding as Ann Arbor.\nThe lands of present-day Ann Arbor were part of Massachusetts's western claim after the French and Indian War (1754\u20131763), bounded by the latitudes of Massachusetts Bay Colony's original charter, to which it was entitled by its interpretation of its original sea-to-sea grant from the British Crown. Massachusetts ceded the claim to the federal government as part of the Northwest Territory after April 19, 1785.\nThe region was once inhabited by several Native American tribes, the most prominent being the Anishinaabe people of the Three Fires \u2014 the Odawa, Ojibwe, and Potawatomi. The Potawatomi founded two villages in the area of what is now Ann Arbor in about 1774. Other tribes that inhabited the area included the Fox, Wyandots, and Sauk. These peoples established several trails that converged on present-day Ann Arbor. The land that included Washtenaw County was ceded to the U.S. by the Odawa, Ojibwe, Potawatomi, and Wyandot in the Treaty of Detroit of 1807.\n19th century.\nAnn Arbor was founded in 1824 by land speculators John Allen and Elisha Walker Rumsey. On May 25, 1824, the town plat was registered with Wayne County as the Village of Annarbour, the earliest known use of the town's name. Allen and Rumsey decided to name it for their wives, both named Ann, and for the stands of bur oak in the of land they purchased for $800 from the federal government at $1.25 per acre. The local Ojibwa named the settlement \"kaw-goosh-kaw-nick\", after the sound of Allen's sawmill.\nAnn Arbor became the seat of Washtenaw County in 1827 and was incorporated as a village in 1833. The Ann Arbor Land Company, a group of speculators, set aside of undeveloped land and offered it to the state of Michigan as the site of the state capitol, but lost the bid to Lansing. In 1837, the property was accepted instead as the site of the University of Michigan.\nSince the university's establishment in the city in 1837, the histories of the University of Michigan and Ann Arbor have been closely linked. The town became a regional transportation hub in 1839 with the arrival of the Michigan Central Railroad, and a north\u2013south railway connecting Ann Arbor to Toledo and other markets to the south was established in 1878. Throughout the 1840s and the 1850s settlers continued to come to Ann Arbor. While the earlier settlers were primarily of British ancestry, the newer settlers also consisted of Germans, Irish, and Black people. In 1851, Ann Arbor was chartered as a city, though the city showed a drop in population during the Depression of 1873. It was not until the early 1880s that Ann Arbor again saw robust growth, with new immigrants from Greece, Italy, Russia, and Poland.\n20th century.\nAnn Arbor saw increased growth in manufacturing, particularly in milling. Ann Arbor's Jewish community also grew after the turn of the 20th century, and its first and oldest synagogue, Beth Israel Congregation, was established in 1916.\nIn 1960, Ann Arbor voters approved a $2.3 million bond issue to build the current city hall, which was designed by architect Alden B. Dow. The City Hall opened in 1963. In 1995, the building was renamed the Guy C. Larcom Jr. Municipal Building in honor of the longtime city administrator who championed the building's construction.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, the city gained a reputation as an important center for liberal politics. Ann Arbor also became a locus for left-wing activism and anti-Vietnam War movement, as well as the student movement. The first major meetings of the national left-wing campus group Students for a Democratic Society took place in Ann Arbor in 1960; in 1965, the city was home to the first U.S. teach-in against the Vietnam War. During the ensuing 15 years, many countercultural and New Left enterprises sprang up and developed large constituencies within the city. These influences washed into municipal politics during the early and mid-1970s when three members of the Human Rights Party (HRP) won city council seats on the strength of the student vote. During their time on the council, HRP representatives fought for measures including pioneering antidiscrimination ordinances, measures decriminalizing marijuana possession, and a rent-control ordinance.\nTwo religious-conservative institutions were created in Ann Arbor; the Word of God (established in 1967), a charismatic inter-denominational movement; and the Thomas More Law Center (established in 1999). Since 1998, Ann Arbor is also the home office of the Anthroposophical Society in the United States, an organization dedicated to supporting the community of those interested in the inner path of schooling known as anthroposophy, developed by Rudolf Steiner.\nFollowing a 1956 vote, the city of East Ann Arbor merged with Ann Arbor to encompass the eastern sections of the city.\n21st century.\nIn the past several decades, Ann Arbor has grappled with the effects of sharply rising land values, gentrification, and urban sprawl stretching into outlying countryside. On November 4, 2003, voters approved a greenbelt plan under which the city government bought development rights on agricultural parcels of land adjacent to Ann Arbor to preserve them from sprawling development. Since then, a vociferous local debate has hinged on how and whether to accommodate and guide development within city limits. Ann Arbor consistently ranks in the \"top places to live\" lists published by various mainstream media outlets every year.\nIn 2016, the city changed mayoral terms from two years to four. Until 2017, City Council held annual elections in which half of the seats (one from each ward) were elected to 2-year terms. These elections were staggered, with each ward having one of its seats up for election in odd years and its other seat up for election in even years. Beginning in 2018 the city council has had staggered elections to 4-year terms in even years. This means that half of the members (one from each ward) are elected in presidential election years, while the other half are elected in mid-term election years. To facilitate this change in scheduling, the 2017 election elected members to terms that lasted 3-years.\nIn 2020, partly as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the city government opened several downtown streets to pedestrians, limiting their use by motor vehicles to emergency vehicles during summertime weekends. In addition to providing a large pedestrian mall, these changes allow restaurants to use more of the sidewalks and part of the street for outdoor seating. These changes were popular enough that in 2021 the city council extended the dates from March to November, continuing the schedule of cordoning off cars from Thursday evening until Monday morning.\nGeography.\nAnn Arbor is located along the Huron River, which flows southeast through the city on its way to Lake Erie. It is the central core of the Ann Arbor, MI Metropolitan Statistical Area, which consists of the whole of Washtenaw County, but is also a part of the Metro Detroit Combined Statistical Area designated by the U.S. Census Bureau. While it borders only Townships, the built-up nature of the sections of Pittsfield and Ypsilanti townships between Ann Arbor and the city of Ypsilanti make the two effectively a single urban area.\nLandscape.\nThe landscape of Ann Arbor consists of hills and valleys, with the terrain becoming steeper near the Huron River. The elevation ranges from about along the Huron River to on the city's west side, near the intersection of Maple Road and Pauline Blvd. Ann Arbor Municipal Airport, which is south of the city at , has an elevation of . Ann Arbor is nicknamed \"Tree Town\", both due to its name and to the dense forestation of its parks and residential areas. The city contains more than 50,000 trees along its streets and an equal number in parks. Into the early 2000s, the emerald ash borer has destroyed many of the city's approximately 10,500 ash trees. \nThe city contains over 160 municipal parks ranging from small neighborhood green spots to large recreation areas such as Buhr Park. Several large city parks and a university park border sections of the Huron River. Fuller Recreation Area, near the University Hospital complex, contains sports fields, pedestrian and bike paths, and swimming pools. The city is also home to the Washtenaw County-owned County Farm Park. The Nichols Arboretum, owned by the University of Michigan, is a arboretum that contains hundreds of plant and tree species. It is on the city's east side, near the university's Central Campus. Located across the Huron River just beyond the university's North Campus is the university's Matthaei Botanical Gardens, which contains 300\u00a0acres of gardens and a large tropical conservatory. Several other green spaces around Ann Arbor are privately owned or owned by government agencies such as Ann Arbor Public Schools. \nCityscape.\nThe cityscape of Ann Arbor is heavily influenced by the University of Michigan, with 22% of downtown and 9.4% of the total land owned by the university. The downtown Central Campus contains some of the oldest extant structures in the city\u2014including the President's House, built in 1840\u2014and separates the South University District from the other three downtown commercial districts. These other three districts, Kerrytown, State Street, and Main Street are contiguous near the northwestern corner of the university.\nMajor landmarks in downtown Ann Arbor include the Michigan Theater, The Diag, and Tower Plaza, a 26-story condominium building that is the city's tallest building. Downtown is also home to several Fairy Doors and other public art installations.\nThree commercial areas south of downtown include the areas near I-94 and Ann Arbor-Saline Road, Briarwood Mall, and the South Industrial area. Other commercial areas include the Arborland/Washtenaw Avenue and Packard Road merchants on the east side, the Plymouth Road area in the northeast, and the Westgate/West Stadium areas on the west side. Downtown contains a mix of 19th- and early-20th-century structures and modern-style buildings, as well as a farmers' market in the Kerrytown district. The city's commercial districts are composed mostly of two- to four-story structures, although downtown and the area near Briarwood Mall contain a small number of high-rise buildings.\nAnn Arbor's residential neighborhoods contain architectural styles ranging from classic 19th- and early 20th-century designs to ranch-style houses. Among these homes are a number of kit houses built in the early 20th century. Contemporary-style houses are farther from the downtown district. Surrounding the University of Michigan campus are houses and apartment complexes occupied primarily by student renters. The 19th-century buildings and streetscape of the Old West Side neighborhood have been preserved virtually intact; in 1972, the district was listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and it is further protected by city ordinances and a nonprofit preservation group.\nClimate.\nAnn Arbor has a typically Midwestern humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\"), which is influenced by the Great Lakes. There are four distinct seasons: winters are cold and snowy, with average highs around . Summers are warm to hot and humid, with average highs around and with slightly more precipitation. Spring and autumn are transitional between the two. The area experiences lake effect weather, primarily in the form of increased cloudiness during late fall and early winter. The monthly daily average temperature in July is , while the same figure for January is . Temperatures reach or exceed on 10 days, and drop to or below on 4.6 nights. Precipitation tends to be the heaviest during the summer months, but most frequent during winter. Snowfall, which normally occurs from November to April but occasionally starts in October, averages per season. The lowest recorded temperature was on February 11, 1885, and the highest recorded temperature was on July 24, 1934.\nDemographics.\nAnn Arbor has seen consistent growth in population between all decennial censuses since 1860 with the exception of the 2010 census which reported almost no growth from the previous census. As of the 2020 U.S. census, there were 123,851 people and 49,337 households residing in the city, with a population density of . The racial makeup of the city including Hispanics in the racial categories was 67.6% White, 6.8% Black, 0.2% Native American, 15.7% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 1.8% from other races, and 7.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race made up 5.5% of the population. Ann Arbor has a small population of Arab Americans, including students as well as local Lebanese and Palestinians, and a large community of Japanese nationals.\nAccording to the 2022 American Community Survey estimates, out of 49,337 households, 33.8% were married-couple households, 9.8% were cohabiting couple households, 26.1% had a male householder with no spouse present, and 30.4% had a female householder with no spouse present. 18.4% of the households had individuals under the age of 18 living in them, and 20.1% had individuals over age 65 living in them. The average household size was 2.22 people and the average family size was 2.78 people. The median age was 25.9; 12.2% of the population was under age 18, and 12.3% was age 65 or older. The percentage of city residents age 25 years or older with at least a high school degree was 97.8% while 77.5% had a bachelor's degree or higher, which is higher than the U.S. national percentage of 89.1% for persons age 25 years or older with at least a high school degree and 34.3% with a bachelor's degree or higher.\nThe median household income in 2022 was $78,740 (versus the U.S. national figure of $75,149), with family households having a median income of $126,292. The per capita income for the city was $52,276, which is higher than the U.S. national per capita income of $41,261. Males working full-time jobs had median earnings of $86,970 compared to $61,543 for females. Out of the 109,973 people with a determined poverty status, 23.1% were below the poverty line compared to the U.S. national poverty rate of 11.1%; the age group with the highest percentage below the poverty level was persons between 18 and 34 years at 43.0% while other age groups have percentages between 2.7% and 7.7%. Further, 3.5% of minors and 7.7% of seniors were below the poverty line.\nCrime.\nAccording to the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program in 2022, Ann Arbor had 371 reported violent crimes (which include homicide, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) and 2069 reported property crimes (which include arson, burglary, larceny-theft, and motor vehicle theft). With a violent crime rate of 309.5 per 100,000 people, the city's violent crime rate is lower than Michigan's rate of 461 per 100,000 people and the U.S. national rate of 380.7 per 100,000 people. However, Ann Arbor's property crime rate, at 1726.0 per 100,000 people, is higher than Michigan's property crime rate of 1536.8 per 100,000 people and lower than the U.S. national property crime rate of 1954.4 per 100,000 people.\nEconomy.\nThe University of Michigan shapes Ann Arbor's economy significantly. It employs about 30,000 workers which includes about 12,000 in the medical center. Other employers are drawn to the area by the university's research and development money, and by its graduates. High tech, health services and biotechnology are other major components of the city's economy; numerous medical offices, laboratories, and associated companies are located in the city. Automobile manufacturers, such as General Motors and Visteon, also employ residents.\nHigh tech companies have located in the area since the 1930s, when International Radio Corporation introduced the first mass-produced AC/DC radio (the Kadette, in 1931) as well as the first pocket radio (the Kadette Jr., in 1933). Current firms include Arbor Networks (provider of Internet traffic engineering and security systems), Arbortext (provider of XML-based publishing software), JSTOR (the digital scholarly journal archive), Truven Health Analytics, and ProQuest, which includes UMI. Duo Security, a cloud-based access security provider of two-factor authentication, is headquartered in Ann Arbor. It was formerly a unicorn and continues to be headquartered in Ann Arbor after its acquisition by Cisco Systems. In November 2021, semiconductor test equipment company KLA Corporation opened a new North American headquarters in Ann Arbor.\nAnn Arbor is the home to Internet2 and the Merit Network, a not-for-profit research and education computer network. Both are located in the South State Commons 2 building on South State Street. The city is also home to a secondary office of Google's AdWords program\u2014the company's primary revenue stream. As of 2022, Ann Arbor is home to more than twenty video game and XR studios of varying sizes. The city plays host to a regional chapter of the International Game Developers Association (IGDA) which hosts monthly meetups, presentations, and educational events.\nThe University of Michigan operates the North Campus Research Complex, a former Pfizer pharmaceutical research facility on the northeast side of Ann Arbor. The city is the home of other research and engineering centers, including the Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory that is operated by NOAA and the Michigan Tech Research Institute. Other research centers sited in the city are the United States Environmental Protection Agency's National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory and the Toyota Technical Center. The city is also home to National Sanitation Foundation International (NSF International), the nonprofit non-governmental organization that develops generally accepted standards for a variety of public health related industries and subject areas.\nNon-high tech companies in Ann Arbor include Domino's Pizza, headquartered on Domino's Farms, a Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired complex just northeast of the city. Another Ann Arbor-based company is Zingerman's Delicatessen, which serves sandwiches and has developed businesses under a variety of brand names. Avfuel, a global supplier of aviation fuels and services, is headquartered in Ann Arbor as is Pinkerton, a detective and private security firm. Many cooperative enterprises were founded in the city; among those that remain are the People's Food Co-op and the Inter-Cooperative Council at the University of Michigan, a student housing cooperative founded in 1937. There are also three cohousing communities\u2014Sunward, Great Oak, and Touchstone\u2014located immediately to the west of the city limits.\nCulture.\nSeveral performing arts groups and facilities are on the University of Michigan's campus, as are museums dedicated to art, archaeology, and natural history and sciences. Founded in 1879, the University Musical Society is an independent performing arts organization that presents over 60 events each year, bringing international artists in music, dance, and theater. Since 2001 Shakespeare in the Arb has presented one play by Shakespeare each June, in a large park near downtown. Regional and local performing arts groups not associated with the university include the Ann Arbor Civic Theatre, the Arbor Opera Theater, the Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra, The Ark, and Performance Network Theatre. State Theatre and the adjacent Michigan Theater are a movie palace and a performing arts center, respectively. Another unique piece of artistic expression in Ann Arbor is the fairy doors. These small portals are examples of installation art and can be found throughout the downtown area.\nThe Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum, an interactive science center, is located in a renovated and expanded historic downtown fire station. The Ann Arbor Art Center is a nonprofit that organizes art activities and exhibitions. Aside from the Ann Arbor District Library, which maintains four branch outlets in addition to its main downtown building, and being the home to the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, Ann Arbor ranks first among U.S. cities in the number of booksellers and books sold per capita.\nSeveral annual events\u2014many of them centered on performing and visual arts\u2014draw visitors to Ann Arbor. One such event is the Ann Arbor Art Fairs, a set of four concurrent juried fairs held on downtown streets. Scheduled on Thursday through Sunday of the third week of July, the fairs draw upward of half a million visitors. Another is the Ann Arbor Film Festival, held during the third week of March, which receives more than 2,500 submissions annually from more than 40 countries and serves as one of a handful of Academy Award\u2013qualifying festivals in the United States.\nAnn Arbor has a long history of openness to marijuana, given Ann Arbor's decriminalization of cannabis, the large number of medical marijuana dispensaries in the city (one dispensary, called People's Co-op, was directly across the street from Michigan Stadium until zoning forced it to move one mile to the west), the large number of pro-marijuana residents, and the annual Hash Bash: an event that is held on the first Saturday of April. Until (at least) the successful passage of Michigan's medical marijuana law, the event had arguably strayed from its initial intent, although for years, a number of attendees have received serious legal responses due to marijuana use on University of Michigan property, which does not fall under the city's progressive and compassionate ticketing program.\nA person from Ann Arbor is called an \"Ann Arborite\", and many long-time residents call themselves \"townies\". The city itself is often called \"A\u00b2\" (\"A-squared\") or \"A2\" (\"A two\") or \"AA\", \"The Deuce\" (mainly by Chicagoans), and \"Tree Town\". With tongue-in-cheek reference to the city's liberal political leanings, some occasionally refer to Ann Arbor as \"The People's Republic of Ann Arbor\" or \"25 square miles surrounded by reality.\" In \"A Prairie Home Companion\" broadcast from Ann Arbor, Garrison Keillor described Ann Arbor as \"a city where people discuss socialism, but only in the fanciest restaurants.\" Ann Arbor sometimes appears on citation indexes as an author, instead of a location, often with the academic degree \"MI\", a misunderstanding of the abbreviation for Michigan.\nSports.\nAnn Arbor is a major center for college sports, most notably at the University of Michigan. Several well-known college sports facilities exist in the city, including Michigan Stadium, the largest American football stadium and the third-largest stadium of any kind in the world with a capacity of 107,601. The stadium is colloquially known as \"The Big House\" due to its status as the largest American football stadium. Crisler Center and Yost Ice Arena play host to the school's basketball (both men's and women's) and ice hockey teams, respectively. Concordia University, a member of the NAIA, also fields sports teams. \nIn semi-professional sports Ann Arbor is represented in the NPSL by AFC Ann Arbor, a soccer club founded in 2014 who call themselves The Mighty Oak.\nOpening in the summer of 2014, the city funded Ann Arbor Skatepark, is a 30,000-square-foot skatepark in located within Veterans Memorial Park. At the opening of the skatepark, professional skateboarders skated the park including Tony Hawk, Andy Macdonald, Alex Sorgente, and Tony Magnusson.\nGovernment.\nAs the county seat of Washtenaw County, the Washtenaw County Trial Court (22nd Circuit Court) is located in Ann Arbor at the Washtenaw County Courthouse on Main Street. Seven judges serve on the court. The 15th Michigan district court, which serves only the city itself, is located within the Ann Arbor Justice Center, immediately next to city hall. The U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan and Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit are also located in downtown Ann Arbor, at the federal building on Liberty Street.\nIn the Michigan Legislature, the city is split between Districts 23, 33, 47, and 48 in the Michigan House of Representatives. In the Michigan Senate, Ann Arbor is covered by Districts 14 and 15. Ann Arbor is within the 6th congressional district, currently represented by Debbie Dingell.\nAnn Arbor has a council-manager form of government, with 11 voting members: the mayor and 10 city council members. Each of the city's five wards are represented by two council members, with the mayor elected at-large during midterm years. Half of the council members are elected in midterm years, with the other in general election years. The mayor is the presiding officer of the city council and has the power to appoint all council committee members as well as board and commission members, with the approval of the city council. The current mayor of Ann Arbor is Christopher Taylor, a Democrat who was elected as mayor in 2014. Day-to-day city operations are managed by a city administrator chosen by the city council. While Democrats, as of 2024, hold the mayorship and all ten council seats, Ann Arbor has two major political factions. A major source of this local divide is differences in views on the city's growth.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPublic schools are part of the Ann Arbor Public Schools (AAPS) district. AAPS has one of the country's leading music programs. For the 2021\u20132022 school year, 17,070 students were enrolled in the Ann Arbor Public Schools. Notable schools include Pioneer, Huron, Skyline, Community high schools, Pathways to Success Academic Campus, and Ann Arbor Open School. The district has a preschool center with both free and tuition-based programs for preschoolers in the district. The University High School, a \"demonstration school\" with teachers drawn from the University of Michigan's education program, was part of the school system from 1924 to 1968.\nAnn Arbor is home to several private schools, including Emerson School, the Father Gabriel Richard High School, Rudolf Steiner School of Ann Arbor (a PreK\u201312 Waldorf school), Clonlara School, Michigan Islamic Academy, and Greenhills School, a prep school. The city is also home to several charter schools such as Central Academy (Michigan) (PreK\u201312) of the Global Educational Excellence (GEE) charter school company, Washtenaw Technical Middle College, and Honey Creek Community School.\nHigher education.\nThe University of Michigan dominates the city of Ann Arbor, providing the city with its distinctive college-town character. University buildings are located in the center of the city and the campus is directly adjacent to the State Street and South University downtown areas.\nOther local colleges and universities include Concordia University Ann Arbor, a Lutheran liberal-arts institution, and Cleary University, a private business school. Washtenaw Community College is located in neighboring Ann Arbor Township. In 2000, the Ave Maria School of Law, a Roman Catholic law school established by Domino's Pizza founder Tom Monaghan, opened in northeastern Ann Arbor, but the school moved to Ave Maria, Florida in 2009, and the Thomas M. Cooley Law School acquired the former Ave Maria buildings for use as a branch campus.\nMedia.\n\"The Ann Arbor News\", owned by the Michigan-based Booth Newspapers chain, was the major newspaper serving Ann Arbor and the rest of Washtenaw County. The newspaper ended its 174-year daily print run in 2009 due to economic difficulties, and began producing two printed editions a week under the name AnnArbor.com. Ann Arbor has been said to be the first significant city to lose its only daily paper. The publication resumed using its former name in 2013, and also produces a daily digital edition named MLive.com. Another Ann Arbor-based publication that has ceased production was the \"Ann Arbor Paper\", a free monthly. The \"Ann Arbor Chronicle\", an online newspaper, covered local news, including meetings of the library board, county commission, and DDA until September 3, 2014.\nCurrent publications in the city include the \"Ann Arbor Journal\" (\"A2 Journal\"), a weekly community newspaper; the \"Ann Arbor Observer\", a free monthly local magazine; and \"Current\", a free entertainment-focused alt-weekly. The \"Ann Arbor Business Review\" covers local business in the area. \"Car and Driver\" magazine and \"Automobile Magazine\" are also based in Ann Arbor. The University of Michigan is served by many student publications, including the independent \"Michigan Daily\" student newspaper, which reports on local, state, and regional issues in addition to campus news.\nFour major AM radio stations based in or near Ann Arbor are WAAM 1600, a conservative news and talk station; WLBY 1290, a business news and talk station; WDEO 990, Catholic radio; and WTKA 1050, which is primarily a sports station. The city's FM stations include NPR affiliate WUOM 91.7; country station WWWW 102.9; and adult-alternative station WQKL 107.1. Freeform station WCBN-FM 88.3 is a local community radio/college radio station operated by the students of the University of Michigan featuring noncommercial, eclectic music and public-affairs programming. The city is also served by public and commercial radio broadcasters in Ypsilanti, the Lansing/Jackson area, Detroit, Windsor, and Toledo.\nAnn Arbor is part of the Detroit television market. WPXD channel 31, the owned-and-operated Detroit outlet of the ION Television network, is licensed to the city. Until its sign-off on August 31, 2017, WHTV channel 18, a MyNetworkTV-affiliated station for the Lansing market, was broadcast from a transmitter in Lyndon Township, west of Ann Arbor. Community Television Network (CTN) is a city-provided cable television channel with production facilities open to city residents and nonprofit organizations. Detroit and Toledo-area radio and television stations also serve Ann Arbor, and stations from Lansing and Windsor, Ontario, can be seen in parts of the area.\nInfrastructure.\nHealthcare.\nThe University of Michigan Health System (UMHS) includes University Hospital, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital and Women's Hospital in its core complex. UMHS also operates out-patient clinics and facilities throughout the city. The area's other major medical centers include a large facility operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs in Ann Arbor, and Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital in nearby Superior Township.\nUtilities.\nThe city provides sewage disposal and water supply services, with water coming from the Huron River and groundwater sources. There are two water-treatment plants, one main and three outlying reservoirs, four pump stations, and two water towers. These facilities serve the city, which is divided into five water districts. The city's water department also operates four dams along the Huron River\u2014Argo, Barton, Geddes, and Superior\u2014of which Barton and Superior provide hydroelectric power.\nThe city also offers waste management services, with Recycle Ann Arbor handling recycling service. Other utilities are provided by private entities. Electrical power and gas are provided by DTE Energy. AT&amp;T Inc. is the primary wired telephone service provider for the area. Cable TV service is primarily provided by Comcast.\nTransportation.\nThe streets in downtown Ann Arbor conform to a grid pattern, though this pattern is less common in the surrounding areas. Major roads branch out from the downtown district to the highways surrounding the city. The city is belted by three freeways: I-94, which runs along the southern and western portion of the city; U.S. Highway 23 (US\u00a023), which primarily runs along the eastern edge of Ann Arbor; and M-14, which runs along the northern edge of the city. Other nearby highways include US\u00a012 (Michigan Ave.), M-17 (Washtenaw Ave.), and M-153 (Ford Rd.). Several of the major surface arteries lead to the I-94/M-14 interchange in the west, US 23 in the east, and the city's southern areas. The Washtenaw County Border-to-Border Trail connects Ann Arbor to Ypsilanti, mostly along the Huron River, for pedestrians, bicycles and other non-motorized transportation.\nThe Ann Arbor Area Transportation Authority (AAATA), which brands itself as \"TheRide\", operates public bus services throughout the city and nearby Ypsilanti. The AAATA operates the Blake Transit Center on Fourth Ave. in downtown Ann Arbor, and the Ypsilanti Transit Center. A separate zero-fare bus service operates within and between the University of Michigan campuses. In 2019, 36% of trips in Ann Arbor were taken by walking, biking or transit.\nSince April 2012, the \"AirRide\" connects to Detroit Metro Airport a dozen times a day. Greyhound Lines provides intercity bus service. The Michigan Flyer, a service operated by Indian Trails, cooperates with AAATA for their AirRide and additionally offers bus service to East Lansing. Megabus has direct service to Chicago, Illinois, while a bus service is provided by Amtrak Thruway for rail passengers making connections to services in East Lansing and Toledo, Ohio.\nAmtrak, which provides service to the city at the Ann Arbor Train Station, operates the \"Wolverine\" train between Chicago and Pontiac via Detroit. The present-day train station neighbors the city's old Michigan Central Depot, which was renovated as a restaurant in 1970. Ann Arbor Municipal Airport is a small, city-run general aviation airport located south of I-94.\nSister cities.\nAnn Arbor has seven sister cities:"}
{"id": "2070", "revid": "492987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2070", "title": "Act of Settlement 1701", "text": "The Act of Settlement (12 &amp; 13 Will. 3. c. 2) is an act of the Parliament of England that settled the succession to the English and Irish crowns to only Protestants, which passed in 1701. More specifically, anyone who became a Roman Catholic, or who married one, became disqualified to inherit the throne. This had the effect of deposing the remaining descendants of Charles I, other than his Protestant granddaughter Anne, as the next Protestant in line to the throne was Sophia of Hanover. Born into the House of Wittelsbach, she was a granddaughter of James VI and I from his most junior surviving line, with the crowns descending only to her non-Catholic heirs. Sophia died less than two months before Queen Anne, and Sophia's son succeeded to the throne as King George I, starting the Hanoverian dynasty in Britain.\nThe Act of Supremacy 1558 had confirmed the independence of the Church of England from Roman Catholicism under the English monarch. One of the principal factors which contributed to the Glorious Revolution was the perceived assaults made on the Church of England by King James II, a Roman Catholic, who was deposed in favour of his Protestant daughter Mary II and her husband William III. The need for this Act of Settlement was prompted by the inability of William and Mary, as well as of Mary's Protestant sister (the future Queen Anne), to produce any surviving children, and by the perceived threat posed by the pretensions to the throne by remaining Roman Catholic members of the House of Stuart.\nThe act played a key role in the formation of the Kingdom of Great Britain as, though England and Scotland had shared a monarch since 1603, they had remained separately governed countries, with the Act catalysing the Union of England and Scotland. However, the Parliament of Scotland was more reluctant to abandon the House of Stuart, members of which had been Scottish monarchs long before they became English. Moreover, the Act also placed limits on both the role of foreigners in the British government and the power of the monarch with respect to the Parliament of England, though some of those provisions have been altered by subsequent legislation.\nAlong with the Bill of Rights 1689, the Act of Settlement remains today one of the main constitutional laws governing the succession not only to the throne of the United Kingdom, but to those of the other Commonwealth realms, whether by assumption or by patriation. The Act of Settlement cannot be altered in any realm except by that realm's own parliament and, by convention, only with the consent of all the other realms, as it touches on the succession to the shared crown. On 26 March 2015, following the Perth Agreement, legislation amending the Act came into effect across the Commonwealth realms that removed the disqualification arising from marriage to a Roman Catholic and instituted absolute primogeniture.\nBackground.\nFollowing the Glorious Revolution, the line of succession to the English throne was governed by the Bill of Rights 1689, which declared that the flight of James II from England to France during the revolution amounted to an abdication of the throne and that James's daughter Mary II and her husband/cousin, William III (William of Orange, who was also James's nephew), were James's successors. The Bill of Rights also provided that the line of succession would go through Mary's Protestant descendants by William and any possible future husband should she outlive him, then through Mary's sister Anne and her Protestant descendants, and then to the Protestant descendants of William III by a possible later marriage should he outlive Mary. During the debate, the House of Lords had attempted to append Sophia and her descendants to the line of succession, but the amendment failed in the Commons.\nMary II died childless in 1694, after which William III did not remarry. In 1700, Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, who was Anne's only child to survive infancy, died of what may have been smallpox at the age of 11. Thus, Anne was left as the only person in line to the throne. The Bill of Rights excluded Catholics from the throne, which ruled out James II and his children (as well as their descendants) sired after he converted to Catholicism in 1668. However, it did not provide for the further succession after Anne. Parliament thus saw the need to settle the succession on Sophia and her descendants, and thereby guarantee the continuity of the Crown in the Protestant line.\nWith religion and lineage initially decided, the ascendancy of William of Orange in 1689 would also bring his partiality to his Dutch favourites that followed. By 1701, anti-Dutch sentiment was widespread in England and action was considered necessary.\nThe act.\nThe Act of Settlement provided that the throne would pass to the Electress Sophia of Hanover\u00a0\u2013 a granddaughter of James VI and I and a niece of King Charles I\u00a0\u2013 and her descendants, but it excluded \"for ever\" \"all and every Person and Persons who ... is are or shall be reconciled to or shall hold Communion with the See or Church of Rome or shall profess the Popish Religion or shall marry a Papist\". Thus, those who were Roman Catholics, and those who married Roman Catholics, were barred from ascending the throne.\nConditional provisions.\nThe act contained eight additional provisions that were to only come into effect upon the death of both William and Anne:\nFirstly, the monarch \"shall join in communion with the Church of England\". This was intended to ensure the exclusion of a Roman Catholic monarch. Along with James II's perceived despotism, his religion was the main cause of the Glorious Revolution, and of the previous linked religious and succession problems which had been resolved by the joint monarchy of William III and Mary II.\nSecond, if a person not native to England comes to the throne, England will not wage war for \"any dominions or territories which do not belong to the Crown of England, without the consent of Parliament\". This would become relevant when a member of the House of Hanover ascended the British throne, as he would retain the territories of the Electorate of Hanover in what is now Lower Saxony (Germany), then part of the Holy Roman Empire. This provision has been dormant since Queen Victoria ascended the throne, because she did not inherit Hanover under the Salic Laws of the German-speaking states.\nThird, no monarch may leave \"the dominions of England, Scotland, or Ireland\", without the consent of Parliament. This provision was repealed in 1716, at the request of George I who was also the Elector of Hanover and Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg within the Holy Roman Empire; because of this, and also for personal reasons, he wished to visit Hanover from time to time.\nFourth, all government matters within the jurisdiction of the Privy Council were to be transacted there, and all council resolutions were to be signed by those who advised and consented to them. This was because Parliament wanted to know who was deciding policies, as sometimes councillors' signatures normally attached to resolutions were absent. This provision was repealed early in Queen Anne's reign, as many councillors ceased to offer advice and some stopped attending meetings altogether.\nFifth, no foreigner (\"no Person born out of the Kingdoms of England Scotland or Ireland or the Dominions thereunto belonging\"), even if naturalised or made a denizen (unless born of English parents), can be a Privy Councillor or a member of either House of Parliament, or hold \"any Office or Place of Trust, either Civill or Military, or to have any Grant of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments from the Crown, to himself or to any other or others in Trust for him\". Subsequent nationality laws (today primarily the British Nationality Act 1981) made naturalised citizens the equal of those native born, and excluded Commonwealth citizens from the definition of foreigners, and citizens of the Irish Republic from the definition of aliens, but otherwise this provision still applies. It has however been disapplied in particular cases by a number of other statutes.\nSixth, no person who has an office under the monarch, or receives a pension from the Crown, was to be a Member of Parliament. This provision was inserted to avoid unwelcome royal influence over the House of Commons. It remains in force, but with several exceptions; ministers of the Crown were exempted early on before Anne's death in order to continue some degree of royal patronage, but had to stand for a by-election to re-enter the House upon such appointment until 1926. As a side effect, this provision means that members of the Commons seeking to resign from parliament can get around the prohibition on resignation by obtaining a sinecure in the control of the Crown; while several offices have historically been used for this purpose, two are currently in use: appointments generally alternate between the stewardships of the Chiltern Hundreds and of the Manor of Northstead.\nSeventh, judges' commissions are valid \"quamdiu se bene gesserint\" (during good behaviour) and if they do not behave themselves, they can be removed only by both Houses of Parliament (or in other Commonwealth realms the one House of Parliament, depending on the legislature's structure). This provision was the result of various monarchs influencing judges' decisions, and its purpose was to assure judicial independence. This patent was used prior to 1701 but did not prevent Charles I from removing Sir John Walter as Chief Baron of the Exchequer.\nEighth, that \"no Pardon under the Great Seal of England be pleadable to an Impeachment by the Commons in Parliament\". This meant in effect that no pardon by the monarch was to save someone from being impeached by the House of Commons.\nOpposition.\nThe Tory administration that replaced the Whig Junto in 1699 took responsibility for steering the Act through Parliament. As a result, it passed with little opposition, although five peers voted against it in the House of Lords, including the Earl of Huntingdon, his brother-in-law the Earl of Scarsdale and three others. While many shared their opposition to a \"foreign\" king, the general feeling was summed up as \"better a German prince than a French one\".\nLegacy.\nFor different reasons, various constitutionalists have praised the Act of Settlement: Henry Hallam called the Act \"the seal of our constitutional laws\" and David Lindsay Keir placed its importance above the Bill of Rights of 1689. Naamani Tarkow wrote: \"If one is to make sweeping statements, one may say that, save Magna Carta (more truly, its implications), the Act of Settlement is probably the most significant statute in English history\".\nUnion of Scotland with England and Wales.\nThe Act of Settlement was, in many ways, the major cause of the union of Scotland with England and Wales to form the Kingdom of Great Britain. The Parliament of Scotland had not been consulted about the Act of Settlement, and, in response, passed the Act of Security 1704, through which Scotland reserved the right to choose its own successor to Queen Anne. Stemming from this, the Parliament of England decided that, to ensure the stability and future prosperity of Great Britain, full union of the two parliaments and nations was essential before Anne's death.\nIt used a combination of exclusionary legislation (the Alien Act 1705), politics, and bribery to achieve this within three years under the Act of Union 1707. This success was in marked contrast to the four attempts at political union between 1606 and 1689, which all failed owing to a lack of political will in both kingdoms. By virtue of Article II of the Treaty of Union, which defined the succession to the throne of Great Britain, the Act of Settlement became part of Scots law as well.\nSuccession to the Crown.\nIn addition to excluding James II, who died a few months after the Act received royal assent, and his Roman Catholic children, Prince James (\"The Old Pretender\") and the Princess Royal, the Act also excluded the descendants of Princess Henrietta, the youngest sister of James II. Henrietta's daughter was Anne, Queen of Sardinia, a Roman Catholic, from whom descend all Jacobite pretenders after 1807.\nWith the legitimate descendants of Charles I either childless (in the case of his two grand-daughters the late Queen Mary II and her successor Queen Anne) or Roman Catholic, Parliament's choice was limited to Sophia of Hanover, the Protestant daughter of the late Elizabeth of Bohemia, the only other child of King James I to have survived childhood. Elizabeth had borne nine children who reached adulthood, of whom Sophia was the youngest daughter. However in 1701 Sophia was the senior Protestant one, therefore with a legitimate claim to the English throne; Parliament passed over her Roman Catholic siblings, namely her sister Louise Hollandine of the Palatinate, and their descendants, who included Elizabeth Charlotte, Duchess of Orl\u00e9ans; Louis Otto, Prince of Salm, and his aunts; Anne Henriette, Princess of Cond\u00e9, and Benedicta Henrietta, Duchess of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg.\nRemoval from the succession due to Catholicism.\nSince the act's passing the most senior living member of the royal family to have married a Roman Catholic, and thereby to have been removed from the line of succession, is Prince Michael of Kent, who married Baroness Marie-Christine von Reibnitz in 1978; he was fifteenth in the line of succession at the time. He was restored to the line of succession in 2015 when the Succession to the Crown Act 2013 came into force, and became 34th in line.\nThe next most senior living descendant of the Electress Sophia who had been ineligible to succeed on this ground is George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews, the elder son of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who married the Roman Catholic Sylvana Palma Tomaselli in 1988. His son, Lord Downpatrick, converted to Roman Catholicism in 2003 and is the most senior descendant of Sophia to be barred as a result of his religion. In 2008 his daughter, Lady Marina Windsor, also converted to Catholicism and was removed from the line of succession. More recently, Peter Phillips, the son of Anne, Princess Royal, and eleventh in line to the throne, married Autumn Kelly; Kelly had been brought up as a Roman Catholic, but she converted to Anglicanism prior to the wedding. Had she not done so, Phillips would have forfeited his place in the succession upon their marriage, only to have it restored in 2015.\nExcluding those princesses who have married into Roman Catholic royal families, such as Marie of Edinburgh, Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg and Princess Beatrice of Edinburgh, one member of the Royal Family (that is, with the style of \"Royal Highness\") has converted to Roman Catholicism since the passage of the Act: the Duchess of Kent, wife of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who converted on 14 January 1994, but her husband did not lose his place in the succession because she was an Anglican at the time of their marriage.\nPresent status.\nAs well as being part of the law of the United Kingdom, the Act of Settlement was received into the laws of all the countries and territories over which the British monarch reigned. It remains part of the laws of the 15 Commonwealth realms and the relevant jurisdictions within those realms. In accordance with established convention, the Statute of Westminster 1931 and later laws, the Act of Settlement (along with the other laws governing the succession of the Commonwealth realms) may only be changed with the agreement of all the realms (and, in some federal realms, the constituent members of those federations). The Succession to the Crown Act 2013 changed many provisions of this Act.\nAmendment proposals.\nChallenges have been made against the Act of Settlement, especially its provisions regarding Roman Catholics and preference for males. However, changing the act is a complex process, since the act governs the shared succession of all the Commonwealth realms. The Statute of Westminster 1931 acknowledges by established convention that any changes to the rules of succession may be made only with the agreement of all of the states involved, with concurrent amendments to be made by each state's parliament or parliaments. Further, as the current monarch's eldest child and, in turn, his eldest child, are Anglican males, any change to the succession laws would have no immediate implications. Consequently, there was little public concern with the issues and debate had been confined largely to academic circles until the November 2010 announcement that Prince William was to marry. This raised the question of what would happen if he were to produce first a daughter and then a son.\n\"The Times\" reported on 6 November 1995 that Prince Charles had said on that day to Tony Blair and Paddy Ashdown that \"Catholics should be able to ascend to the British throne\". Ashdown claimed the Prince said: \"I really can't think why we can't have Catholics on the throne\". In 1998, during debate on a Succession to the Crown Bill, Junior Home Office Minister Lord Williams of Mostyn informed the House of Lords that the Queen had \"no objection to the Government's view that in determining the line of succession to the throne, daughters and sons should be treated in the same way.\"\nAustralia.\nIn October 2011 the Australian federal government was reported to have reached an agreement with all of the states on potential changes to their laws in the wake of amendments to the Act of Settlement. The practice of the Australian states\u2014for example, New South Wales and Victoria\u2014has been, when legislating to repeal some imperial statutes so far as they still applied in Australia, to provide that imperial statutes concerning the royal succession remain in force.\nThe legal process required at the federal level remains, theoretically, unclear. The Australian constitution, as was noted during the crisis of 1936, contains no power for the federal parliament to legislate with respect to the monarchy. Everything thus turns upon the status and meaning of clause 2 in the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 1900, which provides: \"The provisions of this Act referring to the Queen shall extend to Her Majesty's heirs and successors in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom.\"\nAnne Twomey reviews three possible interpretations of the clause.\nHowever, Twomey expresses confidence that, if the High Court of Australia were to be faced with the problems of covering clause 2, it would find some way to conclude that, with regard to Australia, the clause is subject solely to Australian law. Canadian scholar Richard Toporoski theorised in 1998 that \"if, let us say, an alteration were to be made in the United Kingdom to the Act of Settlement 1701, providing for the succession of the Crown... [i]t is my opinion that the domestic constitutional law of Australia or Papua New Guinea, for example, would provide for the succession in those countries of the same person who became Sovereign of the United Kingdom.\"\nIn practice, when legislating for the Perth Agreement (see below), the Australian governments took the approach of the states requesting, and referring power to, the federal government to enact the legislation on behalf of the states (under paragraph 51(xxxviii) of the Australian Constitution) and the Commonwealth of Australia.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, where the Act of Settlement () is now a part of Canadian constitutional law, Tony O'Donohue, a Canadian civic politician, took issue with the provisions that exclude Roman Catholics from the throne, and which make the monarch of Canada the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, requiring him or her to be an Anglican. This, he claimed, discriminated against non-Anglicans, including Catholics, who are the largest faith group in Canada. In 2002, O'Donohue launched a court action that argued the Act of Settlement violated the \"Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms\", but, the case was dismissed by the court. It found that, as the Act of Settlement is part of the Canadian constitution, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as another part of the same constitution, does not have supremacy over it. Also, the court noted that, while Canada has the power to amend the line of succession to the Canadian throne, the Statute of Westminster stipulates that the agreement of the governments of the fifteen other Commonwealth realms that share the Crown would first have to be sought if Canada wished to continue its relationship with these countries. An appeal of the decision was dismissed on 16 March 2005. Some commentators state that, as a result of this, any single provincial legislature could hinder any attempts to change this Act, and by extension, to the line of succession for the shared crown of all 16 Commonwealth realms. Others contend that that is not the case, and changes to the succession instituted by an Act of the Parliament of Canada \"[in accord] with the convention of symmetry that preserves the personal unity of the British and Dominion Crowns\".\nWith the announcement in 2007 of the engagement of Peter Phillips to Autumn Kelly, a Roman Catholic and a Canadian, discussion about the Act of Settlement was revived. Norman Spector called in \"The Globe and Mail\" for Prime Minister Stephen Harper to address the issue of the Act's bar on Catholics, saying Phillips' marriage to Kelly would be the first time the provisions of the Act would bear directly on Canada\u2014Phillips would be barred from acceding to the Canadian throne because he married a Roman Catholic Canadian. (In fact, Lord St Andrews had already lost his place in the line of succession when he married the Roman Catholic Canadian Sylvana Palma Tomaselli in 1988. But St Andrews' place in the line of succession was significantly lower than Phillips'.) Criticism of the Act of Settlement due to the Phillips\u2013Kelly marriage was muted when Autumn Kelly converted to Anglicanism shortly before her marriage, thus preserving her husband's place in the line of succession.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFrom time to time there has been debate over repealing the clause that prevents Roman Catholics, or those who marry one, from ascending to the British throne. Proponents of repeal argue that the clause is a bigoted anachronism; Cardinal Winning, who was leader of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland, called the act an \"insult\" to Catholics. Cardinal Murphy-O'Connor, the leader of the Roman Catholic Church in England, pointed out that Prince William (later the Duke of Cambridge) \"can marry by law a Hindu, a Buddhist, anyone, but not a Roman Catholic.\" Opponents of repeal, such as Enoch Powell and Adrian Hilton, believe that it would lead to the disestablishment of the Church of England as the state religion if a Roman Catholic were to come to the throne. They also note that the monarch must swear to defend the faith and be a member of the Anglican Communion, but that a Roman Catholic monarch would, like all Roman Catholics, owe allegiance to the Pope. This would, according to opponents of repeal, amount to a loss of sovereignty for the Anglican Church.\nWhen in December 1978 there was media speculation that Prince Charles might marry a Roman Catholic, Powell defended the provision that excludes Roman Catholics from ascending the throne, stating his objection was not rooted in religious bigotry but in political considerations. He said a Roman Catholic monarch would mean the acceptance of a source of authority external to the realm and \"in the literal sense, foreign to the Crown-in-Parliament ... Between Roman Catholicism and royal supremacy there is, as Saint Thomas More concluded, no reconciliation.\" Powell concluded that a Roman Catholic crown would be the destruction of the Church of England because \"it would contradict the essential character of that church.\"\nHe continued:\nWhen Thomas Hobbes wrote that \"the Papacy is no other than the ghost of the deceased Roman Empire sitting crowned upon the grave thereof\", he was promulgating an enormously important truth. Authority in the Roman Church is the exertion of that \"imperium\" from which England in the 16th century finally and decisively declared its national independence as the \"alter imperium\", the \"other empire\", of which Henry VIII declared \"This realm of England is an empire\" ... It would signal the beginning of the end of the British monarchy. It would portend the eventual surrender of everything that has made us, and keeps us still, a nation.\nThe Scottish Parliament unanimously passed a motion in 1999 calling for the complete removal of any discrimination linked to the monarchy and the repeal of the Act of Settlement. The following year, \"The Guardian\" challenged the succession law in court, claiming that it violated the European Convention on Human Rights, which provides,\nThe enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, association with a national minority, property, birth, or other status.\nAs the Convention nowhere lists the right to succeed to the Crown as a human right, the challenge was rejected.\nAdrian Hilton, writing in \"The Spectator\" in 2003, defended the Act of Settlement as not \"irrational prejudice or blind bigotry\", but claimed that it was passed because \"the nation had learnt that when a Roman Catholic monarch is upon the throne, religious and civil liberty is lost.\" He points to the Pope's claiming universal jurisdiction, and Hilton argues that \"it would be intolerable to have, as the sovereign of a Protestant and free country, one who owes any allegiance to the head of any other state\" and contends that, if such situation came about, \"we will have undone centuries of common law.\" He said that because the Roman Catholic Church does not recognise the Church of England as an apostolic church, a Roman Catholic monarch who abided by their faith's doctrine would be obliged to view Anglican and Church of Scotland archbishops, bishops, and clergy as part of the laity and therefore \"lacking the ordained authority to preach and celebrate the sacraments.\" (Hilton noted that the Church of Scotland's Presbyterian polity does not include bishops or archbishops.) Hilton said a Roman Catholic monarch would be unable to be crowned by the Archbishop of Canterbury and notes that other European states have similar religious provisions for their monarchs: Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, whose constitutions compel their monarchs to be Lutherans; the Netherlands, which has a constitution requiring its monarchs be members of the Protestant House of Orange; and Belgium, which has a constitution that provides for the succession to be through Roman Catholic houses.\nIn December 2004, a private member's bill\u2014the Succession to the Crown Bill\u2014was introduced in the House of Lords. The government, headed by Tony Blair, blocked all attempts to revise the succession laws, claiming it would raise too many constitutional issues and it was unnecessary at the time. In the British general election the following year, Michael Howard promised to work towards having the prohibition removed if the Conservative Party gained a majority of seats in the House of Commons, but the election was won by Blair's Labour Party. Four years later, plans drawn up by Chris Bryant were revealed that would end the exclusion of Catholics from the throne and end the doctrine of male-preference primogeniture in favour of absolute primogeniture, which governs succession solely on birth order and not on sex. The issue was raised again in January 2009, when a private member's bill to amend the Act of Succession was introduced in parliament.\nAcross the realms.\nIn early 2011 Keith Vaz, a Labour Member of Parliament, introduced to the House of Commons at Westminster a private member's bill which proposed that the Act of Settlement be amended to remove the provisions relating to Roman Catholicism and change the primogeniture governing the line of succession to the British throne from male-preference to absolute cognatic. Vaz sought support for his project from the Canadian Cabinet and Prime Minister Stephen Harper, but the Office of the Prime Minister of Canada responded that the issue was \"not a priority for the government or for Canadians without further elaboration on the merits or drawbacks of the proposed reforms\". Stephenson King, Prime Minister of Saint Lucia, said he supported the idea and it was reported that the government of New Zealand did, as well. The Monarchist League of Canada said at the time to the media that it \"supports amending the Act of Settlement in order to modernize the succession rules.\"\nLater the same year, the Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Nick Clegg, announced that the government was considering a change in the law. At approximately the same time, it was reported that British Prime Minister David Cameron had written to each of the prime ministers of the other fifteen Commonwealth realms, asking for their support in changing the succession to absolute primogeniture and notifying them he would raise his proposals at that year's Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth, Australia. Cameron reportedly also proposed removing the restriction on successors being or marrying Roman Catholics; however, potential Roman Catholic successors would be required to convert to Anglicanism prior to acceding to the throne. In reaction to the letter and media coverage, Harper stated that, this time, he was \"supportive\" of what he saw as \"reasonable modernizations\".\nAt the 2011 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting on 28 October 2011, the prime ministers of the other Commonwealth realms agreed to support Cameron's proposed changes to the Act. The bill put before the Parliament of the United Kingdom would act as a model for the legislation required to be passed in at least some of the other realms, and any changes would only first take effect if the Duke of Cambridge were to have a daughter before a son.\nThe British group Republic asserted that succession reform would not make the monarchy any less discriminatory. As it welcomed the gender equality reforms, the British newspaper \"The Guardian\" criticized the lack of a proposal to remove the ban on Catholics sitting on the throne, as did Alex Salmond, First Minister of Scotland, who pointed out that \"It is deeply disappointing that the reform [of the Act of Settlement of 1701] has stopped short of removing the unjustifiable barrier on a Catholic becoming monarch.\" On the subject, Cameron asserted: \"Let me be clear, the monarch must be in communion with the Church of England because he or she is the head of that Church.\"\nThe disqualification arising from marriage to a Roman Catholic was removed by the Succession to the Crown Act 2013."}
{"id": "2071", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2071", "title": "Afrocelt Sound System", "text": ""}
{"id": "2073", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2073", "title": "Andrew Jackson/First Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "2074", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2074", "title": "Andrew Jackson/Second Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "2075", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2075", "title": "Aircraft hijacking", "text": "Aircraft hijacking (also known as airplane hijacking, skyjacking, plane hijacking, plane jacking, air robbery, air piracy, or aircraft piracy, with the last term used within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States) is the unlawful seizure of an aircraft by an individual or a group. Dating from the earliest of hijackings, most cases involve the pilot being forced to fly according to the hijacker's demands. There have also been incidents where the hijackers have overpowered the flight crew, made unauthorized entry into the cockpit and flown them into buildings\u2014most notably in the September 11 attacks\u2014and in some cases, planes have been hijacked by the official pilot or co-pilot, such as with Ethiopian Airlines Flight 702.\nUnlike carjacking or sea piracy, an aircraft hijacking is not usually committed for robbery or theft. Individuals driven by personal gain often divert planes to destinations where they are not planning to go themselves. Some hijackers intend to use passengers or crew as hostages, either for monetary ransom or for some political or administrative concession by authorities. Various motives have driven such occurrences, such as demanding the release of certain high-profile individuals or for the right of political asylum (notably Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961), but sometimes a hijacking may have been affected by a failed private life or financial distress, as in the case of Aarno Lamminparras in Finnair Flight 405. Hijackings involving hostages have produced violent confrontations between hijackers and the authorities, during negotiation and settlement. In several casesmost famously Air France Flight 139, Lufthansa Flight 181, and Air France Flight 8969the hijackers were not satisfied and showed no inclination to surrender, resulting in the deployment of counterterrorist police tactical units or special forces to rescue the passengers.\nIn most jurisdictions of the world, aircraft hijacking is punishable by life imprisonment or a long prison sentence. In most jurisdictions where the death penalty is a legal punishment, aircraft hijacking is a capital crime, including in China, India, Liberia, and the U.S. states of Georgia and Mississippi.\nHistory.\nAirplane hijackings have occurred since the early days of flight. These can be classified in the following eras: 1929\u20131957, 1958\u20131979, 1980\u20132000 and 2001\u2013present. Early incidents involved light planes, but this later involved passenger aircraft as commercial aviation became widespread.\n1929\u20131957.\nBetween 1929 and 1957, there were fewer than 20 incidents of reported hijackings worldwide; several occurred in Eastern Europe.\nOne of the first unconfirmed hijackings occurred in December 1929. J. Howard \"Doc\" DeCelles was flying a postal route for a Mexican firm, Transportes Aeras Transcontinentales, ferrying mail from San Luis Potos\u00ed to Torreon and then on to Guadalajara. Saturnino Cedillo, the governor of the state of San Luis Potos\u00ed, ordered him to divert. Several other men were also involved, and through an interpreter, DeCelles had no choice but to comply. He was allegedly held captive for several hours under armed guard before being released.\nThe first recorded aircraft hijack took place on February 21, 1931, in Arequipa, Peru. Byron Richards, flying a Ford Tri-Motor, was approached on the ground by armed revolutionaries. He refused to fly them anywhere during a 10-day standoff. Richards was informed that the revolution was successful and he could be freed in return for flying one of the men to Lima.\nThe following year, in September 1932, a Sikorsky S-38 with registration P-BDAD, registered to Nyrba do Brasil, was seized in the company's hangar by three men, who took a hostage. Despite having no flying experience, they managed to take off. However, the aircraft crashed in S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o de Meriti, killing the four men. Apparently, the hijack was related to the events of the Constitutionalist Revolution in S\u00e3o Paulo; it is considered to be the first hijack that took place in Brazil.\nOn October 28, 1939, the first murder on a plane took place in Brookfield, Missouri, US. The victim was Carl Bivens, a flight instructor, who was teaching a man named Earnest P. \"Larry\" Pletch. While airborne in a Taylor Cub monoplane, Pletch shot Bivens twice in the back of the head. Pletch later told prosecutors, \"Carl was telling me I had a natural ability and I should follow that line\", adding, \"I had a revolver in my pocket and without saying a word to him, I took it out of my overalls and I fired a bullet into the back of his head. He never knew what struck him.\" The \"Chicago Daily Tribune\" stated it was one of the most spectacular crimes of the 20th century. Pletch pleaded guilty and was sentenced to life in prison. However, he was released on March 1, 1957, after serving 17 years, and lived until June 2001.\nIn 1942 near Malta, two New Zealanders, a South African, and an Englishman achieved the first confirmed in-air hijack when they overpowered their captors aboard an Italian seaplane that was flying them to a prisoner-of-war camp. As they approached an Allied base, they were strafed by Supermarine Spitfires unaware of the aircraft's true operators and forced to land on the water. However, all on board survived to be picked up by a British boat.\nIn the years following World War II, Philip Baum, an aviation security expert, suggested that the development of a rebellious youth \"piggybacking on to any cause which challenged the status quo or acted in support of those deemed oppressed\" may have been a contributor to attacks against the aviation field. The first hijacking of a commercial flight occurred on the Cathay Pacific \"Miss Macao\" on July 16, 1948. After this incident and others in the 1950s, airlines recommended that flight crews comply with the hijackers' demands rather than risk a violent confrontation. There were also various hijacking incidents and assaults on planes in China and the Middle East. The forced landing by the Israeli Air Force of a Syrian Airlines plane in December 1954 has been described by multiple writers as a state-sponsored hijacking.\nOn 23 July 1956, in the Hungarian People's Republic, seven passengers hijacked a domestic flight of Mal\u00e9v Hungarian Airlines, a Lisunov Li-2 (registration HA-LIG), to escape from behind the Iron Curtain, and flew it to West Germany. The aircraft landed safely at Ingolstadt Air Base without injuries.\nAn aircraft belonging to the airline Lloyd Aereo Boliviano was hijacked in Bolivia on September 26, 1956. The DC-4 was carrying 47 prisoners who were being transported from Santa Cruz, Bolivia, to El Alto, in La Paz. A political group was waiting to take them to a concentration camp located in Carahuara de Carangas, Oruro. The 47 prisoners overpowered the crew and gained control of the aircraft while airborne and diverted the plane to Tartagal, Argentina. Prisoners took control of the aircraft and received instructions to again fly to Salta, Argentina, as the airfield in Tartagal was not big enough. Upon landing, they told the government of the injustice they were subjected to, and received political asylum.\nOn October 22, 1956, French forces hijacked a Moroccan airplane carrying leaders of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) during the ongoing Algerian War. The plane, which was carrying Ahmed Ben Bella, Hocine A\u00eft Ahmed, and Mohamed Boudiaf, was destined to leave from Palma de Mallorca for Tunis where the FLN leaders were to conference with Prime Minister Habib Bourguiba, but French forces redirected the flight to occupied Algiers, where the FLN leaders were arrested.\n1958\u20131979.\nBetween 1958 and 1967, there were approximately 40 hijackings worldwide. Beginning in 1958, hijackings from Cuba to other destinations started to occur; in 1961, hijackings from other destinations to Cuba became prevalent. The first happened on May 1, 1961, on a flight from Miami to Key West. The perpetrator, armed with a knife and gun, forced the captain to land in Cuba.\nAustralia was relatively untouched by the threat of hijackings until July 19, 1960. On that evening, a 22-year-old Russian man attempted to divert Trans Australia Airlines Flight 408 to Darwin or Singapore. The crew were able to subdue the man after a brief struggle.\nAccording to the FAA, in the 1960s, there were 100 attempts of hijackings involving U.S. aircraft: 77 successful and 23 unsuccessful. Recognizing the danger early, the FAA issued a directive on July 28, 1961, which prohibits unauthorized persons from carrying concealed firearms and interfering with crew member duties. The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 was amended to impose severe penalties for those seizing control of a commercial aircraft. Airlines could also refuse to transport passengers who were likely to cause danger. That same year, the FAA and Department of Justice created the Peace Officers Program which put trained marshals on flights. A few years later, on May 7, 1964, the FAA adopted a rule requiring that cockpit doors on commercial aircraft be kept locked at all times. \nIn a five-year period (1968\u20131972) the world experienced 326 hijack attempts, or one every 5.6 days. The incidents were frequent and often just an inconvenience, which resulted in television shows creating parodies. \"Time\" magazine even ran a lighthearted comedy piece called \"What to Do When the Hijacker Comes\". Most incidents occurred in the United States. There were two distinct types: hijackings for transportation elsewhere and hijackings for extortion with the threat of harm.\nBetween 1968 and 1972, there were 90 recorded transport attempts to Cuba. In contrast, there were 26 extortion attempts (see table on the right). The longest and first transcontinental (Los Angeles, Denver, New York, Bangor, Shannon and Rome) hijacking from the US started on 31 October 1969.\nThe Eastern Air Lines Shuttle Flight 1320 on May 17, 1970, witnessed the first fatality in the course of a U.S. hijacking.\nIncidents also became problematic outside of the U.S. For instance, in 1968, El Al Flight 426 was seized by Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) militants on 23 July, an incident which lasted 40 days, making it one of the longest. This record was later beaten in 1999.\nAs a result of the evolving threat, President Nixon issued a directive in 1970 to promote security at airports, electronic surveillance and multilateral agreements for tackling the problem.\nThe International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) issued a report on aircraft hijacking in July 1970. Beginning in 1969 until the end of June 1970, there were 118 incidents of unlawful seizure of aircraft and 14 incidents of sabotage and armed attacks against civil aviation. This involved airlines of 47 countries and more than 7,000 passengers. In this period, 96 people were killed and 57 were injured as a result of hijacking, sabotage and armed attacks.\nThe ICAO stated that this is not isolated to one nation or one region, but a worldwide issue to the safe growth of international civil aviation. Incidents also became notoriousin 1971, a man known as D. B. Cooper hijacked a plane and extorted US$200,000 in ransom before parachuting over Oregon. He was never identified.\nOn August 20, 1971, a Pakistan Air Force T-33 military plane was hijacked prior the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 in Karachi. Lieutenant Matiur Rahman attacked Officer Rashid Minhas and attempted to land in India. Minhas deliberately crashed the plane into the ground near Thatta to prevent the diversion.\nCountries around the world continued their efforts to tackle crimes committed on-board planes. The Tokyo Convention, drafted in 1958, established an agreement between signatories that the \"state in which the aircraft is registered is competent to exercise jurisdiction over crimes committed on board that aircraft while it is in flight\". While the Convention does not make hijacking an international crime, it does contain provisions which obligate the country in which a hijacked aircraft lands to restore the aircraft to its responsible owner, and allow the passengers and crew to continue their journey. The Convention came into force in December 1969.\nA year later, in December 1970, the Hague Convention was drafted which punishes hijackers, enabling each state to prosecute a hijacker if that state does not extradite them, and to deprive them from asylum from prosecution.\nOn December 5, 1972, the FAA issued emergency rules requiring all passengers and their carry-on baggage to be screened. Airports slowly implemented walk-through metal detectors, hand-searches and X-ray machines, to prohibit weapons and explosive devices. These rules came into effect on January 5, 1973, and were welcomed by most of the public. In 1974, Congress enacted a statute which provided for the death penalty for acts of aircraft piracy resulting in death. Between 1968 and 1977, there were approximately 41 hijackings per year.\nIn the 1970s, in pursuit of their demands for Croatia's independence from the Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia, Croatian nationalists hijacked several civilian airliners, such as Scandinavian Airlines System Flight 130 and TWA Flight 355.\n1980\u20132000.\nBy 1980, airport screening and greater cooperation from the international community led to fewer successful hijackings; the number of events had significantly dropped below the 1968 level. Between 1978 and 1988, there were roughly 26 incidents of hijackings a year. A new threat emerged in the 1980s: organised terrorists destroying aircraft to draw attention. For instance, terrorist groups were responsible for the bombing of Air India Flight 182 over the Irish coast. In 1988, Pan Am Flight 103 was bombed flying over Scotland. Terrorist activity which included hijack attempts in the Middle East were also a cause of concern.\nDuring the 1990s, there was relative peace in the United States airspace as the threat of domestic hijacking was seen as a distant memory. Globally, however, hijackings still persisted. Between 1993 and 2003, the highest number of hijackings occurred in 1993 (see table below). This number can be attributed to events in China where hijackers were trying to gain political asylum in Taiwan. Europe and the rest of East Asia were not immune either. On December 26, 1994, Air France Flight 8969 with 172 passengers and crew was hijacked after leaving Algiers. Authorities believed that the goal was to crash the plane into the Eiffel Tower. On June 21, 1995, All Nippon Airways Flight 857 was hijacked by a man claiming to be a member of the Aum Shinrikyo religious cult, demanding the release of its imprisoned leader Shoko Asahara. The incident was resolved when the police stormed the plane.\nOn October 17, 1996, the first hijacking that was brought to an end while airborne was carried out by four operatives of the Austrian special law enforcement unit Cobra on a Russian Aeroflot flight from Malta to Lagos, Nigeria, aboard a Tupolev Tu-154. The operatives escorted inmates detained for deportation to their homelands and were equipped with weapons and gloves. On 12 April 1999, six ELN members hijacked a Fokker 50 of Avianca Flight 9463, flying from Bucaramanga to Bogot\u00e1. Many hostages were held for more than a year, and the last hostage was finally freed 19 months after the hijacking.\n2001\u2013present.\nOn September 11, 2001, four airliners were hijacked by 19 Al-Qaeda extremists: American Airlines Flight 11, United Airlines Flight 175, American Airlines Flight 77 and United Airlines Flight 93. The first two planes were deliberately crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City and the third was crashed into The Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia. The fourth crashed in a field in Stonycreek Township near Shanksville, Pennsylvania after crew and passengers attempted to overpower the hijackers. Authorities believe that the intended target was the U.S. Capitol or the White House in Washington DC. In total, 2,996 people (2,977 if excluding the perpetrators) perished and more than 6,000 were injured in the attacks, making the hijackings the deadliest in modern history.\nFollowing the attacks, the U.S. government formed the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) to handle airport screening at U.S. airports. Government agencies around the world tightened their airport security, procedures and intelligence gathering. Until the September 11 attacks, there had never been an incident whereby a passenger aircraft was used as a weapon of mass destruction. The 9/11 Commission report stated that it was always assumed that a \"hijacking would take the traditional form\"; therefore, airline crews never had a contingency plan for a suicide-hijacking. As Patrick Smith, an airline pilot, summarizes:\nThroughout the mid-2000s, hijackings still occurred but there were much fewer incidents and casualties. The number of incidents had been declining, even before the September 11 attacks. One notable incident in 2006 was the hijacking of Turkish Airlines Flight 1476, flying from Tirana to Istanbul, which was seized by a man named Hakan Ekinci. The aircraft, with 107 passengers and 6 crew, made distress calls to air traffic control and the plane was escorted by military aircraft before landing safely at Brindisi, Italy. In 2007, several incidents occurred in the Middle East and Northern Africa; hijackers in one of these incidents claimed to be affiliated with Al-Qaeda. Towards the end of the decade, AeroMexico experienced its first terror incident when Flight 576 was hijacked by a man demanding to speak with President Calder\u00f3n. In 2007, a man failed to hijack a 737-200 with 103 people on board over Chad.\nBetween 2010 and 2019, the Aviation Safety Network estimates there have been 15 hijackings worldwide with three fatalities. This is a considerably lower figure than in previous decades which can be attributed to greater security enhancements and awareness of September 11\u2013style attacks. On June 29, 2012, an attempt was made to hijack Tianjin Airlines Flight GS7554 from Hotan to \u00dcr\u00fcmqi in China. More recently was the 2016 hijacking of EgyptAir Flight MS181, involving an Egyptian man who claimed to have a bomb and ordered the plane to land in Cyprus. He surrendered several hours later, after freeing the passengers and crew.\nCountermeasures.\nAs a result of the large number of U.S.\u2013Cuba hijackings in the late 1960s to early 1970s, international airports introduced screening technology such as metal detectors, X-ray machines and explosive detection tools. In the U.S., these rules were enforced starting from January 1973 and were eventually copied around the world. These security measures made hijacking a \"higher-risk proposition\" and deterred criminals in later decades. Until September 2001, the FAA set and enforced a \"layered\" system of defense: hijacking intelligence, passenger pre-screening, checkpoint screening and on-board security. The idea was that if one layer were later to fail, another would be able stop a hijacker from boarding a plane. However, the 9/11 Commission found that this layered approach was flawed and unsuitable to prevent the September 11 attacks. The U.S. Transportation Security Administration has since strengthened this approach, with a greater emphasis on intelligence sharing.\nOn-board security.\nIn the history of hijackings, most incidents involved planes being forced to land at a certain destination with demands. As a result, commercial airliners adopted a \"total compliance\" rule which taught pilots and cabin crew to comply with the hijackers' demands. Crews advise passengers to sit quietly to increase their chances of survival. The ultimate goal is to land the plane safely and let the security forces handle the situation. The FAA suggested that the longer a hijacking persisted, the more likely it would end peacefully with the hijackers reaching their goal. Although total compliance is still relevant, the events of September 11 changed this paradigm as this technique cannot prevent a murder-suicide hijacking.\nAfter the September 11 attacks, it became evident that each hijacking situation needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Cabin crew, now aware of the severe consequences, have a greater responsibility for maintaining control of their aircraft. Most airlines also give crew members training in self-defense tactics. Ever since the 1970s, crew are taught to be vigilant for suspicious behaviour. For example, passengers who have no carry-on luggage, or are standing next to the cockpit door with fidgety movements. There have been various incidents when crew and passengers intervened to prevent attacks: on December 22, 2001, Richard Reid attempted to ignite explosives on American Airlines Flight 63. In 2009, on Northwest Flight 253, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab attempted to detonate explosives sewn into his underwear. In 2012, the attempted hijacking of Tianjin Airlines Flight 7554 was stopped when cabin crew placed a trolley in-front of the cockpit door and asked passengers for help.\nCockpit security.\nAs early as 1964, the FAA required cockpit doors on commercial aircraft be kept locked during flight. In 2002, U.S. Congress passed the Arming Pilots Against Terrorism Act, allowing pilots at U.S. airlines to carry guns in the cockpit. Since 2003, these pilots are known as Federal Flight Deck Officers. It is estimated that one in 10 of the 125,000 commercial pilots are trained and armed. Also in 2002, aircraft manufacturers such as Airbus introduced a reinforced cockpit door which is resistant to gunfire and forced entry. Shortly afterwards, the FAA required operators of more than 6,000 aircraft to install tougher cockpit doors by April 9, 2003. Rules were also tightened to restrict cockpit access and make it easier for pilots to lock the doors. In 2015, Germanwings Flight 9525 was seized by the co-pilot and deliberately crashed, while the captain was out. The captain was unable to re-enter the cockpit, because the airline had already reinforced the cockpit door. The European Aviation Safety Agency issued a recommendation for airlines to ensure that at least two people, one pilot and a member of cabin crew, occupy the cockpit during flight. The FAA in the United States enforce a similar rule.\nAir marshal service.\nSome countries operate a marshal service, which puts members of law enforcement on high-risk flights based on intelligence. Their role is to keep passengers safe, by preventing hijackings and other criminal acts committed on a plane. Federal marshals in the U.S. are required to identify themselves before boarding a plane; marshals of other countries often are not. According to the Congressional Research Service, the budget for the U.S. Federal Air Marshal Service was US$719 million in 2007. Marshals often sit as regular passengers, at the front of the plane to allow observation of the cockpit. Despite the expansion of the marshal service, they cannot be on every plane, and they rarely face a real threat on a flight. Critics have questioned the need for them.\nAir traffic control.\nThere is no generic or set of rules for handling a hijacking situation. Air traffic controllers are expected to exercise their best judgement and expertise when dealing with the apparent consequences of an unlawful interference or hijack. Depending on the jurisdiction, the controller will inform authorities, such as the military, who will escort the hijacked plane. Controllers are expected to keep communications to a minimum and clear the runway for a possible landing.\nLegislation for downing hijacked aircraft.\nGermany.\nIn January 2005, a federal law came into force in Germany, called the , which allows \"direct action by armed force\" against a hijacked aircraft to prevent a September 11\u2013style attack. However, in February 2006 the Federal Constitutional Court struck down these provisions of the law, stating such preventive measures were unconstitutional and would essentially be state-sponsored murder, even if such an act would save many more lives on the ground. The main reason behind this decision was that the state would effectively be killing innocent hostages in order to avoid a terrorist attack. The Court also ruled that the Minister of Defense is constitutionally not entitled to act in terrorism matters, as this is the duty of the state and federal police forces. President of Germany Horst K\u00f6hler urged judicial review of the constitutionality of the \"Luftsicherheitsgesetz\" after he signed it into law in 2005.\nIndia.\nIndia published its anti-hijacking policy in August 2005. The policy came into force after approval from the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). The main points of the policy are:\nUnited States.\nPrior to the September 11 attacks, countermeasures were focused on \"traditional\" hijackings. As such, there were no specific rules for handling suicide hijackings, where aircraft would be used as a weapon. Moreover, military response at the time consisted of multiple uncoordinated units, each with its own set of rules of engagement with no unified command structure. Soon after the attacks, however, new rules of engagement were introduced, authorizing the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), the U.S. Air Force command tasked with protecting U.S. airspace, to shoot down hijacked commercial airliners if the plane is deemed a threat to strategic targets. In 2003, the military stated that fighter pilots exercise this scenario several times a week.\nOther countries.\nPoland and Russia are among other countries that have had laws or directives for shooting down hijacked planes. However, in September 2008 the Polish Constitutional Court ruled that the Polish rules were unconstitutional, and voided them.\nInternational law.\nTokyo Convention.\nThe Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, known as the Tokyo Convention, is an international treaty which entered force on December 4, 1969. , it has been ratified by 186 parties. Article 11 of the Tokyo Convention states the following:\nThe signatories agree that if there is unlawful takeover of an aircraft, or a threat of it on their territory, then they will take all necessary measures to regain or keep control over an aircraft. The captain can also disembark a suspected person on the territory of any country, where the aircraft lands, and that country must agree to it, as stated in Articles 8 and 12 of the convention.\nHague Convention.\nThe Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (known as the Hague Convention) went into effect on October 14, 1971. , the convention has 185 signatories.\nMontreal Convention.\nThe Montreal Convention is a multilateral treaty adopted by a diplomatic meeting of ICAO member states in 1999. It amended important provisions of the Warsaw Convention's regime concerning compensation for the victims of air disasters."}
{"id": "2076", "revid": "46052062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2076", "title": "Acropolis of Athens", "text": "The Acropolis of Athens (; ) is an ancient citadel located on a rocky outcrop above the city of Athens, Greece, and contains the remains of several ancient buildings of great architectural and historical significance, the most famous being the Parthenon. The word \"Acropolis\" is . The term acropolis is generic and there are many other acropoleis in Greece. During ancient times the Acropolis of Athens was also more properly known as Cecropia, after the legendary serpent-man Cecrops, the supposed first Athenian king.\nWhile there is evidence that the hill was inhabited as early as the 4th (millennium?) BC, it was Pericles (\u2013429 BC) in the fifth century BC who coordinated the construction of the buildings whose present remains are the site's most important ones, including the Parthenon, the Propylaea, the Erechtheion and the Temple of Athena Nike. The Parthenon and the other buildings were seriously damaged during the 1687 siege by the Venetians during the Morean War when gunpowder being stored by the then Turkish rulers in the Parthenon was hit by a Venetian bombardment and exploded.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nThe Acropolis is located on a flattish-topped rock that rises above sea level in the city of Athens, with a surface area of about . While the earliest artifacts date to the Middle Neolithic era, there have been documented habitations in Attica from the Early Neolithic period (6th millennium BC).\nThere is little doubt that a Mycenaean megaron palace stood upon the hill during the late Bronze Age. Nothing of this structure survives except, probably, a single limestone column base and pieces of several sandstone steps. Soon after the palace was constructed, a Cyclopean massive circuit wall was built, 760 meters long, up to 10 meters high, and ranging from 3.5 to 6 meters thick. From the end of the Helladic IIIB (1300\u20131200 BC) on, this wall would serve as the main defense for the acropolis until the 5th century. The wall consisted of two parapets built with large stone blocks and cemented with an earth mortar called \"emplekton\" (Greek: \u1f14\u03bc\u03c0\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd). The wall uses typical Mycenaean conventions in that it followed the natural contour of the terrain and its gate, which was towards the south, was arranged obliquely, with a parapet and tower overhanging the incomers' right-hand side, thus facilitating defense. There were two lesser approaches up the hill on its north side, consisting of steep, narrow flights of steps cut in the rock. Homer is assumed to refer to this fortification when he mentions the \"strong-built house of Erechtheus\" (\"Odyssey\" 7.81). At some time before the 13th century BC, an earthquake caused a fissure near the northeastern edge of the Acropolis. This fissure extended some 35 meters to a bed of soft marl in which a well was dug. An elaborate set of stairs was built and the well served as an invaluable, protected source of drinking water during times of siege for some portion of the Mycenaean period.\nArchaic Acropolis.\nNot much is known about the architectural appearance of the Acropolis until the Archaic era. During the 7th and the 6th centuries BC, the site was controlled by Kylon during the failed Kylonian revolt, and twice by Peisistratos; each of these was attempts directed at seizing political power by \"coups d'\u00e9tat\". Apart from the Hekatompedon mentioned later, Peisistratos also built an entry gate or propylaea. Nevertheless, it seems that a nine-gate wall, the Enneapylon, had been built around the acropolis hill and incorporated the biggest water spring, the Clepsydra, at the northwestern foot.\nA temple to Athena Polias, the tutelary deity of the city, was erected between 570 and 550 BC. This Doric limestone building, from which many relics survive, is referred to as the Hekatompedon (Greek for \"hundred\u2013footed\"), Ur-Parthenon (German for \"original Parthenon\" or \"primitive Parthenon\"), H\u2013Architecture or Bluebeard temple, after the pedimental three-bodied man-serpent sculpture, whose beards were painted dark blue. Whether this temple replaced an older one or just a sacred precinct or altar is not known. Probably, the Hekatompedon was built where the Parthenon now stands.\nBetween 529 and 520 BC yet another temple was built by the Pisistratids, the Old Temple of Athena, usually referred to as the Arkhaios Ne\u014ds (\u1f00\u03c1\u03c7\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03c2 \u03bd\u03b5\u03ce\u03c2, \"ancient temple\"). This temple of Athena Polias was built upon the D\u00f6rpfeld foundations, between the Erechtheion and the still-standing Parthenon. The Arkhaios Ne\u014ds was destroyed as part of the Achaemenid destruction of Athens during the Second Persian invasion of Greece during 480\u2013479 BC; however, the temple was probably reconstructed during 454 BC, since the treasury of the Delian League was transferred in its opisthodomos. The temple may have been burnt down during 406/405 BC as Xenophon mentions that the old temple of Athena was set afire. Pausanias does not mention it in his 2nd century AD \"Description of Greece\".\nAround 500 BC the Hekatompedon was dismantled to make place for a new grander building, the Older Parthenon (often referred to as the Pre-Parthenon or Early Parthenon). For this reason, Athenians decided to stop the construction of the Olympieion temple which was connoted with the tyrant Peisistratos and his sons, and, instead, used the Piraeus limestone destined for the Olympieion to build the Older Parthenon. To accommodate the new temple, the south part of the summit was cleared, made level by adding some 8,000 two-ton blocks of limestone, a foundation deep at some points, and the rest was filled with soil kept in place by the retaining wall. However, after the victorious Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, the plan was revised and marble was used instead. The limestone phase of the building is referred to as Pre-Parthenon I and the marble phase as Pre-Parthenon II. In 485 BC, construction stalled to save resources as Xerxes became king of Persia, and war seemed imminent.\nThe Older Parthenon was still under construction when the Persians invaded and sacked the city in 480 BC. The building was burned and looted, along with the Ancient Temple and practically everything else on the rock. After the Persian crisis had subsided, the Athenians incorporated many architectural parts of the unfinished temple (unfluted column drums, triglyphs, metopes, etc.) into the newly built northern curtain wall of the Acropolis, where they served as a prominent \"war memorial\" and can still be seen today. The devastated site was cleared of debris. Statuary, cult objects, religious offerings, and unsalvageable architectural members were buried ceremoniously in several deeply dug pits on the hill, serving conveniently as a fill for the artificial plateau created around the Classical Parthenon. This \"Persian debris\" was the richest archaeological deposit excavated on the Acropolis by 1890.\nThe Periclean building program.\nAfter winning at Eurymedon during 468 BC, Cimon and Themistocles ordered the reconstruction of the southern and northern walls of the Acropolis. Most of the major temples, including the Parthenon, were rebuilt by order of Pericles during the so-called Golden Age of Athens (460\u2013430 BC). Phidias, an Athenian sculptor, and Ictinus and Callicrates, two famous architects, were responsible for the reconstruction.\nDuring 437 BC, Mnesicles started building the Propylaea, a monumental gate at the western end of the Acropolis with Doric columns of Pentelic marble, built partly upon the old Propylaea of Peisistratos. These colonnades were almost finished during 432 BC and had two wings, the northern one decorated with paintings by Polygnotus. About the same time, south of the Propylaea, building started on the small Ionic Temple of Athena Nike in Pentelic marble with tetrastyle porches, preserving the essentials of Greek temple design. After an interruption caused by the Peloponnesian War, the temple was finished during the time of Nicias' peace, between 421 BC and 409 BC.\nConstruction of the elegant temple of Erechtheion in Pentelic marble (421\u2013406 BC) was by a complex plan which took account of the extremely uneven ground and the need to circumvent several shrines in the area. The entrance, facing east, is lined with six Ionic columns. Unusually, the temple has two porches, one on the northwest corner borne by Ionic columns, the other, to the southwest, supported by huge female figures or caryatids. The eastern part of the temple was dedicated to Athena Polias, while the western part, serving the cult of the archaic king Poseidon-Erechtheus, housed the altars of Hephaestus and Voutos, brother of Erechtheus. Little is known about the original plan of the interior, which was destroyed by fire during the first century BC and has been rebuilt several times.\nDuring the same period, a combination of sacred precincts including the temples of Athena Polias, Poseidon, Erechtheus, Cecrops, Herse, Pandrosos and Aglauros, with its Kore Porch (Porch of the Maidens) or Caryatids' Balcony was begun. Between the temple of Athena Nike and the Parthenon, there was the Sanctuary of Artemis Brauronia (or the Brauroneion), the goddess represented as a bear and worshipped in the deme of Brauron. According to Pausanias, a wooden statue or \"xoanon\" of the goddess and a statue of Artemis made by Praxiteles during the 4th century BC were both in the sanctuary.\nBehind the Propylaea, Phidias' gigantic bronze statue of Athena Promachos (\"Athena who fights in the front line\"), built between 450 BC and 448 BC, dominated. The base was high, while the total height of the statue was . The goddess held a lance, the gilt tip of which could be seen as a reflection by crews on ships rounding Cape Sounion, and a giant shield on the left side, decorated by Mys with images of the fight between the Centaurs and the Lapiths. Other monuments that have left almost nothing visible to the present day are the Chalkotheke, the Pandroseion, Pandion's sanctuary, Athena's altar, Zeus Polieus's sanctuary and, from Roman times, the circular Temple of Roma and Augustus.\nHellenistic and Roman Period.\nDuring the Hellenistic and Roman periods, many of the existing buildings in the area of the Acropolis were repaired to remedy damage from age and occasionally war. Monuments to foreign kings were erected, notably those of the Attalid kings of Pergamon Attalos II (in front of the NW corner of the Parthenon), and Eumenes II, in front of the Propylaea. These were rededicated during the early Roman Empire to Augustus or Claudius (uncertain) and Agrippa, respectively. Eumenes was also responsible for constructing a stoa on the south slope, similar to that of Attalos in the agora below.\nDuring the Julio-Claudian period, the Temple of Roma and Augustus, a small, round edifice about 23 meters from the Parthenon, was to be the last significant ancient construction on the summit of the rock. Around the same time, on the north slope, in a cave next to the one dedicated to Pan since the Classical period, a sanctuary was founded where the archons dedicated to Apollo on assuming office. During 161 AD, on the south slope, the Roman Herodes Atticus built his grand amphitheater or odeon. It was destroyed by the invading Herulians a century later but was reconstructed during the 1950s.\nDuring the 3rd century, under threat from a Herulian invasion, repairs were made to the Acropolis walls, and the Beul\u00e9 Gate was constructed to restrict entrance in front of the Propylaea, thus returning the Acropolis to use as a fortress.\nByzantine, Latin, and Ottoman Period.\nDuring the Byzantine period, the Parthenon was used as a church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. During the Latin Duchy of Athens, the Acropolis functioned as the city's administrative center, with the Parthenon as its cathedral, and the Propylaea as part of the ducal palace. A large tower was added, the Frankopyrgos (Frankish Tower), demolished during the 19th century.\nAfter the Ottoman conquest of Greece, the Propylaea were used as the garrison headquarters of the Turkish army, the Parthenon was converted into a mosque and the Erechtheum was turned into the governor's private harem. The buildings of the Acropolis suffered significant damage during the 1687 siege by the Venetians in the Morean War. The Parthenon, which was being used as a gunpowder magazine, was hit by artillery and damaged severely.\nDuring subsequent years, the Acropolis was a site of bustling human activity with many Byzantine, Frankish, and Ottoman structures. The dominant feature during the Ottoman period was a mosque inside the Parthenon, complete with a minaret.\nThe Acropolis was besieged thrice during the Greek War of Independence\u2014two sieges from the Greeks in 1821\u20131822 and one from the Ottomans in 1826\u20131827. A new bulwark named after Odysseas Androutsos was built by the Greeks between 1822 and 1825 to protect the recently rediscovered Klepsydra spring, which became the sole fresh water supply of the fortress.\nIndependent Greece.\nAfter independence, most features that dated from the Byzantine, Frankish, and Ottoman periods were cleared from the site in an attempt to restore the monument to its original form, \"cleansed\" of all later additions. The Parthenon mosque was demolished in 1843, and the Frankish Tower in 1875. German Neoclassicist architect Leo von Klenze was responsible for the restoration of the Acropolis in the 19th century, according to German historian Wolf Seidl, as described in his book \"Bavarians in Greece\". \nSome antiquities from the Acropolis were exhibited in the old Acropolis Museum, which was built in the second half of the 19th century.\nAt the beginning of the Axis occupation of Greece in 1941, German soldiers raised the Nazi German War Flag over the Acropolis. It would be taken down by Manolis Glezos and Apostolos Santas in one of the first acts of resistance. In 1944 Greek Prime Minister Georgios Papandreou arrived on the Acropolis to celebrate liberation from the Nazis.\nArchaeological remains.\nThe entrance to the Acropolis was a monumental gateway termed the Propylaea. To the south of the entrance is the tiny Temple of Athena Nike. At the centre of the Acropolis is the Parthenon or Temple of Athena Parthenos (Athena the Virgin). East of the entrance and north of the Parthenon is the temple known as the Erechtheum. South of the platform that forms the top of the Acropolis there are also the remains of the ancient, though often remodelled, Theatre of Dionysus. A few hundred metres away, there is the now partially reconstructed Odeon of Herodes Atticus.\nAll the valuable ancient artifacts are situated in the Acropolis Museum, which resides on the southern slope of the same rock, 280 metres from the Parthenon.\nSite plan.\nSite plan of the Acropolis at Athens showing the major archaeological remains.\nThe Acropolis Restoration Project.\nThe Acropolis Restoration Project began in 1975 to reverse the decay of centuries of attrition, pollution, destruction from military actions, and misguided past restorations. The project included the collection and identification of all stone fragments, even small ones, from the Acropolis and its slopes, and the attempt was made to restore as much as possible using reassembled original material (anastylosis), with new marble from Mount Pentelicus used sparingly. All restoration was made using titanium dowels and is designed to be completely reversible, in case future experts decide to change things. A combination of cutting-edge modern technology and extensive research and reinvention of ancient techniques were used.\nThe Parthenon colonnades, largely destroyed by Venetian bombardment during the 17th century, were restored, with many wrongly assembled columns now properly placed. The roof and floor of the Propylaea were partly restored, with sections of the roof made of new marble and decorated with blue and gold inserts, as in the original. Restoration of the Temple of Athena Nike was completed in 2010.\nA total of 2,675 tons of architectural members were restored, with 686 stones reassembled from fragments of the originals, 905 patched with new marble, and 186 parts made entirely of new marble. A total of 530 cubic meters of new Pentelic marble were used.\nIn 2021, the addition of new reinforced concrete paths to the site to improve accessibility caused controversy among archaeologists.\nCultural significance.\nEvery four years, the Athenians had a festival called the Great Panathenaea that rivaled the Olympic Games in popularity. During the festival, a procession (believed to be depicted on the Parthenon frieze) traveled through the city via the Panathenaic Way and culminated on the Acropolis. There, a new robe of woven wool (\"peplos\") was placed on either the statue of Athena Polias in the Erechtheum (during the annual Lesser Panathenaea) or the statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon (during the Great Panathenaea, held every four years).\nWithin the later tradition of Western civilization and Classical revival, the Acropolis, from at least the mid-18th century on, has often been invoked as a critical symbol of the Greek legacy and of the glories of Classical Greece.\nMost of the artifacts from the temple are housed today in the Acropolis Museum at the foot of the ancient rock.\nGeology.\nThe Acropolis is a klippe consisting of two lithostratigraphic units: the Athens schist and the overlying Acropolis limestone. The Athens schist is a soft reddish rock dating from the late Cretaceous period. The original sediments were deposited in a river delta approximately 72 million years ago. The Acropolis limestone dates from the late Jurassic period, predating the underlying Athens schist by about 30 million years. The Acropolis limestone was thrust over the Athens schist by compressional tectonic forces, forming a nappe or overthrust sheet. Erosion of the limestone nappe led to the eventual detachment of the Acropolis, forming the present-day feature. Where the Athens schist and the limestone meet there are springs and karstic caves. \nMany of the hills in the Athens region were formed by the erosion of the same nappe as the Acropolis. These include the hills of Lykabettos, Areopagus, and Mouseion. \nThe marble used for the buildings of the Acropolis was sourced from the quarries of Mount Pentelicus, a mountain to the northeast of the city.\nGeological instability.\nThe limestone that the Acropolis is built upon is unstable because of the erosion and tectonic shifts that the region is prone to. This instability may cause rock slides that cause damage to the historic site. Various measures have been implemented to protect the site, including retaining walls, drainage systems, and rock bolts. These measures work to counter the natural processes that threaten the historic site.\nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography\nExternal links.\nVideos"}
{"id": "2077", "revid": "224837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2077", "title": "Adam Weishaupt", "text": "Johann Adam Weishaupt (; 6 February 1748 \u2013 18 November 1830) was a German philosopher, professor of civil law and later canon law, and founder of the Illuminati.\nEarly life.\nAdam Weishaupt was born on 6 February 1748 in Ingolstadt in the Electorate of Bavaria. Weishaupt's father Johann Georg Weishaupt (1717\u20131753) died when Adam was five years old. After his father's death he came under the tutelage of his godfather Johann Adam von Ickstatt who, like his father, was a professor of law at the University of Ingolstadt. Ickstatt was a proponent of the philosophy of Christian Wolff and of the Enlightenment, and he influenced the young Weishaupt with his rationalism. Weishaupt began his formal education at age seven at a Jesuit school. He later enrolled at the University of Ingolstadt and graduated in 1768 at age 20 with a doctorate of law. In 1772 he became a professor of law after conversion to Protestantism. The following year he married Afra Sausenhofer of Eichst\u00e4tt.\nAfter Pope Clement XIV's suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1773, Weishaupt became a professor of canon law, a position that was held exclusively by the Jesuits until that time. In 1775 Weishaupt was introduced to the empirical philosophy of Johann Georg Heinrich Feder of the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Both Feder and Weishaupt would later become opponents of Kantian idealism.\nFoundation of the Illuminati.\nOn 1 May 1776 Johann Adam Weishaupt founded the \"Illuminati\" in the Electorate of Bavaria. Initially, Illumination was designated for a group of outstanding and enlightened individuals in society. Indeed, the word was adapted from a Latin root, \"Iluminatus,\" which directly translates to \"enlightened.\" He also adopted the name of \"Brother Spartacus\" within the order. Even encyclopedia references vary on the goal of the order, such as \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1910) saying the Order was not egalitarian or democratic internally, but sought to promote the doctrines of equality and freedom throughout society; while others such as \"Collier's\" have said the aim was to combat religion and foster rationalism in its place. The Illuminati was formed with the vision of liberating humans from religious bondage and undermining corrupted governments.\nThe actual character of the society was an elaborate network of spies and counter-spies. Each isolated cell of initiates reported to a superior, whom they did not know: a party structure that was effectively adopted by some later groups.\nWeishaupt was initiated into the Masonic lodge \"Theodor zum guten Rath\", at Munich in 1777. His project of \"illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of prejudice\" was an unwelcome reform. He used Freemasonry to recruit for his own quasi-masonic society, with the goal of \"perfecting human nature\" through re-education to achieve a communal state with nature, freed of government and organized religion. Presenting their own system as pure masonry, Weishaupt and Adolph Freiherr Knigge, who organized his ritual structure, greatly expanded the secret organization.\nContrary to Immanuel Kant's that Enlightenment (and Weishaupt's Order was in some respects an expression of the Enlightenment Movement) was the passage by a man out of his 'self-imposed immaturity' through daring to 'make use of his own reason, without the guidance of another,' Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati prescribed in great detail everything which the members had obediently to read and think so that Dr. Wolfgang Riedel has commented that this approach to illumination or enlightenment constituted a degradation and twisting of the Kantian principle of Enlightenment. Riedel writes:\nWeishaupt's radical rationalism and vocabulary were not likely to succeed. Writings that were intercepted in 1784 were interpreted as seditious, and the Society was banned by the government of Karl Theodor, Elector of Bavaria, in 1784. Weishaupt lost his position at the University of Ingolstadt and fled Bavaria.\nActivities in exile.\nHe received the assistance of Duke Ernest II of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg (1745\u20131804), and lived in Gotha writing a series of works on illuminism, including \"A Complete History of the Persecutions of the Illuminati in Bavaria\" (1785), \"A Picture of Illuminism\" (1786), \"An Apology for the Illuminati\" (1786), and \"An Improved System of Illuminism\" (1787). Adam Weishaupt died in Gotha on 18 November 1830. He was survived by his second wife, Anna Maria (n\u00e9e Sausenhofer), and his children Nanette, Charlotte, Ernst, Karl, Eduard, and Alfred. His body was buried next to that of his son Wilhelm, who preceded him in death (in 1802), at Friedhof II der Sophiengemeinde Berlin, a Protestant cemetery.\nAfter Weishaupt's Order of Illuminati was banned and its members dispersed, it left behind no enduring traces of influence, not even on its own erstwhile members, who went on to develop in quite different directions.\nAssessment of character and intentions.\nWeishaupt's character and intentions have been variously assessed. Some took a negative view, such as Augustin Barruel, who despite writing that Weishaupt's goals were that \"Equality and Liberty, together with the most absolute independence, are to be the substitutes for all rights and all property\" saw this as more dangerous than beneficial, and John Robison, who regarded Weishaupt as a 'human devil' and saw his mission as one of malevolent destructiveness. Others took a more positive view, including Thomas Jefferson, who wrote in a letter to James Madison that \"Barruel\u2019s own parts of the book are perfectly the ravings of a Bedlamite and considered Weishaupt to be an \"enthusiastic Philanthropist\" who believed in the indefinite perfectibility of man, and believed that the intention of Jesus Christ was simply to \"reinstate natural religion, and by diffusing the light of his morality, to teach us to govern ourselves\".\nIn his defence, Weishaupt wrote a \"Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten\" (A Brief Justification of my Intentions) in 1787. Author Tony Page comments:\nWorks.\nWorks relating to the Illuminati.\nSource"}
{"id": "2078", "revid": "16040873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2078", "title": "Acorn Electron", "text": "The Acorn Electron (nicknamed the Elk inside Acorn and beyond) was introduced as a lower-cost alternative to the BBC Micro educational/home computer, also developed by Acorn Computers, to provide many of the features of that more expensive machine at a price more competitive with that of the ZX Spectrum. It has 32 kilobytes of RAM, and its ROM includes BBC BASIC II together with the operating system. Announced in 1982 for a possible release the same year, it was eventually introduced on 25 August 1983 priced at \u00a3199.\nThe Electron is able to save and load programs onto audio cassette via a cable, originally supplied with the computer, connecting it to any standard tape recorder with the appropriate sockets. It is capable of bitmapped graphics, and can use either a contemporary television set, a colour (RGB) monitor or a monochrome monitor as its display. Several expansions were made available to provide many of the capabilities omitted from the BBC Micro. Acorn introduced a general-purpose expansion unit, the Plus 1, offering analogue joystick and parallel ports, together with cartridge slots into which ROM cartridges, providing software, or other kinds of hardware expansions, such as disc interfaces, could be inserted. Acorn also produced a dedicated disc expansion, the Plus 3, featuring a disc controller and 3.5-inch floppy drive.\nFor a short period, the Electron was reportedly the best selling micro in the United Kingdom, with an estimated 200,000 to 250,000 machines sold over its entire commercial lifespan. With production effectively discontinued by Acorn as early as 1985, and with the machine offered in bundles with games and expansions, later being substantially discounted by retailers, a revival in demand for the Electron supported a market for software and expansions without Acorn's involvement. Its market for games also helped to sustain the continued viability of games production for the BBC Micro.\nHistory.\nAfter Acorn Computers released the BBC Micro, executives believed that the company needed a less expensive computer for the mass market. In May 1982, when asked about the recently announced Sinclair ZX Spectrum's potential to hurt sales of the BBC Micro, priced at \u00a3125 for the 16K model compared to around twice that price for the 16K BBC Model A, Acorn co-founder Hermann Hauser responded that in the third quarter of that year Acorn would release a new \u00a3120\u2013150 computer which \"will probably be called the Electron\", a form of \"miniaturised BBC Micro\", having 32 KB of RAM and 32 KB of ROM, with \"higher resolution graphics than those offered by the Spectrum\". Acorn co-founder Chris Curry also emphasised the Electron's role as being \"designed to compete with the Spectrum... to get the starting price very low, but not preclude expansion in the long term.\"\nDevelopment.\nIn order to reduce component costs, and to prevent cloning, the company reduced the number of chips in the Electron from the 102 on the BBC Micro's motherboard to \"something like 12 to 14 chips\" with most functionality on a single 2,400-gate Uncommitted Logic Array (ULA).\nThe operating system ROM locations 0xFC00-0xFFFF contain the details of some members of the Electron's design team, these differing somewhat from those listed in the corresponding message in the BBC Model B ROM:\nAdditionally, the last bytes of both the BASIC ROM and the Plus 3 interface's ADFS v1.0 ROM include the word \"Roger\", thought to be a reference to Roger Wilson. The case was designed by industrial designer Allen Boothroyd of Cambridge Product Design.\nRelease.\nReports during the second half of 1982 indicated a potential December release, with Curry providing qualified confirmation of such plans, together with an accurate depiction of the machine's form and capabilities, noting that the \"massive ULA\" would be the \"dominant factor\" in any pre-Christmas release. As the end of the year approached, the machine itself was pictured in press reports. With the ULA not ready for \"main production\", however, the launch of the Electron was to be delayed until the spring.\nBy June 1983, with the planned March release having passed, the launch of the Electron had been rescheduled for the \"Acorn User\" Exhibition in August 1983, and the machine was indeed launched at the event. The company expected to ship the Electron before Christmas, and sell 100,000 by February 1984. The price at launch\u00a3199remained unchanged from that stated in an announcement earlier in the year, with the machine's nickname within Acornthe \"Elk\"also being reported publicly for perhaps the first time.\nReviews were generally favourable, starting with positive impressions based on the physical design of the computer, with one reviewer noting, \"The Electron is beautifully designed and builtquite a shock compared to the BBC. Its designer case will look great on the coffee table.\" Praise was also forthcoming for the Electron's keyboard which was regarded as being better than most of its low-cost peers, with only the VIC-20 being comparable. In one review, the keyboard was even regarded as better than the one in the BBC Micro. The provision of rapid BASIC keyword entry though the combination of the key with various letter keys was also welcomed as a helpful aid to prevent typing errors by \"most users\", while \"touch typists\" were still able to type out the keywords in full.\nReviewers also welcomed the machine's excellent graphics compared to its rivals, noting that \"the graphics are much more flexible and the maximum resolution is many times that of the Spectrum's\". The provision of screen modes supporting 80 columns of readable text and graphics resolutions of was described as \"unrivalled by every machine up to the BBC Model B itself\", although the absence of a teletext mode was considered regrettable. Although valued for its low memory usage characteristics in the BBC Micro, one reviewer considered the absence of a \"software simulation of a teletext screen\" to be a \"lazy omission\" even if it would have to be \"awfully slow and take up piles of memory\".\nWhile its speed was acceptable compared to its immediate competition, the Electron was, however, rather slower than the BBC Micro with one review noting that games designed for the BBC Micro ran \"at less than half the speed, with very significant effects on their appeal\". The reduced performance can be attributed to the use of a 4-bit wide memory system instead of the 8-bit wide memory system of the BBC Micro to reduce cost. Due to needing two accesses to the memory instead of one to fetch each byte, along with contention with the video hardware also needing access, reading or writing RAM was much slower than on the BBC Micro. Reviewers were also disappointed by the single-channel sound, noting that \"BBC-style music\" and its \"imitations of various musical instruments\" would not be possible, the latter due to the inability of the sound system to vary the amplitude of sounds.\nDespite some uncertainty about Acorn's target demographic for the Electron, some noted the potential for the machine in education given its robustness, but also given its price, noting that the high price of BBC Model B machines seemed \"rarely justified by their actual practical applications in schools\". The introduction of the Electron was seen as potentially leading to competition between Acorn's different models within the schools market rather than creating a broader audience for them, although the potential for more computers in schools, giving more \"hands-on\" experience for students, was welcomed. Nevertheless, reviewers anticipated that the Electron would sell well at the lower end of the market, with projected sales of 100,000 units by Christmas 1983, helped by the Electron's software compatibility with the BBC Micro and the already established reputation of its predecessor. With parents potentially being convinced of the Electron's educational value, some reviewers foresaw a conflict between parents and \"discerning children\", the latter merely wanting to play games and preferring models with sound and graphics capabilities more appropriate for gaming.\nAlthough Acorn had based its expansion into the United States on the BBC Micro, the company did have plans to introduce the Electron at a later time, with Chris Curry having indicated \"a very heavy push overseas\" involving both the BBC Micro and Electron. A model for the US market was described in an official book, \"The Acorn Guide to the Electron\", but this model was never produced. The Electron was distributed in various other markets and was reviewed by home computing publications in countries such as Norway, West Germany, and New Zealand.\nProduction and volume delivery.\nProduction difficulties at Astec in Malaysia delayed the machine's introduction, forcing Acorn to look to other manufacturers such as AB Electronics in Wales and Wongs in Hong Kong (an original equipment manufacturer making over 30 million circuit boards a year, along with power supplies and plastic housings, for companies such as IBM, Xerox, Atari, and Apple, including units made for Acorn for the BBC Micro). By October 1983, Acorn had received orders for more than 150,000 units, but had production targets of only 25,000 a month before Christmas, meaning that the existing backlog would take more than six months to fulfil. Demand for the Electron was high but only two of WH Smith's London branches had inventory. Ultimately, manufacturing in Malaysia ceased with the anticipated but unspecified number of units having been produced, this having been originally reported as 100,000 units. Acorn's marketing manager, Tom Hohenberg, admitted in early 1984 that \"a lot of the trouble stemmed from the ULA\" in getting production to the desired levels, but that such difficulties had been resolved, although Acorn faced an order backlog of almost a quarter of a million units.\nAs the company increased production during 1984, however, the British home computer market greatly weakened. Hohenberg later noted that after the 1983 Christmas season, Electron deliveries had increased to meet a demand that was no longer there, with the market having \"completely dried up\". Acorn's Christmas 1984 sales were greatly below expectations and by March 1985 the company had reduced the Electron's price to \u00a3129. With the company's unsuccessful expansion into the United States abandoned, Acorn's financial situation had deteriorated sufficiently to prompt Olivetti to rescue the company by taking a 49.30% ownership stake. Renewed efforts were made to sell the machine, bundling it with Acorn's own expansions and software, such as one package adding the Plus 1 expansion, joysticks and a ROM cartridge game to the base machine for a total price of \u00a3219. Acorn committed to supporting the machine \"until the end of 1986\", continuing to supply it (as the Merlin M2105) to British Telecom as part of the Healthnet communications system, with small-scale manufacturing continuing while existing stocks were being run down.\nBy autumn, retailers appeared eager to discount the computer, with prices in stores as low as \u00a3100, reportedly less than the distributor prices of the summer months. As the Christmas season approached, Dixons Retail acquired the remaining Electron inventory to sell, bundled with a cassette recorder and software, at a retail price of \u00a399.95. This deal, from the perspective of a year later, apparently played a significant part in helping to reduce Acorn's unsold inventory from a value of \u00a318\u00a0million to around \u00a37.9\u00a0million, and in combination with \"streamlining corporate activities and reducing overheads\", had helped to reduce Acorn's losses from over \u00a320\u00a0million to less than \u00a33\u00a0million.\nThe deal effectively brought to an end Acorn's interest in the Electron and the lower-cost end of the home computing market, but empowered third-party suppliers whose \"inventiveness and initiative\" was noted as being in contrast with Acorn's lack of interest in the product and the \"false promises\" made to its users. However, Acorn subsequently released the Master Compact a model in the Master series of microcomputers with fewer BBC Micro-style ports and a similar expansion connector to that used by the Electron with the home audience specifically in mind. Indeed, prior to its release, the Master Compact had been perceived as the successor to the Electron. Superficial similarities between the Compact and Acorn Communicator, together with technical similarities between the Electron (particularly when expanded in the form of the Merlin M2105) and the Communicator, may also have driven rumours of an updated Electron model. A more substantial emphasis on the \"home, music and hobby sectors\" came with the appointment of a dedicated marketing manager in 1989 following the launch of the BBC A3000 in the Acorn Archimedes range.\nHardware.\nMuch of the core functionality of the BBC Micro the video and memory controller, cassette input/output, timers and sound generation was replicated using a single customised ULA chip designed by Acorn in conjunction with Ferranti, albeit with only one sound channel instead of three (and one noise channel), and without the character-based Teletext Mode 7.\nThe keyboard includes a form of quick keyword input, similar to that used on the Sinclair ZX Spectrum, through use of the key in combination with other keys labelled with BASIC keywords. However, unlike the Spectrum, this method of rapid keyword entry is optional, and keywords can be entered manually if preferred.\nThe edge connector on the rear of the Electron exposes all address and data bus lines from the CPU, including the upper eight bits of the address bus, in contrast to the limited selection available via the BBC Micro's expansion ports, with the One Megahertz Bus as the principal mechanism for general purpose expansion on the BBC Micro only providing the lower eight bits of the address bus. In addition, various control signals provided by the CPU and ULA are exposed via the Electron's expansion connector.\nThe ULA mediates access to 32\u00a0KB of addressable RAM using four 4164 DRAMs (64\u00a0K\u00d71\u00a0bit), sharing the RAM between the CPU and the video signal generation (or screen refresh) performed by the ULA itself. Two accesses have to be made to the RAM to get each byte (albeit with a single RAS), delivering a maximum transfer rate to or from RAM of one byte per 2\u00a0MHz cycle. In generating the video signal, the ULA is able to take advantage of this 2\u00a0MHz bandwidth when producing the picture for the high-bandwidth screen modes. Due to signalling constraints, the CPU can only access RAM at 1\u00a0MHz, even when it is not competing with the video system.\nWhen the ULA is consuming all of the RAM bandwidth during the active portion of a display line, the CPU is unable to access the RAM. (The Electron uses the Synertek variant of the 6502 processor as that allowed the clock to be stopped for this 40 microsecond period.) In other modes the CPU and video accesses are interleaved with each accessor acquiring bytes at 1\u00a0MHz.\nIn contrast, the BBC Micro employs one or two sets of eight 16-kilobit devices, with the RAM running at twice the speed (4\u00a0MHz) of the CPU (2\u00a0MHz), allowing the video system (screen refresh) and CPU memory accesses to be interleaved, with each accessor able to transfer bytes at 2\u00a0MHz. The RAM access limitations imposed by the Electron's ULA therefore reduce the effective CPU speed by as much as a factor of four relative to the BBC Micro in the more demanding display modes, and as much as a factor of two otherwise. Byte transfers from ROM occur at 2\u00a0MHz, however.\nFor issue 1\u20134 motherboards, the ULA had an issue similar to those experienced by other socketed CPUs. Over time, the thermal heating and cooling could cause the ULA to rise slightly out of its socket just enough to cause the machine to hang or freeze and for other issues to occur preventing the start-up of the machine, in some cases causing the initial beep or tone to sound continuously. This was despite a metal cover and a locking-bar mechanism designed to prevent this from occurring. Pushing down on the metal cover to reseat the ULA was normally sufficient to rectify these issues. Issue 5 and 6 boards utilized a different ULA type, this being known as the Aberdeen ULA (as opposed to the earlier Ferranti ULA) which was mounted on a board that was directly soldered to the main board, with the chip being covered by epoxy resin \"insulating material\". This arrangement dispensed with the 68-pin socket, and this new type of ULA was expected to be \"less prone to failure\". This type of ULA was also used on the German release of the Electron mainboard which is designated by the marking \"GERMAN ELECTRON Issue 1\" on the mainboard rather than just \"ELECTRON\" as for the UK model.\nTechnical specifications.\nThe hardware specification according to official documentation, combined with more technical documentation and analysis is as follows:\nThe composite video output provides a greyscale image on the standard machine, but an internal modification allows a colour image to be produced, albeit with a degradation in picture quality. Acorn ostensibly intended the composite output to be a high-quality output for monochrome monitors, with the RGB output being the preferred high-quality output for colour images.\nMerlin M2105.\nAn unusual variant of the Electron was sold by British Telecom Business Systems as the BT Merlin M2105 Communications Terminal, being previewed by British Telecom at the Communications '84 show. This consisted of a rebadged Electron plus a large expansion unit containing 32\u00a0KB of battery-backed RAM (making up 64\u00a0KB of RAM in total), up to 64\u00a0KB of ROM resident in four sockets (making up to 96\u00a0KB of ROM in total), a Centronics printer port, an RS423 serial port, a modem, and the speech generator previously offered for the BBC Micro. The ROM firmware provided dial-up communications facilities, text editing and text messaging functions. The complete product included a monitor and dot-matrix printer.\nInitially trialled in a six-month pilot at 50 florists, with the intention of rolling out to all 2,500 members of the UK network, these were used by the Interflora florists network in the UK for over a decade. Used mostly for sending messages, despite providing support for other applications, limited availability of the product led Interflora to look for alternatives after five years, although users appeared to be happy with the product as it was.\nThis generic product combination of the Electron and accompanying expansion was apparently known as the Chain during development, itself having a different board layout, with British Telecom having intended the M2105 to be a product supporting access to an online service known as Healthnet. This service aimed to improve and speed up communications within hospitals so that patients could be treated and discharged more quickly, and to facilitate transfers of information to doctors and health workers outside hospitals, with communications taking place over conventional telephone lines. The service was to be introduced in the Hammersmith and Fulham district health authority, with installation starting at Charing Cross Hospital. The Electron was said to be particularly suitable for deployment in this application in that it had a \"large expansion bus\", ostensibly making the machine amenable to the necessary adaptations required for the role, together with its \"price, and the fact it has a real keyboard\". As a Healthnet terminal, the M2105 was intended to support the exchange of forms, letters and memos.\nThe adoption of an Acorn product in this role was perhaps also unusual in that much of BT's Merlin range of this era had been supplied by ICL, notably the M2226 small business computer and M3300 \"communicating word processor\". Nevertheless, the M2105 offered interoperability with other BT products such as the QWERTYphone which was able to receive messages from the M2105 and the Merlin Tonto.\nThe hardware specifications of the M2105, observed from manufactured units, include the 6502 CPU (SY6502 or R6502), ULA and 32\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM fitted in the Electron main unit, plus 32\u00a0KB of static RAM, two 6522 VIA devices for interfacing, AM2910PC modem, SCN2681A UART, and TMS5220 plus TMS6100 for speech synthesis. The speech synthesis was used for the \"voice response\" function which answered incoming voice calls by playing a synthesised message to the caller. The components chosen and the capabilities provided (excluding speech synthesis) are broadly similar to those featured by the Acorn Communicator which was another product of Acorn's custom systems division.\nThe product documentation indicates a specification with 48\u00a0KB of RAM plus 16\u00a0KB of \"non volatile CMOS RAM\" and 96\u00a0KB of ROM, although this particular composition of RAM is apparently contradicted by the RAM devices present on surviving M2105 machines. However, the earlier Chain variant of the board does appear to provide only 16\u00a0KB of static RAM using two HM6264LP-15 chips, also providing an extra 16\u00a0KB of dynamic RAM using eight MK4516-15 chips, suggesting that the product evolved during development.\nRecreations and emulators.\nSeveral emulators of the machine exist:\nElectron software is predominantly archived in the UEF file format.\nThere are also two publicly documented FPGA based recreations of the Acorn Electron hardware: ElectronFPGA for the Papilio Duo hardware and the Acorn-Electron core for the FPGA Arcade \"Replay\" board. In addition, an implementation of the ULA for the Lattice ICE40 series has been made available.\nSoftware.\nA range of titles were made available on cassette at the launch of the Electron through the Acornsoft publishing arm of Acorn, including a number of games, the Forth and Lisp languages, and a handful of other educational and productivity titles. Acorn's decision to provide the Electron with a degree of compatibility with the BBC Micro meant that a number of titles already available for the older machine could be expected to run on its new machine, with only minor cosmetic issues occurring when running some titles. Of the Acornsoft languages, the existing Forth and Lisp language releases worked on the Electron, these being re-released specially for the machine, together with BCPL and Microtext, an authoring system offering programming facilities, which remained BBC-only releases. Games such as Chess and Snooker, plus a number of other titles were also established as being compatible prior to launch. Various applications in Acornsoft's View suite, together with the languages COMAL, Logo and ISO Pascal, were reported as being compatible with the Electron, as were some titles from BBC Soft and other developers.\nLanguages.\nA significant selling point for the Electron was its built-in BBC BASIC interpreter, providing a degree of familiarity from the BBC Micro along with a level of compatibility with the earlier machine. However, as had been the case with the BBC Micro, support for other languages was quickly forthcoming, facilitated by the common heritage of the two systems.\nIn addition to the early releases, Forth and Lisp, Acornsoft released the Pascal subset, S-Pascal, on cassette and followed up with an ISO Pascal implementation on ROM cartridge, the latter providing two 16\u00a0KB ROMs containing a program editor and a Pascal compiler producing intermediate code that required Pascal run-time routines to be loaded. As a more minimal implementation, S-Pascal made use of the machine's built-in BASIC program editing facilities and provided a compiler generating assembly language that would then be assembled, generating machine code for direct execution. ISO Pascal had Oxford Pascal as a direct competitor offering a range of features differentiating it from Acornsoft's product, notably a compiler that could produce a stand-alone \"relocatable 6502 machine-code file\". Acornsoft later released the ISO Pascal Stand Alone Generator product for the BBC Micro and Master series, permitting the generation of executable programs embedding \"sections of the interpreter\" required by each program, with such executables being subject to various licensing restrictions.\nAcornsoft Forth, aiming for compliance with the Forth-79 standard, was regarded as \"an excellent implementation of the language\". It saw competition from Skywave Software's Multi-Forth 83 which was delivered on a ROM chip, supported the Forth-83 standard, and provided a multitasking environment. Future availability of Multi-Forth 83 on ROM cartridge was advertised.\nWith the launch of the Plus 1, Acornsoft Lisp was also made available on cartridge. This Lisp implementation provided only the \"bare essentials\" of a Lisp system that \"a small micro such as the Electron\" could hope to be able to support. However, with the interpreter and initialised workspace being loaded from cassette into RAM in the earlier release, one stated advantage of the ROM version was the availability of more memory for use by programs, with the immediacy of a Lisp system provided as a language ROM being an implicit benefit.\nAcornsoft provided two products offering different degrees of support for the Logo programming language. Turtle Graphics was a cassette-based product, available alongside Forth, Lisp and S-Pascal amongst the first titles released for the Electron, featuring a subset of Logo focused on the interactive aspects of the language. Acornsoft Logo was provided on ROM cartridge and offered a vocabulary of over 200 commands as part of a more comprehensive implementation of the language, exposing its list processing foundations. Turtle Graphics was substantially cheaper than Logo: by 1987, the former had been reportedly discounted to under \u00a33 whereas the latter cost \"less than \u00a330\". Unlike other Acornsoft language products, however, Logo was supplied with \"two thick manuals\".\nApplications.\nAcornsoft made a number of applications available for the Electron. In early 1985, the \"View\" word processor and \"ViewSheet\" spreadsheet applications, familiar from the BBC Micro, were released on ROM cartridge for use with the Electron expanded with a Plus 1, priced at \u00a349.50 each. By running directly from ROM, these applications were able to dedicate all of the machine's available RAM to their documents, and using general filing system mechanisms, documents could be loaded from and saved to cassette or disc, although disc users could also use commands that took advantage of that faster, random-access medium. Cassette-based operation was still regarded as \"perfectly feasible\" since the software itself did not need to be loaded, with loading and saving operations in View achieving about 800 words per minute and in ViewSheet achieving around 200 cells per minute.\nWhen using View in Mode 6, providing a 40-column, 25-line display occupying 8\u00a0KB of memory, around 20\u00a0KB of RAM was available to cassette-based systems or to disc-based systems using products such as the Cumana Floppy Disc System that also maintained PAGE at &amp;E00, this corresponding to about 10 or 11 A4 pages of text. In Mode 3, providing an 80-column, 25-line display occupying 16\u00a0KB, around 6 or 7 A4 pages of text could be retained in memory. Acorn's Plus 3 disc system reduced this workspace by a further 4\u00a0KB. However, documents could be broken up into sections to be processed individually by View. Operation in the 80-column Mode 0 and Mode 3 was reported as being \"sometimes slow\" due to the Electron's hardware architecture, but View supported horizontal scrolling across documents, permitting the use of a 40-column mode to edit wider documents.\nViewSheet could also operate in different display modes, with spreadsheets of approximately 1600 cells being editable in Mode 6 and around 800 cells in Mode 3. A windowing system was provided that permitted ten different views of a spreadsheet to be displayed on screen at once, and recalculation operations were reported to be \"around ten seconds for quite a large model\". Reviewers considered the View and ViewSheet applications to be \"professional\" and to \"compare well with similar software sold for much more expensive machines\" such as the IBM PC, with WordStar being noted as a broadly similar package to View. Compatibility with the same programs on the BBC Micro made a complete Electron-based system an attractive, low-cost, entry-level word processing and spreadsheet system. However, View's printing support was criticised as inadequate without the use of a companion printer driver program.\nAcornsoft did not release its \"ViewStore\" database program specifically for the Electron, but the software was reported as being compatible, albeit with function key combinations different to those documented for the BBC Micro. However, Acornsoft did release a product, \"Database\", on 3.5-inch diskette for use with the Electron upgraded with the Plus 3 expansion. The product provided a suite of programs for the creation, maintenance and analysis of structured data files, visualising records using a card index user interface metaphor, and supporting sorting and searching operations on the stored data.\nSlogger, an established provider of expansions, also produced productivity applications such as \"Starword\", a word processor, and \"Starstore\", a database. Starword provided separate command and editing modes familiar from Acornsoft's View, also supporting 132-column documents and horizontal scrolling for the editing of such wider documents. Along with other operations familiar from View, such as search and replace functions, block-based editing, and control over text justification, it had built-in support for customising documents for output using a mail merge function. Available on ROM for fitting to a ROM expansion such as Slogger's Rombox or inside a separately purchased ROM cartridge, and reportedly developed specifically for the Electron, Starword was considered \"comprehensive and powerful\".\nStarstore, also available on ROM, provided a database management suite primarily aimed at users of cassette storage, with databases being entirely resident in RAM. It supported database definition, data editing, searching, sorting and printing activities. Various features complemented Starword, such as mail merge integration. \"Starstore II\" followed on as an alternative to, as opposed to a direct successor of, the earlier Starstore product by requiring a disc-based system and permitting databases to be as large as the amount of free space on any given disc. Its user interface was improved over the earlier product, offering pop-up menus and cursor-based navigation.\nComputer Concepts' \"Wordwise Plus\", developed from the company's earlier Wordwise product for the BBC Micro and launched in early 1985, was made available for use with the Electron expanded with the E2P-6502 second processor cartridge. The original Wordwise product was incompatible with the Electron due to its use of Mode 7 (the BBC Micro's 40-column Teletext display mode), and being supplied on a ROM chip, it could also not be readily added to the Electron without appropriate expansions. Available from Permanent Memory Systems, producers of the E2P-6502 cartridge, the Electron version of the software was the Hi-Wordwise Plus variant, supplied on disc instead of ROM, and designed to run on the second processor and to use the expanded memory provided in that environment. The program used the Electron's 40-column Mode 6 display.\nExpansion manufacturers Advanced Computer Products and Slogger both made solutions available based on products from Advanced Memory Systems. ACP released a bundle of the \"AMX Mouse\" and \"AMX Art\" software for use with its Advanced Plus 5 expansion, also requiring a DFS-compatible disc system. Slogger produced a version of the desktop publishing package \"Stop Press\" for the Electron, requiring a DFS-compatible disc system, two spare ROM sockets, a mouse, and a suitable user port expansion, with Slogger producing its own user port expansion cartridge. Competing with these products but requiring only a disc system, AVP's \"Pixel Perfect\" offered a rudimentary desktop publishing solution, utilising the computer's high-resolution Mode 0 display.\nGames.\nOf the twelve software titles announced by Acornsoft for the Electron at the machine's launch, six were games titles: \"Snapper\", \"Monsters\" (a clone of Space Panic), \"Meteors\" (a clone of Asteroids), \"Starship Command\", \"Chess\", and the combined title \"Draughts and Reversi\". When the Plus 1 expansion was launched in 1984, three of these titles\"Hopper\", \"Snapper\" and \"Starship Command\"were among the six ROM cartridge titles available at launch, together with the adventure \"Countdown to Doom\". Acornsoft would continue to release games including those based on existing arcade games such as \"Arcadians\" (based on Galaxian) and \"Hopper\" (based on Frogger), as well as original titles such as \"Free Fall\" and \"Elite\".\nMicro Power, already an established BBC Micro games publisher, also entered the Electron market at a relatively early stage, offering ten initial titles either converted from the BBC Micro, in the case of \"Escape from Moonbase Alpha\" and \"Killer Gorilla\", or \"completely re-written\", in the case of \"Moonraider\" (due to differences in the screen handling between the machines). Superior Software, also a significant publisher for the BBC Micro, routinely released games for both machines, notably a licensed version of Atari's Tempest in 1985, but also successful original titles such as the \"Repton\" series of games, \"Citadel\", \"Thrust\" and \"Galaforce\". Superior's role in games publishing for the Acorn machines expanded in 1986 when the company acquired the right to use the Acornsoft brand, leading to the co-branding of games and compilations released by the company and the re-release of existing Acornsoft titles with this branding, Elite among them. The company would subsequently release another \"masterpiece\" with bundled novellathe 1988 game \"Exile\"as well as numerous conversions and compilations.\nBy 1988, the \"big three\" full-price games publishers for the Acorn 8-bit market were identified as Superior Software, Audiogenic (ASL) and Tynesoft, with Top Ten and Alternative Software being the significant budget publishers, and other \"strong contenders\" being Godax, Mandarin and Bug Byte, this assessment made from the perspective of an established games author evaluating trustworthy publishers for aspiring authors. Commercial considerations motivated authors to make their games available for the Electron due to its importance in sales terms, representing \"around half of the Acorn market\", with it being regarded as \"almost compulsory for any mainstream game\" to have an Electron version \"unless your game is a state-of-the-art masterpiece\", with \"Revs\", \"Cholo\" and \"Sentinel\" cited as such BBC Micro exclusives. Although the Electron imposed additional technical constraints on authors accustomed to the BBC Micro, some authors were able to use this to their creative advantage. For instance, of \"Frak!\" it was noted that the \"Electron version is more popular, and considered better than the BBC version because it has a screen designer included\".\nAlthough not as well supported by the biggest software publishers as rivals like the Commodore 64 and Sinclair ZX Spectrum, a good range of games were available for the Electron including popular multi-format games such as \"Chuckie Egg\". There were also many popular games officially converted to the Electron from arcade machines (including \"Crystal Castles\", \"Tempest\", \"Commando\", \"Paperboy\", and \"Yie Ar Kung-Fu\") and other home computer systems (including \"Impossible Mission\", \"Jet Set Willy\", \"The Way of the Exploding Fist\", \"Tetris\", \"The Last Ninja\", \"Barbarian\", \"Ballistix\", \"Predator\", \"Hostages\" and \"SimCity\").\nDespite Acorn themselves effectively shelving the Electron in 1985, games continued to be developed and released by professional software houses until the early 1990s. There were around 1,400 games released for the Acorn Electron, several thousand extra public domain titles were released on disc through Public Domain libraries. Notable enterprises which produced discs of such software are BBC PD, EUG (Electron User Group) and HeadFirst PD.\nDevelopment considerations and techniques.\nLike the BBC Micro, the Electron is constrained by limited memory resources. Of the 32\u00a0KB RAM, 3\u00bd KB is allocated to the OS at startup and at least 10\u00a0KB is taken up by the display buffer in contiguous display modes.\nAlthough programs running on the BBC Micro can use the machine's 6522 chip to trigger interrupts at certain points in the update of each display frame, using these events to change the palette and potentially switching all colours to black, thus blanking regions of the screen and hiding non-graphical data that had been stored in screen memory, the Electron lacks such hardware capabilities as standard. However, it was found to be possible to take advantage of the characteristics of interrupts that were provided, permitting palette changes after the top 100 lines of each display frame, thus facilitating the blanking of either the top 100 or bottom 156 lines of the display. Many games took advantage of this, gaining storage by leaving non-graphical data in the disabled area.\nOther games would simply load non-graphical data into the display and leave it visible as regions of apparently randomly coloured pixels. One notable example is Superior Software's Citadel.\nAlthough page flipping is a hardware possibility, the limited memory forced most applications to do all their drawing directly to the visible screen, often resulting in graphical flicker or visible redraw. A notable exception is Players' \"Joe Blade\" series.\nA number of unusual techniques were employed by some developers to work around apparent limitations of the hardware.\nFiretrack: smooth vertical scrolling.\nAlthough programs can alter the position of the screen in memory, the non-linear format of the display means that vertical scrolling can only be done in blocks of 8 pixels without further work.\n\"Firetrack\", released on a compilation by Superior Software, exploits a division in the way the Electron handles its display of the seven available graphics modes, two are configured so that the final two of every ten scanlines are blank and are not based on the contents of RAM. If 16 scanlines of continuous graphical data are written to a character-block-aligned portion of the screen then they will appear as a continuous block in most modes but in the two non-continuous modes they will be displayed as two blocks of eight scanlines, separated in the middle by two blank scanlines.\nIn order to keep track of its position within the display, the Electron maintains an internal display address counter. The same counter is used in both the continuous and non-continuous graphics modes and switching modes mid-frame does not cause any adjustment to the counter.\n\"Firetrack\" switches from a non-continuous to a continuous graphics mode part way down the display. By using the palette to mask the top area of the display and taking care about when it changes mode it can shift the continuous graphics at the bottom of the display down in two pixel increments because the internal display counter is not incremented on blank scanlines during non-continuous graphics modes.\nExile: sampled speech.\n\"Exile\" turns the Electron's one channel output into a digital speaker for PCM output.\nThe speaker can be programmatically switched on or off at any time but is permanently attached to a hardware counter so is normally only able to output a square wave. But if set to a frequency outside the human audible range then the ear can't perceive the square wave, only the difference between the speaker being switched on and off. This gives the effect of a simple toggle speaker similar to that seen in the 48\u00a0KB Sinclair ZX Spectrum. \"Exile\" uses this to output 1-bit audio samples.\nFrak! and Zalaga: polyphonic music.\nAs part of their copy protection, illegal copies of Aardvark Software's \"Frak!\" and \"Zalaga\" would cause a pseudo-polyphonic rendition of Trumpet Hornpipe, the Captain Pugwash theme tune, to play endlessly rather than loading the game properly (Pugwash being a pirate). On the Electron version of Frak!, the tune was the main theme from \"Benny Hill\" (Boots Randolph's \"Yakety Sax\"). The polyphony was achieved via fast note-switching to achieve the necessary chords.\nHardware expansions.\nSince the Electron provides only a selection of video output ports, a cassette port and the expansion connector, a range of additional expansions were produced to offer ports and connections to various peripherals. The first expansions were largely joystick and printer interfaces or sideways ROM boards. For instance, First Byte Computers developed an interface and software which allowed a \"switched\" joystick to be used with the majority of software titles. This interface became very popular and was sold by W.H. Smiths, Boots, Comet and hundreds of independent computer dealers, selling as many as 23,000 units over a two-year period, helped by a bundling agreement with Dixons.\nAcorn's own expansion strategy was led by the Plus 1 which offered a combination of ports and cartridge connectors, followed by the Plus 3 disc drive unit, but by early 1986 the more general range of expansions had broadened to include floppy drive and RS423 interfaces, Teletext adapters, and other fundamental enhancements to the base machine.\nMulti-function expansions.\nSince the Electron's expansion connector was the basis of practically all external hardware expansions for the machine, unless an expansion propagated this connector to others, as was done by the Acorn Plus 3, the capabilities of any given expansion would limit the capabilities of the expanded machine. Thus, expansions offering a single function, such as joystick ports or a printer port, would need to be disconnected if other capabilities were needed, and then reconnected later. Consequently, multi-function expansions offering a combination of different capabilities offered a significant degree of convenience as well as avoiding wear on the expansion connector.\nAlongside announcements of Acorn's then-unreleased Plus 1, Solidisk previewed a General Purpose Interface for the Electron in early 1984 offering a Centronics printer port, switched joystick port, user port, sideways ROM sockets, and mini-cartridge sockets supported by the 6522 versatile interface adapter (VIA) chip. The Plus 1 itself was released in mid-1984, introducing the influential cartridge format for expansions ultimately used by several other companies.\nAcorn Plus 1.\nThe Acorn Plus 1 added two ROM cartridge slots, an analogue interface (supporting four channels) and a Centronics parallel port, priced at \u00a359.90. The analogue interface was normally used for joysticks, although trackball and graphics tablet devices were available, and the parallel interface was typically used to connect a printer. Game ROM cartridges would boot automatically. Languages in paged ROM cartridges would take precedence over BASIC. (The slot at the front of the interface took priority if both were populated.)\nAccess to ROM occurs at 2\u00a0MHz until RAM access is required, so theoretically programs released on ROM can run up to twice as fast as those released on tape or disc. Despite this, all of the games released on ROM were packaged as ROM filing system cartridges, from which the micro would load programs into main memory in exactly the same way as if it were loading from tape. This meant that programs did not need to be modified for their new memory location and could be written in BASIC but gave no execution speed benefits. Six ROM cartridge titles were announced for the launch of the Plus 1: three arcade games, one adventure game, one educational title, and the \"Lisp\" language implementation, the latter being a genuine language ROM that \"takes the place of the BASIC ROM\" and is instantly available when switching on.\nThe cartridge slots provide additional control lines (compared to the lines available via the edge connector on the rear of the Electron) to ease implementation of ROM cartridges. Acorn described the hardware extension possibilities in promotional literature, giving an RS423 cartridge as an example of this capability of the Plus 1.\nAdditional peripheral cartridges were produced by companies such as Advanced Computer Products (and subsequently PRES) whose Advanced ROM Adaptor (ARA) and Advanced Sideways RAM (ASR) products provided sideways ROM and RAM capabilities, allowing ROM- or EPROM-based software to be accessed to provide languages, utilities and applications. ROM or EPROM devices containing the software could be physically inserted into empty ZIF sockets, or the software would be loaded from ROM image files (typically provided on disk) into RAM devices fitted in such sockets. Such RAM could potentially be powered by a battery and thus be able to retain its contents when the computer itself was powered off. Both such arrangements exposed the software in the same sideways memory region.\nSuch cartridge support enabled the Electron to provide the same functionality as that offered by the expansion ROM slots under the keyboard and on the bottom-left of the BBC Micro B keyboard. However, the need to use cartridge sockets for other peripherals encouraged PRES to develop the Advanced Plus 6 (AP6): an internal RAM and ROM board for the Plus 1 providing six sockets that could be freely used for ROM, EPROM and RAM devices. Installation of the AP6 unit required some modifications to the Plus 1, undertaken either by the user or by PRES, and the product could also be enhanced with the Advanced Plus 7 offering battery-backed RAM support for two 16\u00a0KB banks.\nThe addition of the Plus 1 added a number of new *FX or OSBYTE calls that allowed the OS to read values from the analogue interface and write to the parallel interface.\nThe Plus 1 needed memory page &amp;D for its workspace, and the unit added some processing overhead when enabled, both of these things causing issues with the loading and running of software, particularly cassette-based games. To disable the Plus 1, after pressing BREAK, the following commands could be issued:\n *FX163,128,1\n ?&amp;212=&amp;D6\n ?&amp;213=&amp;F1\n ?&amp;2AC=0\nAn official application note described a similar set of commands to \"remove the Plus One completely from the address map disabling the Centronics and A/D ports (additionally disabling the RS423 cartridge if fitted)\".\nFurther developments.\nAfter Acorn's change of focus away from the Electron, and with a shortage of Plus 1 units available to purchase, Advanced Computer Products secured the rights to manufacture the unit under licence from Acorn, obtaining the injection moulds and tooling, thus restarting production in 1987 after Acorn's own production of the unit had ceased in November 1985. The Advanced Plus 2 (AP2) ROM was later sold by PRES as a replacement ROM for the Plus 1, of whose 8\u00a0KB utility ROM only 3\u00a0KB had been used, thus providing an opportunity for a more comprehensive ROM to be developed. The AP2 added ROM management commands familiar from the BBC Master series, support for various sideways RAM products from PRES, disc formatting and verification utilities for different ADFS versions, a command to disable the Plus 1 entirely, and improvements that made tape loading more reliable in \"high memory\" screen modes.\nSlogger Rombox Plus.\nFollowing on from Slogger's earlier Rombox product an expansion similar in profile to the Plus 1 but offering eight ROM sockets and propagating the expansion connector to other units the Rombox Plus was positioned more directly as a competitor to the Plus 1 in that it offered two cartridge slots and a Centronics print port alongside four ROM sockets. Priced at \u00a349.95, the unit was mostly compatible with cartridges designed for the Plus 1 although one reviewer reported physical issues with some expansion cartridges, suggesting some manufacturing inconsistencies given other users' more positive experiences, but indicated that it was still \"worth considering as an alternative to the Plus 1\". One review reported that the Cumana Electron Filing System cartridge had an edge connector that would not physically fit inside the slot in the Rombox Plus unit; this along with a perceived lack of robustness of the case being their only major reservations about the product. The product's support for utilising 8\u00a0KB RAM devices as a printer buffer, with buffer management provided by the built-in EPROM, was noted as a particular advantage over the Plus 1.\nSlogger Remote Expansion and Plus 2.\nIn early 1989, Slogger announced its \"remote expansion\" (RX) system for the Electron, providing a separate case with power supply to house expansions and disc drives, able to support the weight of a monitor or television. Intended for the RX system, the Plus 2 offered two ROM cartridge slots compatible with the Plus 1, three ROM sockets, and RS423 and user port capabilities. One application of the user port was to connect a mouse, utilised by Slogger's version of the Stop Press desktop publishing package by Advanced Memory Systems.\nSoftware Bargains Plus 1.\nIn mid-1989, Software Bargains announced an expansion providing different levels of Plus 1 functionality, offered as a bare printed circuit board without casing and in three different variants: the basic model offered one cartridge port and was bundled with View and Viewsheet cartridges for \u00a329.95; an extended model offered one cartridge port and a printer port with the two bundled cartridges for \u00a336.95; the full model offered two cartridge ports, printer port and the bundled cartridges for \u00a339.95. Various board upgrade options were also offered between the variants, with the product being described mainly as a vehicle to expose the bundled software packages to as many as 150,000 owners of the estimated 200,000 Electrons in the UK who \"have not yet been able to acquire or use View or Viewsheet\". The lack of casing was considered the most significant disadvantage, with the absence of the analogue port deemed less critical due to a general lack of support for joysticks in many games.\nCommunications and networking.\nTo support connectivity, Acorn announced a Plus 2 network interface with availability scheduled for early 1985, together with a RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1. Neither of these products were delivered as announced.\nAcorn Plus 2.\nThe Acorn Plus 2 interface was due to provide Econet capability. This interface did not make it to market. However, an Econet interface was produced by Barson Computers in Australia and possibly other individuals and businesses.\nAcorn Plus 4.\nThe Acorn Plus 4 interface was due to provide a modem communications capability.\nAndyk RS423 cartridge.\nAndyk announced an RS423 cartridge for the Plus 1 providing a serial port, alongside other products, in late 1985. It was priced at \u00a334.99.\nPace Tellstar/Nightingale.\nOriginally reported in mid-1985 as a collaboration between Acorn and Pace Micro Technology, but launched in early 1986, Pace offered a communications product consisting of a RS423 cartridge, bundled with a Nightingale modem and Tellstar communications software, retailing at around \u00a3161 but discounted to \u00a3145. The substantially reduced price of the Electron itself created an opportunity that Pace was \"exploiting nicely\" with its telecommunications bundle, described by one commentator as \"a marvellous opportunity to get a cheap Prestel set in addition to your normal computer\".\nJafa Systems RS423 cartridge.\nJafa Systems announced an RS423 cartridge in late 1989 to \"fill a two year gap in the market\", offering a serial connector compatible with the BBC Micro together with an on-board socket for 8\u00a0KB or 16\u00a0KB EPROM devices or for 32\u00a0KB RAM, the latter being configured to present two sideways RAM banks to the system. Write protect functionality was supported to prevent certain ROM software from attempting to overwrite itself if stored in RAM. The cartridge board itself was priced at around \u00a330, with a case costing \u00a35 extra, and an optional 32\u00a0KB RAM adding another \u00a320. Support for the E00 ADFS offered by PRES for that company's AP3 disc system was indicated as an application for the sideways RAM.\nSlogger Plus 2 RS423 interface.\nSlogger provided an RS423 interface as an option for its own Plus 2 expansion, announced in early 1989.\nDisc interfaces.\nThe first disc interface to be announced for the Electron was Pace's Le Box in 1984, offering a single-sided 100\u00a0KB floppy drive controlled by the 8271 controller and accessed using the Amcom Disc Filing System, with pricing at \u00a3299 plus VAT including the drive or around \u00a3199 without. The unit also provided eight sideways ROM sockets and was intended to sit under the Electron itself. The unit was connected via cabling to the expansion edge connector and included its own power supply, and other drives including switchable 40/80 track drives offering up to 400\u00a0KB capacity were dealer-supplied options. Although the product was meant to be on sale at the Acorn User Show in August 1984, and had been advertised, it was \"discontinued\" in early 1985 before getting to market, with a Pace representative indicating that prohibitive pricing of the 8271 chips (each at \"over \u00a380 at times\") had left the company considering a re-launch of the product should the pricing situation become more favourable.\nFollowing on from Acorn's Plus 3 interface, Cumana, Solidisk, Advanced Computer Products and Slogger all offered disc interfaces for the Electron. Unlike disc systems on the BBC Micro and the Acorn Plus 3, many of the systems released for the Electron did not claim RAM workspace (and raise the PAGE variable affecting applications above the default of &amp;E00), making it easier to use cassette-based software transferred to disc and to run larger programs from disc.\nLow-cost alternatives to disc systems, briefly made fashionable by press coverage of the Sinclair Microdrive, were reportedly under development by expansion suppliers such as Solidisk, and finished products such as the Phloopy looped tape system were offered for the Electron. Reliability issues were described with the Phloopy, and the product was apparently short-lived.\nAcorn Plus 3.\nLaunched in late 1984 for a price of \u00a3229, the Acorn Plus 3 was a hardware module that connected independently of the Plus 1 and provided a \"self contained disc interface and 3.5 inch single sided disc drive\" offering over 300\u00a0KB of storage per disc using the newly introduced Advanced Disc Filing System (ADFS). The Plus 3 was also reportedly produced with a double-sided drive fitted.\nAn expansion connector for a second 3.5- or 5.25-inch drive was also provided by the unit, with such drives needing to provide a Shugart-compatible connector and their own power supply. The original Electron edge connector was repeated on the back of the Plus 3, allowing the Plus 1 or other compatible expansion to be connected in conjunction with the Plus 3.\nThe double-density drive of the Plus 3 was driven using a WD1770 drive controller by the ADFS. (The Plus 3 had been rumoured to offer Acorn's DFS and to feature an 8272 double-density disk controller before its launch.) Because the WD1770 is capable of single-density mode and uses the same IBM360-derived floppy disc format as the Intel 8271 found in the BBC Micro, it was also possible to use the Disc Filing System with an alternate ROM, such as the ACP 1770 DFS.\nThe Plus 3 reset PAGE to &amp;1D00, reducing the amount of free RAM available to the user. The ADFS system could be temporarily disabled (and PAGE reset to &amp;E00) via the command. Later products such as the PRES E00 ADFS remedied the memory demands of the ADFS, along with other issues suffered by the software as delivered with the Plus 3. If using the Plus 3 in screen modes 0\u20133, the pseudo-variable would be thrown off, as the interrupts were disabled during disk access in these modes. The screen would also blank during disc accesses.\nDisks had to be manually mounted and dismounted using the / commands, or using the ++ key combination. Disks could also be booted from via the standard + key-combination, if the !BOOT file was present on the disk. This behaviour was the same as on the BBC Micro.\nThe Plus 3 included an uprated square black power supply unit with mains cord, manufactured by STC, designed and manufactured in England to and , that was designed to power the Plus 3, in addition to the Electron and the Plus 1 interface as well. This replaced the original cream-coloured \"wall wart\" style power supply, designed to and manufactured in Hong Kong.\nRepair note: If the internal power-supply connector, used to power the existing internal 3.5-inch drive is damaged, and requires replacement, then the original AMP 800-930 4-pin connector, which was already in short supply during the original production run, may be replaced with a Molex 5264 50-37-5043 \"Mini-SPOX\" connector as an alternative.\nAdvanced Plus 3.\nDesigned and produced by Baildon Electronics and sold by PRES, the Advanced Plus 3 (AP3) was a Plus 1 cartridge interface using the WD1770 controller, supplied with Acorn's ADFS and a single-sided 3\u00bd-inch disc drive for \u00a399 plus VAT, offering equivalent functionality to the Acorn Plus 3. Announced in late 1987, the product was made possible by an agreement between ACP and Acorn to license the ADFS software. As with many disc interfaces for the Electron, since the interface provided a connector for the drive, this made it possible to connect a 5\u00bc\" floppy disc drive (more common amongst BBC Micro owners) or the more typical 3\u00bd-inch drive.\nPRES later released a version of ADFS with support for PAGE at &amp;E00, this being achieved by using RAM provided by the Advanced Battery Backed RAM (ABR) cartridge. This version also fixed two notable bugs in Acorn's ADFS, eliminating unreliability when accessing the first tracks on a disc which had previously necessitated the writing of a file (ZYSYSHELP) as a workaround, and switching off the text cursor during disc compaction which had previously caused disc corruption (since the disc data would be processed using screen memory during this operation, and the cursor would modify that data when blinking). The ROM image was supplied on disc for \u00a317.19, whereas a bundle of the ROM and ABR cartridge was \u00a350.95.\nIn 1989, the Advanced Plus 3 Mark 2 was launched, offering a double-sided drive in place of the single-sided drive previously offered. This meant that the storage capacity of each disc was increased from the 320\u00a0KB of the original Plus 3 to 640\u00a0KB (this being supported by ADFS on the Master Compact).\nCumana Floppy Disc System.\nEarly in 1985, Cumana released a cartridge-based interface providing support for double-density storage, a real-time clock and calendar for timestamping of files, and a spare ROM socket for user-fitted sideways ROMs. The filing system used was Cumana's own QFS, supporting 89 files per disc, PAGE at &amp;E00, a non-hierarchical catalogue, ten-character filenames, with a format not directly compatible with either of Acorn's DFS or ADFS. The interface itself cost \u00a3149.95 when originally announced, but settled at around \u00a3115.95 including VAT, also being offered in a promotional bundle with a 5\u00bc-inch drive for \u00a3224.15 including VAT. Later pricing put the interface at \u00a374.95 including VAT.\nSolidisk EFS.\nIn mid-1985, Solidisk released a cartridge-based interface with support for single and double density storage and providing Acorn DFS and ADFS compatibility, 16\u00a0KB of on-board sideways RAM, and a connector for a Winchester hard drive. The cartridge itself cost \u00a359, with a bundle including a double-sided, double-density, 3\u00bd-inch drive costing \u00a3200. A 20\u00a0MB hard drive was offered at a price of \u00a3805.\nAdvanced Plus 4.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Advanced Plus 4 (AP4) from Advanced Computer Products was a cartridge-based interface employing the WD1770 controller and featuring ACP's 1770 DFS product, providing compatibility with Acorn's DFS from the BBC Micro and thereby supporting seven-character filenames and up to 31 files per disc. However, 8\u00a0KB of on-board static RAM was used as workspace for the filing system, keeping PAGE at &amp;E00. An extra ROM socket was provided for a user-fitted sideways ROM, and being a 1770-based interface, it was reported that Acorn's ADFS could be used instead, although since it was not aware of the additional RAM, PAGE would be raised to &amp;1D00 as it would be when using Acorn's Plus 3. The interface was priced at \u00a369.55 plus VAT.\nSlogger Electron Disc System and Pegasus 400.\nSlogger, an established producer of expansions and a reseller of other disc systems, introduced the Electron Disc System in early 1987, priced at \u00a374.95, featuring the Cumana Floppy Disc System interface, which was combined with an Acorn-compatible DFS, SEDFS, having the capability of reading 40-track discs on 80-track drives plus support for Slogger's tape-to-disc conversion products, and reported as offering \"virtual 100 per cent 8271 emulation\" for compatibility with traditional DFS software. The SEDFS ROM was also available separately for existing Cumana interface owners, priced at \u00a324.95.\nThe SEDFS was later bundled with Slogger's own cartridge-based interface and a 40/80-track switchable drive offering up to 400\u00a0KB storage per disc, with the bundle taking the Pegasus 400 name, introduced as part of a sales tour towards the end of 1987. This package of interface and drive cost \u00a3130. The precise DFS variant used by the Pegasus 400 system kept PAGE at &amp;E00 and introduced \"typeahead\" support, permitting keystroke buffering during disc activity on systems with the Turbo-Driver or Master RAM Board fitted and enabled.\nSlogger/Elektuur Turbo boards.\nAnnounced in early 1986, the Slogger Turbo-Driver was a professionally fitted upgrade priced at \u00a342. The board itself plugged into the CPU and BASIC ROM sockets on the main circuit board of the Electron, which merely involved removing socketed components on very early Electron models, but required desoldering work and therefore benefited from a fitting service for later units. The performance benefit of fitting the board was to make some programs, particularly those running in the high bandwidth modes (0 to 3), run up to three times faster.\nThe direct origins of the Slogger product appear to be a board designed by Andyk Limited, announced as the Fast Electron Board in late 1985 with a price of \u00a329.99, whereas the Elektuur modification was described in an article in Dutch Electronics magazine Elektuur and intended for users to perform at home.\nThe Slogger and Elektuur Turbo boards were born out of a hack initially devised at Acorn. By shadowing the lowest 8\u00a0KB of RAM with a static RAM chip outside of reach of the ULA, the CPU could always access it at 2\u00a0MHz. The tradeoff was that the screen could not be located in that 8\u00a0KB. In practice the operating system ROMs always put the screen into the top 20\u00a0KB and as a result this probably only broke compatibility with around 2% of software. Speeding up the low portion of memory is particularly useful on 6502 derived machines because that processor has a faster addressing for the first 256 bytes and so it is common for software to put any variables involved in time-critical sections of program into that region.\nThe cost of the 64 Kbit SRAM chip would have been more than that of doubling the four 64 Kbit DRAM chips to give 8-bit RAM access, fixing both the modest memory and poor performance issues of the Electron.\nSlogger Master RAM Board.\nIntroduced at around the start of 1987 and priced at \u00a364.95 fitted or \u00a354.95 as a kit, the Master RAM Board offered the familiar turbo mode from the Slogger Turbo-Driver alongside a shadow mode providing 32\u00a0KB of static shadow RAM in addition to the existing 32\u00a0KB, thus giving 64\u00a0KB in total. So-called \"legally written software\", this being software using the operating system calls and not writing directly to the screen, could function without significant modification, making substantially more memory available for BASIC, View, Viewsheet, language ROMs and many other applications. By providing extra storage this modification also allowed some games and applications intended for the BBC Micro to function on the Electron despite the lack of a native Mode 7.\nApplications could not directly address video memory in shadow mode without modification, so it was incompatible with most games, although there is no inherent reason why a game could not be written to function in shadow mode. A switch mounted through the case switched between normal, turbo and shadow modes.\nTowards the end of the Electron's commercial lifetime, the Turbo-Driver and Master RAM Boards were offered already fitted to new Electrons in an attempt to increase sales. For a time, Jafa Systems manufactured their own equivalent of the Master RAM Board in order to support their own product range.\nMode 7 display expansions.\nOne of the features of the BBC Micro that was absent in the Electron was the Teletext-style \"Mode 7\" display. The omission of this display mode was remarkable because it had a very low memory requirement (just 1000 bytes) and many BBC programs used it to maximise available memory for program code and data while also providing a colourful 40-column textual display with simple low-resolution graphical decorations.\nSuch display capabilities, desirable in their own right on low-memory computers, were also desirable for delivering content through low-bandwidth communications channels such as that from Teletext and Viewdata services. However, access to such services can be considered to be a separate capability, and the BBC Micro needed to be upgraded to complement its display capability with the Teletext or Prestel adapters to receive such over-the-air or online content.\nJafa Systems provided a number of solutions to remedy the absence of a Teletext display capability. Morley Electronics instead chose to offer an expansion combining the display and reception capabilities.\nSir Computers.\nIn late 1984, Sir Computers announced a Mode 7 adapter unit that plugged into the Electron's expansion connector. Unfortunately, Sir Computers ceased trading before the product was brought to market.\nJafa Systems.\nReleased in 1987 at a price of \u00a389, the Mode 7 Mark 1 Display Unit was a separate unit \"about the size, shape and colour of the Plus One or a Slogger ROMbox\" that connected to the Electron's expansion connector and featured a Motorola 6845 display controller and Mullard SAA5050 character generator to replicate the main elements of the BBC Micro's Teletext display solution. This only used 1\u00a0KB of memory for the display, with the expansion listening to display memory write accesses and buffering the data in its own memory. A ROM was included to extend the operating system to allow activation of Mode 7 as a genuine screen mode and to provide extra commands and to support keyboard shortcuts used on the BBC Micro to emit Teletext control sequences. To support the output of both the Mode 7 display and the existing video output, a lead connected the Electron's RGB output to the expansion, with the expansion providing only RF (television) output.\nConscious of the relatively high price of the Mark 1 unit, John Wike of Jafa devised and, at the end of 1988, introduced a software-based \"Mode 7 Simulator\", priced at \u00a325, supplied on a ROM cartridge that rendered the Mode 7 display in a low-resolution, 8-colour graphics mode. Although cheap and effective in enabling use of some software that only used official operating system routines for text output, this solution proved very slow because the Electron had to be placed into the high-bandwidth Mode 2 display to be able to show eight colours at once. In doing so, the CPU spent a lot of time drawing representations of Mode 7 characters and graphics that in a hardware solution would be achieved without any demand on the CPU. It also used up 20\u00a0KB of RAM for the graphics display rather than the 1000 bytes of a hardware Mode 7.\nA conceptually similar predecessor to the software-based simulator was published by Electron User in early 1987, offering a monochrome Mode 4 simulation of the Teletext display, using the lower 25 character lines of the screen to show the Teletext output, reserving several lines at the top of the screen for a representation of Mode 7 used to prepare the eventual visual output. However, the program did not support direct access to Mode 7 memory locations. The author noted that a Mode 2 version would have been possible but would have required a redesigned character set and \"too much memory\".\nA further refinement of the hardware solution was introduced in 1989 with the Mode 7 Mark 2 Display Unit, which retained the SAA5050 character generator but omitted the 6845 display controller, and was fitted internally in the Electron itself instead of being housed in an external unit, although some kind of ROM expansion unit was needed to hold the driver/utilities ROM. It used software to ensure that the SAA5050 was fed with the correct character data. A software ROM would put the machine into a two-colour, 40-column graphics mode (thus providing one byte per character), and as the ULA read display data from memory in the usual fashion, the SAA5050 would listen to the data it was reading and produce a Mode 7 interpretation of the same information, this being achieved by fitting a board on top of the ULA connecting to its pins. When necessary the hardware would switch between the conventional Electron graphics output and the Mode 7 output being produced by the add-on, feeding it to the Electron's built-in video output sockets via the red, green and blue lines on the motherboard.\nThe disadvantage to this system is that while the SAA5050 would expect to be repeatedly fed the same 40 bytes of data for every display scanline of each character row, the ULA would read a different set of 40 bytes for every display scanline in order to produce a full graphics display. A software ROM worked around this by duplicating the data intended for a Mode 7 display in memory. Although this produced a Mode 7 that had less of an impact upon CPU performance than a software solution, gave the same visual quality as the BBC Micro, and supported direct access to Mode 7 screen addresses as well as accesses via operating system routines, it still used 10\u00a0KB of memory for the display and reduced the amount of readily-usable application memory (as indicated by HIMEM) by another 6\u00a0KB.\nHowever, with users increasingly able to rely on expansions such as the Slogger Master RAM board to provide more memory, and with this combination of expansions acknowledged throughout the user manual, the emphasis of the Mode 7 Simulator and Mark 2 Display Unit was arguably to deliver the actual display capabilities for those applications that needed them, instead of using Mode 7 as a way of economising with regard to memory usage, and to do so at a reasonable price. In this latter regard, the Mark 2 model was available as a kit costing \u00a325 or as an assembled product (requiring some soldering) costing \u00a349, with a fitting service available for \u00a310.\nThe Jafa interfaces did not provide a Teletext or Viewdata reception capability, but the Mark 2 was explicitly stated to work in conjunction with the Morley Electronics Teletext Adapter. Meanwhile, the manual for the Mark 2 noted that the product would provide the functionality of a Viewdata terminal if combined with Jafa's RS423 cartridge.\nMorley Electronics.\nMorley Electronics produced a Teletext Adaptor expansion for the BBC Micro and the Electron. Since the BBC Micro has the Mode 7 display capability, the model aimed at the BBC Micro merely provided the content reception capability needed to receive and decode Teletext signals, connecting to the user port and power supply. However, the Electron models provided both display and reception capabilities, doing so by routing either the RGB or UHF signals (depending on the model) through the unit in order to introduce the Mode 7 output produced by the unit, also connecting via a cartridge. The Teletext display capabilities in the Electron models exceeded those of the BBC Micro, with one reviewer noting that the enhanced capabilities permitted \"black text on a coloured background, something I've always wanted to do on my Beeb\". The UHF model of the Electron adapter also supported overlaying of Teletext onto video and framing of video.\nSecond Processor expansions.\nAcorn did demonstrate a prototype \"Tube\" interface for the Electron alongside the Plus 3 interface at the Compec exhibition in November 1984, although this was never brought to market directly by Acorn.\nAdvanced Plus 5.\nDespite Acorn's withdrawal from the Electron peripheral market, Baildon Electronics developed the Advanced Plus 5 (AP5) expansion, featuring Tube, 1\u00a0MHz bus and user port interfaces, which plugged into a Plus 1 cartridge socket. This provided a sufficient level of compatibility that both the 6502 and Z80 second processor products from Acorn were shown to work, providing a Tube implementation that was \"as faithful as you can get\", with it also being noted that the Electron being available for as little as \u00a350 at that point in its commercial lifespan was a \"very cheap way of getting a CP/M machine\". Some differences in the memory map of the Electron meant that BBC Micro software would need modifications to work on the Electron with AP5. The price of the unit in late 1986 was \u00a366.70.\nThe additional facilities of the AP5 alongside the Tube interface permitted various expansions for the BBC Micro to be made available for the Electron. These included the Hybrid Music 5000 and the AMX Mouse.\nPMS Electron Second Processor.\nIn 1986, Permanent Memory Systems (PMS) announced a second processor product for the Electron, the PMS-E2P, as a self-contained cartridge for use with the Plus 1 containing a second 2\u00a0MHz 6502A processor plus 64\u00a0KB of RAM, priced at \u00a389. This was based on a product originally developed by John Wike of Jafa Systems. Available as a kit or in assembled form, it could even be adapted to connect directly to the Electron's expansion connector, thus avoiding the need to even have a Plus 1 expansion, although this would require the user to find other solutions for attaching peripherals. The implementation of the interface between the Electron and second processor was said to adhere closely to Acorn's recommendations, noting that any hardware or software compatibility issues were likely to be the fault of other vendors not similarly adhering to Acorn's guidelines. PMS supplied Acorn's Hi-BASIC with the E2P, permitting the use of as much as 44\u00a0KB of the second processor's RAM with BASIC programs. The company also made a version of Computer Concepts' Wordwise Plus available for the E2P, priced at \u00a339.95.\nSound system expansions.\nDespite the Electron having only limited sound generation capabilities, few expansions were offered to overcome the machine's limitations.\nMillsgrade Voxbox.\nAdvertised in late 1985, the Voxbox by Millsgrade Limited was an expansion connecting to the Electron's expansion connector that provided allophone-based speech synthesis, with driver software provided on cassette. The supplied software supported the definition of spoken words built up from the allophones these allophones or sounds being stored in the expansion's own ROM and for catalogues of words to be created and saved. A program was supplied that extended BASIC to allow the use of the synthesiser in user programs. The expansion used the General Instrument SP0256A-AL2 speech synthesis chip.\nSound Expansion cartridge.\nOriginally announced in 1987 by Project Expansions to be priced at around \u00a340, the Sound Expansion cartridge could be fitted in a Plus 1 (or compatible) slot and provide sound output equivalent to that of the BBC Micro, with Superior Software's Speech bundled as a \"limited offer\". A product of the same name and with similar functionality was subsequently sold by Complex Software for around \u00a355, employing its own adjustable speaker in the cartridge unit. Superior Software had announced a version of Speech for the unexpanded Acorn Electron in 1986, but this was never released.\nHybrid Music 5000.\nHybrid Technology's Music 5000 was adapted and released by PRES for use with the 1\u00a0MHz bus of the Advanced Plus 5 expansion, with the Music 5000 itself priced at \u00a3113.85. The only functional differences between the Electron adaptation and the original BBC Micro unit involved the use of Mode 6 for the display and the reduced performance of the Electron imposing some limitations on processing in programs written for the system, although this was not thought to prevent most programs for the system from working on the Electron version.\nLegacy.\nAlthough the Electron presented challenges to developers in terms of the amount of memory available to programs and, particularly for those writing or porting games to the machine, a reduction in hardware features useful for controlling or presenting content on the screen, developers often discovered creative workarounds to deliver commercially successful products, making the business of writing conversions a viable one for some developers.\nSeveral features that would later be associated with the BBC Master and Archimedes first appeared as features of Electron expansion units, including ROM cartridge slots and the Advanced Disc Filing System, a hierarchical improvement to the BBC's original Disc Filing System. Having been envisaged as the basis of a portable computer with \"a very strong emphasis on communications\" during its development, supporting both modem and Econet interfaces, the BT Merlin M2105 product subsequently combined the Electron with communications functionality, and the Acorn Communicator developed such concepts further, introducing networking support.\nThe availability of the Electron at discounted prices from 1985 onwards led to increased demand for third-party software and expansions for the machine. While it may not have been as popular as the Spectrum, Commodore 64 or Amstrad CPC, it did sell in sufficient numbers to ensure that new software titles from established producers were being produced right up until the early 1990s, with mainstream publications dedicated to the machine having effectively supported it for five years beyond the point at which Acorn's own support had ceased. One reviewer concluded that even at this point in 1990, \"Electron owners wishing to upgrade their machine will find themselves better served now than at any time in the machine\u2019s history.\""}
{"id": "2079", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2079", "title": "Autumn equinox", "text": ""}
{"id": "2080", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2080", "title": "A Fire Upon the Deep", "text": "A Fire Upon the Deep is a 1992 science fiction novel by American writer Vernor Vinge. It is a space opera involving superhuman intelligences, aliens, variable physics, space battles, love, betrayal, genocide, and a communication medium resembling Usenet. \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" won the Hugo Award in 1993, sharing it with \"Doomsday Book\" by Connie Willis.\nBesides the normal print book editions, the novel was also included on a CD-ROM sold by ClariNet Communications along with the other nominees for the 1993 Hugo awards. The CD-ROM edition included numerous annotations by Vinge on his thoughts and intentions about different parts of the book, and was later released as a standalone e-book. It has a loose prequel, \"A Deepness in the Sky\", from 1999, and a direct sequel, \"The Children of the Sky\", from 2012.\nSetting.\nThe novel is set in various locations in the Milky Way. The galaxy is divided into four concentric volumes called the \"Zones of Thought\"; it is not clear to the novel's characters whether this is a natural phenomenon or an artificially produced one, but it seems to roughly correspond with galactic-scale stellar density and a Beyond region is mentioned in the Sculptor Galaxy as well. The Zones reflect fundamental differences in basic physical laws, and one of the main consequences is their effect on intelligence, both biological and artificial. Artificial intelligence and automation is most directly affected, in that advanced hardware and software from the Beyond or the Transcend will work less and less well as a ship \"descends\" towards the Unthinking Depths. But even biological intelligence is affected to a lesser degree. The four zones are spoken of in terms of \"low\" to \"high\" as follows:\nOne of the characters in the book, Ravna, uses this analogy to explain the relation between the zones:\nPlot.\nAn expedition from Straumli Realm, a young human civilization in the high Beyond, investigates a newly discovered five-billion-year-old data archive in the low Transcend that offers the possibility of unimaginable riches. The expedition's facility, High Lab, is gradually and secretly compromised by an initially dormant superintelligence within the archive later known as the Blight. However, shortly before the Blight's final \"flowering\", two self-aware entities created similarly to the Blight plot to aid the humans before the Blight can gain its full powers.\nFinally recognizing the danger, the researchers at High Lab attempt to flee in two ships, one carrying the adults and the second carrying the children in \"coldsleep boxes\". The Blight discovers that the first ship lists a data storage device in its cargo manifest; assuming it contains information that could harm it, the Blight destroys the ship. The second ship escapes.\nThe ship lands on a distant planet with a medieval-level civilization of dog-like creatures, dubbed \"Tines\", who live in packs as group minds. Upon landing, however, the two surviving adults, husband and wife, are ambushed and killed by Tine fanatics known as Flenserists, in whose realm they have landed. The Flenserists capture a young boy named Jefri Olsndot and his wounded sister, Johanna. Johanna is rescued by a Tine named Pilgrim who witnessed the ambush and taken to a neighboring kingdom ruled by a brilliant Tine named Woodcarver. Steel, the Flenserists' leader, tells Jefri that Johanna and their parents were killed by Woodcarver and exploits him in order to develop advanced technology (such as cannon and radio communication), while Johanna and the knowledge stored in her \"dataset\" device help Woodcarver rapidly develop as well. A highly placed Flenserist spy keeps Steel informed of Woodcarver's progress.\nA distress signal from the sleeper ship eventually reaches \"Relay\", a major information/service provider for the galactic communications network. A benign transcendent being named \"the Old One\" contacts Relay, seeking information about the Blight and the humans who released it, and reconstitutes a human man named Pham Nuwen from the wreckage of a spaceship to act as its agent, using his doubt of his own memory's veracity to keep him under its control. Ravna Bergsndot, the only human Relay employee, traces the sleeper ship's signal to the Tines' world and persuades her employer to investigate what it took from High Lab, contracting the merchant vessel \"Out of Band II\", owned by two sentient plant \"Skroderiders\", Blueshell and Greenstalk, to transport her and Pham there.\nBefore the mission is launched, the Blight launches a surprise attack on Relay and kills Old One. As Old One dies, it downloads what information it can into Pham to defeat the Blight, and Pham, Ravna and the Skroderiders barely escape Relay's destruction in the \"Out of Band II\".\nThe Blight expands, taking over races and \"rewriting\" their people to become its agents, murdering several other Powers, and seizing other archives in the Beyond, looking for what was taken. It finally realizes where the danger truly lies and sends a hastily assembled fleet in pursuit.\nThe humans arrive at the Tines' homeworld first and ally with Woodcarver to defeat the Flenserists and rescue Jefri. Pham initiates Countermeasure, which extends the Slow Zone outward by thousands of light years, enveloping and killing the Blight at the cost of wrecking thousands of civilizations and causing trillions of deaths. The humans are stranded on the Tines world, now in the depths of the Slow Zone. Activating Countermeasure is fatal to Pham, but before he dies, the ghost of Old One within his mind reveals to him that, although his body is a reconstruction, his memories are real. (Vinge expands on Pham's backstory in \"A Deepness in the Sky\".)\nIntelligent species.\nAprahanti.\nA race of humanoids with colorful butterfly-like wings who attempt to use the chaos wrought by the Blight to reestablish their waning hegemony. Despite their attractive, delicate appearance, the Aprahanti are an extremely fearsome and vicious species.\nBlight.\nAn ancient, malevolent super-intelligent entity which strives to constantly expand and can easily manipulate electronics and organic beings.\nDirokimes.\nAn older race which originally inhabited Sjandra Kei before the arrival of humanity. They work with the humans.\nHumans.\nAll humans in the novel (except Pham) are descended from Nyjoran stock. Their ancestors were \"Tuvo-Norsk\" asteroid miners from Old Earth's solar system, which is noted as being on the other side of the galaxy in the Slow Zone. (\"Nyjora\" sounds similar to New Norwegian \"New Earth\".) One of the major human habitations is Sjandra Kei, three systems comprising roughly 28\u00a0billion individuals. Their main language is Samnorsk, the Norwegian term for a hypothetical unification of the Bokm\u00e5l and Nynorsk forms of the language. (Vinge indicates in the book's dedication that several key ideas in it came to him while at a conference in Troms\u00f8, Norway.)\nSkroders/Riders/Skroderiders.\nA race of plantlike beings with fronds that serve as arms. The Riders have little native capacity for short-term memory. They are one of the longest-existing species; five billion years ago, someone gave them six-wheeled mechanical constructs (\"skrodes\") to move around and to provide short-term memory that made it easier for them to retain information well enough to become long-term memory in the vegetable \"rider\". It is later revealed that their \"benefactor\" is the Blight, and it is able to easily corrupt and remotely operate the Riders via their skrodes.\nTines.\nA race of group minds: each person is a \"pack\" of 4\u20138 doglike members, which communicate within the pack using very short-range ultrasonic waves from drumlike organs called \"tympana\".\nEach \"soul\" can survive and evolve by adding members to replace those who die, potentially for hundreds of years, as Woodcarver does.\nRelated works.\nVinge first used the concepts of \"Zones of Thought\" in a 1988 novella \"The Blabber\", which occurs after \"Fire\". Vinge's novel \"A Deepness in the Sky\" (1999) is a prequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" set 20,000 years earlier and featuring Pham Nuwen. Vinge's \"The Children of the Sky\", \"a near-term sequel to \"A Fire Upon the Deep\", set ten years later, was released in October 2011.\nVinge's former wife, Joan D. Vinge, has also written stories in the Zones of Thought universe, based on his notes. These include \"The Outcasts of Heaven Belt\", \"Legacy\", and (as of 2008) a planned novel featuring Pham Nuwen.\nTitle.\nVinge's original title for the novel was \"Among the Tines\"; its final title was suggested by his editors.\nAwards and nominations.\n\"A Fire Upon the Deep\" shared the 1993 Hugo Award for Best Novel with \"Doomsday Book\". The book was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel of 1992, the 1993 John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel, and the 1993 Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel.\nCritical reactions.\nJo Walton wrote: \"Any one of the ideas in \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" would have kept an ordinary writer going for years. For me it's the book that does everything right, the example of what science fiction does when it works. ... \"A Fire Upon the Deep\" remains a favourite and a delight to re-read, absorbing even when I know exactly what's coming.\""}
{"id": "2082", "revid": "14926857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2082", "title": "Aeronautics", "text": "Aeronautics is the science or art involved with the study, design, and manufacturing of air flight-capable machines, and the techniques of operating aircraft and rockets within the atmosphere. \nWhile the term originally referred solely to \"operating\" the aircraft, it has since been expanded to include technology, business, and other aspects related to aircraft. \nThe term \"aviation\" is sometimes used interchangeably with aeronautics, although \"aeronautics\" includes lighter-than-air craft such as airships, and includes ballistic vehicles while \"aviation\" technically does not.\nA significant part of aeronautical science is a branch of dynamics called aerodynamics, which deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nHistory.\nEarly ideas.\nAttempts to fly without any real aeronautical understanding have been made from the earliest times, typically by constructing wings and jumping from a tower with crippling or lethal results.\nWiser investigators sought to gain some rational understanding through the study of bird flight. Medieval Islamic Golden Age scientists such as Abbas ibn Firnas also made such studies. The founders of modern aeronautics, Leonardo da Vinci in the Renaissance and Cayley in 1799, both began their investigations with studies of bird flight.\nMan-carrying kites are believed to have been used extensively in ancient China. In 1282 the Italian explorer Marco Polo described the Chinese techniques then current. The Chinese also constructed small hot air balloons, or lanterns, and rotary-wing toys.\nAn early European to provide any scientific discussion of flight was Roger Bacon, who described principles of operation for the lighter-than-air balloon and the flapping-wing ornithopter, which he envisaged would be constructed in the future. The lifting medium for his balloon would be an \"aether\" whose composition he did not know.\nIn the late fifteenth century, Leonardo da Vinci followed up his study of birds with designs for some of the earliest flying machines, including the flapping-wing ornithopter and the rotating-wing helicopter. Although his designs were rational, they were not based on particularly good science. Many of his designs, such as a four-person screw-type helicopter, have severe flaws. He did at least understand that \"An object offers as much resistance to the air as the air does to the object.\" (Newton would not publish the Third law of motion until 1687.) His analysis led to the realisation that manpower alone was not sufficient for sustained flight, and his later designs included a mechanical power source such as a spring. Da Vinci's work was lost after his death and did not reappear until it had been overtaken by the work of George Cayley.\nBalloon flight.\nThe modern era of lighter-than-air flight began early in the 17th century with Galileo's experiments in which he showed that air has weight. Around 1650 Cyrano de Bergerac wrote some fantasy novels in which he described the principle of ascent using a substance (dew) he supposed to be lighter than air, and descending by releasing a controlled amount of the substance. Francesco Lana de Terzi measured the pressure of air at sea level and in 1670 proposed the first scientifically credible lifting medium in the form of hollow metal spheres from which all the air had been pumped out. These would be lighter than the displaced air and able to lift an airship. His proposed methods of controlling height are still in use today; by carrying ballast which may be dropped overboard to gain height, and by venting the lifting containers to lose height. In practice de Terzi's spheres would have collapsed under air pressure, and further developments had to wait for more practicable lifting gases.\nFrom the mid-18th century the Montgolfier brothers in France began experimenting with balloons. Their balloons were made of paper, and early experiments using steam as the lifting gas were short-lived due to its effect on the paper as it condensed. Mistaking smoke for a kind of steam, they began filling their balloons with hot smoky air which they called \"electric smoke\" and, despite not fully understanding the principles at work, made some successful launches and in 1783 were invited to give a demonstration to the French \"Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\".\nMeanwhile, the discovery of hydrogen led Joseph Black in to propose its use as a lifting gas, though practical demonstration awaited a gas-tight balloon material. On hearing of the Montgolfier Brothers' invitation, the French Academy member Jacques Charles offered a similar demonstration of a hydrogen balloon. Charles and two craftsmen, the Robert brothers, developed a gas-tight material of rubberised silk for the envelope. The hydrogen gas was to be generated by chemical reaction during the filling process.\nThe Montgolfier designs had several shortcomings, not least the need for dry weather and a tendency for sparks from the fire to set light to the paper balloon. The manned design had a gallery around the base of the balloon rather than the hanging basket of the first, unmanned design, which brought the paper closer to the fire. On their free flight, De Rozier and d'Arlandes took buckets of water and sponges to douse these fires as they arose. On the other hand, the manned design of Charles was essentially modern. As a result of these exploits, the hot air balloon became known as the \"Montgolfi\u00e8re\" type and the gas balloon the \"Charli\u00e8re\".\nCharles and the Robert brothers' next balloon, \"\", was a Charli\u00e8re that followed Jean Baptiste Meusnier's proposals for an elongated dirigible balloon, and was notable for having an outer envelope with the gas contained in a second, inner ballonet. On 19 September 1784, it completed the first flight of over 100\u00a0km, between Paris and Beuvry, despite the man-powered propulsive devices proving useless.\nIn an attempt the next year to provide both endurance and controllability, de Rozier developed a balloon having both hot air and hydrogen gas bags, a design which was soon named after him as the \"Rozi\u00e8re.\" The principle was to use the hydrogen section for constant lift and to navigate vertically by heating and allowing to cool the hot air section, in order to catch the most favourable wind at whatever altitude it was blowing. The balloon envelope was made of goldbeater's skin. The first flight ended in disaster and the approach has seldom been used since.\nCayley and the foundation of modern aeronautics.\nSir George Cayley (1773\u20131857) is widely acknowledged as the founder of modern aeronautics. He was first called the \"father of the aeroplane\" in 1846 and Henson called him the \"father of aerial navigation.\" He was the first true scientific aerial investigator to publish his work, which included for the first time the underlying principles and forces of flight.\nIn 1809 he began the publication of a landmark three-part treatise titled \"On Aerial Navigation\" (1809\u20131810). In it he wrote the first scientific statement of the problem, \"The whole problem is confined within these limits, viz. to make a surface support a given weight by the application of power to the resistance of air.\" He identified the four vector forces that influence an aircraft: \"thrust\", \"lift\", \"drag\" and \"weight\" and distinguished stability and control in his designs.\nHe developed the modern conventional form of the fixed-wing aeroplane having a stabilising tail with both horizontal and vertical surfaces, flying gliders both unmanned and manned.\nHe introduced the use of the whirling arm test rig to investigate the aerodynamics of flight, using it to discover the benefits of the curved or cambered aerofoil over the flat wing he had used for his first glider. He also identified and described the importance of dihedral, diagonal bracing and drag reduction, and contributed to the understanding and design of ornithopters and parachutes.\nAnother significant invention was the tension-spoked wheel, which he devised in order to create a light, strong wheel for aircraft undercarriage.\nThe 19th century: Otto Lilienthal and the first human flights.\nDuring the 19th century Cayley's ideas were refined, proved and expanded on, culminating in the works of Otto Lilienthal.\nLilienthal was a German engineer and businessman who became known as the \"flying man\". He was the first person to make well-documented, repeated, successful flights with gliders, therefore making the idea of \"heavier than air\" a reality. Newspapers and magazines published photographs of Lilienthal gliding, favourably influencing public and scientific opinion about the possibility of flying machines becoming practical.\nHis work lead to him developing the concept of the modern wing. His flight attempts in Berlin in the year 1891 are seen as the beginning of human flight and the \"Lilienthal Normalsegelapparat\" is considered to be the first air plane in series production, making the \"Maschinenfabrik Otto Lilienthal\" in Berlin the first air plane production company in the world.\nOtto Lilienthal is often referred to as either the \"father of aviation\" or \"father of flight\".\nOther important investigators included Horatio Phillips.\nBranches.\nAeronautics may be divided into three main branches, Aviation, Aeronautical science and Aeronautical engineering.\nAviation.\nAviation is the art or practice of aeronautics. Historically aviation meant only heavier-than-air flight, but nowadays it includes flying in balloons and airships.\nAeronautical engineering.\nAeronautical engineering covers the design and construction of aircraft, including how they are powered, how they are used and how they are controlled for safe operation.\nA major part of aeronautical engineering is aerodynamics, the science of passing through the air.\nWith the increasing activity in space flight, nowadays aeronautics and astronautics are often combined as aerospace engineering.\nAerodynamics.\nThe science of aerodynamics deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion, such as an aircraft.\nThe study of aerodynamics falls broadly into three areas:\n\"Incompressible flow\" occurs where the air simply moves to avoid objects, typically at subsonic speeds below that of sound (Mach 1).\n\"Compressible flow\" occurs where shock waves appear at points where the air becomes compressed, typically at speeds above Mach 1.\n\"Transonic flow\" occurs in the intermediate speed range around Mach 1, where the airflow over an object may be locally subsonic at one point and locally supersonic at another.\nRocketry.\nA rocket or rocket vehicle is a missile, spacecraft, aircraft or other vehicle which obtains thrust from a rocket engine. In all rockets, the exhaust is formed entirely from propellants carried within the rocket before use. Rocket engines work by action and reaction. Rocket engines push rockets forwards simply by throwing their exhaust backwards extremely fast.\nRockets for military and recreational uses date back to at least 13th-century China. Significant scientific, interplanetary and industrial use did not occur until the 20th century, when rocketry was the enabling technology of the Space Age, including setting foot on the Moon.\nRockets are used for fireworks, weaponry, ejection seats, launch vehicles for artificial satellites, human spaceflight and exploration of other planets. While comparatively inefficient for low speed use, they are very lightweight and powerful, capable of generating large accelerations and of attaining extremely high speeds with reasonable efficiency.\nChemical rockets are the most common type of rocket and they typically create their exhaust by the combustion of rocket propellant. Chemical rockets store a large amount of energy in an easily released form, and can be very dangerous. However, careful design, testing, construction and use minimizes risks."}
{"id": "2083", "revid": "48479730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2083", "title": "Auguste and Louis Lumi\u00e8re", "text": "The Lumi\u00e8re brothers (, ; ), Auguste Marie Louis Nicolas Lumi\u00e8re (19 October 1862 \u2013 10 April 1954) and Louis Jean Lumi\u00e8re (5 October 1864 \u2013 6 June 1948), were French manufacturers of photography equipment, best known for their \"\" motion picture system and the short films they produced between 1895 and 1905, which places them among the earliest filmmakers.\nTheir screening of a single film on 22 March 1895, for around 200 members of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'encouragement pour l'industrie nationale (Society for the Development of the National Industry) in Paris was probably the first presentation of projected film. Their first commercial public screening on 28 December 1895, for around 40 paying visitors and invited relations has traditionally been regarded as the birth of cinema. Either the techniques or the business models of earlier filmmakers proved to be less viable than the breakthrough presentations of the Lumi\u00e8res.\nHistory.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers were born in Besan\u00e7on, France, to Charles-Antoine Lumi\u00e8re (1840\u20131911) and Jeanne Jos\u00e9phine Costille Lumi\u00e8re, who were married in 1861 and moved to Besan\u00e7on, setting up a small photographic portrait studio. Here were born Auguste, Louis and their daughter Jeanne. They moved to Lyon in 1870, where their two other daughters were born: M\u00e9lina and Francine. Auguste and Louis both attended La Martiniere, the largest technical school in Lyon.\nThey patented several significant processes leading up to their film camera, most notably film perforations (originally implemented by \u00c9mile Reynaud) as a means of advancing the film through the camera and projector. The original had been patented by L\u00e9on Guillaume Bouly on 12 February 1892. The \u2014 a three-in-one device that could record, develop, and project motion pictures \u2014 was further developed by the Lumi\u00e8res. The brothers patented their own version on 13 February 1895.\nThe date of the recording of their first film is in dispute. In an interview with Georges Sadoul given in 1948, Louis claimed that he shot the film in August 1894 \u2013 before the arrival of the kinetoscope in France. This is questioned by historians, who consider that a functional Lumi\u00e8re camera did not exist before the beginning of 1895.\nThe Lumi\u00e8re brothers saw film as a novelty and had withdrawn from the film business by 1905. They went on to develop the first practical photographic colour process, the Lumi\u00e8re Autochrome.\nLouis died on 6 June 1948, and Auguste on 10 April 1954. They are buried in a family tomb in the New Guilloti\u00e8re Cemetery in Lyon.\nFirst film screenings.\nOn 22 March 1895, in Paris, at the Society for the Development of the National Industry, in front of a small audience, one of whom was said to be L\u00e9on Gaumont, then director of the company , the Lumi\u00e8res privately screened a single film, \"Workers Leaving the Lumi\u00e8re Factory\". The main focus of the conference by Louis concerned the recent developments in the photographic industry, mainly the research on polychromy (colour photography). It was much to Lumi\u00e8re's surprise that the moving black-and-white images retained more attention than the coloured stills.\nThe Lumi\u00e8res gave their first paid public screening on 28 December 1895, at Salon Indien du Grand Caf\u00e9 in Paris. This presentation consisted of the following 10 short films:\nEach film was up to long, which, when hand cranked through a projector, runs approximately 50 seconds.\nThe Lumi\u00e8res went on tour with the in 1896, visiting places like Brussels, Bombay, London, Montreal, New York City, Palestine, and Buenos Aires.\nIn 1896, only a few months after the initial screenings in Europe, films by the Lumiere Brothers were shown in Egypt, first in the Tousson stock exchange in Alexandria on 5 November 1896, and then in the Hamam Schneider (Schneider Bath) in Cairo.\nEarly colour photography.\nThe brothers stated that \"the cinema is an invention without any future\" and declined to sell their camera to other filmmakers such as Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s. This made many film makers upset. Consequently, their role in the history of film was exceedingly brief. In parallel with their cinema work they experimented with colour photography. They worked on colour photographic processes in the 1890s including the Lippmann process (interference heliochromy) and their own 'bichromated glue' process, a subtractive colour process, examples of which were exhibited at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1900. This last process was commercialised by the Lumieres but commercial success had to wait for their next colour process. In 1903 they patented a colour photographic process, the \"Autochrome Lumi\u00e8re\", which was launched on the market in 1907. Throughout much of the 20th century, the Lumi\u00e8re company was a major producer of photographic products in Europe, but the brand name, Lumi\u00e8re, disappeared from the marketplace following merger with Ilford.\nFilm systems that preceded the Cin\u00e9matographe Lumi\u00e8re.\nEarlier moving images, for instance those of the phantasmagoria shows, the ph\u00e9nakisticope, the zoetrope and \u00c9mile Reynaud's Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Optique consisted of hand-drawn images. A system that could record photographic reality in motion, in a fashion much like it is seen by the eyes, had a greater impact on people.\nEadweard Muybridge's Zoopraxiscope projected moving painted silhouettes based on his chronophotographic work. The only Zoopraxiscope disc with actual photographs was made as an early form of stop motion.\nLess-known predecessors, such as Jules Duboscq's Bioscope (patented in 1852) were not developed to project the moving images.\nA Polish inventor Kazimierz Pr\u00f3szy\u0144ski built his camera and projecting device, called Pleograph, in 1894, before those made by the Lumi\u00e8re brothers.\nLe Prince went missing in 1890, before he got around to give public demonstrations of the patented cameras and projectors he had been developing during the previous years. His short film known as \"Roundhay Garden Scene\" (1888) has later come to be regarded as the oldest film.\nWilliam Friese-Greene patented a \"machine camera\" in 1889, which embodied many aspects of later film cameras. He displayed the results at photographic societies in 1890 and developed further cameras but did not publicly project the results.\nOttomar Ansch\u00fctz's Electrotachyscope projected very short loops of high photographic quality.\nThomas Edison believed projection of films wasn't as viable a business model as offering the films in the \"peepshow\" kinetoscope device. Watching the images on the screen turned out to be much preferred by audiences. Thomas Edison's Kinetoscope (developed by William Kennedy Dickson), premiered publicly in 1894.\nLauste and Latham's Eidoloscope was demonstrated for members of the press on 21 April 1895, and opened to the paying public on Broadway on 20 May. They shot films up to twenty minutes long at speeds over thirty frames per second and showed them in many US cities. The Eidoloscope Company was dissolved in 1896 after various internal disputes.\nMax and Emil Skladanowsky, inventors of the Bioscop, had offered projected moving images to a paying public in Berlin from 1 November 1895, until the end of the month. Their machinery was relatively cumbersome and their films much shorter than those of the Lumi\u00e8re brothers. The Skladnowskys' booked screenings in Paris were cancelled after the news of the Lumi\u00e8re show. Nonetheless, they toured their films to other countries."}
{"id": "2084", "revid": "1268163929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2084", "title": "Acts of the Apostles", "text": "The Acts of the Apostles (, \"Pr\u00e1xeis Apost\u00f3l\u014dn\"; ) is the fifth book of the New Testament; it tells of the founding of the Christian Church and the spread of its message to the Roman Empire.\nActs and the Gospel of Luke make up a two-part work, Luke\u2013Acts, by the same anonymous author. Traditionally, the author is believed to be Luke the Evangelist, a doctor who travelled with Paul the Apostle. It is usually dated to around 80\u201390 AD, although some scholars suggest 110\u2013120 AD. The first part, the Gospel of Luke, tells how God fulfilled his plan for the world's salvation through the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. Acts continues the story of Christianity in the 1st century, beginning with the ascension of Jesus to Heaven. The early chapters, set in Jerusalem, describe the Day of Pentecost (the coming of the Holy Spirit), the expulsion of Christians from Jerusalem and the establishment of the church at Antioch. The later chapters narrate the continuation of the message under Paul the Apostle and concludes with his imprisonment in Rome, where he awaits trial.\nLuke\u2013Acts is an attempt to answer a theological problem, namely how the Messiah of the Jews came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church; the answer it provides is that the message of Christ was sent to the Gentiles because the Jews rejected it. Luke\u2013Acts can also be seen as a defense of the Jesus movement addressed to the Jews: the bulk of the speeches and sermons in Acts are addressed to Jewish audiences, with the Romans serving as external arbiters on disputes concerning Jewish customs and law. On the one hand, Luke portrays the followers of Jesus as a sect of the Jews, and therefore entitled to legal protection as a recognised religion; on the other, Luke seems unclear as to the future that God intends for Jews and Christians, celebrating the Jewishness of Jesus and his immediate followers, while also stressing how the Jews had rejected the Messiah.\nComposition and setting.\nTitle, unity of Luke \u2013 Acts, authorship and date.\nThe name \"Acts of the Apostles\" was first used by Irenaeus in the late 2nd century. It is not known whether this was an existing name for the book or one invented by Irenaeus; it does seem clear that it was not given by the author, as the word \"pr\u00e1xeis\" (deeds, acts) only appears once in the text (Acts 19:18) and there it refers not to the apostles but to deeds confessed by their followers.\nThe Gospel of Luke and Acts make up a two-volume work which scholars call Luke\u2013Acts. Together they account for 27.5% of the New Testament, the largest contribution attributed to a single author, providing the framework for both the Church's liturgical calendar and the historical outline into which later generations have fitted their idea of the story of Jesus and the early church. The author is not named in either volume. According to Church tradition dating from the 2nd century, the author was Luke, named as a companion of the apostle Paul in three of the letters attributed to Paul himself; this view is still sometimes advanced, but \"a critical consensus emphasizes the countless contradictions between the account in Acts and the authentic Pauline letters.\" An example can be seen by comparing Acts's accounts of Paul's conversion (Acts 9:1\u201331, 22:6\u201321, and 26:9\u201323) with Paul's own statement that he remained unknown to Christians in Judea after that event (Galatians 1:17\u201324). The author \"is an admirer of Paul, but does not share Paul's own view of himself as an apostle; his own theology is considerably different from Paul's on key points and does not represent Paul's own views accurately.\" He was educated, a man of means, probably urban, and someone who respected manual work, although not a worker himself; this is significant, because more high-brow writers of the time looked down on the artisans and small business people who made up the early church of Paul and were presumably Luke's audience.\nThe interpretation of the \"we\" passages as indicative that the writer was a historical eyewitness (whether Luke the evangelist or not), remains the most influential in current biblical studies. Objections to this viewpoint include the above claim that Luke-Acts contains differences in theology and historical narrative which are irreconcilable with the authentic letters of Paul the Apostle.\nThe earliest possible date for Luke-Acts is around 62 AD, the time of Paul's imprisonment in Rome, but most scholars date the work to 80\u201390 AD on the grounds that it uses Mark as a source, looks back on the destruction of Jerusalem, and does not show any awareness of the letters of Paul (which began circulating late in the first century); if it does show awareness of the Pauline epistles, and also of the work of the Jewish historian Josephus, as some believe, then a date in the early 2nd century is possible.\nManuscripts.\nThere are two major textual variants of Acts, the Western text-type and the Alexandrian. The oldest complete Alexandrian manuscripts date from the 4th century and the oldest Western ones from the 6th, with fragments and citations going back to the 3rd. Western texts of Acts are 6.2\u20138.4% longer than Alexandrian texts, the additions tending to enhance the Jewish rejection of the Messiah and the role of the Holy Spirit, in ways that are stylistically different from the rest of Acts. The majority of scholars prefer the Alexandrian (shorter) text-type over the Western as the more authentic, but this same argument would favour the Western over the Alexandrian for the Gospel of Luke, as in that case the Western version is the shorter.\nGenre, sources and historicity of Acts.\nThe title \"Acts of the Apostles\" (\"Praxeis Apostolon\") would seem to identify it with the genre telling of the deeds and achievements of great men (\"praxeis\"), but it was not the title given by the author. The anonymous author aligned Luke\u2013Acts to the 'narratives' ( ) which many others had written, and described his own work as an \"orderly account\" (). It lacks exact analogies in Hellenistic or Jewish literature. The author may have taken as his model the works of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who wrote a well-known history of Rome, or the Jewish historian Josephus, author of a history of the Jews. Like them, he anchors his history by dating the birth of the founder (Romulus for Dionysius, Moses for Josephus, Jesus for Luke) and like them he tells how the founder is born from God, taught authoritatively, and appeared to witnesses after death before ascending to heaven. By and large the sources for Acts can only be guessed at, but the author would have had access to the Septuagint (a Greek translation of the Jewish scriptures), the Gospel of Mark, and either the hypothetical collection of \"sayings of Jesus\" called the Q source or the Gospel of Matthew. He transposed a few incidents from Mark's gospel to the time of the Apostles\u2014for example, the material about \"clean\" and \"unclean\" foods in Mark 7 is used in Acts 10, and Mark's account of the accusation that Jesus has attacked the Temple (Mark 14:58) is used in a story about Stephen (Acts 6:14). There are also points of contacts (meaning suggestive parallels but something less than clear evidence) with 1 Peter, the Letter to the Hebrews, and 1 Clement. Other sources can only be inferred from internal evidence\u2014the traditional explanation of the three \"we\" passages, for example, is that they represent eyewitness accounts. The search for such inferred sources was popular in the 19th century, but by the mid-20th it had largely been abandoned.\nActs was read as a reliable history of the early church well into the post-Reformation era, but by the 17th century biblical scholars began to notice that it was incomplete and tendentious\u2014its picture of a harmonious church is quite at odds with that given by Paul's letters, and it omits important events such as the deaths of both Peter and Paul. The mid-19th-century scholar Ferdinand Baur suggested that the author had re-written history to present a united Peter and Paul and advance a single orthodoxy against the Marcionites (Marcion was a 2nd-century heretic who wished to cut Christianity off entirely from the Jews); Baur continues to have enormous influence, but today there is less interest in determining the historical accuracy of Acts (although this has never died out) than in understanding the author's theological program.\nAudience and authorial intent.\nLuke was written to be read aloud to a group of Jesus-followers gathered in a house to share the Lord's supper. The author assumes an educated Greek-speaking audience, but directs his attention to specifically Christian concerns rather than to the Greco-Roman world at large. He begins his gospel with a preface addressed to Theophilus (; cf. ), informing him of his intention to provide an \"ordered account\" of events which will lead his reader to \"certainty\". He did not write in order to provide Theophilus with historical justification\u2014\"did it happen?\"\u2014but to encourage faith\u2014\"what happened, and what does it all mean?\"\nActs (or Luke\u2013Acts) is intended as a work of \"edification\", meaning \"the empirical demonstration that virtue is superior to vice.\" The work also engages with the question of a Christian's proper relationship with the Roman Empire, the civil power of the day: could a Christian obey God and also Caesar? The answer is ambiguous. The Romans never move against Jesus or his followers unless provoked by the Jews, in the trial scenes the Christian missionaries are always cleared of charges of violating Roman laws, and Acts ends with Paul in Rome proclaiming the Christian message under Roman protection; at the same time, Luke makes clear that the Romans, like all earthly rulers, receive their authority from Satan, while Christ is ruler of the kingdom of God.\nStructure and content.\nStructure.\nActs is divided into 28 chapters. The work has two key structural principles. The first is the geographic movement from Jerusalem, centre of God's Covenantal people, the Jews, to Rome, centre of the Gentile world. This structure reaches back to the author's preceding work, the Gospel of Luke, and is signaled by parallel scenes such as Paul's utterance in Acts 19:21, which echoes Jesus's words in Luke 9:51: Paul has Rome as his destination, as Jesus had Jerusalem. The second key element is the roles of Peter and Paul, the first representing the Jewish Christian church, the second the mission to the Gentiles.\nContent.\nThe Gospel of Luke began with a prologue addressed to Theophilus; Acts likewise opens with an address to Theophilus and refers to \"my earlier book\", almost certainly the gospel.\nThe apostles and other followers of Jesus meet and elect Matthias to replace Judas Iscariot as a member of The Twelve. On Pentecost, the Holy Spirit descends and confers God's power on them, and Peter and John preach to many in Jerusalem and perform healings, casting out of evil spirits, and raising of the dead. The first believers share all property in common, eat in each other's homes, and worship together. At first many Jews follow Christ and are baptized, but the followers of Jesus begin to be increasingly persecuted by other Jews. Stephen is accused of blasphemy and stoned. Stephen's death marks a major turning point: the Jews have rejected the message, and henceforth it will be taken to the Gentiles.\nThe death of Stephen initiates persecution, and many followers of Jesus leave Jerusalem. The message is taken to the Samaritans, a people rejected by Jews, and to the Gentiles. Saul of Tarsus, one of the Jews who persecuted the followers of Jesus, is converted by a vision to become a follower of Christ (an event which Luke regards as so important that he relates it three times). Peter, directed by a series of visions, preaches to Cornelius the Centurion, a Gentile God-fearer, who becomes a follower of Christ. The Holy Spirit descends on Cornelius and his guests, thus confirming that the message of eternal life in Christ is for all mankind. The Gentile church is established in Antioch (north-western Syria, the third-largest city of the empire), and here Christ's followers are first called Christians.\nThe mission to the Gentiles is promoted from Antioch and confirmed at a meeting in Jerusalem between Paul and the leadership of the Jerusalem church. Paul spends the next few years traveling through western Asia Minor and the Aegean, preaching, converting, and founding new churches. On a visit to Jerusalem he is set on by a Jewish mob. Saved by the Roman commander, he is accused by the Jews of being a revolutionary, the \"ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes\", and imprisoned. Later, Paul asserts his right as a Roman citizen, to be tried in Rome and is sent by sea to Rome, where he spends another two years under house arrest, proclaiming the Kingdom of God and teaching freely about \"the Lord Jesus Christ\". Acts ends abruptly without recording the outcome of Paul's legal troubles.\nTheology.\nPrior to the 1950s, Luke\u2013Acts was seen as a historical work, written to defend Christianity before the Romans or Paul against his detractors; since then the tendency has been to see the work as primarily theological. Luke's theology is expressed primarily through his overarching plot, the way scenes, themes and characters combine to construct his specific worldview. His \"salvation history\" stretches from the Creation to the present time of his readers, in three ages: first, the time of \"the Law and the Prophets\" (Luke 16:16), the period beginning with Genesis and ending with the appearance of John the Baptist (Luke 1:5\u20133:1); second, the epoch of Jesus, in which the Kingdom of God was preached (Luke 3:2\u201324:51); and finally the period of the Church, which began when the risen Christ was taken into Heaven, and would end with his second coming.\nLuke\u2013Acts is an attempt to answer a theological problem, namely how the Messiah, promised to the Jews, came to have an overwhelmingly non-Jewish church; the answer it provides, and its central theme, is that the message of Christ was sent to the Gentiles because the Jews rejected it. This theme is introduced in Chapter 4 of the Gospel of Luke, when Jesus, rejected in Nazareth, recalls the rejection of prophets. at the end of the gospel he commands his disciples to preach his message to all nations, \"beginning from Jerusalem.\" He repeats the command in Acts, telling them to preach \"in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the Earth.\" They then proceed to do so, in the order outlined: first Jerusalem, then Judea and Samaria, then the entire (Roman) world.\nFor Luke, the Holy Spirit is the driving force behind the spread of the Christian message, and he places more emphasis on it than do any of the other evangelists. The Spirit is \"poured out\" at Pentecost on the first Samaritan and Gentile believers and on disciples who had been baptised only by John the Baptist, each time as a sign of God's approval. The Holy Spirit represents God's power (at his ascension, Jesus tells his followers, \"You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you\"): through it the disciples are given speech to convert thousands in Jerusalem, forming the first church (the term is used for the first time in Acts 5).\nOne issue debated by scholars is Luke's political vision regarding the relationship between the early church and the Roman Empire. On the one hand, Luke generally does not portray this interaction as one of direct conflict. Rather, there are ways in which each may have considered having a relationship with the other rather advantageous to its own cause. For example, early Christians may have appreciated hearing about the protection Paul received from Roman officials against Gentile rioters in Philippi (Acts 16:16\u201340) and Ephesus (Acts 19:23\u201341), and against Jewish rioters on two occasions (Acts 17:1\u201317; Acts 18:12\u201317). Meanwhile, Roman readers may have approved of Paul's censure of the illegal practice of magic (Acts 19:17\u201319) as well as the amicability of his rapport with Roman officials such as Sergius Paulus (Acts 13:6\u201312) and Festus (Acts 26:30\u201332). Furthermore, Acts does not include any account of a struggle between Christians and the Roman government as a result of the latter's imperial cult. Thus Paul is depicted as a moderating presence between the church and the Roman Empire.\nOn the other hand, events such as the imprisonment of Paul at the hands of the empire (Acts 22\u201328) as well as several encounters that reflect negatively on Roman officials (for instance, Felix's desire for a bribe from Paul in Acts 24:26) function as concrete points of conflict between Rome and the early church. Perhaps the most significant point of tension between Roman imperial ideology and Luke's political vision is reflected in Peter's speech to the Roman centurion, Cornelius (Acts 10:36). Peter states that \"this one\" [\u03bf\u1f57\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2], i.e. Jesus, \"is lord [\u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2] of all.\" The title, \u03ba\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, was often ascribed to the Roman emperor in antiquity, rendering its use by Luke as an appellation for Jesus an unsubtle challenge to the emperor's authority.\nComparison with other writings.\nGospel of Luke.\nAs the second part of the two-part work Luke\u2013Acts, Acts has significant links to the Gospel of Luke. Major turning points in the structure of Acts find parallels in Luke: the presentation of the child Jesus in the Temple parallels the opening of Acts in the Temple, Jesus's forty days of testing in the wilderness prior to his mission parallel the forty days prior to his Ascension in Acts, the mission of Jesus in Samaria and the Decapolis (the lands of the Samaritans and Gentiles) parallels the missions of the Apostles in Samaria and the Gentile lands, and so on (see Gospel of Luke). These parallels continue through both books, contributing to the narrative unity of the work.\nHowever, scholars have noted differences between Luke and Acts, including some apparent contradictions. For example, the gospel seems to place the Ascension on Easter Sunday, shortly after the Resurrection, while Acts 1 puts it forty days later. Such differences have led to debates over the nature of the unity between the two books. While not seriously questioning the single authorship of Luke\u2013Acts, these variations suggest a complex literary structure that balances thematic continuity with narrative development across two volumes. Literary studies have explored how Luke sets the stage in his gospel for key themes that recur and develop throughout Acts, including the offer to and rejection of the Messianic kingdom by Israel, and God's sovereign establishment of the church for both Jews and Gentiles. \nPauline epistles.\nActs agrees with Paul's letters on the major outline of Paul's career: he is converted and becomes a Christian missionary and apostle, establishing new churches in Asia Minor and the Aegean and struggling to free Gentile Christians from the Jewish Law. There are also agreements on many incidents, such as Paul's escape from Damascus, where he is lowered down the walls in a basket. But details of these same incidents are frequently contradictory: for example, according to Paul it was a pagan king who was trying to arrest him in Damascus, but according to Luke it was the Jews (2 Corinthians 11:33 and Acts 9:24). Acts speaks of \"Christians\" and \"disciples\", but Paul never uses either term, and it is striking that Acts never mentions Paul being in conflict with the Jerusalem church and places Paul under the authority of the Jerusalem church and its leaders, especially James and Peter (Acts 15 vs. Galatians 2). Acts omits much from the letters, notably Paul's problems with his congregations (internal difficulties are said to be the fault of the Jews instead), and his apparent final rejection by the church leaders in Jerusalem (Acts has Paul and Barnabas deliver an offering that is accepted, a trip that has no mention in the letters). There are also major differences between Acts and Paul on Christology (the understanding of Christ's nature), eschatology (the understanding of the \"last things\"), and apostleship."}
{"id": "2085", "revid": "31850773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2085", "title": "Assyria", "text": "Assyria (Neo-Assyrian cuneiform: , \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\") was a major ancient Mesopotamian civilization that existed as a city-state from the 21st century BC to the 14th century BC and eventually expanded into an empire from the 14th century BC to the 7th century BC.\nSpanning from the early Bronze Age to the late Iron Age, modern historians typically divide ancient Assyrian history into the Early Assyrian ( 2600\u20132025 BC), Old Assyrian ( 2025\u20131364 BC), Middle Assyrian ( 1363\u2013912 BC), Neo-Assyrian (911\u2013609 BC), and post-imperial (609 BC\u2013 AD 240) periods, based on political events and gradual changes in language. Assur, the first Assyrian capital, was founded 2600 BC, but there is no evidence that the city was independent until the collapse of the Third Dynasty of Ur, in the 21st century BC, when a line of independent kings starting with Puzur-Ashur I began ruling the city. Centered in the Assyrian heartland in northern Mesopotamia, Assyrian power fluctuated over time. The city underwent several periods of foreign rule or domination before Assyria rose under Ashur-uballit I in the early 14th century BC as the Middle Assyrian Empire. In the Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods, Assyria was one of the two major Mesopotamian kingdoms, alongside Babylonia in the south, and at times became the dominant power in the ancient Near East. Assyria was at its strongest in the Neo-Assyrian period, when the Assyrian army was the strongest military power in the world and the Assyrians ruled the largest empire then yet assembled in world history, spanning from parts of modern-day Iran in the east to Egypt in the west.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire fell in the late 7th century BC, conquered by a coalition of the Babylonians, who had lived under Assyrian rule for about a century, and the Medes. Though the core urban territory of Assyria was extensively devastated in the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire and the succeeding Neo-Babylonian Empire invested few resources in rebuilding it, ancient Assyrian culture and traditions continued to survive for centuries throughout the post-imperial period. Assyria experienced a recovery under the Seleucid and Parthian empires, though it declined again under the Sasanian Empire, which sacked numerous cities and semi-independent Assyrian territories in the region, including Assur itself. The remaining Assyrian people, who have survived in northern Mesopotamia to modern times, were gradually Christianized from the 1st century AD onward. Ancient Mesopotamian religion persisted at Assur until its final sack in the 3rd century AD, and at certain other holdouts for centuries thereafter.\nThe triumph of ancient Assyria can be attributed not only to its vigorous warrior-monarchs but also to its adeptness in efficiently assimilating and governing conquered territories using inventive and advanced administrative mechanisms. The developments in warfare and governance introduced by ancient Assyria continued to be employed by subsequent empires and states for centuries. Ancient Assyria also left a legacy of great cultural significance, particularly through the Neo-Assyrian Empire, making a prominent impression in later Assyrian, Greco-Roman, and Hebrew literary and religious tradition.\nNomenclature.\nIn the Old Assyrian period, when Assyria was merely a city-state centered on the city of Assur, the state was typically referred to as \"\u0101lu A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"city of Ashur\"). From the time of its rise as a territorial state in the 14th century BC and onward, Assyria was referred to in official documents as \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"land of Ashur\"), marking its shift to being a regional polity. The first attested use of the term \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" is during the reign of Ashur-uballit I ( 1363\u20131328 BC), who was the first king of the Middle Assyrian Empire. Both \"\u0101lu A\u0161\u0161ur\" and \"m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" derive from the name of the Assyrian national deity Ashur. Ashur probably originated in the Early Assyrian period as a deified personification of Assur itself. In the Old Assyrian period the deity was considered the formal king of Assur; the actual rulers only used the style \"I\u0161\u0161i'ak\" (\"governor\"). From the time of Assyria's rise as a territorial state, Ashur began to be regarded as an embodiment of the entire land ruled by the Assyrian kings.\nThe modern name \"Assyria\" is of Greek origin, derived from \u0391\u03c3\u03c3\u03c5\u03c1\u03af\u03b1 (\"Assur\u00eda\"). The term's first attested use is during the time of the ancient Greek historian Herodotus (5th century BC). The Greeks called the Levant \"Syria\" and Mesopotamia \"Assyria\", even though the local population, both at that time and well into the later Christian period, used both terms interchangeably to refer to the entire region. It is not known whether the Greeks began referring to Mesopotamia as \"Assyria\" because they equated the region with the Assyrian Empire, long fallen by the time the term is first attested, or because they named the region after the people who lived there, the Assyrians. Because the term is so \"similar to Syria\", scholars have been examining since the 17th century whether the two terms are connected. And because, in sources predating the Greek ones, the shortened form \"Syria\" is attested as a synonym for Assyria, notably in Luwian and Aramaic texts from the time of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, modern scholars overwhelmingly support the conclusion that the names are connected.\nBoth \"Assyria\" and the contraction, \"Syria,\" are ultimately derived from the Akkadian \"A\u0161\u0161ur\". Following the decline of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the subsequent empires that held dominion over the Assyrian lands adopted distinct appellations for the region, with a significant portion of these names also being rooted in \"A\u0161\u0161ur\". The Achaemenid Empire referred to Assyria as \"A\u03b8\u016br\u0101\" (\"Athura\"). The Sasanian Empire inexplicably referred to Lower Mesopotamia as Asoristan (\"land of the Assyrians\"), though the northern province of N\u014dd\u0161\u012brag\u0101n, which included much of the old Assyrian heartland, was also sometimes called \"At\u016bria\" or \"\u0100th\u014dr\". In Syriac, Assyria was and is referred to as \"\u02be\u0100thor\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAgricultural villages in the region that would later become Assyria are known to have existed by the time of the Hassuna culture, 6300\u20135800 BC. Though the sites of some nearby cities that would later be incorporated into the Assyrian heartland, such as Nineveh, are known to have been inhabited since the Neolithic, the earliest archaeological evidence from Assur dates to the Early Dynastic Period, 2600 BC. During this time, the surrounding region was already relatively urbanized. There is no evidence that early Assur was an independent settlement, and it might not have been called Assur at all initially, but rather Baltil or Baltila, used in later times to refer to the city's oldest portion. \nThe name \"Assur\" is first attested for the site in documents of the Akkadian period in the 24th century BC. Through most of the Early Assyrian period ( 2600\u20132025 BC), Assur was dominated by states and polities from southern Mesopotamia. Early on, Assur for a time fell under the loose hegemony of the Sumerian city of Kish and it was later occupied by both the Akkadian Empire and then the Third Dynasty of Ur. In 2025 BC, due to the collapse of the Third Dynasty of Ur, Assur became an independent city-state under Puzur-Ashur I.\nAssur was under the Puzur-Ashur dynasty home to less than 10,000 people and likely held very limited military power; no military institutions at all are known from this time and no political influence was exerted on neighboring cities. The city was still influential in other ways; under Erishum I ( 1974\u20131934 BC), Assur experimented with free trade, the earliest known such experiment in world history, which left the initiative for trade and large-scale foreign transactions entirely to the populace rather than the state. \nRoyal encouragement of trade led to Assur quickly establishing itself as a prominent trading city in northern Mesopotamia and soon thereafter establishing an extensive long-distance trade network, the first notable impression Assyria left in the historical record. Among the evidence left from this trade network are large collections of Old Assyrian cuneiform tablets from Assyrian trade colonies, the most notable of which is a set of 22,000 clay tablets found at K\u00fcltepe, near the modern city of Kayseri in Turkey. \nAs trade declined, perhaps due to increased warfare and conflict between the growing states of the Near East, Assur was frequently threatened by larger foreign states and kingdoms. The original Assur city-state, and the Puzur-Ashur dynasty, came to an end 1808 BC when the city was conquered by the Amorite ruler of Ekallatum, Shamshi-Adad I. Shamshi-Adad's extensive conquests in northern Mesopotamia eventually made him the ruler of the entire region, founding what some scholars have termed the \"Kingdom of Upper Mesopotamia\". The survival of this realm relied chiefly on Shamshi-Adad's own strength and charisma and it thus collapsed shortly after his death 1776 BC.\nAfter Shamshi-Adad's death, the political situation in northern Mesopotamia was highly volatile, with Assur at times coming under the brief control of Eshnunna, Elam and the Old Babylonian Empire. At some point, the city returned to being an independent city-state, though the politics of Assur itself were volatile as well, with fighting between members of Shamshi-Adad's dynasty, native Assyrians and Hurrians for control. The infighting came to an end after the rise of Bel-bani as king 1700 BC. Bel-bani founded the Adaside dynasty, which after his reign ruled Assyria for about a thousand years. \nAssyria's rise as a territorial state in later times was in large part facilitated by two separate invasions of Mesopotamia by the Hittites. An invasion by the Hittite king Mursili I in 1595 BC destroyed the dominant Old Babylonian Empire, allowing the smaller kingdoms of Mitanni and Kassite Babylonia to rise in the north and south, respectively. Around 1430 BC, Assur was subjugated by Mitanni, an arrangement that lasted for about 70 years, until 1360 BC. Another Hittite invasion by \u0160uppiluliuma I in the 14th century BC effectively crippled the Mitanni kingdom. After his invasion, Assyria succeeded in freeing itself from its suzerain, achieving independence once more under Ashur-uballit I ( 1363\u20131328 BC) whose rise to power, independence, and conquests of neighboring territory traditionally marks the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire ( 1363\u2013912 BC).\nAssyrian Empire.\nAshur-uballit I was the first native Assyrian ruler to claim the royal title \"\u0161ar\" (\"king\"). Shortly after achieving independence, he further claimed the dignity of a great king on the level of the Egyptian pharaohs and the Hittite kings. Assyria's rise was intertwined with the decline and fall of the Mitanni kingdom, its former suzerain, which allowed the early Middle Assyrian kings to expand and consolidate territories in northern Mesopotamia. Under the warrior-kings Adad-nirari I ( 1305\u20131274\u00a0BC), Shalmaneser I ( 1273\u20131244\u00a0BC) and Tukulti-Ninurta I ( 1243\u20131207\u00a0BC), Assyria began to realize its aspirations of becoming a significant regional power. \nThese kings campaigned in all directions and incorporated a significant amount of territory into the growing Assyrian Empire. Under Shalmaneser I, the last remnants of the Mitanni kingdom were formally annexed into Assyria. The most successful of the Middle Assyrian kings was Tukulti-Ninurta I, who brought the Middle Assyrian Empire to its greatest extent. His most notable military achievements were his victory at the Battle of Nihriya 1237\u00a0BC, which marked the beginning of the end of Hittite influence in northern Mesopotamia, and his temporary conquest of Babylonia, which became an Assyrian vassal 1225\u20131216\u00a0BC. Tukulti-Ninurta was also the first Assyrian king to try to move the capital away from Assur, inaugurating the new city Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as capital 1233 BC. The capital was returned to Assur after his death.\nTukulti-Ninurta I's assassination 1207 BC was followed by inter-dynastic conflict and a significant drop in Assyrian power. Tukulti-Ninurta I's successors were unable to maintain Assyrian power and Assyria became increasingly restricted to just the Assyrian heartland, a period of decline broadly coinciding with the Late Bronze Age collapse. Though some kings in this period of decline, such as Ashur-dan I ( 1178\u20131133\u00a0BC), Ashur-resh-ishi I (1132\u20131115\u00a0BC) and Tiglath-Pileser I (1114\u20131076\u00a0BC) worked to reverse the decline and made significant conquests, their conquests were ephemeral and shaky, quickly lost again. From the time of Eriba-Adad II (1056\u20131054\u00a0BC) onward, Assyrian decline intensified. \nThe Assyrian heartland remained safe since it was protected by its geographical remoteness. Since Assyria was not the only state to undergo decline during these centuries, and the lands surrounding the Assyrian heartland were also significantly fragmented, it would ultimately be relatively easy for the reinvigorated Assyrian army to reconquer large parts of the empire. Under Ashur-dan II (934\u2013912\u00a0BC), who campaigned in the northeast and northwest, Assyrian decline was at last reversed, paving the way for grander efforts under his successors. The end of his reign conventionally marks the beginning of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911\u2013609 BC).\nThrough decades of conquests, the early Neo-Assyrian kings worked to retake the lands of the Middle Assyrian Empire. Since this \"reconquista\" had to begin nearly from scratch, its eventual success was an extraordinary achievement. Under Ashurnasirpal II (883\u2013859\u00a0BC), the Neo-Assyrian Empire became the dominant political power in the Near East. In his ninth campaign, Ashurnasirpal II marched to the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, collecting tribute from various kingdoms on the way. A significant development during Ashurnasirpal II's reign was the second attempt to transfer the Assyrian capital away from Assur. Ashurnasirpal restored the ancient and ruined town of Nimrud, also located in the Assyrian heartland, and in 879 BC designated that city as the new capital of the empire. Though no longer the political capital, Assur remained the ceremonial and religious center of Assyria. \nAshurnasirpal II's son Shalmaneser III (859\u2013824\u00a0BC) also went on wide-ranging wars of conquest, expanding the empire in all directions. After Shalmaneser III's death, the Neo-Assyrian Empire entered into a period of stagnation dubbed the \"age of the magnates\", when powerful officials and generals were the principal wielders of political power rather than the king. This time of stagnation came to an end with the rise of Tiglath-Pileser III (745\u2013727\u00a0BC), who reduced the power of the magnates, consolidated and centralized the holdings of the empire, and through his military campaigns and conquests more than doubled the extent of Assyrian territory. The most significant conquests were the vassalization of the Levant all the way to the Egyptian border and the 729 BC conquest of Babylonia.\nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire reached the height of its extent and power under the Sargonid dynasty, founded by Sargon II (722\u2013705\u00a0BC). Under Sargon II and his son Sennacherib (705\u2013681\u00a0BC), the empire was further expanded and the gains were consolidated. Both kings founded new capitals. Sargon II moved the capital to the new city of Dur-Sharrukin in 706 BC and the year after, Sennacherib transferred the capital to Nineveh, which he ambitiously expanded and renovated, and might even have built the hanging gardens there, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world. The 671 BC conquest of Egypt under Esarhaddon (681\u2013669\u00a0BC) brought Assyria to its greatest ever extent. \nAfter the death of Ashurbanipal (669\u2013631\u00a0BC), the Neo-Assyrian Empire swiftly collapsed. One of the primary reasons was the inability of the Neo-Assyrian kings to resolve the \"Babylonian problem\"; despite many attempts to appease Babylonia in the south, revolts were frequent all throughout the Sargonid period. The revolt of Babylon under Nabopolassar in 626 BC, in combination with an invasion by the Medes under Cyaxares in 615/614 BC, led to the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire. Assur was sacked in 614 BC and Nineveh fell in 612 BC. The last Assyrian ruler, Ashur-uballit II, tried to rally the Assyrian army at Harran in the west but he was defeated in 609 BC, marking the end of the ancient line of Assyrian kings and of Assyria as a state.\nLater history.\nDespite the violent downfall of the Assyrian Empire, Assyrian culture continued to survive through the subsequent post-imperial period (609 BC \u2013 AD 240) and beyond. The Assyrian heartland experienced a dramatic decrease in the size and number of inhabited settlements during the rule of the Neo-Babylonian Empire founded by Nabopolassar; the former Assyrian capital cities Assur, Nimrud and Nineveh were nearly completely abandoned. Throughout the time of the Neo-Babylonian and later Achaemenid Empire, Assyria remained a marginal and sparsely populated region. Toward the end of the 6th century BC, the Assyrian dialect of the Akkadian language went extinct, having toward the end of the Neo-Assyrian Empire already largely been replaced by Aramaic as a vernacular language. \nUnder the empires succeeding the Neo-Babylonians, from the late 6th century BC onward, Assyria began to experience a recovery. Under the Achaemenids, most of the territory was organized into the province Athura (\"A\u03b8\u016br\u0101\"). The organization into a single large province, the lack of interference of the Achaemenid rulers in local affairs, and the return of the cult statue of Ashur to Assur soon after the Achaemenids conquered Babylon facilitated the survival of Assyrian culture. Under the Seleucid Empire, which controlled Mesopotamia from the late 4th to mid-2nd century BC, Assyrian sites such as Assur, Nimrud and Nineveh were resettled and a large number of villages were rebuilt and expanded.\nAfter the Parthian Empire conquered the region in the 2nd century BC, the recovery of Assyria continued, culminating in an unprecedented return to prosperity and revival in the 1st to 3rd centuries AD. The region was resettled and restored so intensely that the population and settlement density reached heights not seen since the Neo-Assyrian Empire. The region was under the Parthians primarily ruled by a group of vassal kingdoms, including Osroene, Adiabene and Hatra. Though in some aspects influenced by Assyrian culture, these states were for the most part not ruled by Assyrian rulers. \nAssur itself flourished under Parthian rule. From around or shortly after the end of the 2nd century BC, the city may have become the capital of its own small semi-autonomous Assyrian realm, either under the suzerainty of Hatra, or under direct Parthian suzerainty. On account of the resemblance between the stelae by the local rulers and those of the ancient Assyrian kings, they may have seen themselves as the restorers and continuators of the old royal line. The ancient Ashur temple was restored in the 2nd century AD. This last cultural golden age came to an end with the sack of Assur by the Sasanian Empire 240. During the sack, the Ashur temple was destroyed again and the city's population was dispersed.\nStarting from the 1st century AD onward, many of the Assyrians became Christianized, though holdouts of the old ancient Mesopotamian religion continued to survive for centuries. Despite the loss of political power, the Assyrians continued to constitute a significant portion of the population in northern Mesopotamia until religiously motivated suppression and massacres under the Ilkhanate and the Timurid Empire in the 14th century, which relegated them to a local ethnic and religious minority. The Assyrians lived largely in peace under the rule of the Ottoman Empire, which gained control of Assyria in 16th century. \nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, when the Ottomans grew increasingly nationalistic, further persecutions and massacres were enacted against the Assyrians, most notably the \"Sayfo\" (Assyrian genocide), which resulted in the deaths of as many as 250,000 Assyrians. Throughout the 20th century, many unsuccessful proposals have been made by the Assyrians for autonomy or independence. Further massacres and persecutions, enacted both by governments and by terrorist groups such as the Islamic State, have resulted in most of the Assyrian people living in diaspora.\nGovernment and military.\nKingship.\nIn the Assur city-state of the Old Assyrian period, the government was in many respects an oligarchy, where the king was a permanent, albeit not the only prominent, actor. The Old Assyrian kings were not autocrats, with sole power, but rather acted as stewards on behalf of the god Ashur and presided over the meetings of the city assembly, the main Assyrian administrative body during this time. The composition of the city assembly is not known, but it is generally believed to have been made up of members of the most powerful families of the city, many of whom were merchants. The king acted as the main executive officer and chairman of this group of influential individuals and also contributed with legal knowledge and expertise. The Old Assyrian kings were styled as \"i\u0161\u0161iak A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"governor [on behalf] of Ashur\"), with Ashur being considered the city's formal king. That the populace of Assur in the Old Assyrian period often referred to the king as \"rub\u0101\u2019um\" (\"great one\") clearly indicates that the kings, despite their limited executive power, were seen as royal figures and as being \"primus inter pares\" (first among equals) among the powerful individuals of the city.\nAssur first experienced a more autocratic form of kingship under the Amorite conqueror Shamshi-Adad I, the earliest ruler of Assur to use the style \"\u0161arrum\" (king) and the title 'king of the Universe'. Shamshi-Adad I appears to have based his more absolute form of kingship on the rulers of the Old Babylonian Empire. Under Shamshi-Adad I, Assyrians also swore their oaths by the king, not just by the god. This practice did not survive beyond his death. The influence of the city assembly had disappeared by the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period. Though the traditional \"i\u0161\u0161iak A\u0161\u0161ur\" continued to be used at times, the Middle Assyrian kings were autocrats, in terms of power having little in common with the rulers of the Old Assyrian period. As the Assyrian Empire grew, the kings began to employ an increasingly sophisticated array of royal titles. Ashur-uballit I was the first to assume the style \"\u0161ar m\u0101t A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"king of the land of Ashur\") and his grandson Arik-den-ili ( 1317\u20131306\u00a0BC) introduced the style \"\u0161arru dannu\" (\"strong king\"). Adad-nirari I's inscriptions required 32 lines to be devoted just to his titles. This development peaked under Tukulti-Ninurta I, who assumed, among other titles, the styles \"king of Assyria and Karduniash\", \"king of Sumer and Akkad\", \"king of the Upper and the Lower Seas\" and \"king of all peoples\". Royal titles and epithets were often highly reflective of current political developments and the achievements of individual kings; during periods of decline, the royal titles used typically grew more simple again, only to grow grander once more as Assyrian power experienced resurgences.\nThe kings of the Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods continued to present themselves, and be viewed by their subjects, as the intermediaries between Ashur and mankind. This position and role was used to justify imperial expansion: the Assyrians saw their empire as being the part of the world overseen and administered by Ashur through his human agents. In their ideology, the outer realm outside of Assyria was characterized by chaos and the people there were uncivilized, with unfamiliar cultural practices and strange languages. The mere existence of the \"outer realm\" was regarded as a threat to the cosmic order within Assyria and as such, it was the king's duty to expand the realm of Ashur and incorporate these strange lands, converting chaos to civilization. Texts describing the coronation of Middle and Neo-Assyrian kings at times include Ashur commanding the king to \"broaden the land of Ashur\" or \"extend the land at his feet\". As such, expansion was cast as a moral and necessary duty. Because the rule and actions of the Assyrian king were seen as divinely sanctioned, resistance to Assyrian sovereignty in times of war was regarded to be resistance against divine will, which deserved punishment. Peoples and polities who revolted against Assyria were seen as criminals against the divine world order. Since Ashur was the king of the gods, all other gods were subjected to him and thus the people who followed those gods should be subjected to the representative of Ashur, the Assyrian king.\nThe kings also had religious and judicial duties. Kings were responsible for performing various rituals in support of the cult of Ashur and the Assyrian priesthood. They were expected, together with the Assyrian people, to provide offerings to not only Ashur but also all the other gods. From the time of Ashur-resh-ishi I onward, the religious and cultic duties of the king were pushed somewhat into the background, though they were still prominently mentioned in accounts of building and restoring temples. Assyrian titles and epithets in inscriptions from then on generally emphasized the kings as powerful warriors. Developing from their role in the Old Assyrian period, the Middle and Neo-Assyrian kings were the supreme judicial authority in the empire, though they generally appear to have been less concerned with their role as judges than their predecessors in the Old Assyrian period were. The kings were expected to ensure the welfare and prosperity of the Assyria and its people, indicated by multiple inscriptions referring to the kings as \"shepherds\" (\"re\u2019\u00fb\").\nCapital cities.\nNo word for the idea of a capital city existed in Akkadian, the nearest being the idea of a \"city of kingship\", i.e. an administrative center used by the king, but there are several examples of kingdoms having multiple \"cities of kingship\". Due to Assyria growing out of the Assur city-state of the Old Assyrian period, and due to the city's religious importance, Assur was the administrative center of Assyria through most of its history. Though the royal administration at times moved elsewhere, the ideological status of Assur was never fully superseded and it remained a ceremonial center in the empire even when it was governed from elsewhere. The transfer of the royal seat of power to other cities was ideologically possible since the king was Ashur's representative on Earth. The king, like the deity embodied Assyria itself, and so the capital of Assyria was in a sense wherever the king happened to have his residence.\nThe first transfer of administrative power away from Assur occurred under Tukulti-Ninurta I, who 1233 BC inaugurated Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as capital. Tukulti-Ninurta I's foundation of a new capital was perhaps inspired by developments in Babylonia in the south, where the Kassite dynasty had transferred the administration from the long-established city of Babylon to the newly constructed city of Dur-Kurigalzu, also named after a king. It seems that Tukulti-Ninurta I intended to go further than the Kassites and also establish Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta as the new Assyrian cult center. The city was however not maintained as capital after Tukulti-Ninurta I's death, with subsequent kings once more ruling from Assur. \nThe Neo-Assyrian Empire underwent several different capitals. There is some evidence that Tukulti-Ninurta II (890\u2013884\u00a0BC), perhaps inspired by his predecessor of the same name, made unfulfilled plans to transfer the capital to a city called Nemid Tukulti-Ninurta, either a completely new city or a new name applied to Nineveh, which by this point already rivalled Assur in scale and political importance. The capital was transferred under Tukulti-Ninurta II's son Ashurnasirpal II to Nimrud in 879 BC. An architectural detail separating Nimrud and the other Neo-Assyrian capitals from Assur is that they were designed in a way that emphasized royal power: the royal palaces in Assur were smaller than the temples but the situation was reversed in the new capitals. Sargon II transferred the capital in 706 BC to the city Dur-Sharrukin, which he built himself. Since the location of Dur-Sharrukin had no obvious practical or political merit, this move was probably an ideological statement. Immediately after Sargon II's death in 705 BC, his son Sennacherib transferred the capital to Nineveh, a far more natural seat of power. Though it was not meant as a permanent royal residence, Ashur-uballit II chose Harran as his seat of power after the fall of Nineveh in 612 BC. Harran is typically seen as the short-lived final Assyrian capital. No building projects were conducted during this time, but Harran had been long-established as a major religious center, dedicated to the god S\u00een.\nAristocracy and elite.\nBecause of the nature of source preservation, more information about the upper classes of ancient Assyria survives than for the lower ones. At the top of Middle and Neo-Assyrian society were members of long-established and large families called \"houses\". Members of this aristocracy tended to occupy the most important offices within the government and they were likely descendants of the most prominent families of the Old Assyrian period. One of the most influential offices in the Assyrian administration was the position of vizier (\"sukkallu\"). From at least the time of Shalmaneser I onward, there were grand viziers (\"sukkallu rabi\u2019u\"), superior to the ordinary viziers, who at times governed their own lands as appointees of the kings. At least in the Middle Assyrian period, the grand viziers were typically members of the royal family and the position was at this time, as were many other offices, hereditary.\nThe elite of the Neo-Assyrian Empire was expanded and included several different offices. The Neo-Assyrian inner elite is typically divided by modern scholars into the \"magnates\", a set of high-ranking offices, and the \"scholars\" (\"umm\u00e2n\u012b\"), tasked with advising and guiding the kings through interpreting omens. The magnates included the offices \"masennu\" (treasurer), \"n\u0101gir ekalli\" (palace herald), \"rab \u0161\u0101q\u00ea\" (chief cupbearer), \"rab \u0161a-r\u0113\u0161i\" (chief officer/eunuch), \"sartinnu\" (chief judge), \"sukkallu\" (grand vizier) and \"turtanu\" (commander-in-chief), which at times continued to be occupied by royal family members. Some of the magnates also acted as governors of important provinces and all of them were deeply involved with the Assyrian military, controlling significant forces. They also owned large tax-free estates, scattered throughout the empire. In the late Neo-Assyrian Empire, there was a growing disconnect between the traditional Assyrian elite and the kings due to eunuchs growing unprecedently powerful. The highest offices both in the civil administration and the army began to be occupied by eunuchs with deliberately obscure and lowly origins since this ensured that they would be loyal to the king. Eunuchs were trusted since they were believed to not be able to have any dynastic aspirations of their own.\"\"\nFrom the time of Erishum I in the early Old Assyrian period onward, a yearly office-holder, a \"limmu\" official, was elected from the influential men of Assyria. The \"limmu\" official gave their name to the year, meaning that their name appeared in all administrative documents signed that year. Kings were typically the \"limmu\" officials in their first regnal years. In the Old Assyrian period, the \"limmu\" officials also held substantial executive power, though this aspect of the office had disappeared by the time of the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nAdministration.\nThe success of Assyria was not only due to energetic kings who expanded its borders but more importantly due to its ability to efficiently incorporate and govern conquered lands. From the rise of Assyria as a territorial state at the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period onward, Assyrian territory was divided into a set of provinces or districts (\"p\u0101\u1e2butu\"). The total number and size of these provinces varied and changed as Assyria expanded and contracted. Every province was headed by a provincial governor (\"bel p\u0101\u1e2bete\",\" b\u0113l p\u012bh\u0101ti\" or \"\u0161aknu\") who was responsible for handling local order, public safety and economy. Governors also stored and distributed the goods produced in their province, which were inspected and collected by royal representatives once a year. Through these inspections, the central government could keep track of current stocks and production throughout the country. Governors had to pay both taxes and offer gifts to the god Ashur, though such gifts were usually small and mainly symbolic. The channeling of taxes and gifts were not only a method of collecting profit but also served to connect the elite of the entire empire to the Assyrian heartland. In the Neo-Assyrian period, an extensive hierarchy within the provincial administration is attested. At the bottom of this hierarchy were lower officials, such as village managers (\"rab \u0101l\u0101ni\") who oversaw one or more villages, collecting taxes in the form of labor and goods and keeping the administration informed of the conditions of their settlements, and corv\u00e9e officers (\"\u0161a b\u0113t-k\u016bdini\") who kept tallies on the labor performed by forced laborers and the remaining time owed. Individual cities had their own administrations, headed by mayors (\"\u1e2bazi\u2019\u0101nu\"), responsible for the local economy and production.\nSome regions of the Assyrian Empire were not incorporated into the provincial system but were still subjected to the rule of the Assyrian kings. Such vassal states could be ruled indirectly through allowing established local lines of kings to continue ruling in exchange for tribute or through the Assyrian kings appointing their own vassal rulers. Through the \"ilku\" system, the Assyrian kings could also grant arable lands to individuals in exchange for goods and military service.\nTo overcome the challenges of governing a large empire, the Neo-Assyrian Empire developed a sophisticated state communication system, which included various innovative techniques and relay stations. Per estimates by Karen Radner, an official message sent in the Neo-Assyrian period from the western border province Quw\u00ea to the Assyrian heartland, a distance of 700 kilometers (430 miles) over a stretch of lands featuring many rivers without any bridges, could take less than five days to arrive. Such communication speed was unprecedented before the rise of the Neo-Assyrian Empire and was not surpassed in the Middle East until the telegraph was introduced by the Ottoman Empire in 1865, nearly two and a half thousand years after the Neo-Assyrian Empire's fall.\nMilitary.\nThe Assyrian army was throughout its history mostly composed of levies, mobilized only when they were needed (such as in the time of campaigns). Through regulations, obligations and sophisticated government systems, large amounts of soldiers could be recruited and mobilized already in the early Middle Assyrian period. A small central standing army unit was established in the Neo-Assyrian Empire, dubbed the \"ki\u1e63ir \u0161arri\" (\"king's unit\"). Some professional (though not standing) troops are also attested in the Middle Assyrian period, dubbed \"\u1e2bur\u0101du\" or \"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u1e2bur\u0101d\u0101tu\", though what their role was is not clear due to the scarcity of sources. Perhaps this category included archers and charioteers, who needed more extensive training than normal foot soldiers.\nThe Assyrian army developed and evolved over time. In the Middle Assyrian period, foot soldiers were divided into the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a kakk\u0113\" (\"weapon troops\") and the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a ar\u00e2t\u0113\" (\"shield-bearing troops\") but surviving records are not detailed enough to determine what the differences were. It is possible that the \"s\u1ea1 b\u016b \u0161a kakk\u0113\" included ranged troops, such as slingers (\"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u0161a u\u0161pe\") and archers (\"\u1e63\u0101b\u016b \u0161a qalte\"). The chariots in the army composed a unit of their own. Based on surviving depictions, chariots were crewed by two soldiers: an archer who commanded the chariot (\"m\u0101ru damqu\") and a driver (\"\u0161a mugerre\"). Chariots first entered extensive military use under Tiglath-Pileser I in the 12th\u201311th centuries BC and were in the later Neo-Assyrian period gradually phased out in favor of cavalry (\"\u0161a pet\u1e2balle\"). In the Middle Assyrian period, cavalry was mainly used for escorting or message deliveries.\nUnder the Neo-Assyrian Empire, important new developments in the military were the large-scale introduction of cavalry, the adoption of iron for armor and weapons, and the development of new and innovative siege warfare techniques. At the height of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Assyrian army was the strongest army yet assembled in world history. The number of soldiers in the Neo-Assyrian army was likely several hundred thousand. The Neo-Assyrian army was subdivided into \"ki\u1e63ru\", composed of perhaps 1,000 soldiers, most of whom would have been infantry soldiers (\"z\u016bk\", \"zukk\u00fb\" or \"raks\u016bte\"). The infantry was divided into three types: light, medium and heavy, with varying weapons, level of armor and responsibilities. While on campaign, the Assyrian army made heavy use of both interpreters/translators (\"targumannu\") and guides (\"r\u0101di kibsi\"), both probably being drawn from foreigners resettled in Assyra.\nPopulation and society.\nPopulation and social standing.\nPopulace.\nThe majority of the population of ancient Assyria were farmers who worked land owned by their families. Old Assyrian society was divided into two main groups: slaves (\"subrum\") and free citizens, referred to as \"aw\u012blum\" (\"men\") or \"A\u0161\u0161ur\" (\"sons of Ashur\"). Among the free citizens there was also a division into \"rabi\" (\"big\") and \"\u1e63aher\" (\"small\") members of the city assembly. Assyrian society grew more complex and hierarchical over time. In the Middle Assyrian Empire, there were several groups among the lower classes, the highest of which were the free men (\"a\u2019\u0131l\u016b\"), who like the upper classes could receive land in exchange for performing duties for the government, but who could not live on these lands since they were comparably small. Below the free men were the unfree men (\"\u0161iluhlu\u032e\"). The unfree men had given up their freedom and entered the services of others on their own accord, and were in turn provided with clothes and rations. Many of them probably originated as foreigners. Though similar to slavery, it was possible for an unfree person to regain their freedom by providing a replacement and they were during their service considered the property of the government rather than their employers. Other lower classes of the Middle Assyrian period included the \"\u0101l\u0101y\u00fb\" (\"village residents\"), \"\u0101lik ilke\" (people recruited through the \"ilku\" system) and the \"hup\u0161u\", though what these designations meant in terms of social standing and living standards is not known.\nThe Middle Assyrian structure of society by and large endured through the subsequent Neo-Assyrian period. Below the higher classes of Neo-Assyrian society were free citizens, semi-free laborers and slaves. It was possible through steady service to the Assyrian state bureaucracy for a family to move up the social ladder; in some cases stellar work conducted by a single individual enhanced the status of their family for generations to come. In many cases, Assyrian family groups, or \"clans\", formed large population groups within the empire referred to as tribes. Such tribes lived together in villages and other settlements near or adjacent to their agricultural lands.\nSlavery was an intrinsic part of nearly every society in the ancient Near East. There were two main types of slaves in ancient Assyria: chattel slaves, primarily foreigners who were kidnapped or who were spoils of war, and debt slaves, formerly free men and women who had been unable to pay off their debts. In some cases, Assyrian children were seized by authorities due to the debts of their parents and sold off into slavery when their parents were unable to pay. Children born to slave women automatically became slaves themselves, unless some other arrangement had been agreed to. Though Old Babylonian texts frequently mention the geographical and ethnic origin of slaves, there is only a single known such reference in Old Assyrian texts (whereas there are many describing slaves in a general sense), a slave girl explicitly being referred to as Subaraean, indicating that ethnicity was not seen as very important in terms of slavery. The surviving evidence suggests that the number of slaves in Assyria never reached a large share of the population. In the Akkadian language, several terms were used for slaves, commonly \"wardum\", though this term could confusingly also be used for (free) official servants, retainers and followers, soldiers and subjects of the king. Because many individuals designated as \"wardum\" in Assyrian texts are described as handling property and carrying out administrative tasks on behalf of their masters, many may have in actuality been free servants and not slaves in the common meaning of the term. A number of \"wardum\" are however also recorded as being bought and sold.\nStatus of women.\nThe main evidence concerning the lives of ordinary women in ancient Assyria is in administrative documents and law codes. There was no legal distinction between men and women in the Old Assyrian period and they had more or less the same rights in society. Since several letters written by women are known from the Old Assyrian period, it is evident that women were free to learn how to read and write. Both men and women paid the same fines, could inherit property, participated in trade, bought, owned, and sold houses and slaves, made their own last wills, and were allowed to divorce their partners. Records of Old Assyrian marriages confirm that the dowry to the bride belonged to her, not the husband, and it was inherited by her children after her death. Although they were equal legally, men and women in the Old Assyrian period were raised and socialized differently and had different social expectations and obligations. Typically, girls were raised by their mothers, taught to spin, weave, and help with daily tasks and boys were taught trades by masters, later often following their fathers on trade expeditions. Sometimes the eldest daughter of a family was consecrated as a priestess. She was not allowed to marry and became economically independent.\nWives were expected to provide their husbands with garments and food. Although marriages were typically monogamous, husbands were allowed to buy a female slave in order to produce an heir if his wife was infertile. The wife was allowed to choose that slave and the slave never gained the status of a second wife. Husbands who were away on long trading journeys were allowed to take a second wife in one of the trading colonies, although with strict rules that must be followed: the second wife was not allowed to accompany him back to Assur and both wives had to be provided with a home to live in, food, and wood.\nThe status of women decreased in the Middle Assyrian period, as can be gathered from laws concerning them among the Middle Assyrian Laws. Among these laws were punishments for various crimes, often sexual or marital ones. Although they did not deprive women of all their rights and they were not significantly different from other ancient Near Eastern laws of their time, the Middle Assyrian Laws effectively made women second-class citizens. However, it is not clear how strongly these laws were enforced. These laws gave men the right to punish their wives as they wished. Among the harshest punishments written into these laws, for a crime not even committed by the woman, was that a raped woman would be forcibly married to her rapist. These laws also specified that certain women were obliged to wear veils while out on the street, marital status being the determining factor. Some women, such as slave women and \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" women, were prohibited from wearing veils and others, such as certain priestesses, were only allowed to wear veils if they were married.\nNot all laws were suppressive against women; women whose husbands died or were taken prisoner in war, and who did not have any sons or relatives to support them, were guaranteed support from the government. The \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" women have historically been believed to have been prostitutes, but today, are interpreted as women with an independent social existence, i.e. not tied to a husband, father, or institution. Although most \"\u1e2bar\u0131mt\u016b\" appear to have been poor, there were noteworthy exceptions. The term appears with negative connotations in several texts. Their mere existence makes it clear that it was possible for women to live independent lives, despite their lesser social standing during that period.\nDuring the Neo-Assyrian period that followed, royal and upper-class women experienced increased influence. Women attached to the Neo-Assyrian royal court sent and received letters, were independently wealthy, and could buy and own lands of their own. The queens of the Neo-Assyrian Empire are better attested historically than queens of preceding periods of the culture. Under the Sargonid dynasty, they were granted their own military units, sometimes they are known to have partaken alongside other units in military campaigns.\nAmong the most influential women of the Neo-Assyrian period were Shammuramat, queen of Shamshi-Adad V (824\u2013811\u00a0BC), who in the reign of her son Adad-nirari III (811\u2013783\u00a0BC) might have been regent and participated in military campaigns. Another is Naqi'a, who influenced politics in the reigns of Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal.\nEconomy.\nIn the Old Assyrian period, a major portion of Assur's population was involved in the city's international trade. As can be gathered from hiring contracts and other records, the trade involved people of many different occupations, including porters, guides, donkey drivers, agents, traders, bakers and bankers. Because of the extensive cuneiform records known from the period, details of the trade are relatively well-known. It has been estimated that just in the period 1950\u20131836 BC, twenty-five tons of Anatolian silver was transported to Assur, and that approximately one hundred tons of tin and 100,000 textiles were transported to Anatolia in return. The Assyrians also sold livestock, processed goods and reed products. In many cases, the materials sold by Assyrian colonists came from far-away places; the textiles sold by Assyrians in Anatolia were imported from southern Mesopotamia and the tin came from the east in the Zagros Mountains.\nAfter international trade declined in the 19th century BC, the Assyrian economy became increasingly oriented toward the state. In the Neo-Assyrian period, the wealth generated through private investments was dwarfed by the wealth of the state, which was by far the largest employer in the empire and had a monopoly on agriculture, manufacturing and exploitation of minerals. The imperial economy advantaged mainly the elite, since it was structured in a way that ensured that surplus wealth flowed to the government and was then used for the maintenance of the state throughout the empire. Though all means of production were owned by the state, there also continued to be a vibrant private economic sector within the empire, with property rights of individuals ensured by the government.\nPersonal identity and continuity.\nEthnicity and culture are largely based in self-perception and self-designation. A distinct Assyrian identity seems to have formed already in the Old Assyrian period, when distinctly Assyrian burial practices, foods and dress codes are attested and Assyrian documents appear to consider the inhabitants of Assur to be a distinct cultural group. A wider Assyrian identity appears to have spread across northern Mesopotamia under the Middle Assyrian Empire, since later writings concerning the reconquests of the early Neo-Assyrian kings refer to some of their wars as liberating the Assyrian people of the cities they reconquered.\nSurviving evidence suggests that the ancient Assyrians had a relatively open definition of what it meant to be Assyrian. Modern ideas such as a person's ethnic background, or the Roman idea of legal citizenship, do not appear to have been reflected in ancient Assyria. Although Assyrian accounts and artwork of warfare frequently describe and depict foreign enemies, they are not depicted with different physical features, but rather with different clothing and equipment. Assyrian accounts describe enemies as barbaric only in terms of their behavior, as lacking correct religious practices, and as doing wrongdoings against Assyria. All things considered, there does not appear to have been any well-developed concepts of ethnicity or race in ancient Assyria. What mattered for a person to be seen by others as Assyrian was mainly fulfillment of obligations (such as military service), being affiliated with the Assyrian Empire politically and maintaining loyalty to the Assyrian king. One of the inscriptions that attest to this view, as well as royal Assyrian policies enacted to encourage assimilation and cultural mixture, is Sargon II's account of the construction of Dur-Sharrukin. One of the passages of the inscription reads:\nAlthough the text clearly differentiates the new settlers from those that had been \"born Assyrians\", the aim of Sargon's policy was also clearly to transform the new settlers into Assyrians through appointing supervisors and guides to teach them. Though the expansion of the Assyrian Empire, in combination with resettlements and deportations, changed the ethno-cultural make-up of the Assyrian heartland, there is no evidence to suggest that the more ancient Assyrian inhabitants of the land ever disappeared or became restricted to a small elite, nor that the ethnic and cultural identity of the new settlers was anything other than \"Assyrian\" after one or two generations.\nAlthough the use of the term \"Assyrian\" by the modern Assyrian people has historically been the target of misunderstanding and controversy, both politically and academically, Assyrian continuity is generally scholarly accepted based on both historical and genetic evidence in the sense that the modern Assyrians are regarded to be descendants of the population of the ancient Assyrian Empire. Though the ancient Akkadian language and cuneiform script did not survive for long in Assyria after the empire was destroyed in 609 BC, Assyrian culture clearly did; the old Assyrian religion continued to be practised at Assur until the 3rd century AD, and at other sites for centuries thereafter, gradually losing ground to Christianity. At Mardin, believers in the old religion are known from as late as the 18th century. Individuals with names harkening back to ancient Mesopotamia are also attested at Assur until it was sacked for the last time in AD 240 and at other sites as late as the 13th century. Though many foreign states ruled over Assyria in the millennia following the empire's fall, there is no evidence of any large scale influx of immigrants that replaced the original population, which instead continued to make up a significant portion of the region's people until the Mongol and Timurid massacres in the late 14th century.\nIn pre-modern Syriac-language (the type of Aramaic used in Christian Mesopotamian writings) sources, the typical self-designations used are \"\u02be\u0101r\u0101m\u0101y\u0101\" (\"Aramean\") and \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", with the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" (\"Assyrian\") rarely being used as a self-designation. The terms Assyria (\"\u02be\u0101thor\") and Assyrian (\"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\") were however used in several senses in pre-modern times; most notably being used for the ancient Assyrians and for the land surrounding Nineveh (and for the city of Mosul, built next to Nineveh's ruins). In Syriac translations of the Bible, the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\" is also used to refer to the ancient Assyrian Empire. In the sense of a citizen of Mosul, the designation \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" were used for some individuals in the pre-modern period. The reluctance of Christians to use \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" as a self-designation could perhaps be explained by the Assyrians described in the Bible being prominent enemies of Israel; the term \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" was sometimes employed in Syriac writings as a term for enemies of Christians. In this context, the term was sometimes applied to the Persians of the Sasanian Empire; the 4th-century Syriac writer Ephrem the Syrian for instance referred to the Sasanian Empire as \"filthy \"\u02be\u0101thor\", mother of corruption\". In a similar fashion, the term was also sometimes applied to the later Muslim rulers.\nThe self-designation \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", \"sury\u0101y\u0113\" or \"s\u016br\u014dy\u0113\", sometimes translated as \"Syrian\", is believed to be derived from the Akkadian term \"ass\u016br\u0101yu\" (\"Assyrian\"), which was sometimes even in ancient times rendered in the shorter form \"s\u016br\u0101yu\". Some medieval Syriac Christian documents used \"\u0101s\u016br\u0101y\u0113\" and \"s\u016br\u0101y\u0113\", rather than \"\u0101th\u014dr\u0101y\u0113\", also for the ancient Assyrians. Medieval and modern Armenian sources also connected \"ass\u016br\u0101yu\" and \"sury\u0101y\u0101\", consistently referring to the Aramaic-speaking Christians of Mesopotamia and Syria as \"Asori\".\nDespite the complex issue of self-designations, pre-modern Syriac-language sources at times identified positively with the ancient Assyrians and drew connections between the ancient empire and themselves. Most prominently, ancient Assyrian kings and figures long appeared in local folklore and literary tradition and claims of descent from ancient Assyrian royalty were forwarded both for figures in folklore and by actual living high-ranking members of society in northern Mesopotamia. Visits by missionaries from various western churches to the Assyrian heartland in the 18th century likely contributed to the Assyrian people more strongly relating their self-designation and identity to ancient Assyria; in the context of interactions with westerners who connected them to the ancient Assyrians, and due to an increasing number of atrocities and massacres directed against them, the Assyrian people experienced a cultural \"awakening\" or \"renaissance\" toward the end of the 19th century, which led to the development of a national ideology more strongly rooted in their descent from ancient Assyria and a re-adoption of self-designations such as \"\u02be\u0101thor\u0101y\u0101\" and \"\u02be\u0101sur\u0101y\u0101\". Today, \"s\u016bry\u014dy\u014d\" or \"s\u016br\u0101y\u0101\" are the predominant self-designations used by Assyrians in their native language, though they are typically translated as \"Assyrian\" rather than \"Syrian\".\nCulture.\nLanguages.\nAkkadian.\nThe ancient Assyrians primarily spoke and wrote the Assyrian language, a Semitic language (i.e. related to modern Hebrew and Arabic) closely related to Babylonian, spoken in southern Mesopotamia. Both Assyrian and Babylonian are generally regarded by modern scholars to be dialects of the Akkadian language. This is a modern convention since contemporary ancient authors considered Assyrian and Babylonian to be two separate languages. Only Babylonian was referred to as \"akkad\u00fbm\", with Assyrian being referred to as \"a\u0161\u0161ur\u00fb\" or \"a\u0161\u0161ur\u0101yu\". Though both were written with cuneiform script, the signs look quite different and can be distinguished relatively easily. \nGiven the vast timespan covered by ancient Assyria, the Assyrian language developed and evolved over time. Modern scholars broadly categorize it into three different periods, roughly (though far from precisely) corresponding to the periods used to divide Assyrian history: the Old Assyrian language (2000\u20131500\u00a0BC), Middle Assyrian language (1500\u20131000\u00a0BC) and Neo-Assyrian language (1000\u2013500\u00a0BC). Because the record of Assyrian tablets and documents is still somewhat spotty, many of the stages of the language remain poorly known and documented.\nThe signs used in Old Assyrian texts are for the most part less complex than those used during the succeeding Middle and Neo-Assyrian periods and they were fewer in number, amounting to no more than 150\u2013200 unique signs, most of which were syllabic signs (representing syllables). Due to the limited number of signs used, Old Assyrian is relatively easier to decipher for modern researchers than later forms of the language, though the limited number of signs also means that there are in cases several possible alternative phonetic values and readings. This means that while it is easy to decipher the signs, many researchers remain uncomfortable with the language itself. Though it was a more archaic variant of the later Assyrian language, Old Assyrian also contains several words that are not attested in later periods, some being peculiar early forms of words and others being names for commercial terms or various textile and food products from Anatolia.\nIn the Middle and Neo-Assyrian empires, the later versions of the Assyrian language were not the only versions of Akkadian used. Though Assyrian was typically used in letters, legal documents, administrative documents, and as a vernacular, Standard Babylonian was also used in an official capacity. Standard Babylonian was a highly codified version of ancient Babylonian, as used around 1500 BC, and was used as a language of high culture, for nearly all scholarly documents, literature, poetry and royal inscriptions. The culture of the Assyrian elite was strongly influenced by Babylonia in the south; in a vein similar to how Greek civilization was respected in, and influenced, ancient Rome, the Assyrians had much respect for Babylon and its ancient culture.\nBecause of the multilingual nature of the vast empire, many loan words are attested as entering the Assyrian language during the Neo-Assyrian period. The number of surviving documents written in cuneiform grow considerably fewer in the late reign of Ashurbanipal, which suggests that the language was declining since it is probably attributable to an increased use of Aramaic, often written on perishable materials such as leather scrolls or papyrus. The ancient Assyrian language did not disappear completely until around the end of the 6th century BC, well into the subsequent post-imperial period.\nAramaic and other languages.\nBecause the Assyrians never imposed their language on foreign peoples whose lands they conquered outside of the Assyrian heartland, there were no mechanisms in place to stop the spread of languages other than Akkadian. Beginning with the migrations of Arameans into Assyrian territory during the Middle Assyrian period, this lack of linguistic policies facilitated the spread of the Aramaic language. As the most widely spoken and mutually understandable of the Semitic languages (the language group containing many of the languages spoken through the empire), Aramaic grew in importance throughout the Neo-Assyrian period and increasingly replaced the Neo-Assyrian language even within the Assyrian heartland itself. From the 9th century BC onward, Aramaic became the \"de facto\" lingua franca of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, with Neo-Assyrian and other forms of Akkadian becoming relegated to a language of the political elite.\nFrom the time of Shalmaneser III, in the 9th century BC, Aramaic was used in state-related contexts alongside Akkadian and by the time of Tiglath-Pileser III, the kings employed both Akkadian and Aramaic-language royal scribes, confirming the rise of Aramaic to a position of an official language used by the imperial administration. During the time after the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the old Assyrian language was completely abandoned in Mesopotamia in favor of Aramaic. By 500 BC, Akkadian was probably no longer a spoken language.\nModern Assyrian people refer to their language as \"Assyrian\" (\"S\u016brayt\" or \"S\u016breth\"). Though it has little in common with the Assyrian dialect of the Akkadian language, it is a modern version of the ancient Mesopotamian Aramaic. The language retains some influence of ancient Akkadian, particularly in the form of loanwords. Modern Assyrian varieties of Aramaic are often referred to by scholars as Neo-Aramaic or Neo-Syriac. As a liturgical language, many Assyrians also speak Syriac, a codified version of classical Aramaic as spoken at Edessa during the Christianization of Assyria.\nAnother language sometimes used in ancient Assyria as a language of scholarship and culture, though only in written form, was the ancient Sumerian language. At the height of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, various other local languages were also spoken within the imperial borders, though none achieved the same level of official recognition as Aramaic.\nArchitecture.\nThere are three surviving forms of primary evidence for the architecture of ancient Assyria. The most important form is the surviving buildings themselves, found through archaeological excavations, but important evidence can also be gathered from both contemporary documentation, such as letters and administrative documents that describe buildings that might not have been preserved, as well as documentation by later kings concerning the building works of previous kings. Assyrian buildings and construction works were almost always constructed out of mudbrick. Limestone was also used, though primarily only in works such as aqueducts and river walls, exposed to running water, and defensive fortifications.\nIn order to support large buildings, they were often built on top of foundation platforms or on mud brick foundations. Floors were typically made of rammed earth, covered in important rooms with carpets or reed mats. Floors in locations that were exposed to the elements, such as outside on terraces or in courtyards, were paved with stone slabs or backed bricks. Roofs, particularly in larger rooms, were supported through the use of wooden beams.\nThe ancient Assyrians accomplished several technologically complex construction projects, including constructions of whole new capital cities, which indicates sophisticated technical knowledge. Though in large part following previous Mesopotamian architecture, there are several characteristic features of ancient Assyrian architecture. Some examples of features of ancient Assyrian architecture include stepped merlons, vaulted roofs, and palaces to a large degree often being made up of sets of self-contained suites.\nArt.\nA relatively large number of statues and figurines have been recovered from the ruins of temples in Assur dating to the Early Assyrian period. Most of the surviving artwork from this time was clearly influenced by the artwork of foreign powers. For instance, a set of 87 alabaster figures of male and female worshippers from Assur before the rise of the Akkadian Empire greatly resembles Early Dynastic Sumerian figures. Because of variation in artwork elsewhere, the artwork of early Assur was also highly variable depending on the time period, ranging from highly stylized to highly naturalistic.\nAmong the most unique finds from the Early period is the head of a woman of which her eyes, eyebrows, and elaborate hair covering were originally inlaid. This head is typical of the art style of the Akkadian period, with an overall naturalistic style, smooth and soft curves and a full mouth. Another unique art piece from the early period is an ivory figurine of a nude woman, and fragments of at least five additional similar figurines. The ivory used might have come from Indian elephants, which would indicate trade between early Assur and the early tribes and states of Iran. Among other artwork known from the early period are a handful of large stone statues of rulers (governors and foreign kings), figures of animals, and stone statues of naked women.\nThe artwork known from the Old Assyrian period, other than a few objects such as a partial stone statue perhaps depicting Erishum I, is largely limited to seals and impressions of seals on cuneiform documents. Royal seals from the Puzur-Ashur dynasty of kings, prior to the rise of Shamshi-Adad I, are very similar to the seals of the kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur. In the Middle Assyrian period, from Ashur-uballit I onward, seals looked quite different and appear to emphasize royal power, rather than the theological and cosmic sources of the king's right to rule. Among non-royal seals of the Middle Assyrian period a wide assortment of different motifs are known, including both religious scenes and peaceful scenes of animals and trees. From the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I onward, seals also sometimes featured contests and struggles between humans, various animals, and mythological creatures.\nSeveral other new artistic innovations were also made in the Middle Assyrian period. In the temple dedicated to Ishtar in Assur, four cult pedestals (or \"altars\") from the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I have been discovered. These altars were decorated with various motifs, common inclusions being the king (sometimes multiple times) and protective divine figures and standards. One of the pedestals preserves along the lower step of its base a relief image which is the earliest known narrative image in Assyrian art history. This relief, which is not very well-preserved, appears to depict rows of prisoners before the Assyrian king. The earliest known Assyrian wall paintings are also from the time of Tukulti-Ninurta I, from his palace in Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. Motifs included plant-based patterns (rosettes and palmettes), trees and bird-headed genies. The colors used to paint the walls included black, red, blue, and white. An unusual limestone statue of a nude woman is known from Nineveh from the time of Ashur-bel-kala (1074\u20131056\u00a0BC). An entirely new type of monument introduced in the 11th century BC were obelisks; four-sided stone stelae decorated all around with both images and text. Obelisks saw continued use until at least the 9th century BC.\nCompared to other periods, a larger amount of artwork survives from the Neo-Assyrian period, particularly monumental art made under the patronage of the kings. The most well-known form of Neo-Assyrian monumental art are wall reliefs, carved stone artwork that lined the internal and external walls of temples and palaces. Another well-known form of Neo-Assyrian art are colossi, often human-headed lions or bulls (\"lamassu\"), that were placed at the gates of temples, palaces and cities. The earliest known examples of both wall reliefs and colossi are from the reign of Ashurnasirpal II, who might have been inspired by the Hittite monumental art that he saw on his campaigns to the Mediterranean.\nWall paintings such as those made under Tukulti-Ninurta I in the Middle Assyrian period also continued to be used, sometimes to supplement wall reliefs and sometimes instead of them. Interior walls could be decorated by covering the mudbrick used in construction with painted mud plaster and exterior walls were at times decorated with glazed and painted tiles or bricks. The most extensive known surviving sets of wall reliefs are from the reign of Sennacherib. In terms of Neo-Assyrian artwork, modern scholars have paid particular attention to the reliefs produced under Ashurbanipal, which have been described as possessing a distinct \"epic quality\" unlike the art under his predecessors.\nScholarship and literature.\nAncient Assyrian literature drew heavily on Babylonian literary traditions. Both the Old and Middle Assyrian periods are limited in terms of surviving literary texts. The most important surviving Old Assyrian literary work is \"Sargon, Lord of Lies\", a text found in a well-preserved version on a cuneiform tablet from K\u00fcltepe. Once thought to have been a parody, the tale is a first-person narrative of the reign of Sargon of Akkad, the founder of the Akkadian Empire. The text follows Sargon as he gains strength from the god Adad, swears by Ishtar, the \"lady of combat\", and speaks with the gods. Surviving Middle Assyrian literature is only slightly more diverse. \nA distinct Assyrian scholarship tradition, though still drawing on Babylonian tradition, is conventionally placed as beginning around the time of the beginning of the Middle Assyrian period. The rising status of scholarship at this time might be connected to the kings beginning to regard amassing knowledge as a way to strengthen their power. Known Middle Assyrian works include the \"Tukulti-Ninurta Epic\" (a narrative of the reign of Tukulti-Ninurta I and his exploits), fragments of other royal epics, \"The Hunter\" (a short martial poem) and some royal hymns.\nThe clear majority of surviving ancient Assyrian literature is from the Neo-Assyrian period. The kings of the Neo-Assyrian Empire began to see preserving knowledge as one of their responsibilities, and not, as previous kings had, a responsibility of private individuals and temples. This development might have originated with the kings no longer viewing the divination performed by their diviners as enough and wished to have access to the relevant texts themselves. The office of chief scholar is first attested in the reign of the Neo-Assyrian king Tukulti-Ninurta II.\nMost of the surviving ancient Assyrian literature comes from the Neo-Assyrian Library of Ashurbanipal, which included more than 30,000 documents. Libraries were built in the Neo-Assyrian period to preserve knowledge of the past and maintain scribal culture. Neo-Assyrian texts fall into a wide array of genres, including divinatory texts, divination reports, treatments for the sick (either medical or magical), ritual texts, incantations, prayers and hymns, school texts and literary texts. An innovation of the Neo-Assyrian period were the annals, a genre of texts recording the events of the reigns of a king, particularly military exploits. Annals were disseminated throughout the empire and probably served propagandistic purposes, supporting the legitimacy of the king's rule. \nVarious purely literary works, previously aligned by scholars with propaganda, are known from the Neo-Assyrian period. Such works include, among others, the \"Underworld Vision of an Assyrian Crown Prince\", the \"Sin of Sargon\" and the \"Marduk Ordeal\". In addition to their own works, the Assyrians copied and preserved earlier Mesopotamian literature. The inclusion of texts such as the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", the \"En\u00fbma Eli\u0161\" (the Babylonian creation myth), \"Erra\", the \"Myth of Etana\" and the \"Epic of Anzu\" in the Library of Ashurbanipal is the primary reason for how such texts have survived to the present day.\nReligion.\nAncient Assyrian religion.\nKnowledge of the ancient polytheistic Assyrian religion, referred to as \"Ashurism\" by some modern Assyrians, is mostly limited to state cults given that little can be ascertained of the personal religious beliefs and practices of the common people of ancient Assyria. The Assyrians worshipped the same pantheon of gods as the Babylonians in southern Mesopotamia. The chief Assyrian deity was the national deity Ashur. Though the deity and the ancient capital city are commonly distinguished by modern historians through calling the god Ashur and the city Assur, both were inscribed in the exact same way in ancient times (\"A\u0161\u0161ur\"). In documents from the preceding Old Assyrian period, the city and god are often not clearly differentiated, which suggests that Ashur originated sometime in the Early Assyrian period as a deified personification of the city itself. \nBelow Ashur, the other Mesopotamian deities were organized in a hierarchy, with each having their own assigned roles (the sun-god Shamash was for instance regarded as a god of justice and Ishtar was seen as a goddess of love and war) and their own primary seats of worship (Ninurta was for instance primarily worshipped at Nimrud and Ishtar primarily at Arbela). Quintessentially Babylonian deities such as Enlil, Marduk, and Nabu were worshipped in Assyria just as much as in Babylonia, and several traditionally Babylonian rituals, such as the \"akitu\" festival, were borrowed in the north.\nAshur's role as the chief deity was flexible and changed with the changing culture and politics of the Assyrians themselves. In the Old Assyrian period, Ashur was mainly regarded as a god of death and revival, related to agriculture. Under the Middle and Neo-Assyrian Empire, Ashur's role was expanded and thoroughly altered. Possibly originating as a reaction to the period of suzerainty under the Mittani kingdom, Middle Assyrian theology presented Ashur as a god of war, who bestowed the Assyrian kings not only with divine legitimacy, something retained from the Old Assyrian period, but also commanded the kings to enlarge Assyria (\"the land of Ashur\") with Ashur's \"just scepter\", i.e. expand the Assyrian Empire through military conquest. \nThis militarization of Ashur might also have derived from the Amorite conqueror Shamshi-Adad I equating Ashur with the southern Enlil during his rule over northern Mesopotamia in the 18th and 17th centuries BC. In the Middle Assyrian period, Ashur is attested with the title \"king of the gods\", a role previous civilizations in both northern and southern Mesopotamia ascribed to Enlil. The development of equating Ashur with Enlil, or at least transferring Enlil's role to Ashur, was paralleled in Babylon, where the previously unimportant local god Marduk was elevated in the reign of Hammurabi (18th century BC) to the head of the pantheon, modelled after Enlil.\nAssyrian religion was centered in temples, monumental structures that included a central shrine which housed the cult statue of the temple's god, and several subordinate chapels with space for statues of other deities. Temples were typically self-contained communities; they had their own economic resources, chiefly in the form of land holdings, and their own hierarchically organized personnel. In later times, temples became increasingly dependent on royal benefits, in the shape of specific taxes, offerings and donations of booty and tribute. The head of a temple was titled as the \"chief administrator\" and was responsible to the Assyrian king since the king was regarded to be Ashur's representative in the mortal world. Records from temples showcase that divination in the form of astrology and extispicy (studying the entrails of dead animals) were important parts of the Assyrian religion since they were believed to be means through which deities communicated with the mortal world.\nUnlike many other ancient empires, the Neo-Assyrian Empire did at its height not impose its culture and religion on conquered regions; there were no significant temples built for Ashur outside of northern Mesopotamia. In the post-imperial period, after the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Assyrians continued to venerate Ashur and the rest of the pantheon, though without the Assyrian state, religious beliefs in many parts of the Assyrian heartland diverged and developed in different directions. From the time of Seleucid rule over the region (4th to 2nd century BC) onward, there was a strong influence of the ancient Greek religion, with many Greek deities becoming syncretized with Mesopotamian deities. There was also some influence of Judaism, given that the kings of Adiabene, a vassal kingdom covering much of the old Assyrian heartland, converted to Judaism in the 1st century AD. \nIn the 1st century BC onward, as a frontier region between the Roman and the Parthian empires, Assyria was likely highly religiously complex and diverse. Under Parthian rule, both old and new gods were worshipped at Assur. As late as the time of the city's second destruction in the 3rd century AD, the most important deity was still Ashur, known during this time as \"Assor\" or \"Asor\". Worship of Ashur during this time was carried out in the same way as it had been in ancient times, per a cultic calendar effectively identical to that used under the Neo-Assyrian Empire 800 years prior. The ancient Mesopotamian religion persisted in some places for centuries after the end of the post-imperial period, such as at Harran until at least the 10th century (the \"Sabians\" of Harran) and at Mardin until as late as the 18th century (the \"Shams\u012byah\").\nChristianity.\nThe Church of the East developed early in Christian history. Though tradition holds that Christianity was first spread to Mesopotamia by Thomas the Apostle, the exact timespan when the Assyrians were first Christianized is unknown. The city of Arbela was an important early Christian center; according to the later \"Chronicle of Arbela\", Arbela became the seat of a bishop already in AD 100, but the reliability of this document is questioned among scholars. It is however known that both Arbela and Kirkuk later served as important Christian centers in the Sasanian and later Islamic periods. \nAccording to some traditions, Christianity took hold in Assyria when Saint Thaddeus of Edessa converted King Abgar V of Osroene in the mid-1st century AD. From the 3rd century AD onward, it is clear that Christianity was becoming the major religion of the region, with Christ replacing the old Mesopotamian deities. Assyrians had by this time already intellectually contributed to Christian thought; in the 1st century AD, the Christian Assyrian writer Tatian composed the influential \" Diatessaron\", a synoptic rendition of the gospels.\nThough Christianity is today an intrinsic part of Assyrian identity, Assyrian Christians have over the centuries splintered into a number of different Christian denominations. Though the prominent Assyrian Church of the East, the followers of which have often been termed \"Nestorians\", continues to exist, other prominent eastern churches include the Chaldean Catholic Church, which split off in the 16th century, the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, and the Ancient Church of the East, which branched off from the Assyrian Church of the East in 1968.\nThough these churches have been distinct for centuries, they still follow much of the same liturgical, spiritual and theological foundation. There are also Assyrian followers of various denominations of Protestantism, chiefly due to missions by American missionaries of the Presbyterian Church.\nBecause the Assyrian Church of the East remains dismissed as \"Nestorian\" and heretical by many other branches of Christianity, it has not been admitted into the Middle East Council of Churches and it does not take part in the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church. This does not mean that efforts to approach ecumenism have not been undertaken. In 1994, Pope John Paul II and Patriarch Dinkha IV signed the Common Christological Declaration Between the Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East, with some further efforts also having been made in the years since. \nHistorically, the main obstacle in the way of ecumenism has been the ancient text \"Liturgy of Addai and Mari\", used in the Assyrian churches, wherein the anaphora does not contain the Words of Institution, seen as indispensable by the Catholic Church. This obstacle was removed in 2001, when the Catholic Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith determined that the text could be considered valid in Catholicism as well, despite the absence of the words. Some efforts have also been made to approach reunification of the Assyrian and Chaldean churches. In 1996, Dinkha IV and Patriarch Raphael I Bidawid of the Chaldean Church signed a list of common proposals to move toward unity, approved by synods of both churches in 1997."}
{"id": "2086", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2086", "title": "Abijah", "text": "Abijah ( ') is a Biblical Hebrew unisex name which means \"my Father is Yah\". The Hebrew form ' also occurs in the Bible.\nRussian name.\nThe variant used in the Russian language is \"\" ('), with \"\" or \"\" ('), being older forms. Included into various, often handwritten, church calendars throughout the 17th\u201319th centuries, it was omitted from the official Synodal Menologium at the end of the 19th century. In 1924\u20131930, the name (as \"\", a form of \"'\") was included into various Soviet calendars, which included the new and often artificially created names promoting the new Soviet realities and encouraging the break with the tradition of using the names in the Synodal Menologia. In Russian it is only used as a female name. Diminutives of this name include \" (') and \" (\"\")."}
{"id": "2087", "revid": "18066332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2087", "title": "Ark", "text": "Ark or ARK may refer to:"}
{"id": "2088", "revid": "49032093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2088", "title": "Aphasia", "text": "Aphasia, also known as dysphasia, is an impairment in a person\u2019s ability to comprehend or formulate language because of damage to specific brain regions. The major causes are stroke and head trauma; prevalence is hard to determine, but aphasia due to stroke is estimated to be 0.1\u20130.4% in developed countries. Aphasia can also be the result of brain tumors, epilepsy, autoimmune neurological diseases, brain infections, or neurodegenerative diseases (such as dementias).\nTo be diagnosed with aphasia, a person's language must be significantly impaired in one or more of the four aspects of communication. In the case of progressive aphasia, a noticeable decline in language abilities over a short period of time is required. The four aspects of communication include spoken language production and comprehension, written language production and comprehension. Impairments in any of these aspects can impact functional communication.\nThe difficulties of people with aphasia can range from occasional trouble finding words, to losing the ability to speak, read, or write; intelligence, however, is unaffected. Expressive language and receptive language can both be affected as well. Aphasia also affects visual language such as sign language. In contrast, the use of formulaic expressions in everyday communication is often preserved. For example, while a person with aphasia, particularly expressive aphasia (Broca's aphasia), may not be able to ask a loved one when their birthday is, they may still be able to sing \"Happy Birthday\". One prevalent deficit in all aphasias is anomia, which is a difficulty in finding the correct word.\nWith aphasia, one or more modes of communication in the brain have been damaged and are therefore functioning incorrectly. Aphasia is \"not\" caused by damage to the brain resulting in motor or sensory deficits, thus producing abnormal speech\u00a0\u2014 that is, aphasia is not related to the \"mechanics\" of speech, but rather the individual's language cognition. However, it is possible for a person to have both problems, e.g. in the case of a hemorrhage damaging a large area of the brain. An individual's language abilities incorporate the socially shared set of rules, as well as the thought processes that go behind communication (as it affects both verbal and nonverbal language). Aphasia is not a result of other peripheral motor or sensory difficulty, such as paralysis affecting the speech muscles, or a general hearing impairment.\nNeurodevelopmental forms of auditory processing disorder (APD) are differentiable from aphasia in that aphasia is by definition caused by acquired brain injury, but acquired epileptic aphasia has been viewed as a form of APD.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPeople with aphasia may experience any of the following behaviors due to an acquired brain injury, although some of these symptoms may be due to related or concomitant problems, such as dysarthria or apraxia, and not primarily due to aphasia. Aphasia symptoms can vary based on the location of damage in the brain. Signs and symptoms may or may not be present in individuals with aphasia and may vary in severity and level of disruption to communication. Often those with aphasia may have a difficulty with naming objects, so they might use words such as \"thing\" or point at the objects. When asked to name a pencil they may say it is a \"thing used to write\".\nRelated behaviors.\nGiven the previously stated signs and symptoms, the following behaviors are often seen in people with aphasia as a result of attempted compensation for incurred speech and language deficits:\nCognitive deficits.\nWhile aphasia has traditionally been described in terms of language deficits, there is increasing evidence that many people with aphasia commonly experience co-occurring non-linguistic cognitive deficits in areas such as attention, memory, executive functions and learning. By some accounts, cognitive deficits, such as attention and working memory constitute the underlying cause of language impairment in people with aphasia. Others suggest that cognitive deficits often co-occur, but are comparable to cognitive deficits in stroke patients without aphasia and reflect general brain dysfunction following injury. Whilst it has been shown that cognitive neural networks support language reorganisation after stroke,\nThe degree to which deficits in attention and other cognitive domains underlie language deficits in aphasia is still unclear.\nIn particular, people with aphasia often demonstrate short-term and working memory deficits. These deficits can occur in both the verbal domain as well as the visuospatial domain. Furthermore, these deficits are often associated with performance on language specific tasks such as naming, lexical processing, and sentence comprehension, and discourse production. Other studies have found that most, but not all people with aphasia demonstrate performance deficits on tasks of attention, and their performance on these tasks correlate with language performance and cognitive ability in other domains. Even patients with mild aphasia, who score near the ceiling on tests of language often demonstrate slower response times and interference effects in non-verbal attention abilities.\nIn addition to deficits in short-term memory, working memory, and attention, people with aphasia can also demonstrate deficits in executive function. For instance, people with aphasia may demonstrate deficits in initiation, planning, self-monitoring, and cognitive flexibility. Other studies have found that people with aphasia demonstrate reduced speed and efficiency during completion of executive function assessments.\nRegardless of their role in the underlying nature of aphasia, cognitive deficits have a clear role in the study and rehabilitation of aphasia. For instance, the severity of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has been associated with lower quality of life, even more so than the severity of language deficits. Furthermore, cognitive deficits may influence the learning process of rehabilitation and language treatment outcomes in aphasia. Non-linguistic cognitive deficits have also been the target of interventions directed at improving language ability, though outcomes are not definitive. While some studies have demonstrated language improvement secondary to cognitively-focused treatment, others have found little evidence that the treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia has an influence on language outcomes.\nOne important caveat in the measurement and treatment of cognitive deficits in people with aphasia is the degree to which assessments of cognition rely on language abilities for successful performance. Most studies have attempted to circumvent this challenge by utilizing non-verbal cognitive assessments to evaluate cognitive ability in people with aphasia. However, the degree to which these tasks are truly \"non-verbal\" and not mediated by language is unclear. For instance, Wall et al. found that language and non-linguistic performance was related, except when non-linguistic performance was measured by \"real life\" cognitive tasks.\nCauses.\nAphasia is most often caused by stroke, where about a quarter of patients who experience an acute stroke develop aphasia. However, any disease or damage to the parts of the brain that control language can cause aphasia. Some of these can include brain tumors, traumatic brain injury, epilepsy and progressive neurological disorders. In rare cases, aphasia may also result from herpesviral encephalitis. The herpes simplex virus affects the frontal and temporal lobes, subcortical structures, and the hippocampal tissue, which can trigger aphasia. In acute disorders, such as head injury or stroke, aphasia usually develops quickly. When caused by brain tumor, infection, or dementia, it develops more slowly.\nSubstantial damage to tissue anywhere within the region shown in blue (on the figure in the infobox above) can potentially result in aphasia. Aphasia can also sometimes be caused by damage to subcortical structures deep within the left hemisphere, including the thalamus, the internal and external capsules, and the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia. The area and extent of brain damage or atrophy will determine the type of aphasia and its symptoms. A very small number of people can experience aphasia after damage to the right hemisphere only. It has been suggested that these individuals may have had an unusual brain organization prior to their illness or injury, with perhaps greater overall reliance on the right hemisphere for language skills than in the general population.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA), while its name can be misleading, is actually a form of dementia that has some symptoms closely related to several forms of aphasia. It is characterized by a gradual loss in language functioning while other cognitive domains are mostly preserved, such as memory and personality. PPA usually initiates with sudden word-finding difficulties in an individual and progresses to a reduced ability to formulate grammatically correct sentences (syntax) and impaired comprehension. The etiology of PPA is not due to a stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), or infectious disease; it is still uncertain what initiates the onset of PPA in those affected by it.\nEpilepsy can also include transient aphasia as a prodromal or episodic symptom. However, the repeated seizure activity within language regions may also lead to chronic, and progressive aphasia. Aphasia is also listed as a rare side-effect of the fentanyl patch, an opioid used to control chronic pain.\nDiagnosis.\nNeuroimaging methods.\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) are the most common neuroimaging tools used in identifying aphasia and studying the extent of damage in the loss of language abilities. This is done by doing MRI scans and locating the extent of lesions or damage within brain tissue, particularly within areas of the left frontal and temporal regions- where a lot of language related areas lie. In fMRI studies a language related task is often completed and then the BOLD image is analyzed. If there are lower than normal BOLD responses that indicate a lessening of blood flow to the affected area and can show quantitatively that the cognitive task is not being completed.\nThere are limitations to the use of fMRI in aphasic patients particularly. Because a high percentage of aphasic patients develop it because of stroke there can be infarct present which is the total loss of blood flow. This can be due to the thinning of blood vessels or the complete blockage of it. This is important in fMRI as it relies on the BOLD response (the oxygen levels of the blood vessels), and this can create a false hyporesponse upon fMRI study. Due to the limitations of fMRI such as a lower spatial resolution, it can show that some areas of the brain are not active during a task when they in reality are. Additionally, with stroke being the cause of many cases of aphasia the extent of damage to brain tissue can be difficult to quantify therefore the effects of stroke brain damage on the functionality of the patient can vary.\nMRI is often used to predict or confirm the subtype of aphasia present. Researchers compared three subtypes of aphasia\u00a0\u2014 nonfluent-variant primary progressive aphasia (nfPPA), logopenic-variant primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA), and semantic-variant primary progressive aphasia (svPPA), with primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and Alzheimer's disease. This was done by analyzing the MRIs of patients with each of the subsets of PPA. Images which compare subtypes of aphasia as well as for finding the extent of lesions are generated by overlapping images of different participant's brains (if applicable) and isolating areas of lesions or damage using third-party software such as MRIcron. MRI has also been used to study the relationship between the type of aphasia developed and the age of the person with aphasia. It was found that patients with fluent aphasia are on average older than people with non-fluent aphasia. It was also found that among patients with lesions confined to the anterior portion of the brain an unexpected portion of them presented with fluent aphasia and were remarkably older than those with non-fluent aphasia. This effect was not found when the posterior portion of the brain was studied.\nIn a study on the features associated with different disease trajectories in Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related primary progressive aphasia (PPA), it was found that metabolic patterns via PET SPM analysis can help predict progression of total loss of speech and functional autonomy in AD and PPA patients. This was done by comparing an MRI or CT image of the brain and presence of a radioactive biomarker with normal levels in patients without Alzheimer's Disease. Apraxia is another disorder often correlated with aphasia. This is due to a subset of apraxia which affects speech. Specifically, this subset affects the movement of muscles associated with speech production, apraxia and aphasia are often correlated due to the proximity of neural substrates associated with each of the disorders. Researchers concluded that there were 2 areas of lesion overlap between patients with apraxia and aphasia, the anterior temporal lobe and the left inferior parietal lobe.\nEvidence for positive treatment outcomes can also be quantified using neuroimaging tools. The use of fMRI and an automatic classifier can help predict language recovery outcomes in stroke patients with 86% accuracy when coupled with age and language test scores. The stimuli tested were sentences both correct and incorrect and the subject had to press a button whenever the sentence was incorrect. The fMRI data collected focused on responses in regions of interest identified by healthy subjects. \u00a0Recovery from aphasia can also be quantified using diffusion tensor imaging. The accurate fasciculus (AF) connects the right and left superior temporal lobe, premotor regions/posterior inferior frontal gyrus. and the primary motor cortex. In a study which enrolled patients in a speech therapy program, an increase in AF fibers and volume was found in patients after 6-weeks in the program which correlated with long-term improvement in those patients. The results of the experiment are pictured in Figure 2. This implies that DTI can be used to quantify the improvement in patients after speech and language treatment programs are applied.\nClassification.\nAphasia is best thought of as a collection of different disorders, rather than a single problem. Each individual with aphasia will present with their own particular combination of language strengths and weaknesses. Consequently, it is a major challenge just to document the various difficulties that can occur in different people, let alone decide how they might best be treated. Most classifications of the aphasias tend to divide the various symptoms into broad classes. A common approach is to distinguish between the fluent aphasias (where speech remains fluent, but content may be lacking, and the person may have difficulties understanding others), and the nonfluent aphasias (where speech is very halting and effortful, and may consist of just one or two words at a time).\nHowever, no such broad-based grouping has proven fully adequate, or reliable. There is wide variation among people even within the same broad grouping, and aphasias can be highly selective. For instance, people with naming deficits (anomic aphasia) might show an inability only for naming buildings, or people, or colors. Unfortunately, assessments that characterize aphasia in these groupings have persisted. This is not helpful to people living with aphasia, and provides inaccurate descriptions of an individual pattern of difficulties.\nThere are typical difficulties with speech and language that come with normal aging as well. As we age, language can become more difficult to process, resulting in a slowing of verbal comprehension, reading abilities and more likely word finding difficulties. With each of these, though, unlike some aphasias, functionality within daily life remains intact.\nClassical-localizationist approaches.\nLocalizationist approaches aim to classify the aphasias according to their major presenting characteristics and the regions of the brain that most probably gave rise to them. Inspired by the early work of nineteenth-century neurologists Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke, these approaches identify two major subtypes of aphasia and several more minor subtypes:\nRecent classification schemes adopting this approach, such as the Boston-Neoclassical Model, also group these classical aphasia subtypes into two larger classes: the nonfluent aphasias (which encompasses Broca's aphasia and transcortical motor aphasia) and the fluent aphasias (which encompasses Wernicke's aphasia, conduction aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia). These schemes also identify several further aphasia subtypes, including: anomic aphasia, which is characterized by a selective difficulty finding the names for things; and global aphasia, where both expression and comprehension of speech are severely compromised.\nMany localizationist approaches also recognize the existence of additional, more \"pure\" forms of language disorder that may affect only a single language skill. For example, in pure alexia, a person may be able to write, but not read, and in pure word deafness, they may be able to produce speech and to read, but not understand speech when it is spoken to them.\nCognitive neuropsychological approaches.\nAlthough localizationist approaches provide a useful way of classifying the different patterns of language difficulty into broad groups, one problem is that most individuals do not fit neatly into one category or another. Another problem is that the categories, particularly the major ones such as Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia, still remain quite broad and do not meaningfully reflect a person's difficulties. Consequently, even amongst those who meet the criteria for classification into a subtype, there can be enormous variability in the types of difficulties they experience.\nInstead of categorizing every individual into a specific subtype, cognitive neuropsychological approaches aim to identify the key language skills or \"modules\" that are not functioning properly in each individual. A person could potentially have difficulty with just one module, or with a number of modules. This type of approach requires a framework or theory as to what skills/modules are needed to perform different kinds of language tasks. For example, the model of Max Coltheart identifies a module that recognizes phonemes as they are spoken, which is essential for any task involving recognition of words. Similarly, there is a module that stores phonemes that the person is planning to produce in speech, and this module is critical for any task involving the production of long words or long strings of speech. Once a theoretical framework has been established, the functioning of each module can then be assessed using a specific test or set of tests. In the clinical setting, use of this model usually involves conducting a battery of assessments, each of which tests one or a number of these modules. Once a diagnosis is reached as to the skills/modules where the most significant impairment lies, therapy can proceed to treat these skills.\nProgressive aphasias.\nPrimary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a neurodegenerative focal dementia that can be associated with progressive illnesses or dementia, such as frontotemporal dementia / Pick Complex Motor neuron disease, Progressive supranuclear palsy, and Alzheimer's disease, which is the gradual process of progressively losing the ability to think. Gradual loss of language function occurs in the context of relatively well-preserved memory, visual processing, and personality until the advanced stages. Symptoms usually begin with word-finding problems (naming) and progress to impaired grammar (syntax) and comprehension (sentence processing and semantics). The loss of language before the loss of memory differentiates PPA from typical dementias. People with PPA may have difficulties comprehending what others are saying. They can also have difficulty trying to find the right words to make a sentence. There are three classifications of Primary Progressive Aphasia : Progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), Semantic Dementia (SD), and Logopenic progressive aphasia (LPA).\nProgressive Jargon Aphasia is a fluent or receptive aphasia in which the person's speech is incomprehensible, but appears to make sense to them. Speech is fluent and effortless with intact syntax and grammar, but the person has problems with the selection of nouns. Either they will replace the desired word with another that sounds or looks like the original one or has some other connection or they will replace it with sounds. As such, people with jargon aphasia often use neologisms, and may perseverate if they try to replace the words they cannot find with sounds. Substitutions commonly involve picking another (actual) word starting with the same sound (e.g., clocktower \u2013 colander), picking another semantically related to the first (e.g., letter \u2013 scroll), or picking one phonetically similar to the intended one (e.g., lane \u2013 late).\nDeaf aphasia.\nThere have been many instances showing that there is a form of aphasia among deaf individuals. Sign languages are, after all, forms of language that have been shown to use the same areas of the brain as verbal forms of language. Mirror neurons become activated when an animal is acting in a particular way or watching another individual act in the same manner. These mirror neurons are important in giving an individual the ability to mimic movements of hands. Broca's area of speech production has been shown to contain several of these mirror neurons resulting in significant similarities of brain activity between sign language and vocal speech communication. People use facial movements to create, what other people perceive, to be faces of emotions. While combining these facial movements with speech, a more full form of language is created which enables the species to interact with a much more complex and detailed form of communication. Sign language also uses these facial movements and emotions along with the primary hand movement way of communicating. These facial movement forms of communication come from the same areas of the brain. When dealing with damages to certain areas of the brain, vocal forms of communication are in jeopardy of severe forms of aphasia. Since these same areas of the brain are being used for sign language, these same, at least very similar, forms of aphasia can show in the Deaf community. Individuals can show a form of Wernicke's aphasia with sign language and they show deficits in their abilities in being able to produce any form of expressions. Broca's aphasia shows up in some people, as well. These individuals find tremendous difficulty in being able to actually sign the linguistic concepts they are trying to express.\nSeverity.\nThe severity of the type of aphasia varies depending on the size of the stroke. However, there is much variance between how often one type of severity occurs in certain types of aphasia. For instance, any type of aphasia can range from mild to profound. Regardless of the severity of aphasia, people can make improvements due to spontaneous recovery and treatment in the acute stages of recovery. Additionally, while most studies propose that the greatest outcomes occur in people with severe aphasia when treatment is provided in the acute stages of recovery, Robey (1998) also found that those with severe aphasia are capable of making strong language gains in the chronic stage of recovery as well. This finding implies that persons with aphasia have the potential to have functional outcomes regardless of how severe their aphasia may be. While there is no distinct pattern of the outcomes of aphasia based on severity alone, global aphasia typically makes functional language gains, but may be gradual since global aphasia affects many language areas.\nPrevention.\nAphasia is largely caused by unavoidable instances. However, some precautions can be taken to decrease risk for experiencing one of the two major causes of aphasia: stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI). To decrease the probability of having an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke, one should take the following precautions:\nTo prevent aphasia due to traumatic injury, one should take precautionary measures when engaging in dangerous activities such as:\nAdditionally, one should always seek medical attention after sustaining head trauma due to a fall or accident. The sooner that one receives medical attention for a traumatic brain injury, the less likely one is to experience long-term or severe effects.\nManagement.\nMost acute cases of aphasia recover some or most skills by participating in speech and language therapy. Recovery and improvement can continue for years after the stroke. After the onset of aphasia, there is approximately a six-month period of spontaneous recovery; during this time, the brain is attempting to recover and repair the damaged neurons. Improvement varies widely, depending on the aphasia's cause, type, and severity. Recovery also depends on the person's age, health, motivation, handedness, and educational level.\nSpeech and language therapy that is higher intensity, higher dose or provided over a long duration of time leads to significantly better functional communication, but people might be more likely to drop out of high intensity treatment (up to 15 hours per week). A total of 20\u201350 hours of speech and language therapy is necessary for the best recovery. The most improvement happens when 2\u20135 hours of therapy is provided each week over 4\u20135 days. Recovery is further improved when besides the therapy people practice tasks at home. Speech and language therapy is also effective if it is delivered online through video or by a family member who has been trained by a professional therapist.\nRecovery with therapy is also dependent on the recency of stroke and the age of the person. Receiving therapy within a month after the stroke leads to the greatest improvements. Three or six months after the stroke more therapy will be needed, but symptoms can still be improved. People with aphasia who are younger than 55 years are the most likely to improve, but people older than 75 years can still get better with therapy.\nThere is no one treatment proven to be effective for all types of aphasias. The reason that there is no universal treatment for aphasia is because of the nature of the disorder and the various ways it is presented. Aphasia is rarely exhibited identically, implying that treatment needs to be catered specifically to the individual. Studies have shown that, although there is no consistency on treatment methodology in literature, there is a strong indication that treatment, in general, has positive outcomes. Therapy for aphasia ranges from increasing functional communication to improving speech accuracy, depending on the person's severity, needs and support of family and friends. Group therapy allows individuals to work on their pragmatic and communication skills with other individuals with aphasia, which are skills that may not often be addressed in individual one-on-one therapy sessions. It can also help increase confidence and social skills in a comfortable setting.\nEvidence does not support the use of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for improving aphasia after stroke. Moderate quality evidence does indicate naming performance improvements for nouns, but not verbs using tDCS\nSpecific treatment techniques include the following:\nSemantic feature analysis (SFA)\u00a0\u2014 a type of aphasia treatment that targets word-finding deficits\u00a0\u2014 is based on the theory that neural connections can be strengthened by using related words and phrases that are similar to the target word, to eventually activate the target word in the brain. SFA can be implemented in multiple forms such as verbally, written, using picture cards, etc. The SLP provides prompting questions to the individual with aphasia in order for the person to name the picture provided. Studies show that SFA is an effective intervention for improving confrontational naming.\nMelodic intonation therapy is used to treat non-fluent aphasia and has proved to be effective in some cases. However, there is still no evidence from randomized controlled trials confirming the efficacy of MIT in chronic aphasia. MIT is used to help people with aphasia vocalize themselves through speech song, which is then transferred as a spoken word. Good candidates for this therapy include people who have had left hemisphere strokes, non-fluent aphasias such as Broca's, good auditory comprehension, poor repetition and articulation, and good emotional stability and memory. An alternative explanation is that the efficacy of MIT depends on neural circuits involved in the processing of rhythmicity and formulaic expressions (examples taken from the MIT manual: \"I am fine,\" \"how are you?\" or \"thank you\"); while rhythmic features associated with melodic intonation may engage primarily left-hemisphere subcortical areas of the brain, the use of formulaic expressions is known to be supported by right-hemisphere cortical and bilateral subcortical neural networks.\nSystematic reviews support the effectiveness and importance of partner training. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD), involving family with the treatment of an aphasic loved one is ideal for all involved, because while it will no doubt assist in their recovery, it will also make it easier for members of the family to learn how best to communicate with them.\nWhen a person's speech is insufficient, different kinds of augmentative and alternative communication could be considered such as alphabet boards, pictorial communication books, specialized software for computers or apps for tablets or smartphones.\nWhen addressing Wernicke's aphasia, according to Bakheit et al. (2007), the lack of awareness of the language impairments, a common characteristic of Wernicke's aphasia, may affect the rate and extent of therapy outcomes. Robey (1998) determined that at least 2 hours of treatment per week is recommended for making significant language gains. Spontaneous recovery may cause some language gains, but without speech-language therapy, the outcomes can be half as strong as those with therapy.\nWhen addressing Broca's aphasia, better outcomes occur when the person participates in therapy, and treatment is more effective than no treatment for people in the acute period. Two or more hours of therapy per week in acute and post-acute stages produced the greatest results. High-intensity therapy was most effective, and low-intensity therapy was almost equivalent to no therapy.\nPeople with global aphasia are sometimes referred to as having irreversible aphasic syndrome, often making limited gains in auditory comprehension, and recovering no functional language modality with therapy. With this said, people with global aphasia may retain gestural communication skills that may enable success when communicating with conversational partners within familiar conditions. Process-oriented treatment options are limited, and people may not become competent language users as readers, listeners, writers, or speakers no matter how extensive therapy is. However, people's daily routines and quality of life can be enhanced with reasonable and modest goals. After the first month, there is limited to no healing to language abilities of most people. There is a grim prognosis, leaving 83% who were globally aphasic after the first month that will remain globally aphasic at the first year. Some people are so severely impaired that their existing process-oriented treatment approaches offer no signs of progress, and therefore cannot justify the cost of therapy.\nPerhaps due to the relative rareness of conduction aphasia, few studies have specifically studied the effectiveness of therapy for people with this type of aphasia. From the studies performed, results showed that therapy can help to improve specific language outcomes. One intervention that has had positive results is auditory repetition training. Kohn et al. (1990) reported that drilled auditory repetition training related to improvements in spontaneous speech, Francis et al. (2003) reported improvements in sentence comprehension, and Kalinyak-Fliszar et al. (2011) reported improvements in auditory-visual short-term memory.\nIndividualized service delivery.\nIntensity of treatment should be individualized based on the recency of stroke, therapy goals, and other specific characteristics such as age, size of lesion, overall health status, and motivation. Each individual reacts differently to treatment intensity and is able to tolerate treatment at different times post-stroke. Intensity of treatment after a stroke should be dependent on the person's motivation, stamina, and tolerance for therapy.\nOutcomes.\nIf the symptoms of aphasia last longer than two or three months after a stroke, a complete recovery is unlikely. However, it is important to note that some people continue to improve over a period of years and even decades. Improvement is a slow process that usually involves both helping the individual and family understand the nature of aphasia and learning compensatory strategies for communicating.\nAfter a traumatic brain injury (TBI) or cerebrovascular accident (CVA), the brain undergoes several healing and re-organization processes, which may result in improved language function. This is referred to as spontaneous recovery. Spontaneous recovery is the natural recovery the brain makes without treatment, and the brain begins to reorganize and change in order to recover. There are several factors that contribute to a person's chance of recovery caused by stroke, including stroke size and location. Age, sex, and education have not been found to be very predictive. There is also research pointing to damage in the left hemisphere healing more effectively than the right.\nSpecific to aphasia, spontaneous recovery varies among affected people and may not look the same in everyone, making it difficult to predict recovery.\nThough some cases of Wernicke's aphasia have shown greater improvements than more mild forms of aphasia, people with Wernicke's aphasia may not reach as high a level of speech abilities as those with mild forms of aphasia.\nPrevalence.\nAphasia affects about two million people in the U.S. and 250,000 people in Great Britain. Nearly 180,000 people acquire the disorder every year in the U.S., 170,000 due to stroke. Any person of any age can develop aphasia, given that it is often caused by a traumatic injury. However, people who are middle aged and older are the most likely to acquire aphasia, as the other etiologies are more likely at older ages. For example, approximately 75% of all strokes occur in individuals over the age of 65. Strokes account for most documented cases of aphasia: 25% to 40% of people who survive a stroke develop aphasia as a result of damage to the language-processing regions of the brain.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded case of aphasia is from an Egyptian papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, which details speech problems in a person with a traumatic brain injury to the temporal lobe.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, aphasia was a major focus for scientists and philosophers who were working in the beginning stages of the field of psychology.\nIn medical research, speechlessness was described as an incorrect prognosis, and there was no assumption that underlying language complications existed. Broca and his colleagues were some of the first to write about aphasia, but Wernicke was the first credited to have written extensively about aphasia being a disorder that contained comprehension difficulties. Despite claims of who reported on aphasia first, it was F.J. Gall that gave the first full description of aphasia after studying wounds to the brain, as well as his observation of speech difficulties resulting from vascular lesions. A recent book on the entire history of aphasia is available (Reference: Tesak, J. &amp; Code, C. (2008) \"Milestones in the History of Aphasia: Theories and Protagonists\". Hove, East Sussex: Psychology Press).\nEtymology.\n\"Aphasia\" is from Greek \"a-\" (\"without\", negative prefix) + \"ph\u00e1sis\" (\"\u03c6\u03ac\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\", \"speech\").\nThe word \"aphasia\" comes from the word \u1f00\u03c6\u03b1\u03c3\u03af\u03b1 \"aphasia\", in Ancient Greek, which means \"speechlessness\", derived from \u1f04\u03c6\u03b1\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 \"aphatos\", \"speechless\" from \u1f00- \"a-\", \"not, un\" and \u03c6\u03b7\u03bc\u03af \"phemi\", \"I speak\".\nFurther research.\nResearch is currently being done using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to witness the difference in how language is processed in normal brains vs aphasic brains. This will help researchers to understand exactly what the brain must go through in order to recover from Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and how different areas of the brain respond after such an injury.\nAnother intriguing approach being tested is that of drug therapy. Research is in progress that will hopefully uncover whether or not certain drugs might be used in addition to speech-language therapy in order to facilitate recovery of proper language function. It's possible that the best treatment for Aphasia might involve combining drug treatment with therapy, instead of relying on one over the other.\nOne other method being researched as a potential therapeutic combination with speech-language therapy is brain stimulation. One particular method, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), alters brain activity in whatever area it happens to stimulate, which has recently led scientists to wonder if this shift in brain function caused by TMS might help people re-learn language. Another type of external brain stimulation is transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS), but existing research has not shown it to be useful for improving aphasia after a stroke."}
{"id": "2089", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2089", "title": "Aorta", "text": "The aorta ( ; : aortas or aortae) is the main and largest artery in the human body, originating from the left ventricle of the heart, branching upwards immediately after, and extending down to the abdomen, where it splits at the aortic bifurcation into two smaller arteries (the common iliac arteries). The aorta distributes oxygenated blood to all parts of the body through the systemic circulation.\nStructure.\nSections.\nIn anatomical sources, the aorta is usually divided into sections.\nOne way of classifying a part of the aorta is by anatomical compartment, where the thoracic aorta (or thoracic portion of the aorta) runs from the heart to the diaphragm. The aorta then continues downward as the abdominal aorta (or abdominal portion of the aorta) from the diaphragm to the aortic bifurcation.\nAnother system divides the aorta with respect to its course and the direction of blood flow. In this system, the aorta starts as the ascending aorta, travels superiorly from the heart, and then makes a hairpin turn known as the aortic arch. Following the aortic arch, the aorta then travels inferiorly as the descending aorta. The descending aorta has two parts. The aorta begins to descend in the thoracic cavity and is consequently known as the thoracic aorta. After the aorta passes through the diaphragm, it is known as the abdominal aorta. The aorta ends by dividing into two major blood vessels, the common iliac arteries and a smaller midline vessel, the median sacral artery.\nAscending aorta.\nThe ascending aorta begins at the opening of the aortic valve in the left ventricle of the heart. It runs through a common pericardial sheath with the pulmonary trunk. These two blood vessels twist around each other, causing the aorta to start out posterior to the pulmonary trunk, but end by twisting to its right and anterior side.\nThe transition from ascending aorta to aortic arch is at the pericardial reflection on the aorta.\nAt the root of the ascending aorta, the lumen has small pockets between the cusps of the aortic valve and the wall of the aorta, which are called the aortic sinuses or the sinuses of Valsalva. The left aortic sinus contains the origin of the left coronary artery and the right aortic sinus likewise gives rise to the right coronary artery. Together, these two arteries supply the heart. The posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a coronary artery. For this reason the left, right and posterior aortic sinuses are also called left-coronary, right-coronary and non-coronary sinuses.\nAortic arch.\nThe aortic arch loops over the left pulmonary artery and the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk, to which it remains connected by the ligamentum arteriosum, a remnant of the fetal circulation that is obliterated a few days after birth. In addition to these blood vessels, the aortic arch crosses the left main bronchus. Between the aortic arch and the pulmonary trunk is a network of autonomic nerve fibers, the cardiac plexus or \"aortic plexus\". The left vagus nerve, which passes anterior to the aortic arch, gives off a major branch, the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which loops under the aortic arch just lateral to the ligamentum arteriosum. It then runs back to the neck.\nThe aortic arch has three major branches: from proximal to distal, they are the brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, and the left subclavian artery. The brachiocephalic trunk supplies the right side of the head and neck as well as the right arm and chest wall, while the latter two together supply the left side of the same regions.\nThe aortic arch ends, and the descending aorta begins at the level of the intervertebral disc between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae.\nThoracic aorta.\nThe thoracic aorta gives rise to the intercostal and subcostal arteries, as well as to the superior and inferior left bronchial arteries and variable branches to the esophagus, mediastinum, and pericardium. Its lowest pair of branches are the superior phrenic arteries, which supply the diaphragm, and the subcostal arteries for the twelfth rib.\nAbdominal aorta.\nThe abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm at the level of the twelfth thoracic vertebra. It gives rise to lumbar and musculophrenic arteries, renal and middle suprarenal arteries, and visceral arteries (the celiac trunk, the superior mesenteric artery and the inferior mesenteric artery). It ends in a bifurcation into the left and right common iliac arteries. At the point of the bifurcation, there also springs a smaller branch, the median sacral artery.\nDevelopment.\nThe ascending aorta develops from the outflow tract, which initially starts as a single tube connecting the heart with the aortic arches (which will form the great arteries) in early development but is then separated into the aorta and the pulmonary trunk.\nThe aortic arches start as five pairs of symmetrical arteries connecting the heart with the dorsal aorta, and then undergo a significant remodelling to form the final asymmetrical structure of the great arteries, with the 3rd pair of arteries contributing to the common carotids, the right 4th forming the base and middle part of the right subclavian artery and the left 4th being the central part of the aortic arch. The smooth muscle of the great arteries and the population of cells that form the aorticopulmonary septum that separates the aorta and pulmonary artery is derived from cardiac neural crest. This contribution of the neural crest to the great artery smooth muscle is unusual as most smooth muscle is derived from mesoderm. In fact the smooth muscle within the abdominal aorta is derived from mesoderm, and the coronary arteries, which arise just above the semilunar valves, possess smooth muscle of mesodermal origin. A failure of the aorticopulmonary septum to divide the great vessels results in persistent truncus arteriosus.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe aorta is an elastic artery, and as such is quite distensible. The aorta consists of a heterogeneous mixture of smooth muscle, nerves, intimal cells, endothelial cells, immune cells, fibroblast-like cells, and a complex extracellular matrix. The vascular wall is subdivided into three layers known as the tunica externa, tunica media, and tunica intima. The aorta is covered by an extensive network of tiny blood vessels called vasa vasorum, which feed the tunica externa and tunica media, the outer layers of the aorta. The aortic arch contains baroreceptors and chemoreceptors that relay information concerning blood pressure and blood pH and carbon dioxide levels to the medulla oblongata of the brain. This information along with information from baroreceptors and chemoreceptors located elsewhere is processed by the brain and the autonomic nervous system mediates appropriate homeostatic responses.\nWithin the tunica media, smooth muscle and the extracellular matrix are quantitatively the largest components, these are arranged concentrically as musculoelastic layers (the elastic lamella) in mammals. The elastic lamella, which comprise smooth muscle and elastic matrix, can be considered as the fundamental structural unit of the aorta and consist of elastic fibers, collagens (predominately type III), proteoglycans, and glycoaminoglycans. The elastic matrix dominates the biomechanical properties of the aorta. The smooth muscle component, while contractile, does not substantially alter the diameter of the aorta, but rather serves to increase the stiffness and viscoelasticity of the aortic wall when activated.\nVariation.\nVariations may occur in the location of the aorta, and the way in which arteries branch off the aorta. The aorta, normally on the left side of the body, may be found on the right in dextrocardia, in which the heart is found on the right, or situs inversus, in which the location of all organs are flipped.\nVariations in the branching of individual arteries may also occur. For example, the left vertebral artery may arise from the aorta, instead of the left common carotid artery.\nIn patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital disorder, the fetal ductus arteriosus fails to close, leaving an open vessel connecting the pulmonary artery to the proximal descending aorta.\nFunction.\nThe aorta supplies all of the systemic circulation, which means that the entire body, except for the respiratory zone of the lung, receives its blood from the aorta. Broadly speaking, branches from the ascending aorta supply the heart; branches from the aortic arch supply the head, neck, and arms; branches from the thoracic descending aorta supply the chest (excluding the heart and the respiratory zone of the lung); and branches from the abdominal aorta supply the abdomen. The pelvis and legs get their blood from the common iliac arteries.\nBlood flow and velocity.\nThe contraction of the heart during systole is responsible for ejection and creates a (pulse) wave that is propagated down the aorta, into the arterial tree. The wave is reflected at sites of impedance mismatching, such as bifurcations, where reflected waves rebound to return to semilunar valves and the origin of the aorta. These return waves create the dicrotic notch displayed in the aortic pressure curve during the cardiac cycle as these reflected waves push on the aortic semilunar valve. With age, the aorta stiffens such that the pulse wave is propagated faster and reflected waves return to the heart faster before the semilunar valve closes, which raises the blood pressure. The stiffness of the aorta is associated with a number of diseases and pathologies, and noninvasive measures of the pulse wave velocity are an independent indicator of hypertension. Measuring the pulse wave velocity (invasively and non-invasively) is a means of determining arterial stiffness. Maximum aortic velocity may be noted as Vmax or less commonly as AoVmax.\nMean arterial pressure (MAP) is highest in the aorta, and the MAP decreases across the circulation from aorta to arteries to arterioles to capillaries to veins back to atrium. The difference between aortic and right atrial pressure accounts for blood flow in the circulation. When the left ventricle contracts to force blood into the aorta, the aorta expands. This stretching gives the potential energy that will help maintain blood pressure during diastole, as during this time the aorta contracts passively. This Windkessel effect of the great elastic arteries has important biomechanical implications. The elastic recoil helps conserve the energy from the pumping heart and smooth out the pulsatile nature created by the heart. Aortic pressure is highest at the aorta and becomes less pulsatile and lower pressure as blood vessels divide into arteries, arterioles, and capillaries such that flow is slow and smooth for gases and nutrient exchange.\nClinical significance.\nCentral aortic blood pressure has frequently been shown to have greater prognostic value and to show a more accurate response to antihypertensive drugs than has peripheral blood pressure.\nOther animals.\nAll amniotes have a broadly similar arrangement to that of humans, albeit with a number of individual variations. In fish, however, there are two separate vessels referred to as aortas. The ventral aorta carries de-oxygenated blood from the heart to the gills; part of this vessel forms the ascending aorta in tetrapods (the remainder forms the pulmonary artery). A second, dorsal aorta carries oxygenated blood from the gills to the rest of the body and is homologous with the descending aorta of tetrapods. The two aortas are connected by a number of vessels, one passing through each of the gills.\nAmphibians also retain the fifth connecting vessel, so that the aorta has two parallel arches.\nHistory.\nThe word \"aorta\" stems from the Late Latin \"\" from Classical Greek \"aort\u0113\" (), from \"aeir\u014d\", \"I lift, raise\" () This term was first applied by Aristotle when describing the aorta and describes accurately how it seems to be \"suspended\" above the heart.\nThe function of the aorta is documented in the Talmud, where it is noted as one of three major vessels entering or leaving the heart, and where perforation is linked to death."}
{"id": "2090", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2090", "title": "Albert of Brandenburg Prussia", "text": ""}
{"id": "2093", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2093", "title": "Abimelech", "text": "Abimelech (also spelled Abimelek or Avimelech; ) was the generic name given to all Philistine kings in the Hebrew Bible from the time of Abraham through King David. In the Book of Judges, Abimelech, son of Gideon, of the Tribe of Manasseh, is proclaimed king of Shechem after the death of his father.\nEtymology.\nThe name or title \"Abimelech\" is formed from Canaanite words for \"father\" and \"king,\" and may be interpreted in a variety of ways, including \"Father-King\", \"My father is king,\" or \"Father of a king.\" In the Pentateuch, it is used as a title for kings in the land of Canaan.\nAbimelech can be translated in Arabic as well into \"My father is king\", \"My father is owner\" or \"Father of a king,\" where () means father or my father while () means king or () for owner.\nAt the time of the Amarna tablets (mid-14th century BC), there was an Egyptian governor of Tyre similarly named Abimilki, \nAbimelech of Gerar.\nAbimelech was most prominently the name of a polytheistic king of Gerar who is mentioned in two of the three wife\u2013sister narratives in the Book of Genesis, in connection with both Abraham and Isaac.\nKing Abimelech of Gerar also appears in an extra-biblical tradition recounted in texts such as the \"Arabic Apocalypse of Peter\", the \"Cave of Treasures\" and the \"Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan\", as one of twelve regional kings in Abraham's time said to have built the city of Jerusalem for Melchizedek.\nAbimelech son of Jerubbaal/Gideon.\nThe Book of Judges mentions Abimelech, son of judge Gideon (also known as Jerubbaal). According to the biblical narrative, Abimelech was an extremely conniving and evil person. He persuaded his mother's brothers to encourage the people of Shechem to back him in a plot to overthrow his family rule and make him sole ruler. \nAfter slaying all but one of his seventy brothers, Abimelech was crowned king. The brother who escaped, Jotham youngest son of Jerrubaal, made a pronouncement against Abimelech and those who had crowned him.\nThe curse was that if they had not dealt righteously with the family of Jerrubaal, then fire would come against Abimelech from the people of Shechem and fire would come out of Abimelech against the people who had backed him in this bloody coup.\nAfter Abimelech ruled for three years, the pronouncement came through. The people of Shechem set robbers to lie in wait of any goods or money headed to Abimelech and steal everything.\nThen Gaal Son of Ebed went to Shechem and drunkenly bragged that he would remove Abimelech from the throne. Zebul, ruler of Shechem, sent word to Abimelech along with a battle strategy. Once Zebul taunted Gaal into fighting Abimelech, he shut Gaal and his brethren out of the city. \nAbimelech then slew the field workers that came out of the city of Shechem the next day. When he heard that the people of Shechem had locked themselves in a strong tower, he and his men set fire to it, killing about a thousand men and women.\nAfter this, Abimelech went to Thebez and camped against it. When he went close to the tower in Thebez to set it on fire, a woman dropped an upper millstone on Abimelech's head. He did not want to be known as having been killed by a woman, so he asked his armour bearer to run him through with a sword. His place of death is cited as being Thebez.\nRussian use.\nAvimelekh () is a Russian male first name derived from Abimelech. It was included into various, often handwritten, church calendars throughout the 17th\u201319th centuries, but was omitted from the official Synodal Menologium at the end of the 19th century. \nOther people with this name.\nApart from the king (or kings) of Gerar, the Bible also records this name for:\nOther literary references include:"}
{"id": "2095", "revid": "16084631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2095", "title": "Anomalous operation", "text": ""}
{"id": "2099", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2099", "title": "Andrew Tridgell", "text": "Andrew \"Tridge\" Tridgell (born 28 February 1967) is an Australian computer programmer. He is the author of and a contributor to the Samba file server, and co-inventor of the rsync algorithm.\nHe has analysed complex proprietary protocols and algorithms, to allow compatible free and open source software implementations.\nProjects.\nTridgell was a major developer of the Samba software, analyzing the Server Message Block protocol used for workgroup and network file sharing by Microsoft Windows products. He developed the hierarchical memory allocator, originally as part of Samba.\nFor his PhD dissertation, he co-developed rsync, including the rsync algorithm, a highly efficient file transfer and synchronisation tool. He was also the original author of rzip, which uses a similar algorithm to rsync. He developed spamsum, based on locality-sensitive hashing algorithms.\nHe is the author of KnightCap, a reinforcement-learning based chess engine.\nTridgell was also a leader in hacking the TiVo to make it work in Australia, which uses the PAL video format.\nIn April 2005, Tridgell tried to produce free software (now known as SourcePuller) that interoperated with the BitKeeper source code repository. This was cited as the reason that BitMover revoked a license allowing Linux developers free use of their BitKeeper product. Linus Torvalds, the creator of the Linux kernel, and Tridgell were thus involved in a public debate about the events, in which Tridgell stated that, not having bought or owned BitKeeper \u2013 and thus having never agreed to its license \u2013 he could not violate it, and was analyzing the protocol ethically, as he had done with Samba. Tridgell's involvement in the project resulted in Torvalds accusing him of playing dirty tricks with BitKeeper. Tridgell claimed his analysis started with simply telneting to a BitKeeper server and typing codice_1.\nIn 2011 Tridgell became involved with the software development of ArduPilot Mega, an open source Arduino-based UAV controller board, working on an entry with CanberraUAV for the UAV Challenge Outback Rescue.\nAcademic achievements.\nTridgell completed a PhD at the Computer Sciences Laboratory of the Australian National University. His original doctorate work was in the area of speech recognition but was never completed. His submitted dissertation 'Efficient Algorithms for Sorting and Synchronization' was based on his work on the rsync algorithm."}
{"id": "2100", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2100", "title": "Applesoft BASIC", "text": "Applesoft BASIC is a dialect of Microsoft BASIC, developed by Marc McDonald and Ric Weiland, supplied with Apple II computers. It supersedes Integer BASIC and is the BASIC in ROM in all Apple II series computers after the original Apple II model. It is also referred to as FP BASIC (from floating point) because of the Apple DOS command codice_1 used to invoke it, instead of codice_2 for Integer BASIC.\nApplesoft BASIC was supplied by Microsoft and its name is derived from the names of both Apple Computer and Microsoft. Apple employees, including Randy Wigginton, adapted Microsoft's interpreter for the Apple II and added several features. The first version of Applesoft was released in 1977 on cassette tape and lacked proper support for high-resolution graphics. Applesoft II, which was made available on cassette and disk and in the ROM of the Apple II Plus and subsequent models, was released in 1978. It is this latter version, which has some syntax differences and support for the Apple II high-resolution graphics modes, that is usually synonymous with the term \"Applesoft.\"\nHistory.\nWhen Steve Wozniak wrote Integer BASIC for the Apple II, he did not implement support for floating-point arithmetic because he was primarily interested in writing games, a task for which integers alone were sufficient. In 1976, Microsoft had developed Microsoft BASIC for the MOS Technology 6502, but at the time there was no production computer that used it. Upon learning that Apple had a 6502 machine, Microsoft asked if the company were interested in licensing BASIC, but Steve Jobs replied that Apple already had one.\nThe Apple II was unveiled to the public at the West Coast Computer Faire in April 1977 and became available for sale in June. One of the most common customer complaints about the computer was BASIC's lack of floating-point math. Making things more problematic was that the rival Commodore PET personal computer had a floating point-capable BASIC interpreter from the beginning. As Wozniak\u2014the only person who understood Integer BASIC well enough to add floating point features\u2014was busy with the Disk II drive and controller and with Apple DOS, Apple turned to Microsoft.\nApple reportedly obtained an eight-year license for Applesoft BASIC from Microsoft for a flat fee of $31,000, renewing it in 1985 through an arrangement that gave Microsoft the rights and source code for Apple's Macintosh version of BASIC. Applesoft was designed to be backwards-compatible with Integer BASIC and uses the core of Microsoft's 6502 BASIC implementation, which includes using the GET command for detecting key presses and not requiring any spaces on program lines. While Applesoft BASIC is slower than Integer BASIC, it has many features that the older BASIC lacks:\nConversely, Applesoft lacks the codice_10 (remainder) operator from Integer BASIC.\nAdapting BASIC for the Apple II was a tedious job as Apple received a source listing for Microsoft 6502 BASIC which proved to be buggy and also required the addition of Integer BASIC commands. Since Apple had no 6502 assembler on hand, the development team was forced to send the source code over the phone lines to Call Computer, an outfit that offered compiler services. This was an extremely tedious, slow process and after Call Computer lost the source code due to an equipment malfunction, one of the programmers, Cliff Huston, used his own IMSAI 8080 computer to cross assemble the BASIC source.\nFeatures.\nApplesoft is similar to Commodore's BASIC 2.0 aside from features inherited from Integer BASIC. There are a few minor differences such as Applesoft's lack of bitwise operators; otherwise most BASIC programs that do not use hardware-dependent features will run on both BASICs.\nThe statement redirects output to an expansion card, and redirects input from an expansion card. The slot number of the card is specified after the or within the statement. The computer locks-up if there is no card present in the slot. restores output to the 40 column screen and to the keyboard.\nThe statement can be used to redirect output to the printer (e.g. ) where x is the slot number containing the printer port card. To send a BASIC program listing to the printer, the user types .\nUsing on a slot with a disk drive (usually in slot 6) causes Applesoft to boot the disk drive. Using on a slot with an 80 column card (usually in slot 3) switches to 80 column text mode.\nAs with Commodore BASIC, numeric variables are stored as 40-bit floating point; each variable requires five bytes of memory. The programmer may designate variables as integer by following them with a percent sign, in which case they use two bytes and are limited to a range of -32768 to 32767; however BASIC internally converts them back to floating point when performing calculations, while each percent sign also takes an additional byte of program code, so in practice this feature is only useful for reducing the memory usage of large array variables, as it offers no performance benefit.\nThe RND function generates a pseudorandom fractional number between 0 and 1. returns the most recently generated random number. with a negative number will jump to a point in the sequence determined by the particular negative number used. RND with any positive value generates the next number in the sequence, not dependent on the actual value given.\nLike other implementations of Microsoft BASIC, Applesoft discards spaces (outside of strings and comments) on program lines. codice_11 adds spaces when displaying code for the sake of readability. Since adds a space before and after every tokenized keyword, it often produces two spaces in a row where one would suffice for readability.\nThe default prompt for codice_12 is a question mark. codice_13 does not add a leading space in front of numbers.\nLimitations.\nThrough several early models of the Apple II, Applesoft BASIC did not support the use of lowercase letters in programs, except in strings. codice_13 is a valid command but codice_15 and codice_16 result in a syntax error.\nApplesoft lacks several commands and functions common to most of the non-6502 Microsoft BASIC interpreters, such as:\nApplesoft does not have commands for file or disk handling, other than to save and load programs via cassette tape. The Apple II disk operating system, known simply as DOS, augments the language to provide such abilities.\nOnly the first two letters of variables names are significant. For example, \"LOW\" and \"LOSS\" are treated as the same variable, and attempting to assign a value to \"LOSS\" overwrites any value assigned to \"LOW\". A programmer also has to avoid consecutive letters that are Applesoft commands or operations. The name \"SCORE\" for a variable is interpreted as containing the codice_21 Boolean operator, rendered as codice_22. \"BACKGROUND\" contains codice_23, the command to invoke the low-resolution graphics mode, and results in a syntax error.\nSound and graphics.\nThe only sound support is the option to codice_13 an ASCII bell character to sound the system alert beep, and a codice_25 command to click the speaker. The language is not fast enough to produce more than a baritone buzz from repeated clicks. Programs can, however, store a machine-language routine to be called to generate electronic musical tones spanning several octaves.\nApplesoft supports drawing in the Apple II's low resolution and high resolution modes. There are commands to plot pixels and draw horizontal and vertical lines in low resolution. High resolution allows arbitrary lines and vector-based shape tables for drawing scaled and rotated objects. The only provision for mixing text and graphics is the four lines of text at the bottom of a graphic display.\nBeginning with the Apple IIe, a \"double-high resolution\" mode became available on machines with 128k of memory. This mode essentially duplicates the resolution of the original high resolution mode, but including all 16 colors of the low resolution palette. Applesoft does not provide direct support for this mode. Apple IIGS-specific modes are likewise not supported.\nExtensions.\nApplesoft BASIC can be extended by two means: the ampersand () command and the function. These are two features that call low-level machine-language routines stored in memory, which is useful for routines that need to be fast or require direct access to arbitrary functions or data in memory. The function takes one argument, and can be programmed to derive and return a calculated function value to be used in a numerical expression. is effectively a shorthand for , with an address that is predefined. By calling routines in the Applesoft ROM, it is possible for ampersand routines to parse values that follow the ampersand. Numerous third-party commercial packages were available to extend Applesoft using ampersand routines.\nBugs.\nA deficiency with error-trapping via codice_26 means that the system stack is not reset if an error-handling routine does not invoke codice_27, potentially leading to a crash. The built-in pseudorandom number generator function codice_28 is capable of producing a predictable series of outputs due to the manner in which the generator is seeded when first powering on. This behavior is contrary to how Apple's documentation describes the function.\nPerformance.\nWozniak originally referred to his Integer BASIC as \"Game BASIC\" (having written it so he could implement a \"Breakout\" clone for his new computer). Few action games were written in Applesoft BASIC, in large part because the use of floating-point numbers for all math operations degrades performance.\nApplesoft BASIC programs are stored as a linked list of lines; a codice_29 or codice_30 takes linear time. Some programs have the subroutines at the top to reduce the time for calling them.\nUnlike Integer BASIC, Applesoft does not convert literal numbers (like 100) in the source code to binary when a line is entered. Rather, the ASCII string is converted whenever the line is executed. Since variable lookup is often faster than this conversion, it can be faster to store numeric constants used inside loops in variables before the loop is entered.\nSample code.\nHello, World! in Applesoft BASIC can be entered as the following:\n10TEXT:HOME\n20?\"HELLO WORLD\"\nMultiple commands can be included on the same line of code if separated by a colon (codice_31). The codice_32 can be used in Applesoft BASIC (and almost all versions of Microsoft BASIC) as a shortcut for \"PRINT\", though spelling out the word is not only acceptable but canonical\u2014Applesoft converted \"?\" in entered programs to the same token as \"PRINT\" (thus no memory is actually saved by using \"?\"), thus either appears as \"PRINT\" when a program is listed. The program above appears in a codice_11 command as:\n10 TEXT : HOME\n20 PRINT \"HELLO WORLD\"\nWhen Applesoft II BASIC was initially released in mid-1978, it came on cassette tape and could be loaded into memory via the Apple II's machine language monitor. When the enhanced Apple II+ replaced the original II in 1979, Applesoft was now included in ROM and automatically started on power-up if no bootable floppy disk was present. Conversely, Integer BASIC was now removed from ROM and turned into an executable file on the DOS 3.3 disk.\nEarly evolution.\nThe original Applesoft, stored in RAM as documented in its Reference Manual of November 1977, has smaller interpreter code than the later Applesoft II, occupying 8\u00bd\u00a0KB of memory, instead of the 10\u00a0KB used by the later Applesoft II. Consequently, it lacks a number of command features developed for the later, mainstream version:\nas well as several the later version would have, that had already been present in Apple's Integer BASIC:\nIn addition, its low-resolution graphics commands have different names from their Integer BASIC/Applesoft II counterparts. All command names are of the form PLTx such that GR, COLOR=, PLOT, HLIN and VLIN are called PLTG, PLTC, PLTP, PLTH, and PLTV, respectively. The command for returning to text mode, known as TEXT in other versions, is simply TEX, and carries the proviso that it has to be the last statement in a program line.\nApplesoft BASIC 1.x was closer to Microsoft's original 6502 BASIC code than the later Applesoft II; it retained the Memory Size? prompt and displayed a Microsoft copyright notice. To maintain consistency with Integer BASIC, the \"Ok\" prompt from Microsoft's code was replaced by a ] character. Applesoft 1.x also prompted the user upon loading if they wished to disable the REM statement and the LET keyword in assignment statements in exchange for lores graphics commands.\nThe USR() function is also defined differently, serving as a stand-in for the absent CALL command. Its argument is not for passing a numerical value to the machine-language routine, but is instead the call-address of the routine itself; there is no \"hook\" to pre-define the address. All of several examples in the manual use the function only to access \"system monitor ROM\" routines, or short user-routines to manipulate the ROM routines. No mention is made of any code to calculate the value returned by the function itself; the function is always shown being assigned to \"dummy\" variables, which, without action to set a value by user-code, just receive a meaningless value handed back to them. Even accessed ROM routines that return values (in examples, those that provide the service of PDL() and SCRN() functions) merely have their values stored, by user-routines, in locations that are separately PEEKed in a subsequent statement.\nUnlike in Integer BASIC and Applesoft II, the Boolean operators AND, OR and NOT perform bitwise operations on 16-bit integer values. If they are given values outside that range, an error results.\nThe terms OUT and PLT (and the aforementioned IN) appear in the list of reserved words, but are not explained anywhere in the manual.\nRelated BASICs.\nSeveral compilers for Applesoft BASIC exist, including TASC (The Applesoft Compiler) from Microsoft in 1981.\nColeco claimed that its Adam home computer's SmartBASIC was source-code compatible with Applesoft.\nMicrosoft licensed a BASIC compatible with Applesoft to VTech for its Laser 128 clone.\nReferences.\nThis article includes text from Everything2, licensed under GFDL."}
{"id": "2101", "revid": "198939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2101", "title": "Asterix", "text": "Asterix ( or , \"Asterix the Gaul\") (also known as Asterix and Obelix in some adaptations or The Adventures of Asterix) is a French comic album series about a Gaulish village which, thanks to a magic potion that enhances strength, resists the forces of Julius Caesar's Roman Republic Army in a nonhistorical telling of the time after the Gallic Wars. Many adventures take the titular hero Asterix and his friend Obelix to Rome and beyond.\nThe series first appeared in the Franco-Belgian comic magazine \"Pilote\" on 29 October 1959. It was written by Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and illustrated by Albert Uderzo until Goscinny's death in 1977. Uderzo then took over the writing until 2009, when he sold the rights to publishing company Hachette; he died in 2020. In 2013, a new team consisting of Jean-Yves Ferri (script) and Didier Conrad (artwork) took over. , 40 volumes have been released; the most recent was penned by new writer Fabcaro and released on 26 October 2023.\nBy that year, the volumes in total had sold 393 million copies, making them the best-selling European comic book series, and the second best-selling comic book series in history after \"One Piece\".\nDescription.\nAsterix comics usually start with the following introduction: \" The year is 50 BC. Gaul is entirely occupied by the Romans. Well, not entirely... One small village of indomitable Gauls still holds out against the invaders. And life is not easy for the Roman legionaries who garrison the fortified camps of Totorum, Aquarium, Laudanum and Compendium...\"The series follows the adventures of a village of Gauls as they resist Roman occupation in 50 BC. They do so using a magic potion, brewed by their druid Getafix (Panoramix in the French version), which temporarily gives the recipient superhuman strength. The protagonists, the title character Asterix and his friend Obelix, have various adventures. The \"-ix\" ending of both names (as well as all the other pseudo-Gaulish \"-ix\" names in the series) alludes to the \"-rix\" suffix (meaning \"king\", like \"-rex\" in Latin) present in the names of many real Gaulish chieftains such as Vercingetorix, Orgetorix, and Dumnorix.\nIn some of the stories, they travel to foreign countries, whilst other tales are set in and around their village. For much of the history of the series (volumes 4 through 29), settings in Gaul and abroad alternate, with even-numbered volumes set abroad and odd-numbered volumes set in Gaul, mostly in the village.\nThe \"Asterix\" series is one of the most popular Franco-Belgian comics in the world, with the series being translated into 111 languages and dialects .\nThe success of the series has led to the adaptation of its books into 15 films: ten animated, and five live action (two of which, \"\" and \"Asterix and Obelix vs. Caesar\", were major box office successes in France). There have also been a number of games based on the characters, and a theme park near Paris, Parc Ast\u00e9rix. The very first French satellite, Ast\u00e9rix, launched in 1965, was named after the character, whose name is close to Greek \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1 and Latin \"astrum\", meaning a \"star\". As of 20 April 2022, 385million copies of \"Asterix\" books had been sold worldwide and translated in 111 languages making it the world's most widely translated comic book series, with co-creators Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and Albert Uderzo being France's best-selling authors abroad.\nIn April 2022, Albert and Ren\u00e9's general director, C\u00e9leste Surugue, hosted a 45-minute talk entitled 'The Next Incarnation of a Heritage Franchise: Asterix' and spoke about the success of the Asterix franchise, of which he noted \"The idea was to find a subject with a strong connection with French culture and, while looking at the country's history, they ended up choosing its first defeat, namely the Gaul's Roman colonisation\". He also went on to say how, since 1989, Parc Asterix has attracted an average of 2.3 million visitors per year. Other notable mentions were how the franchise includes 10 animated movies, which recorded over 53 million viewers worldwide. The inception of Studios Id\u00e9fix in 1974 and the opening of Studio 58 in 2016 were among the necessary steps to make Asterix a \"100% Gaulish production\", considered the best solution to keep the creative process under control from start to finish and to employ French manpower. He also noted how a new album is now published every two years, with print figures of 5 million and an estimated readership of 20 million.\nPublication history.\nPrior to creating the \"Asterix\" series, Goscinny and Uderzo had had success with their series \"Oumpah-pah\", which was published in \"Tintin\" magazine.\n\"Ast\u00e9rix\" was originally serialised in \"Pilote\" magazine, debuting in the first issue on 29 October 1959. In 1961, the first book was put together, titled \"Asterix the Gaul\". From then on, books were released generally on a yearly basis. Their success was exponential; the first book sold 6,000 copies in its year of publication; a year later, the second sold 20,000. In 1963, the third sold 40,000; the fourth, released in 1964, sold 150,000. A year later, the fifth sold 300,000; 1966's \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" sold 400,000 upon initial publication. The ninth \"Asterix\" volume, when first released in 1967, sold 1.2 million copies in two days.\nUderzo's first preliminary sketches portrayed Asterix as a huge and strong traditional Gaulish warrior. But Goscinny had a different picture in his mind, visualizing Asterix as a shrewd, compact warrior who would possess intelligence and wit more than raw strength. However, Uderzo felt that the downsized hero needed a strong but dim companion, to which Goscinny agreed. Hence, Obelix was born. Despite the growing popularity of \"Asterix\" with the readers, the financial backing for the publication \"Pilote\" ceased. \"Pilote\" was taken over by Georges Dargaud.\nWhen Goscinny died in 1977, Uderzo continued the series by popular demand of the readers, who implored him to continue. He continued to issue new volumes of the series, but on a less frequent basis. Many critics and fans of the series prefer the earlier collaborations with Goscinny. Uderzo created his own publishing company, \u00c9ditions Albert Ren\u00e9, which published every album drawn and written by Uderzo alone since then. However, Dargaud, the initial publisher of the series, kept the publishing rights on the 24 first albums made by both Uderzo and Goscinny. In 1990, the Uderzo and Goscinny families decided to sue Dargaud to take over the rights. In 1998, after a long trial, Dargaud lost the rights to publish and sell the albums. Uderzo decided to sell these rights to Hachette instead of Albert-Ren\u00e9, but the publishing rights on new albums were still owned by Albert Uderzo (40%), Sylvie Uderzo (20%) and Anne Goscinny (40%).\nIn December 2008, Uderzo sold his stake to Hachette, which took over the company. In a letter published in the French newspaper \"Le Monde\" in 2009, Uderzo's daughter, Sylvie, attacked her father's decision to sell the family publishing firm and the rights to produce new \"Ast\u00e9rix\" adventures after his death. She said:\n... the co-creator of \"Ast\u00e9rix\", France's comic strip hero, has betrayed the Gaulish warrior to the modern-day Romans \u2013 the men of industry and finance.\nHowever, Ren\u00e9 Goscinny's daughter, Anne, also gave her agreement to the continuation of the series and sold her rights at the same time. She is reported to have said that \"\"Asterix\" has already had two lives: one during my father's lifetime and one after it. Why not a third?\". A few months later, Uderzo appointed three illustrators, who had been his assistants for many years, to continue the series. In 2011, Uderzo announced that a new \"Asterix\" album was due out in 2013, with Jean-Yves Ferri writing the story and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric M\u00e9barki drawing it. A year later, in 2012, the publisher Albert-Ren\u00e9 announced that Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric M\u00e9barki had withdrawn from drawing the new album, due to the pressure he felt in following in the steps of Uderzo. Comic artist Didier Conrad was officially announced to take over drawing duties from M\u00e9barki, with the due date of the new album in 2013 unchanged.\nIn January 2015, after the murders of seven cartoonists at the satirical Paris weekly \"Charlie Hebdo\", \"Ast\u00e9rix\" creator Albert Uderzo came out of retirement to draw two \"Ast\u00e9rix\" pictures honouring the memories of the victims.\nList of titles.\nNumbers 1\u201324, 32 and 34 are by Goscinny and Uderzo. Numbers 25\u201331 and 33 are by Uderzo alone. Numbers 35\u201339 are by Jean-Yves Ferri and Didier Conrad. Years stated are for their initial album release.\n\"Asterix Conquers Rome\" is a comics adaptation of the animated film \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\". It was released in 1976 and was the 23rd volume to be published, but it has been rarely reprinted and is not considered to be canonical to the series. The only English translations ever to be published were in the \"Asterix Annual 1980\" and never an English standalone volume. A picture-book version of the same story was published in English translation as \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\" by Hodder &amp; Stoughton in 1978.\nIn 1996, a tribute album in honour of Albert Uderzo was released titled \"Uderzo Croqu\u00e9 par ses Amis\", a volume containing 21 short stories with Uderzo in Ancient Gaul. This volume was published by Soleil Productions and has not been translated into English.\nIn 2007, \u00c9ditions Albert Ren\u00e9 released a tribute volume titled \"Ast\u00e9rix et ses Amis\", a 60-page volume of one-to-four-page short stories. It was a tribute to Albert Uderzo on his 80th birthday by 34 European cartoonists. The volume was translated into nine languages. , it has not been translated into English.\nIn 2016, the French publisher Hachette, along with Anne Goscinny and Albert Uderzo decided to make the special issue album \"The XII Tasks of Asterix\" for the 40th anniversary of the film \"The Twelve Tasks of Asterix\". There was no English edition.\nSynopsis and characters.\nThe main setting for the series is an unnamed coastal village, rumoured to be inspired by Erquy in Armorica (present-day Brittany), a province of Gaul (modern France), in the year 50 BC. Julius Caesar has conquered nearly all of Gaul for the Roman Empire during the Gallic Wars. The little Armorican village, however, has held out because the villagers can gain temporary superhuman strength by drinking a magic potion brewed by the local village druid, Getafix. His chief is Vitalstatistix.\nThe main protagonist and hero of the village is Asterix, who, because of his shrewdness, is usually entrusted with the most important affairs of the village. He is aided in his adventures by his rather corpulent and slower thinking friend, Obelix, who, because he fell into the druid's cauldron of the potion as a baby, has permanent superhuman strength (because of this, Getafix steadfastly refuses to allow Obelix to drink the potion, as doing so would have a dangerous and unpredictable result, as shown in \"Asterix and Obelix All at Sea\"). Obelix is usually accompanied by Dogmatix, his little dog. (Except for Asterix and Obelix, the names of the characters change with the language. For example, Obelix's dog's name is \"Id\u00e9fix\" in the original French edition.)\nAsterix and Obelix (and sometimes other members of the village) go on various adventures both within the village and in far away lands. Places visited in the series include parts of Gaul (Lutetia, Corsica etc.), neighbouring nations (Belgium, Spain, Britain, Germany etc.), and far away lands (North America, Middle East, India etc.).\nThe series employs science-fiction and fantasy elements in the more recent books; for instance, the use of extraterrestrials in \"Asterix and the Falling Sky\" and the city of Atlantis in \"Asterix and Obelix All at Sea\".\nWith rare exceptions, the ending of the albums usually shows a big banquet with the village's inhabitants gathering \u2013 the sole exception is the bard Cacofonix restrained and gagged to prevent him from singing (but in \"Asterix and the Normans\" the blacksmith Fulliautomatix was tied up). Mostly the banquets are held under the starry nights in the village, where roast boar is devoured and all (but one) are set about in merrymaking. However, there are a few exceptions, such as in \"Asterix and Cleopatra\".\nHumour.\nThe humour encountered in the \"Asterix\" comics often centers around puns, caricatures, and tongue-in-cheek stereotypes of contemporary European nations and French regions. Much of the multi-layered humour in the initial Asterix books was French-specific, which delayed the translation of the books into other languages for fear of losing the jokes and the spirit of the story. Some translations have actually added local humour: In the Italian translation, the Roman legionaries are made to speak in 20th-century Roman dialect, and Obelix's famous \"Ils sont fous, ces Romains\" (\"These Romans are crazy\") is translated pragmatically as \"Sono pazzi questi romani\", humorously alluding to the Roman abbreviation \"SPQR\". In another example: Hiccups are written onomatopoeically in French as \"hips\", but in English as \"hic\", allowing Roman legionaries in more than one of the English translations to decline their hiccups absurdly in Latin (\"hic, haec, hoc\"). The newer albums share a more universal humour, both written and visual.\nCharacter names.\nAll the fictional characters in \"Asterix\" have names which are puns on their roles or personalities, and which follow certain patterns specific to nationality. Certain rules are followed (most of the time) such as Gauls (and their neighbours) having an \"-ix\" suffix for the men and ending in \"-a\" for the women; for example, Chief Vitalstatistix (so called due to his portly stature) and his wife Impedimenta (often at odds with the chief). The male Roman names end in \"-us\", echoing Latin nominative male singular form, as in Gluteus Maximus, a muscle-bound athlete whose name is literally the butt of the joke. Gothic names (present-day Germany) end in \"-ic\", after Gothic chiefs such as Alaric and Theoderic; for example Rhetoric the interpreter. Greek names end in \"-os\" or \"-es\"; for example, Thermos the restaurateur. British names usually end in \"-ax\" or \"-os\" and are often puns on the taxation associated with the later United Kingdom; examples include Mykingdomforanos, a British tribal chieftain, Valuaddedtax the druid, and Selectivemploymentax the mercenary. Names of Normans end with \"-af\", for example Nescaf or Cenotaf. Egyptian characters often end in \"-is\", such as the architects Edifis and Artifis, and the scribe Exlibris. Indic names, apart from the only Indic female characters Orinjade and Lemuhnade, exhibit considerable variation; examples include Watziznehm, Watzit, Owzat, and Howdoo. Other nationalities are treated to pidgin translations from their language, like Huevos y Bacon, a Spanish chieftain (whose name, meaning eggs and bacon, is often guidebook Spanish for tourists), or literary and other popular media references, like Dubbelosix (a sly reference to James Bond's codename \"007\").\nMost of these jokes, and hence the names of the characters, are specific to the translation; for example, the druid named Getafix in English translation \u2013 \"get a fix\", referring to the character's role in dispensing the magic potion \u2013 is \"Panoramix\" in the original French and \"Miraculix\" in German. Even so, occasionally the wordplay has been preserved: Obelix's dog, known in the original French as \"Id\u00e9fix\" (from \"id\u00e9e fixe\", a \"fixed idea\" or obsession), is called \"Dogmatix\" in English, which not only renders the original meaning strikingly closely (\"dogmatic\") but in fact adds another layer of wordplay with the syllable \"Dog-\" at the beginning of the name.\nThe name \"Asterix\", French \"Ast\u00e9rix\", comes from ', meaning \"asterisk\", which is the typographical symbol *\"' indicating a footnote, from the Greek word \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1 (\"aster\"), meaning a \"star\". His name is usually left unchanged in translations, aside from accents and the use of local alphabets. For example, in Esperanto, Polish, Slovene, Latvian, and Turkish it is \"Asteriks\" (in Turkish he was first named \"B\u00fcc\u00fcr\" meaning \"shorty\", but the name was then standardised). Two exceptions include Icelandic, in which he is known as \"\u00c1str\u00edkur\" (\"Rich of love\"), and Sinhala, where he is known as (\"Soora Pappa\"), which can be interpreted as \"Hero\". The name \"Obelix\" (\"Ob\u00e9lix\") may refer to \"obelisk\", a stone column from ancient Egypt (and hence his large size and strength and his task of carrying around menhirs), but also to another typographical symbol, the obelisk or obelus ().\nFor explanations of some of the other names, see List of \"Asterix\" characters.\nEthnic stereotypes.\nMany of the \"Asterix\" adventures take place in other countries away from their homeland in Gaul. In every album that takes place abroad, the characters meet (usually modern-day) stereotypes for each country, as seen by the French.\nWhen the Gauls see foreigners speaking their foreign languages, these have different representations in the cartoon speech bubbles:\nTranslations.\nThe various volumes have been translated into more than 120 languages and dialects. Besides the original French language, most albums are available in Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, Galician, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latin, Latvian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovene, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Ukrainian.\nSome books have also been translated into languages including Esperanto, Scottish Gaelic, Irish, Scots, Indonesian, Hindi, Persian, Bengali, Afrikaans, Arabic, Frisian, Romansch, Thai, Vietnamese, Welsh, Sinhala, Ancient Greek, and Luxembourgish.\nIn Europe, several volumes were translated into a variety of regional languages and dialects, such as Alsatian, Breton, Chtimi (Picard), and Corsican in France; Bavarian, Swabian, and Low German in Germany; and Savo, Karelia, Rauma, and Helsinki slang dialects in Finland. In Portugal a special edition of the first volume, \"Asterix the Gaul\", was translated into local language Mirandese. In Greece, a number of volumes have appeared in the Cretan Greek, Cypriot Greek, and Pontic Greek dialects. In the Italian version, while the Gauls speak standard Italian, the legionaries speak in the Romanesque dialect. In the former Yugoslavia, the \"Forum\" publishing house translated Corsican text in \"Asterix in Corsica\" into the Montenegrin dialect of Serbo-Croatian (today called Montenegrin).\nIn the Netherlands, several volumes were translated into West Frisian, a Germanic language spoken in the province of Friesland; into Limburgish, a regional language spoken not only in Dutch Limburg but also in Belgian Limburg and North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany; and into Tweants, a dialect in the region of Twente in the eastern province of Overijssel. Hungarian-language books were published in the former Yugoslavia for the Hungarian minority living in Serbia. Although not translated into a fully autonomous dialect, the books differ slightly from the language of the books issued in Hungary. In Sri Lanka, the cartoon series was adapted into Sinhala as \"Sura Pappa\".\nMost volumes have been translated into Latin and Ancient Greek, with accompanying teachers' guides, as a way of teaching these ancient languages.\nEnglish translation.\nBefore Asterix became famous in the English-speaking world, translations of some strips were published in British comics including \"Valiant\", \"Ranger\", and \"Look &amp; Learn\", under names \"Little Fred and Big Ed\" and \"Beric the Bold\", set in Roman-occupied Britain. These were included in an exhibition on Goscinny's life and career, and Asterix, in London's Jewish Museum in 2018.\nIn 1970, William Morrow and Company published English translations in hardback of three Asterix albums for the American market. These were \"Asterix the Gaul\", \"Asterix and Cleopatra\" and \"Asterix the Legionary\". Lawrence Hughes in a letter to \"The New York Times\" stated, \"Sales were modest, with the third title selling half the number of the first. I was publisher at the time, and Bill Cosby tried to buy film and television rights. When that fell through, we gave up the series.\"\nThe first 33 Asterix albums were translated into English by Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge (including the three volumes reprinted by William Morrow), who were widely praised for maintaining the spirit and humour of the original French versions. Hockridge died in 2013, so Bell translated books 34 to 36 by herself, before retiring in 2016 for health reasons. She died in 2018. Adriana Hunter became translator.\nUS publisher Papercutz in December 2019 announced it would begin publishing \"all-new more American translations\" of the Asterix books, starting on 19 May 2020. The launch was postponed to 15 July 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The new translator is Joe Johnson, a professor of French and Spanish at Clayton State University.\nAdaptations.\nThe series has been adapted into various media. There are 18 films, 15 board games, 40 video games, and 1 theme park.\nTelevision series.\nOn 17 November 2018, a 52 eleven-minute episode animated series featuring Dogmatix (Id\u00e9fix in the French version) was announced to be in production by Studio 58 and Futurikon for broadcast on France T\u00e9l\u00e9visions in 2020. On 21 December 2020, it was confirmed that \"Dogmatix and the Indomitables\" had been pushed back to fall 2021, with o2o Studio producing the animation. The show is distributed globally by LS Distribution. The series premiered on the Okoo streaming service on 2 July before beginning its linear broadcast on France 4 on 28 August 2021.\nOn 3 March 2021, it was announced that Asterix the Gaul is to star in a new Netflix animated series directed by Alain Chabat. The series will be adapted from one of the classic volumes, \"Asterix and the Big Fight\", where the Romans, after being constantly embarrassed by Asterix and his village cohorts, organize a brawl between rival Gaulish chiefs and try to fix the result by kidnapping a druid along with his much-needed magic potion. The series, originally scheduled for 2023, will debut in 2025, and will be CG-animated.\nGames.\nMany gamebooks, board games and video games are based upon the \"Asterix\" series. In particular, many video games were released by various computer game publishers.\nTheme park.\nParc Ast\u00e9rix, a theme park 22 miles north of Paris, based upon the series, was opened in 1989. It is one of the most visited sites in France, with around 2.3\u00a0million visitors per year."}
{"id": "2102", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2102", "title": "Arizona Cardinals", "text": "The Arizona Cardinals are a professional American football team based in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The Cardinals compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) West division. The team plays its home games at State Farm Stadium in Glendale, a suburb northwest of the state capital of Phoenix.\nThe team was established in Chicago in 1898 as the Morgan Athletic Club, and joined the NFL as a charter member on September 17, 1920. The Cardinals are the oldest continuously run professional football franchise in the United States, and, along with the Chicago Bears, are the only NFL charter member franchises still in operation. In , the team moved to St. Louis, where it was commonly referred to as the \"Football Cardinals\", the \"Gridbirds\", or the \"Big Red\" to avoid confusion with Major League Baseball's (MLB) St. Louis Cardinals. Before the season, the team moved to Tempe, Arizona, an eastern suburb of Phoenix, where it played home games for the next 18 seasons at Sun Devil Stadium on the campus of Arizona State University. In , the team moved to their current home field in suburban Glendale, although their executive offices and training facility remain in Tempe. From 1988 to 2012 (except 2005, when they trained in Prescott), the Cardinals conducted their annual summer training camp at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff. The Cardinals moved their training camp to State Farm Stadium, then known as University of Phoenix Stadium, in 2013.\nThe Cardinals have won two NFL championships, both while the team was in Chicago. The first, in , was disputed by supporters of the runner-up Pottsville Maroons. Their second, and the first to be won in a championship game, came in , nearly two decades before the first Super Bowl. They returned to the title game to defend in 1948, but lost the rematch 7\u20130 in a snowstorm in Philadelphia.\nThe team has since suffered many losing seasons and, as of 2024, has the longest active championship drought in North American sports at 77 seasons (one more than MLB's Cleveland Guardians, who last won the World Series in 1948). The Cardinals have recorded the most losses by a franchise in NFL history with 803 regular season losses as of . The team's all-time win\u2013loss record (including regular season and playoff games) at the conclusion of the 2023 season was ( in the regular season, in the playoffs). They have been to the playoffs 11 times and have won seven playoff games, including three in the 2008\u201309 NFL playoffs. During that season, they won their only NFC Championship Game since the 1970 AFL\u2013NFL merger, and reached Super Bowl XLIII in 2009, losing 27\u201323 to the Pittsburgh Steelers. The team has won five division titles (, , , , and ) since their 1947\u201348 NFL championship game appearances. The Cardinals are the only NFL team that has never lost a playoff game at home: their 5\u20130 record encompasses the 1947 NFL Championship Game, two games during the 2008\u201309 NFL playoffs, one during the 2009\u201310 playoffs, and one during the 2015\u201316 playoffs. In their 36 seasons since moving to the Valley of the Sun in 1988, the Cardinals have a total of six playoff appearances, three division titles, and the one NFC championship.\nHistory.\nChicago Cardinals (1920\u20131959).\nThe franchise dates to 1898, when a neighborhood group gathered to play on the South Side of Chicago, calling themselves the Morgan Athletic Club. Chicago painting and building contractor Chris O'Brien acquired the team, which he moved to Normal Field on Racine Avenue. The team was known as the Racine Normals until 1901, when O'Brien bought used jerseys from the University of Chicago. After he described the faded maroon clothing as \"Cardinal red\", the team became the Racine Street Cardinals. Eventually in 1920, the team became a charter member of the American Professional Football Association (APFA), which was rechristened the National Football League (NFL) two years later. The team entered the league as the Racine Cardinals, but changed their name to the Chicago Cardinals in 1922 to avoid confusion with the Horlick-Racine Legion, who entered the league the same year.\nNFL champions (1925).\nIn 1925, the Cardinals were awarded the NFL Championship after the Pottsville Maroons were suspended for playing a game in what was deemed \"another team's territory.\" Having beat the Cardinals in a head-to-head game earlier in the season, the Pottsville Maroons won their extra game against the University of Notre Dame, helping them finish the year with the same record as the Cardinals. The Cardinals were also guilty of breaking NFL rules by scheduling two additional games against the Hammond Pros and the Milwaukee Badgers, both of whom had already disbanded for the season. The game against the Badgers spurred a scandal when the Badgers filled out their roster with four high school players, in violation of NFL rules.\nNFL Champions (1947).\nDuring the post-World War II years, the team reached two straight NFL finals against the Philadelphia Eagles, winning in 1947 (eight months after Charles Bidwill's death) but losing the following year. In the late 1950s, after years of bad seasons and losing fans to their crosstown rivals, the Chicago Bears, the Cardinals were almost bankrupt, and owner Violet Bidwill Wolfner became interested in moving the team to a new city.\nSt. Louis Cardinals (1960\u20131987).\nDue to the formation of the rival American Football League, the NFL allowed Bidwill to move the team to St. Louis, Missouri, where they became the St. Louis Cardinals. They were locally called the \"Big Red\", the \"Gridbirds\" or the \"Football Cardinals\" to avoid confusion with the local baseball team of the same name. During the Cardinals' 28-year stay in St. Louis, they advanced to the playoffs just three times (1974, 1975 and 1982), never hosting or winning. They did, however, win the Playoff Bowl, a now-defunct post-season game for third place, in 1964 against the Green Bay Packers by a score of 24\u201317. The overall mediocrity of the Cardinals, combined with a then-21-year-old stadium, caused game attendance to dwindle, and owner Bill Bidwill decided to move the team to Arizona.\nPhoenix/Arizona Cardinals (1988\u2013present).\nNot long after the end of the 1987 NFL season, Bidwill agreed to move to Phoenix on a handshake deal with state and local officials, and the team became the Phoenix Cardinals. The team changed their name to the Arizona Cardinals on March 17, 1994. \nThe Cardinals hired Vince Tobin as head coach prior to the 1996 season. In his first season, he led the team to a 7\u20139 mark in the 1996 season. The team regressed in the 1997 season with a 4\u201312 record. The 1998 NFL season saw the Cardinals break two long droughts, qualifying for the playoffs for the first time in 16 years. The team got their first postseason win since 1947 by defeating the Dallas Cowboys 20\u20137 in the . The Cardinals saw their run end in the Divisional Round with a 41\u201321 loss to the Minnesota Vikings. The Cardinals regressed to a 6\u201310 record in the 1999 season. In the 2000 season, Tobin was fired after a 2\u20135 start. Dave McGinnis finished the season out with a 1\u20138 record.\nPrior to the 2001 season, the Cardinals named McGinnis as their full-time head coach. He coached for three seasons, regressing each year record-wise. He was fired by the team following the 2003 season.\nPrior to the 2004 season, the Cardinals hired Dennis Green as head coach. He coached the team to three consecutive losing seasons before being fired following the 2006 season.\nThe Cardinals hired Ken Whisenhunt as head coach prior to the 2007 season. In his first season with the team, Whisenhunt led the Cardinals to a 8\u20138 record in the 2007 season. In the 2008 postseason, the Cardinals, led by quarterback Kurt Warner, won the Wild Card Round over the Atlanta Falcons, the Divisional Round against the Carolina Panthers, and the against the Philadelphia Eagles to advance to the Super Bowl for the first time in their history. They lost Super Bowl XLIII 27\u201323 to the Pittsburgh Steelers in the final seconds of the game.\nAfter their historic 2008 season, the Cardinals posted a 10\u20136 record in , their first season with 10 wins in Arizona. The Cardinals clinched their second consecutive NFC West title but were defeated by eventual Super Bowl champion New Orleans Saints, 45\u201314 in the divisional playoffs. After the 2012 season, the Cardinals fired Whisenhunt as head coach. Prior to the 2013 season, the team hired Bruce Arians as head coach. Arians' first season with the team saw the Cardinals go 10\u20136 but miss the postseason in 2013. The next time they would make the playoffs would be in , as a wild card. They set the best regular-season record in their history in Arizona at 11\u20135 but were defeated by the 7\u20138\u20131 NFC South champions, the Carolina Panthers.\nThe next year, the Cardinals set a franchise-best 13\u20133 record and clinched their first-ever first-round playoff bye as the NFC's second seed. They defeated the Green Bay Packers , giving quarterback Carson Palmer his first playoff victory. The Cardinals then advanced to their second in their history but were blown out by the top-seeded 15\u20131 Panthers 49\u201315, committing seven turnovers.\nThe Cardinals then fell to 7\u20138\u20131 in and 8\u20138 in . After the 2017 season, Arians retired as head coach. The Cardinals hired Steve Wilks to be the head coach prior to the 2018 season. The team dropped to a 3\u201313 record in , tying the franchise record set in for the worst record in a 16-game season. Wilks was fired following the season. The Cardinals hired Kliff Kingsbury as head coach prior to the 2019 season. At the 2019 NFL Draft, the Cardinals used the top overall pick in the draft on Oklahoma quarterback Kyler Murray. The team improved to 5\u201310\u20131 in and 8\u20138 in . In , the Cardinals went 11\u20136, posting a winning record and returning to the postseason for the first time since 2015, but lost to the Los Angeles Rams in the Wild Card round. They failed to improve their record in 2022, dropping to the bottom of NFC West at 4\u201313, and missing the playoffs. Kingsbury was fired as head coach following the 2022 season. Under first year head coach Jonathan Gannon, the Cardinals once again finished in fourth in the NFC West with a 4\u201313 record in 2023.\nLogos and uniforms.\nStarting in , the team had a logo of a cardinal bird (pyrrhuloxia) perched on the laces of a football.\nThe Cardinals moved to Arizona in , and the flag of Arizona was added to the sleeves the following year. In , the team began wearing red pants with their white jerseys, as new coach Joe Bugel wanted to emulate his former employer, the Washington Redskins, who at the time wore burgundy pants with their white jerseys (the Redskins later returned to their 1970s gold pants with all their jerseys).\nIn , the Cardinals participated in the NFL's 75th-anniversary throwback uniform program. The jerseys were similar to those of the 1920s Chicago Cardinals, with an interlocking \"CC\" logo and three stripes on each sleeve. The uniform numbers were moved to the right chest. The pants were khaki to simulate the color and material used in that era. The Cardinals also stripped the logos from their helmets for two games: at Cleveland and home vs. Pittsburgh.\nThe Cardinal head on the helmet also appeared on the sleeve of the white jersey from 1982 to 1995. In 1996, the state flag of Arizona was moved higher on the sleeve after the Cardinal head was eliminated as sleeves on football jerseys became shorter, and black was removed as an accent color, instead replaced with a blue to match the predominant color of the state flag. In 2002, the Cardinals began to wear all-red and all-white combinations, and continued to do so through 2004, prior to the team's makeover.\nIn , the team unveiled its first major changes in a century. The cardinal-head logo was updated to look sleeker and meaner than its predecessor. Numerous fans had derisively called the previous version a \"parakeet\". Black again became an accent color after an eight-year absence, while trim lines were added to the outside shoulders, sleeves, and sides of the jerseys and pants. Both the red and white jerseys have the option of red or white pants.\nHoping to break a six-game losing streak, the Cardinals wore the red pants for the first time on October 29, 2006, in a game at Lambeau Field against the Green Bay Packers. The Packers won 31\u201314, and the Cards headed into their bye week with a 1\u20137 mark. Following the bye week, the Cardinals came out in an all-red combination at home against the Dallas Cowboys and lost, 27\u201310. Arizona did not wear the red pants for the remainder of the season and won four of their last seven games. However, the following season, in , the Cardinals again wore their red pants for their final 3 home games. They wore red pants with white jerseys in games on the road at the Cincinnati Bengals and Seattle Seahawks. They paired red pants with red jerseys, the all-red combination, for home games against the Detroit Lions, San Francisco 49ers, Cleveland Browns, and St. Louis Rams. The red pants were not worn at all in , but they were used in home games against Seattle, Minnesota, and St. Louis in . The red pants were paired with the white road jersey for the first time in three years during a 2010 game at Carolina, but the white jersey/red pants combination was not used again until 2018, when they broke out the combination against the Kansas City Chiefs.\nThe Cardinals' first home game in Arizona, in 1988, saw them play in red jerseys. Thereafter, for the next 18 years in Arizona, the Cardinals, like a few other NFL teams in warm climates, wore their white jerseys at home during the first half of the season\u2014forcing opponents to suffer in their darker jerseys during Arizona autumns that frequently see temperatures over 100\u00a0\u00b0F (38\u00a0\u00b0C). However, this tradition did not continue when the Cardinals moved from Sun Devil Stadium to State Farm Stadium in 2006, as early-season games (and some home games late in the season) were played with the roof closed. With the temperature inside at a comfortable 70\u00a0\u00b0F (21\u00a0\u00b0C), the team opted to wear red jerseys at home full-time. The Cardinals wore white jerseys at home for the first time at State Farm Stadium on August 29, 2008, in a preseason game against the Denver Broncos.\nThe Cardinals wore white at home for the first time in a regular-season game at State Farm Stadium against the Houston Texans on October 11, . In October 2009, the NFL recognized Breast Cancer Awareness Month, and players wore pink-accented items, including gloves, wristbands, and shoes. The team thought the pink accents looked better with white uniforms than with red.\nFrom 1970 through 1983, and again in many seasons between 1989 and 2002, the Cardinals would wear white when hosting the Dallas Cowboys in order to force the Cowboys to don their \"jinxed\" blue jerseys. They have not done this since moving into State Farm Stadium, however.\nThe season saw the Cardinals debut a new, alternate black jersey. In , the Cardinals debuted an all-black set for the NFL Color Rush program. While the regular black alternates featured white lettering and are paired with white pants, the Cardinals' Color Rush alternates used red lettering and black pants for the occasion. Starting in 2022, both black uniforms would be paired with an alternate black helmet with black facemasks.\nBefore the season, the Cardinals unveiled new uniforms. Most notably, the team opted to wear all-red uniforms at home and all-white uniforms on the road, with all-black uniforms as the alternate. The red uniform featured the state name in front in addition to white numbers with silver trim. The white uniform featured red numbers with black trim, and red and silver stripes along the pants and sleeves. The black alternate uniform design mirrored that of the white uniform, featuring red numbers with silver trim, and red and silver stripes along the pants and sleeves. On both uniforms, the silver sleeve stripe contained the team name. Both the red and white uniforms are worn with white helmets and silver facemasks, while the black uniform is worn with the black helmets from 2022. The new helmets featured silver flakes while the black helmet had red flakes in them.\nFans.\nThe Cardinals' playoff drought has exhibited resilience for some fans who have shown longtime devotion to the team. Fans of the Cardinals are often referred to as the Red Sea or the Bird Gang, with several notable fans such as Blake Shelton and Jordin Sparks. In honor of the tragic death of former safety Pat Tillman, the Cardinals strengthened their relationship with members of the armed forces community. The team regularly markets to military personnel and frequently visits nearby Luke Air Force Base in support of Arizona's servicemen.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nBoth the oldest and most intense divisional rivalry for the Cardinals, the matchup saw both teams first meet during the 1937 NFL season, while the Rams played in Cleveland, and the Cardinals were still originally located in Chicago. Both teams had played in St. Louis for a brief period in their histories. Their Rivalry with the Los Angeles Rams has resurged in recent years as both teams found playoff success, despite the Cardinals' best efforts; the Rams have been 9\u20131 since hiring head coach Sean McVay in 2017. The Week 17 matchup of the 2020 season saw both teams playing for a playoff berth; despite the injury to Rams quarterback Jared Goff, the Cardinals lost 18\u20137 and were eliminated from the postseason. The Cardinals' streak ended against the Rams the following season. They took the lead in the NFC over the Rams and started the season 7\u20130. In the following matchup, the Rams won on Monday Night Football; the Cardinals lost 6 of 10 games after their 7\u20130 start. The Cardinals would clinch a wild card berth after a week 17 win over the Dallas Cowboys. They played the Rams in Los Angeles and lost 34\u201311 as Kyler Murray threw 2 interceptions with one returned for a touchdown. The Rams lead the series 50\u201340\u20132 while leading the postseason series 2\u20130.\nSeattle Seahawks.\nOne of the newer rivalries in the NFL, the Cardinals and Seattle Seahawks became divisional rivals after both were moved to the NFC West as a result of the league's realignment in 2002. This rivalry has become one of the NFL's more bitter in recent years, as the mid-to-late 2010s often saw the Seahawks and Cardinals squaring off for NFC West supremacy. The rivalry featured such clashes between the likes of Carson Palmer or Kyler Murray for the Cardinals against Pete Carroll and Russell Wilson for the Seahawks during the era. Seattle leads the series 25\u201322\u20131, and the two teams have yet to meet in the playoffs.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\n Though they first met in 1951 and would meet occasionally until 2000, this would not become a full-fledged rivalry until both teams were placed in the NFC West division in 2002. While a close rivalry, it is often lopsided on both ends. After the 49ers won nine of ten meetings between 2009 and 2013, the Cardinals won eight straight meetings between 2014 and 2018. The 49ers lead the series 34\u201329.\nThe two teams have yet to meet in the playoffs.\nHistoric.\nChicago Bears.\nThe historic rivalry between the Cardinals and the Chicago Bears features the only two teams that remain from the league's inception in 1920. At that time, the Bears were known as the Decatur Staleys, and the Cardinals were the Racine Cardinals. In 1922, the matchup between the teams became known as \"The Battle of Chicago\" for 38 years, making it the first true rivalry in the league's history. The Bears lead the all-time series 59\u201329\u20136.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nWhilst the Cardinals were located in St. Louis from 1960 to 1987; the team took part in an instate rivalry with the Kansas City Chiefs, with a trophy being awarded to the winner of the matchup. The series ended following the Cardinals' relocation to Arizona in 1988. The Chiefs posted a 16\u20137\u20132 mark in its Governor's Cup series against the Cardinals from 1968 to 1987, going 3\u20131\u20131 in the regular season record and 13\u20136\u20131 in preseason play.\nSeasons and overall records.\nSingle-season records.\nPoints Scored: 489 ()\nPassing\nRushing\nReceiving\nReturns\nKicking\nPlayers of note.\nRetired numbers.\nNotes:\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\n\"Italics\" = played a portion of career with the Cardinals and enshrined representing another team\nDierdorf, Smith, Wehrli and Wilson were members of the St. Louis Football Ring of Fame in The Dome at America's Center when the Rams played there from 1995 to 2015.\nRing of Honor.\nThe Cardinals' Ring of Honor was started in to mark the opening of State Farm Stadium. It honors former Cardinal greats from all eras of the franchise's history. Following is a list of inductees and the dates that they were inducted.\nStaff.\nThe Cardinals have had 42 head coaches throughout their history. Their first head coach was Paddy Driscoll, who compiled a 17\u20138\u20134 record with the team from 1920 to 1922. Jimmy Conzelman, Jim Hanifan and Ken Whisenhunt are tied as the longest-serving head coaches in Cardinals history. On April 14, 2022, Mark Ahlemeier, the Cardinals equipment manager, retired after working with the organization for 41 seasons.\nRadio and television.\nThe Cardinals' flagship radio station is KMVP-FM; Dave Pasch, Ron Wolfley, and Paul Calvisi handle the radio broadcast. Spanish-language radio broadcasts are heard on the combo of KQMR/KHOV-FM \"Latino Mix\" under a contract with Univisi\u00f3n, signed in 2015. Prior to 2015, they were heard on KDVA/KVVA-FM \"Jos\u00e9 FM\", as well as co-owned KBMB AM 710. The Cardinals were the first NFL team to offer all 20 preseason and regular season games on Spanish-language radio, doing so in 2000. Luis Hernandez and Rolando Cant\u00fa are the Spanish broadcast team. The Cardinals have the most extensive Mexican affiliate network in the NFL, with contracts with Grupo Larsa (in the state of Sonora) and Grupo Radiorama (outside Sonora) and stations in 20 cities, including Hermosillo, Guadalajara and Mexico City.\nFrom 2017 to 2023, NBC affiliate KPNX broadcasts the team's preseason games on television (which, that year, included the Hall of Fame Game broadcast by NBC), called by Pasch and Wolfley, with station anchor Paul Gerke as sideline reporter. The broadcasts were syndicated regionally to KTTU and KMSB-TV in Tucson, and, until the Raiders' move to Las Vegas, KVVU-TV in Las Vegas.\nIn 2024, KTVK and KPHO purchased preseason broadcast rights to the Cardinals. This will be in addition to any Cardinals games already scheduled for KPHO.\nReferences.\nNotes\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "2103", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2103", "title": "Atlanta Falcons", "text": "The Atlanta Falcons are a professional American football team based in Atlanta. The Falcons compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) South division. The Falcons were founded on June 30, 1965, and joined the NFL in 1966 as an expansion team, after the NFL offered then-owner Rankin Smith a franchise to keep him from joining the rival American Football League (AFL).\nIn their 57 years of existence, the Falcons have compiled a record of 390\u2013503\u20136 ( in the regular season and in the playoffs), winning division championships in 1980, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2012, and 2016. The Falcons have appeared in two Super Bowls, the first during the 1998 season in Super Bowl XXXIII, where they lost to the Denver Broncos and the second 18 years later, a overtime loss to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI. They are the oldest major professional sports team in America with no championships.\nThe Falcons' current home field is Mercedes-Benz Stadium, which opened for the 2017 season; the team's headquarters and practice facilities are located at a site in Flowery Branch, northeast of Atlanta in Hall County.\nHistory.\nProfessional football comes to Atlanta (1962).\nProfessional football first came to Atlanta in 1962, when the American Football League (AFL) staged two preseason contests, with one featuring the Denver Broncos vs. the Houston Oilers and the second pitting the Dallas Texans against the Oakland Raiders. Two years later, the AFL held another exhibition, this time with the New York Jets taking on the San Diego Chargers.\nIn 1965, after the Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium (then known simply as Atlanta Stadium) was built, the city of Atlanta felt the time was right to start pursuing professional football. One independent group which had been active in NFL exhibition promotions in Atlanta applied for franchises in both the AFL and NFL, acting entirely on its own with no guarantee of stadium rights. Another group reported it had deposited earnest money for a team in the AFL.\nWith everyone running in different directions, some local businessmen (Cox Broadcasting) worked out a deal and were awarded an AFL franchise on contingent upon acquiring exclusive stadium rights from city NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle, who had been moving slowly in Atlanta matters, was spurred by the AFL interest and headed on the next plane down to Atlanta to block the rival league's claim on the city of Atlanta. He forced the city to make a choice between the two leagues; by June 30, the city picked Rankin Smith and the NFL.\nThe AFL's original expansion plans in June 1965 were for two new teams in Atlanta and It later evolved into the Miami Dolphins in 1966 and the Cincinnati Bengals in 1968. The NFL had planned to add two teams in ; the competition with the AFL for Atlanta forced the first to be added a year early in . The odd number of teams (15) resulted in one idle team (bye) each week, with each team playing 14 games over 15 weeks (similar to : 12 games over 13 weeks). The second expansion team, the New Orleans Saints, joined the NFL as planned in 1967 as its sixteenth franchise.\nThe Atlanta Falcons franchise began when it was approved to begin play in 1966 by a unanimous vote of the NFL club owners on June 21, 1965. Rozelle granted ownership nine days later on June 30 to 40-year-old Rankin Smith Sr., an executive vice president of Life Insurance Company of Georgia. He paid $8.5 million, the highest price in NFL history at the time for a franchise. Rozelle and Smith made the deal in about five minutes and the Atlanta Falcons brought the largest and most popular sport to the city of Atlanta.\nThe Atlanta expansion team became the 15th NFL franchise, and they were awarded the first overall pick in the 1966 NFL draft as well as the final pick in each of the first five rounds. They selected consensus All-American linebacker Tommy Nobis from the University of Texas, making him the first-ever Falcon. The league also held the expansion draft six weeks later in which Atlanta selected unprotected players from the 14 existing franchises. Although the Falcons selected many good players in those drafts, they still were not able to win right away.\nThe Atlanta team received its nickname on August 29, 1965. Miss Julia Elliott, a school teacher from Griffin, was singled out from many people who suggested \"Falcons\" as the nickname for the new franchise. She wrote: \"the Falcon is proud and dignified, with great courage and fight. It never drops its prey. It is deadly and has a great sporting tradition.\"\nSmith family era (1966\u20132001).\nThe Falcons' inaugural season was in 1966, and their first preseason game was on August 1, a loss to the Philadelphia Eagles. Under head coach Norb Hecker, Atlanta lost their first nine regular-season games in 1966; their first victory came on the road against the struggling New York Giants on November 20 in Yankee Stadium. Two weeks later, Atlanta won at Minnesota, and beat St. Louis in Atlanta the next week for their first home win. The team finished with a 1\u201312\u20131 record the next year, with the only win coming in Week 7 in a 21\u201320 win over the Minnesota Vikings in 1967. After a 0\u20133 start to the 1968 season, Hecker was dismissed. Norm Van Brocklin finished out the season as head coach with a 2\u20139 record. Van Brocklin continued to coach the team the next season. The team improved to a 6\u20138 record in 1969.\nThe Falcons had their first Monday Night Football game in Atlanta during the 1970 season, a 20\u20137 loss to the Miami Dolphins. The team went 4\u20138\u20132 in 1970. The only two winning seasons in their first 12 years were and \nIn the 1978 season, the 9\u20137 Falcons qualified for the playoffs for the first time and won the Wild Card game against the Eagles 14\u201313. The following week, they lost to the Dallas Cowboys 27\u201320 in the Divisional Playoffs. The 1979 team regressed to a 6\u201310 record.\nIn the 1980 season, after a nine-game winning streak, the Falcons posted a franchise then-best record of 12\u20134 and captured their first NFC West division title. The next week, their dream season ended at home with a loss to the Cowboys 30\u201327 in the divisional playoffs. In the strike-shortened 1982 season, the 5\u20134 Falcons made the playoffs but lost to the Minnesota Vikings, 30\u201324. Falcons coach Leeman Bennett was fired after the loss. The team then had losing seasons for the next eight years. Dan Henning was hired prior to the 1983 season.\nIn the 1989 NFL draft, the Falcons selected cornerback Deion Sanders in the first round, who helped them for the next four years, setting many records for the franchise. \"Neon Deion\" (a.k.a. \"Prime Time\") had a flashy appeal and helped bring media attention to one of the league's most anonymous franchises. Sanders was also famous for playing on major league baseball teams (New York Yankees and the Atlanta Braves) while simultaneously playing in the NFL.\nAfter defeating the New Orleans Saints in the NFC Wild Card game, the Falcons' 1991 season ended in a divisional playoff loss to the Washington Redskins. In the 1991 NFL draft, the Falcons selected quarterback Brett Favre as the 33rd overall pick. During his rookie season, he played in two games where he amassed a record of four passing attempts with no receptions and two interceptions. The following February, Favre was traded to the Green Bay Packers.\nIn 1992, the Atlanta Falcons opened a new chapter in their history moving into the newly constructed Georgia Dome, where the team has defeated all 31 other NFL teams at least once during its time there.\nDan Reeves years (1997\u20132003).\nIn 1998, under recently acquired head coach Dan Reeves, quarterback Chris Chandler and running back Jamal Anderson the \"Dirty Bird\" Falcons had their greatest season to date. On November 8, they beat the New England Patriots 41\u201310, ending a streak of 22 losses at cold-weather sites. The team finished with a franchise-best 14\u20132 regular-season record and the NFC West division championship. On January 17, 1999, the Falcons upset the top-seeded Vikings at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in the NFC Championship Game 30\u201327, in an exciting overtime victory. However, in their first-ever Super Bowl appearance, they lost 34\u201319 to the defending champion Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII.\nIn the second game of the Falcons 1999 season, running back Jamal Anderson, who had been a key player in the Falcons' 1998 success, suffered a season-ending knee injury. The Falcons finished the season with a very disappointing 5\u201311 regular-season record. In 2000, the Falcons suffered through another horrendous season finishing 4\u201312 and once again missing the playoffs.\nIn the 2001 NFL draft, the Falcons orchestrated a trade with the San Diego Chargers, acquiring the first overall pick (which was used on quarterback Michael Vick) in exchange for wide receiver-return specialist Tim Dwight and the fifth overall pick (used on running back LaDainian Tomlinson).\nThe Falcons finished the 2001 season with a record of 7\u20139 and missed the playoffs. Jessie Tuggle retired following 14 seasons in Atlanta.\nArthur Blank era (2002\u2013present).\nOn December 6, 2001, billionaire Home Depot co-founder Arthur M. Blank reached a preliminary agreement with the Falcons' Taylor Smith to purchase the team for a reported $545 million. In a special meeting prior to Super Bowl XXXVI in New Orleans on February 2, 2002, NFL owners voted unanimously to approve the deal.\nThe 2002 season saw the Falcons return to the playoffs with a regular-season record of 9\u20136\u20131, tying the Pittsburgh Steelers. It was Vick's first year as the starter, and the team, with newly acquired running back Warrick Dunn, delivered the Green Bay Packers their first home playoff loss ever with a 27\u20137 result in the Wild Card Round. A 20\u20136 loss to the Donovan McNabb-led Philadelphia Eagles the following week, however, ended the Falcons' season.\nOn March 19, 2003, the Falcons presented their new logo. During the 2003 preseason Vick broke his leg and missed the first 12 games of the season. After losing 7 straight games, the decision was made to fire head coach Dan Reeves. Wade Phillips acted as interim coach for the final three games. Although the Falcons won 3 of their last 4 games after the return of Vick, they ended up with a 5\u201311 record that year.\nJim Mora years (2004\u20132006).\nIn 2004, a new head coach, Jim L. Mora, was hired and Vick returned for the full season. The Falcons went 11\u20135, winning their third division title and earning a first-round bye into the playoffs. In the divisional playoffs, the Falcons defeated the St. Louis Rams, 47\u201317, in the Georgia Dome, advancing to the NFC Championship Game, which they lost to the Eagles, 27\u201310.\nThe Falcons again fell short of achieving back-to-back winning seasons in , going 8\u20138. In , Michael Vick became the first quarterback in league history to rush for more than 1,000 yards in a season, with 1,039. After finishing the season 7\u20139, however, coach Jim Mora was dismissed.\nBobby Petrino.\nBobby Petrino, the University of Louisville's football coach, replaced Mora. Before the 2007 season began, Vick was suspended indefinitely by the NFL after pleading guilty to charges involving dog fighting in the state of Virginia. On December 10, 2007, Vick received a 23-month prison sentence and was officially cut from the Atlanta roster.\nFor the 2007 season, the Falcons were forced to start Joey Harrington at quarterback. On December 11, 13 games into his first NFL season as head coach, Bobby Petrino resigned without notice to coach at the University of Arkansas, leaving the beleaguered players only a note in the locker room. Secondary Coach Emmitt Thomas was named interim coach for the final three games of the season on December 12. The Falcons ended the year with a dismal 4\u201312 record.\nAfter the tumultuous and disappointing 2007 season, the Falcons made a number of moves, hiring a new general manager and head coach, drafting a new starting quarterback, and signing a starting running back.\nMIke Smith years (2008\u20132014).\nOn January 13, 2008, the Falcons named former Patriots director of college football scouting Thomas Dimitroff General Manager. On January 23, Jacksonville Jaguars defensive coach and former linebackers coach for the 2000 Super Bowl champion Baltimore Ravens Mike Smith was named the Falcons' new head coach. Chargers back-up running back Michael Turner agreed to a 6-year, $30 million deal on March 2. On April 26, Matt Ryan (quarterback from Boston College) was drafted third overall in the 2008 NFL draft by the Falcons.\nThe Falcons finished the 2008 regular season with a record of 11\u20135, and the #5 seed in the playoffs. On December 21, 2008, Atlanta beat the Minnesota Vikings 24\u201317 to clinch a wild card spot, earning a trip to the playoffs for the first time since 2004. The Falcons would go on to lose in the wild-card round of the 2008 NFL playoffs to the eventual NFC champion Arizona Cardinals, 30\u201324.\nMatt Ryan started all 16 games in his rookie season and was named the Associated Press Offensive Rookie of the Year. First-year head coach Mike Smith was named 2008 NFL Coach of the Year.\nAlthough they failed to make the playoffs in 2009 the team rallied to win their final three regular-season games to record back-to-back winning seasons for the first time in franchise history. The Falcons defeated the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 20\u201310 in the final game of the season to improve their record to 9\u20137.\nIn 2010, with a regular-season record of 13\u20133, the Falcons secured a third straight winning season, their fourth overall divisional title, and the top overall seed in the NFC playoffs; however, the Falcons were overpowered by the eventual Super Bowl XLV champion Green Bay Packers in the NFC Divisional Playoffs 48\u201321. The Falcons scored 414 points \u2013 the fifth-most in franchise history. The team sent an NFL-high and franchise-best nine players to the 2011 Pro Bowl.\nThe Falcons made a surprise trade up with the Cleveland Browns in the 2011 NFL draft to select Alabama wide receiver Julio Jones sixth overall. In exchange, the Falcons gave up their first-, second- and fourth-round draft picks in 2011, and their first and fourth draft picks in 2012. Jones, along with teammates Tony Gonzalez and Roddy White, have since been dubbed Atlanta's \"Big Three\" (based on their total number of reception yards). On August 30, 2011, Sports Illustrated senior writer Peter King, who correctly predicted the 2011 Super Bowl, made his predictions for the 2011 season and picked the Falcons to defeat the San Diego Chargers in the 2012 Super Bowl. The Falcons finished the season at 10\u20136, securing the fifth seed after a Week 17 beatdown of Tampa Bay in which the Falcons pulled their starters after leading 42\u20130 just 23 minutes into the game.\nThe Falcons then went on to play the New York Giants in a 2011 NFC Wild Card Game at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey. The first half was a defensive struggle, with the first points coming off of a safety by the Falcons, giving Atlanta a 2\u20130 lead. In the second quarter, though, Eli Manning connected with Hakeem Nicks for a short touchdown pass to make it 7\u20132 Giants heading into the second half. Then the Giants took control, as Manning threw for two more touchdown passes to Mario Manningham and Nicks and the defense completed its shutout of the Falcons to give the New York Giants the win, 24\u20132, and the Falcons their third straight playoff loss with Matt Ryan and Mike Smith. After the season, defensive coordinator Brian VanGorder accepted a coaching job at Auburn University, and the offensive coordinator Mike Mularkey took the head coaching job in Jacksonville.\nAtlanta exploded out of the gate, going a franchise-best 8\u20130 and remaining the last unbeaten team in the NFL that year. Their hopes to get an undefeated season came to an end with a 27\u201331 loss to the division rival Saints. Julio Jones had a remarkable second year, grabbing 10 touchdowns and 1,198 yards. The Falcons finished the season 13\u20133, and clinched the number one seed in the NFC playoffs.\nThe Falcons played the Seattle Seahawks in their first playoff game. Although they went down 28\u201327 with only 31 seconds left on the clock, Matt Ryan led the team to their first playoff victory, 30\u201328. It was the only playoff victory in the Mike Smith era.\nThe Atlanta Falcons then advanced to face the San Francisco 49ers. The Falcons seized control of the game early with a Matt Bryant field goal, a trio of Matt Ryan touchdown passes caught by Julio Jones and Tony Gonzalez coupled with outstanding defensive play. By the end of the half, the score was 24\u201314. The tides of the game began to shift in the second half as the 49ers rallied back with a pair of Frank Gore touchdown runs. Atlanta's offense attempted to reply but were ultimately shut down by the 49er defense. A few series later, late in the 4th quarter with little time remaining, Atlanta found themselves in a 4th and 4 situation at the 10-yard line. The Falcons needed just 10 more yards to secure victory and advance to their first Super Bowl berth in 14 years. Matt Ryan fired a pass to Roddy White which was ultimately broken up by inside linebacker NaVorro Bowman, resulting in a 28\u201324 defeat.\nFollowing the success of the previous season, the Falcons were an expected Super Bowl contender. However, injuries hampered the team's performance and the team finished the season 4\u201312. With that, the streak of consecutive winning seasons came to an end and Mike Smith had his first losing season as a head coach. Tony Gonzalez, in his final season in the NFL, was selected to the 2014 Pro Bowl as a starter representing Team Rice. Following the conclusion of the 2012 season, director of player personnel Les Snead departed the team to join the St. Louis Rams and Dave Caldwell, assistant to general manager Thomas Dimitroff, left the team to join the Jacksonville Jaguars. Scott Pioli, former GM of the Kansas City Chiefs, was announced as the Falcons' new assistant GM. Mike Smith was given a one-year extension on his contract as head coach. The Falcons had the 6th overall pick in the 2014 NFL draft with which they selected Jake Matthews, who played as offensive tackle for Texas A&amp;M.\nDespite having another rough season, the Falcons still had an opportunity to qualify for the playoffs at the end of the regular season. The Falcons hosted the Carolina Panthers in their regular season finale, with the winners clinching the NFC South division. Unfortunately, the Falcons lost in a 34\u20133 blowout as Matt Ryan threw two interceptions that were returned for touchdowns and got sacked six times. The Falcons finished the season 6\u201310, marking the second consecutive losing season for the team. The following day, Mike Smith was fired after seven seasons as head coach. The Falcons would soon hire Seattle Seahawks defensive coordinator Dan Quinn as the team's 16th head coach. The Falcons had the 8th overall pick in the 2015 NFL draft with which they selected Vic Beasley, a defensive end from Clemson University.\nDan Quinn years (2015\u20132020).\nIn February 2015, the team was investigated by the NFL for alleged use of artificial crowd noise in the Georgia Dome. The Falcons lost a 2016 NFL draft selection as a result of the league's investigation.\nDan Quinn's first season saw a 5\u20130 start, the team's best start in four years. They would then struggle throughout the rest of the season by losing 8 of their last 11 games, resulting in an 8\u20138 record in the 2015 season. They did, however, give the Panthers their only regular-season loss. The Falcons used their first-round pick in the 2016 NFL draft on safety Keanu Neal from the University of Florida.\nIn the Falcons' 25th and final season in the Georgia Dome, Atlanta lost their week 1 game to the Buccaneers 24\u201331. The Falcons would then win their next four including one over the Panthers, when the franchise set new records: Matt Ryan threw for 503 yards, and Julio Jones caught 12 passes for 300 yards. Beating the San Francisco 49ers 41\u201313 in Week 15, the Falcons improved to 9\u20135 and secured their first winning season since 2012. One week later, the Falcons defeated the Panthers in Charlotte, North Carolina, and clinched their first NFC South division title since 2012. In their last regular-season game at the Georgia Dome, the Falcons defeated the New Orleans Saints, and secured an 11\u20135 record and a first-round bye.\nIn the divisional round of the playoffs, Atlanta defeated the Seahawks 36\u201320 in the Georgia Dome, and hosted their last game at the Georgia Dome against the Green Bay Packers in the NFC Championship Game on January 22, 2017. The Falcons defeated the Packers 44\u201321 to advance to Super Bowl LI as the NFC champions. Atlanta was up 28\u20133 late in the third quarter, and the New England Patriots scored 31 unanswered points, with the last 6 in the first-ever overtime in the Super Bowl. The Patriots' 25-point comeback was the largest in Super Bowl history.\nIn 2016, the Falcons scored 540 points in the regular season, the seventh-most in NFL history, tied with the Greatest Show on Turf (the 2000 St. Louis Rams). However, the Falcons defense gave up 406 points, 27th in the league.\nThe Falcons moved into their new home, the Mercedes-Benz Stadium, this season. Their first game ever played at the new stadium was a preseason loss to the Arizona Cardinals. The first regular-season game at the new stadium was a rematch of the 2016\u201317 NFC Championship, with Atlanta defeating Green Bay 34\u201323. Their first loss of the season was a 23\u201317 home defeat to the Buffalo Bills in week 4. The team returned to the playoffs with a 10\u20136 record (albeit with a third-place finish in the NFC South). The Falcons defeated the Los Angeles Rams 26\u201313 in the Wild Card round, but their 2017 season came to an end a week later in the Divisional Playoff round at the hands of the eventual Super Bowl champion Philadelphia Eagles 15\u201310. The 2018 and 2019 seasons saw the Falcons go 7\u20139 and miss the postseason both years.\nIn their first game with new uniforms, the Falcons lost to the Seattle Seahawks at home 38\u201325. The Falcons then suffered comebacks made by both the Cowboys on the road (39\u201340) and then back in Atlanta against the Bears (26\u201330). On October 11, after the team suffered a 23\u201316 loss at home against the Carolina Panthers and fell to 0\u20135, the Falcons announced the firings of Quinn and Dimitroff. Defensive coordinator Raheem Morris took over for the rest of the season, leading the team to a 4\u201312 record. Morris was not retained after the season, and soon joined the Los Angeles Rams as their defensive coordinator.\nArthur Smith years (2021\u20132024).\nOn January 15, 2021, the Falcons announced that Tennessee Titans offensive coordinator Arthur Smith had been named the 18th head coach in franchise history. Four days later, New Orleans Saints executive Terry Fontenot was named the Falcons' new general manager. Tight end Kyle Pitts was selected with the 4th pick of the 2021 draft, and longtime star receiver Julio Jones was traded to the Titans, after publicly requesting a trade from Atlanta. The Falcons improved on their record from the prior year, finishing the season with a 7\u201310 record.\nOn March 21, 2022, the Falcons traded longtime star quarterback Matt Ryan to the Indianapolis Colts. During the 2022 season, the team finished last place in the NFC South with a 7\u201310 record.\nThe Falcons entered the 2023 seasons with heightened expectations after drafting Texas running back Bijan Robinson with the eighth overall pick of the 2023 draft and making significant improvements in free agency, including signing Jessie Bates and Calais Campbell to improve their defense. However, the team finished with a 7\u201310 record for the third consecutive season, although they had been in contention for a playoff spot until the final day of the season before a 48\u201317 loss to the New Orleans Saints on January 7, 2024. The following day, Smith was fired after three years as head coach.\nRaheem Morris years (2024-present).\nOn January 25, 2024, the Falcons announced Raheem Morris's return to the organization, this time as the 19th head coach in Falcons history. During the early months of his tenure, Morris faced scrutiny and criticism for his questionable player selection decisions.\nStadiums.\nThe Falcons have called three stadiums home in their 51 years of existence, and its third home in their history opened in the late summer of 2017. The first was the Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium, sharing with the Atlanta Braves Major League Baseball team until 1991. In 1992, the Georgia Dome was built, and the Falcons played there from its opening to the 2016 season. The Dome has been frequently used for college football, including Georgia State football and college bowl games such as the Peach Bowl.\nIn an effort to replace the aging Georgia Dome and potentially host a future Super Bowl, team owner Arthur Blank proposed a deal with the city of Atlanta to build a new state-of-the-art stadium not far from where the Georgia Dome is located. Blank will contribute $800 million and the city of Atlanta will contribute an additional $200 million via bonds backed by the city's hotel/motel tax towards the construction of a retractable roof stadium. Blank will contribute additional money for cost overruns if it is needed. The team will provide up to $50 million towards infrastructure costs that weren't included in the construction budget and to retire the remaining debt on the Georgia Dome. In addition, Blank's foundation and the city will each provide $15 million for development in surrounding neighborhoods. Though the total cost of the stadium was initially estimated to be around $1 billion, the total cost was revised to $1.5 billion according to Blank. In March 2013, the Atlanta City Council voted 11\u20134 in favor of building the stadium. The retractable roof Mercedes-Benz Stadium broke ground in May 2014, and became the third home stadium for the Falcons and the first for the new Atlanta United FC Major League Soccer club upon opening in 2017.\nLogo and uniforms.\nThe Atlanta Falcons' colors are black, red, silver and white. When the team began play in 1966, the Falcons wore red helmets with a black falcon crest logo. In the center of the helmet was a center black stripe surrounded by two gold stripes and two white stripes. These colors represented the two college rival schools in the state of Georgia; rival schools Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets (white and gold) and the Georgia Bulldogs (red and black). Although the gold was removed after several seasons, the white remains to this day. They wore white pants and either black or white jerseys. At first, the falcon crest logo was also put on the jersey sleeves, but it was replaced by a red and white stripe pattern four years later. They switched from black to red jerseys in 1971, and the club began to wear silver pants in 1978. The facemasks on the helmets were initially gray, becoming white in 1978, and then black in 1984; the team wore black face masks until its 2020 redesign.\nA prototype white helmet was developed for the team prior to the 1974 season, but was never worn.\nIn 1990, the uniform design changed to black helmets, silver pants, and either black or white jerseys. The numbers on the white jerseys were black, but were changed to red in 1997. (The red numerals could be seen on the away jerseys briefly in 1990.)\nBoth the logo and uniforms changed in 2003. The logo was redesigned with red and silver accents to depict a more powerful, aggressive falcon, which now more closely resembles the capital letter \"F\".\nAlthough the Falcons still wore black helmets, the new uniforms featured jerseys and pants with red trim down the sides. The uniform design consisted of either black or white jerseys, and either black or white pants. During that same year, a red alternate jersey with black trim was also introduced. The Falcons also started wearing black cleats with these uniforms.\nIn 2004, the red jerseys became the primary jerseys, and the black ones became the alternate, both worn with white pants. In select road games, the Falcons wear black pants with white jerseys. The Falcons wore an all-black combination for home games against their archrivals, the New Orleans Saints, winning the first two contests (24\u201321 in and 36\u201317 in ), but losing 31\u201313 in . The Falcons wore the all-black combination against the New Orleans Saints for four straight seasons starting in 2004, With the last time being in 2007, losing 34\u201314. They wore the combination again in 2006, against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Week 2. The Falcons won that game, 14\u20133. The Falcons also wore their all-black uniform in 2007 against the New York Giants, and in 2008 against the Carolina Panthers and against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (for the second time). After that, the black pants and uniforms were retired and the white pants were now used full-time with the regular uniforms.\nIn the 1980s, the Falcons wore their white uniforms at home most of the time because of the heat. When the Falcons started playing in a dome, the team switched to their dark uniforms for home games but have worn their white uniforms at home a few times since switching to the dome. It was announced at the 2009 state of the franchise meeting that the Falcons would wear 1966 throwback uniforms for a couple games during the 2009 season. The Atlanta Falcons wore 1966 throwback jerseys for two home games in 2009 \u2013 against the Carolina Panthers on September 20 and against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on November 29. The Falcons won both of those games. They donned the throwbacks again for 2 games in 2010, against Baltimore and San Francisco, winning both of those games as well. The throwbacks were used twice in 2011 and 2012; both times were against the Panthers and Saints. However, the throwbacks were retired following a 2013 NFL rule requiring only one helmet shell per team.\nThe Falcons unveiled an all-red Color Rush uniform on September 13, 2016; however, due to the fact that the Falcons and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers had similar all-red Color Rush uniforms, the Falcons were unable to wear their Color Rush uniform until the 2017 season.\nAlso in 2016, the Falcons unveiled a mixed throwback uniform set. The uniform tops, pants and socks closely resembled their 1960s kits. From 2016 to 2021, due to the NFL's one-shell rule, the Falcons wore the black helmets with the original logo decal similar to the design they wore in the 1990s. However, starting in 2022, with the NFL now reinstating the use of alternate helmets, the Falcons brought back the original red helmets to pair with their throwback uniforms.\nIt was revealed in January 2020 that the Falcons will change uniforms for the 2020 NFL season. The ensuing design featured the return to black as the primary home uniform color for the first time since 2003. Both the primary home and road uniforms featured the \"ATL\" abbreviation in red above either white or black numbers with red drop shadows. The white and black tops are usually paired with either white or black pants. The alternate uniform featured a red/black gradient design and also featured the \"ATL\" abbreviation in white above white numbers with black drop shadows. Black pants are only used with this uniform. All three uniforms feature red side stripes. The current throwback uniform was also retained. In addition, the Falcons switched to matte helmets with the enlarged falcon logo and gray facemasks. The red/black gradient alternates only lasted three seasons before it was removed from the uniform rotation in 2023.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nNew Orleans Saints.\nThe Falcons have shared a heated divisional rivalry with the New Orleans Saints (first the NFC West, and now the NFC South). The two teams were often basement-dwellers in the division; but the rivalry grew as a means of pride between the two cities, as they were the only two NFL teams in the Deep South for multiple decades. The series is the oldest and most iconic rivalry in the NFC South as the two teams have long harbored bad blood against one another. The series is currently tied at 55\u201355, including the most recent loss to the Saints on January 7, 2024, when the Falcons lost 48\u201317.\nCarolina Panthers.\nIn addition, the Falcons share a similar, rivalry with the Carolina Panthers, with both teams having been in the NFC West from the Panthers' founding in 1995 to the NFL realignment in 2002. Similar to their rivalry with the Saints, the Falcons have often endured several competitive divisional battles with the Panthers for lead of the NFC South, though the two have yet to meet in the postseason. The series is also known as the \"I-85 Rivalry\" due to Atlanta and Charlotte being only four hours apart on Interstate 85. The Falcons lead the series 36\u201322.\nTampa Bay Buccaneers.\nThe Falcons share a less-intense divisional rivalry with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers since the NFL realignment in 2002. The two had been regional opponents but very little had linked any further animosity towards the two as the Buccaneers played in the former NFC Central before the realignment. The two teams would find themselves competing over staff and players alike, particularly during the 2000s after the Falcons had lured general manager Rich McKay after winning Super Bowl XXXVII the season prior. McKay's ties with Tampa extend into his family as his father John McKay was head coach of the Buccaneers for nine seasons.\nConference.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nThe Eagles lead the Falcons 21\u201315\u20131, with a 3\u20131 lead in playoff games. The rivalry first emerged after the Falcons upset the Eagles 14\u201313 in the , and only intensified further in the 2000s thanks to the rivalry between prominent dual-threat quarterbacks Donovan McNabb, and Michael Vick. Recently, the Falcons lost to the Eagles in the .\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Falcons have also shared a playoff rivalry with the Green Bay Packers as much of the connections between the two teams stems from Atlanta trading future hall-of-fame quarterback Brett Favre to the Green Bay on February 11, 1992, in exchange for a first-round pick. The two teams have met four times in the postseason, most recently during the 2016\u201317 NFC Championship as it would also be the final game played at the Georgia Dome. The Packers lead the all-time series 19\u201316, while both teams are tied in the postseason 2\u20132.\nStatistics.\nRecord vs. opponents.\nIncludes postseason records\nSource:\n! Total || 393|| 455 || 6 || || || || || 10\u201314 ()\nPlayers.\nPro Football Hall of Famers.\nHumphrey is the only person in the Hall of Fame who spent the majority of his career with the Falcons.\nRing of Honor.\nFourteen members are included in the Atlanta Falcons Ring of Honor.\nDraft history.\nIn the team's history, the Falcons have had the number one overall pick four times.\nCoaching staff.\nHead coaches.\nIn their history, the Atlanta Falcons have had 18 head coaches. Five coaches have served in interim roles\nRadio and television.\nThe Falcons' flagship radio station is WZGC 92.9 The Game. Wes Durham, son of longtime North Carolina Tar Heels voice Woody Durham, is the Falcons' play-by-play announcer, with former Atlanta Falcons quarterback and pro football veteran, Dave Archer serving as color commentator.\nIn 2014, The CW affiliate WUPA became the official television station of the Falcons, gaining rights to its preseason games, which are produced by CBS Sports.\nIn the regular season, the team's games are seen on Fox's O&amp;O affiliate WAGA. When the Falcons challenge an AFC team, CBS affiliate WANF will air those games while Sunday night games are televised on WXIA, the local NBC affiliate.\nRadio affiliates.\nSource:"}
{"id": "2104", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2104", "title": "Heathenry in the United States", "text": "Heathenry is a modern Pagan new religious movement that has been active in the United States since at least the early 1970s. Although the term \"Heathenry\" is often employed to cover the entire religious movement, different Heathen groups within the United States often prefer the term \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" or \"Odinism\" as self-designations.\nHeathenry appeared in the United States during the 1960s, at the same time as the wider emergence of modern Paganism in the United States. Among the earliest American group was the Odinist Fellowship, founded by Danish migrant Else Christensen in 1969.\nHistory.\n\u00c1satr\u00fa grew steadily in the United States during the 1960s. In 1969, the Danish Odinist Else Christensen established the Odinist Fellowship from her home in Florida. Heavily influenced by Alexander Rud Mills' writings, she began publication of a magazine, \"The Odinist\", although this focused to a greater extent on right-wing and racialist ideas than theological ones. Stephen McNallen first founded the Viking Brotherhood in the early 1970s, before creating the \u00c1satr\u00fa Free Assembly (AFA) in 1976, which broke up in 1986 amid widespread political disagreements after McNallen's repudiation of neo-Nazis within the group. In the 1990s, McNallen founded the \u00c1satr\u00fa Folk Assembly (AFA), an ethnically oriented Heathen group headquartered in California.\nMeanwhile, Valgard Murray and his kindred in Arizona founded the \u00c1satr\u00fa Alliance (AA) in the late 1980s, which shared the AFA's perspectives on race and which published the \"Vor Tru\" newsletter. In 1987, Edred Thorsson and James Chisholm founded The Troth, which was incorporated in Texas. Taking an inclusive, non-racialist view, it soon grew into an international organisation.\nTerminology.\nIn English usage, the genitive \"\" \"of \u00c6sir faith\" is often used on its own to denote adherents (both singular and plural). This term is favored by practitioners who focus on the deities of Scandinavia, although it is problematic as many Asatruar worship deities and entities other than the \u00c6sir, such as the Vanir, Valkyries, Elves, and Dwarves. Other practitioners term their religion \"Vanatr\u00fa\", meaning \"those who honour the Vanir\" or \"D\u00edsitr\u00fa\", meaning \"those who honour the Goddesses\", depending on their particular theological emphasis.\nWithin the community it is sometimes stated that the term \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" pertains to groups which are not racially focused, while \"Odinism\" is the term preferred by racially oriented groups. However, in practice, there is no such neat division in terminology.\nThere are notable differences of emphasis between \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" as practiced in the US and in Scandinavia. According to , American Asatruar tend to prefer a more devotional form of worship and a more emotional conception of the Nordic gods than Scandinavian practitioners, reflecting the parallel tendency of highly emotional forms of Christianity prevalent in the United States.\nDemographics.\nAlthough deeming it impossible to calculate the exact size of the Heathen community in the US, sociologist Jeffrey Kaplan estimated that, in the mid-1990s, there were around 500 active practitioners in the country, with a further thousand individuals on the periphery of the movement. He noted that the overwhelming majority of individuals in the movement were white, male, and young. Most had at least an undergraduate degree, and worked in a mix of white collar and blue collar jobs. From her experience within the community, Snook concurred that the majority of American Heathens were male, adding also that most were also white and middle-aged, but believed that there had been a growth in the proportion of Heathen women in the US since the mid-1990s.\nIn 2003, the Pagan Census Project led by Helen A. Berger, Evan A. Leach, and Leigh S. Shaffer gained 60 responses from Heathens in the US, noting that 65% were male and 35% female, which they saw as the \"opposite\" of the rest of the country's Pagan community. The majority had a college education, but were generally less well educated than the wider Pagan community, with a lower median income than the wider Pagan community too.\nPolitics and controversies.\n\u00c1satr\u00fa organizations have memberships which span the entire political and spiritual spectrum. There is a history of political controversy within organized US \u00c1satr\u00fa, mostly surrounding the question of how to deal with such adherents as place themselves in a context of the far right and white supremacy, notably resulting in the fragmentation of the \"Asatru Free Assembly\" in 1986.\nExternally, political activity on the part of \u00c1satr\u00fa organizations has surrounded campaigns against alleged religious discrimination, such as the call for the introduction of an \u00c1satr\u00fa \"emblem of belief\" by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs to parallel the Wiccan pentacle granted to the widow of Patrick Stewart in 2006. In May 2013, the \"Hammer of Thor\" was added to the list of United States Department of Veterans Affairs emblems for headstones and markers. It was reported in early 2019 that a Heathenry service was held on the U.S. Navy's USS John C. Stennis\nFolkish \u00c1satr\u00fa, Universalism and racialism.\nHistorically, the main dispute between the national organizations has generally centered on the interpretation of \"Nordic heritage\" as either something cultural, or as something genetic or racial. In the internal discourse within American \u00c1satr\u00fa, this cultural/racial divide has long been known as \"universalist\" vs. \"folkish\" \u00c1satr\u00fa.\nThe Troth takes the \"universalist\" position, claiming \"\u00c1satr\u00fa\" as a synonym for \"Northern European Heathenry\" taken to comprise \"many variations, names, and practices, including Theodism, Irminism, Odinism, and Anglo-Saxon Heathenry\". The Asatru Folk Assembly takes the folkish position, claiming that \u00c1satr\u00fa and the Germanic beliefs are ancestral in nature, and as an indigenous religion of the European Folk should only be accessed by the descendants of Europe. In the UK, Germanic Neopaganism is more commonly known as Odinism or as \"Heathenry\". This is mostly a matter of terminology, and US \u00c1satr\u00fa may be equated with UK Odinism for practical purposes, as is evident in the short-lived International Asatru-Odinic Alliance of folkish \u00c1satr\u00fa/Odinist groups.\nSome groups identifying as \u00c1satr\u00fa have been associated with national socialist and white nationalist movements. Wotansvolk, for example, is an explicitly racial form.\nMore recently, however, many \u00c1satr\u00fa groups have been taking a harder stance against these elements of their community. Declaration 127, so named for the corresponding stanza of the H\u00e1vam\u00e1l: \"When you see misdeeds, speak out against them, and give your enemies no fri\u00f0\u201d is a collective statement denouncing and testifying disassociation with the Asatru Folk Assembly for alleged racial and sexually-discriminatory practices and beliefs signed by over 150 \u00c1satr\u00fa religious organizations from over 15 different nations mainly represented on Facebook.\nDiscrimination charges.\nInmates of the \"Intensive Management Unit\" at Washington State Penitentiary who are adherents of \u00c1satr\u00fa in 2001 were deprived of their Thor's Hammer medallions.\nIn 2007, a federal judge confirmed that \u00c1satr\u00fa adherents in US prisons have the right to possess a Thor's Hammer pendant. An inmate sued the Virginia Department of Corrections after he was denied it while members of other religions were allowed their medallions.\nIn the \"Georgacarakos v. Watts\" case Peter N. Georgacarakos filed a pro se civil-rights complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado against 19 prison officials for \"interference with the free exercise of his \u00c1satr\u00fa religion\" and \"discrimination on the basis of his being \u00c1satr\u00fa\"."}
{"id": "2106", "revid": "48816110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2106", "title": "Ansible", "text": "The term ansible refers to a category of fictional technological devices capable of superluminal or faster-than-light communication. These devices can instantaneously transmit and receive messages across obstacles and vast distances, including between star systems and even galaxies. As a name for such a device, the word \"ansible\" first appeared in a 1966 novel by Ursula K. Le Guin. Since that time, the broad use of the term has continued in the works of numerous science-fiction authors, across a variety of settings and continuities. Related terms are ultraphone and ultrawave.\nCoinage by Ursula Le Guin.\nUrsula K. Le Guin first used the word \"ansible\" in her 1966 novel \"Rocannon's World\". Etymologically, the word was a contraction of \"answerable\", as the device allowed its users to receive answers to their messages in a reasonable amount of time, even over interstellar distances.\nThe ansible was the basis for creating a specific kind of interstellar civilization, where communications between far-flung stars are instantaneous, but humans can only travel at relativistic speeds. Under these conditions, a full-fledged galactic empire is not possible, but there is a looser interstellar organization, in which several of Le Guin's protagonists are involved.\nAlthough Le Guin invented the name \"ansible\" for this type of device (fleshed out with specific details in her fictional works), the broader concept of instantaneous superluminal or faster-than-light communication had previously existed in science fiction. Similar communication functions were included in a device called an \u201cinterocitor\u201d in the 1952 novel \"This Island Earth\" by Raymond F.\u00a0Jones, and the 1955 film based on the novel. Similarly in 1954, another of these devices called the \"Dirac Communicator\" appeared in James Blish's short story \"Beep\", which was expanded into the 1974 novel \"The Quincunx of Time\". Additionally, Robert A. Heinlein, in his 1958 novel \"Time for the Stars,\" employed instantaneous telepathic communication between identical twin pairs over interstellar distances, and like Le Guin, provided a technical explanation based on a non-Einsteinian principle of simultaneity.\nIn Le Guin's works.\nIn her subsequent works, Le Guin continued to develop the concept of the ansible:\nAny ansible may be used to communicate through any other, by setting its coordinates to those of the receiving ansible. They have a limited bandwidth, which only allows for at most a few hundred characters of text to be communicated in any transaction of a dialog session, and are attached to a keyboard and small display to perform text messaging.\nUse by later authors.\nSince Le Guin's conception of the ansible, the name of the device has been borrowed by numerous authors. While Le Guin's ansible was said to communicate \"instantaneously\", the name has also been adopted for devices capable of communication at finite speeds that are faster than light. David Langford publishes the science fiction fanzine and newsletter Ansible (magazine).\nOrson Scott Card's works.\nOrson Scott Card, in his 1977 novelette and 1985 novel \"Ender's Game\" and its sequels, used the term \"ansible\" as an unofficial name for the Philotic Parallax Instantaneous Communicator, a machine capable of communicating across infinite distances with no time delay. In \"Ender's Game\", Colonel Graff states that \"somebody dredged the name \"ansible\" out of an old book somewhere\". In an answer on the question-and-answer website Quora, Card explained why he chose to reuse the word \"ansible\" for an FTL communication device instead of developing a new in-universe name for one: In a FTL universe, you have several levels. [If you] can travel hyperfast, but no radio signal can outstrip [outrun] your ship, [then] you have to carry the mail with you. It's like the way things were between Europe and America before the laying of the successful transatlantic cable. But once it was laid, messages could be sent long before a ship could make the passage. That is like the ansible universe in Ursula K. LeGuin's early Hainish novels. Since I needed to use exactly that rule set, why not use the word \u2014 an excellent word \u2014 which I apply in the same way we all say 'robot,' an invented word that has entered the language, [and thereby] pay tribute to the writer from whose works I learned the word.\nIn the universe of the \"Ender's Game\" series, the ansible's functions involved a fictional subatomic particle, the philote. The two quarks inside a pi meson can be separated by an arbitrary distance, while remaining connected by \"philotic rays\". This concept is similar to quantum teleportation due to entanglement; however, in reality, quark confinement prevents quarks from being separated by any observable distance.\nCard's version of the ansible was also featured in the video game \"Advent Rising\", for which Card helped write the story, and in the movie \"Ender's Game\", which was based on the book.\nOther writers.\nNumerous other writers have included ansibles and similar faster-than-light communication devices in their fictional works. Notable examples include:"}
{"id": "2108", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2108", "title": "Adalbert of Prague", "text": "Adalbert of Prague, (, , , , ; 95623 April 997), known in the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovakia by his birth name Vojt\u011bch (), was a Czech missionary and Christian saint. He was the Bishop of Prague and a missionary to the Hungarians, Poles, and Prussians, who was martyred in his efforts to convert the Baltic Prussians to Christianity. He is said to be the composer of the oldest Czech hymn \"Hospodine, pomiluj ny\" and \"Bogurodzica\", the oldest known Polish anthem but his authorship of them has not been confirmed.\nAdalbert was later declared the patron saint of the Czech Republic, Poland, and the Duchy of Prussia. He is also the patron saint of the Archdiocese of Esztergom in Hungary.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nBorn as \"Vojt\u011bch\" in 952 or in gord Libice, he belonged to the Slavnik clan, one of the two most powerful families in Bohemia. Events from his life were later recorded by a Bohemian priest Cosmas of Prague (1045\u20131125). Vojt\u011bch's father was Slavn\u00edk (d. 978\u2013981), a duke ruling a province centred at Libice. His mother was St\u0159ezislava (d. 985\u2013987), and according to David Kalhous belonged to the P\u0159emyslid dynasty. He had five brothers: Sob\u011bslav, Spytim\u00edr, Dobroslav, Po\u0159ej, and \u010c\u00e1slav. Cosmas also refers to Radim (later Gaudentius) as a brother; who is believed to have been a half-brother by his father's liaison with another woman. After he survived a grave illness in childhood, his parents decided to dedicate him to the service of God. Adalbert was well educated, having studied for approximately ten years (970\u201380) in Magdeburg under Adalbert of Magdeburg. The young Vojt\u011bch took his tutor's name \"Adalbert\" at his Confirmation.\nEpiscopacy.\nIn 981 Adalbert of Magdeburg died, and his young protege Adalbert returned to Bohemia. Later Bishop Dietmar of Prague ordained him a Catholic priest. In 982, Bishop Dietmar died, and Adalbert, despite being under canonical age, was chosen to succeed him as Bishop of Prague. Amiable and somewhat worldly, he was not expected to trouble the secular powers by making excessive claims for the Church. Although Adalbert was from a wealthy family, he avoided comfort and luxury, and was noted for his charity and austerity. After six years of preaching and prayer, he had made little headway in evangelising the Bohemians, who maintained deeply embedded pagan beliefs.\nAdalbert opposed the participation of Christians in the slave trade and complained of polygamy and idolatry, which were common among the people. Once he started to propose reforms he was met with opposition from both the secular powers and the clergy. His family refused to support Duke Boleslaus in an unsuccessful war against Poland. Adalbert was no longer welcome and eventually forced into exile. In 988 he went to Rome. He lived as a hermit at the Benedictine monastery of Saint Alexis. Five years later, Boleslaus requested that the Pope send Adalbert back to Prague, in hopes of securing his family's support. Pope John XV agreed, with the understanding that Adalbert was free to leave Prague if he continued to encounter entrenched resistance. Adalbert returned as bishop of Prague, where he was initially received with demonstrations of apparent joy. Together with a group of Italian Benedictine monks which brought with him, he founded in 14 January 993 a monastery in B\u0159evnov (then situated westward from Prague, now part of the city), the second oldest monastery on Czech territory.\nIn 995, the Slavniks' former rivalry with the P\u0159emyslids, who were allied with the powerful Bohemian clan of the Vr\u0161ovids, resulted in the storming of the Slavnik town of Libice nad Cidlinou, which was led by the P\u0159emyslid Boleslaus II the Pious. During the struggle four or five of Adalbert's brothers were killed. The Zli\u010d Principality became part of the P\u0159emyslids' estate. Adalbert unsuccessfully attempted to protect a noblewoman caught in adultery. She had fled to a convent, where she was killed. In upholding the right of sanctuary, Bishop Adalbert responded by excommunicating the murderers. Butler suggests that the incident was orchestrated by enemies of his family.\nAfter this, Adalbert could not safely stay in Bohemia and escaped from Prague. Strachkvas was eventually appointed to be his successor. However, Strachkvas suddenly died during the liturgy at which he was to accede to his episcopal office in Prague. The cause of his death is still ambiguous. The Pope directed Adalbert to resume his see, but believing that he would not be allowed back, Adalbert requested a brief as an itinerant missionary.\nAdalbert then traveled to Hungary and probably baptized G\u00e9za of Hungary and his son Stephen in Esztergom. Then he went to Poland where he was cordially welcomed by then-Duke Boleslaus I and installed as Bishop of Gniezno.\nMission and martyrdom in Prussia.\nAdalbert again relinquished his diocese, namely that of Gniezno, and set out as a missionary to preach to the inhabitants near Prussia. Boles\u0142aw I, Duke (and, later, King) of Poland, sent soldiers with Adalbert on his mission to the Prussians. The Bishop and his companions, entered Prussian territory and traveled along the coast of the Baltic Sea to Gda\u0144sk. At the borders of the Polish realm, at the mouth of the Vistula River, his half-brother Radim (Gaudentius), Benedict-Bogusza (who was probably a Pole), and at least one interpreter, ventured out into Prussia alone, as Boles\u0142aw had only sent his soldiers to escort them to the border.\nAdalbert achieved some success upon his arrival, however his arrival mostly caused strain upon the local Prussian populations. Partially this was because of the imperious manner with which he preached, but potentially because he preached utilizing a book. The Prussians had an oral society where communication was face to face. To the locals Adalbert reading from a book may have come off as a manifestation of an evil action. He was forced to leave this first village after being struck in the back of the head by an oar by a local chieftain, causing the pages of his book to scatter upon the ground. He and his companions then fled across a river.\nIn the next place that Adalbert tried to preach, his message was met with the locals banging their sticks upon the ground, calling for the death of Adalbert and his companions. Retreating once again Adalbert and his companions went to a market place of Truso (near modern-day Elbl\u0105g). Here they were met with a similar response as at the previous place. On the 23 April 997, after mass, while Adalbert and his companions lay in the grass while eating a snack, they were set upon by a pagan mob. The mob was led by a man named Sicco, possibly a pagan priest, who delivered the first blow against Adalbert, before the others joined in. They removed Adalbert's head from his body after he was dead, and mounted on a pole while they returned home. This encounter may also have taken place in Tenkitten and Fischhausen (now Primorsk, Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia). It is recorded that his body was bought back for its weight in gold by King Boleslaus I of Poland.\nVeneration and relics.\nA few years after his martyrdom, Adalbert was canonized as Saint Adalbert of Prague. His life was written in \"Vita Sancti Adalberti Pragensis\" by various authors, the earliest being traced to imperial Aachen and the Bishop of Li\u00e8ge, Notger von L\u00fcttich, although it was previously assumed that the Roman monk John Canaparius wrote the first \"Vita\" in 999. Another famous biographer of Adalbert was Bruno of Querfurt who wrote a hagiography of him in 1001\u20134.\nNotably, the P\u0159emyslid rulers of Bohemia initially refused to ransom Adalbert's body from the Prussians who murdered him, and therefore it was purchased by Poles. This fact may be explained by Adalbert's belonging to the Slavniks family which was rival to the P\u0159emyslids. Thus Adalbert's bones were preserved in Gniezno, which assisted Boleslaus I of Poland in increasing Polish political and diplomatic power in Europe.\nAccording to Bohemian accounts, in 1039 the Bohemian Duke Bretislav I looted the bones of Adalbert from Gniezno in a raid and translated them to Prague. According to Polish accounts, however, he stole the wrong relics, namely those of Gaudentius, while the Poles concealed Adalbert's relics which remain in Gniezno. In 1127 his severed head, which was not in the original purchase according to \"Roczniki Polskie\", was discovered and translated to Gniezno. In 1928, one of the arms of Adalbert, which Boles\u0142aw I had given to Holy Roman Emperor Otto III in 1000, was added to the bones preserved in Gniezno. Therefore, today Adalbert has two elaborate shrines in the Prague Cathedral and Royal Cathedral of Gniezno, each of which claims to possess his relics, but which of these bones are his authentic relics is unknown. For example, pursuant to both claims two skulls are attributed to Adalbert. The one in Gniezno was stolen in 1923.\nThe massive bronze doors of Gniezno Cathedral, dating from around 1175, are decorated with eighteen reliefs of scenes from Adalbert's life. They are the only Romanesque ecclesiastical doors in Europe depicting a cycle illustrating the life of a saint, and therefore are a precious relic documenting Adalbert's martyrdom. We can read that door literally and theologically.\nThe one thousandth anniversary of Adalbert's martyrdom was on 23 April 1997. It was commemorated in Poland, the Czech Republic, Germany, Russia, and other nations. Representatives of Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Evangelical churches traveled on a pilgrimage to Adalbert's tomb located in Gniezno. Pope John Paul II visited the cathedral and celebrated a liturgy there in which heads of seven European nations and approximately one million faithful participated.\nA ten-meter cross was erected near the village of Beregovoe (formerly Tenkitten), Kaliningrad Oblast, where Adalbert is thought to have been martyred by the Prussians.\nFeast day.\nHe is also commemorated on 23 April by Evangelical Church in Germany and Eastern Orthodox Church.\nIn popular culture and society.\nThe Dagmar and V\u00e1clav Havel VIZE 97 Foundation Prize, given annually to a distinguished thinker \"whose work exceeds the traditional framework of scientific knowledge, contributes to the understanding of science as an integral part of general culture and is concerned with unconventional ways of asking fundamental questions about cognition, being and human existence\"\nincludes a massive replica of Adalbert's crozier by Czech artist Ji\u0159\u00ed Plie\u0161t\u00edk.\nSt. Vojtech Fellowship was established in 1870 by Slovak Catholic priest Andrej Radlinsk\u00fd. It had facilitated Slovak Catholic thinkers and authors, continuing to publish religious original works and translations to this day. It is the official publishing body of Episcopal Conference of Slovakia."}
{"id": "2110", "revid": "31541467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2110", "title": "\u00c6lfheah of Canterbury", "text": "\u00c6lfheah (\u00a0\u2013 19 April 1012), more commonly known today as Alphege, was an Anglo-Saxon Bishop of Winchester, later Archbishop of Canterbury. He became an anchorite before being elected abbot of Bath Abbey. His reputation for piety and sanctity led to his promotion to the episcopate and, eventually, to his becoming archbishop. \u00c6lfheah furthered the cult of Dunstan and also encouraged learning. He was captured by Viking raiders in 1011 during the siege of Canterbury and killed by them the following year after refusing to allow himself to be ransomed. \u00c6lfheah was canonised as a saint in 1078. Thomas Becket, a later Archbishop of Canterbury, prayed to \u00c6lfheah just before his murder in Canterbury Cathedral in 1170.\nLife.\n\u00c6lfheah was born around 953, supposedly in Weston on the outskirts of Bath, and became a monk early in life. He first entered the monastery of Deerhurst, but then moved to Bath, where he became an anchorite. He was noted for his piety and austerity and rose to become abbot of Bath Abbey. The 12th-century chronicler, William of Malmesbury recorded that \u00c6lfheah was a monk and prior at Glastonbury Abbey, but this is not accepted by all historians. Indications are that \u00c6lfheah became abbot at Bath by 982, perhaps as early as around 977. He perhaps shared authority with his predecessor \u00c6scwig after 968.\nProbably due to the influence of Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury (959\u2013988), \u00c6lfheah was elected Bishop of Winchester in 984, and was consecrated on 19 October that year. While bishop he was largely responsible for the construction of a large organ in the cathedral, audible from over a mile (1600\u00a0m) away and said to require more than 24\u00a0men to operate. He also built and enlarged the city's churches, and promoted the cult of Swithun and his predecessor, \u00c6thelwold of Winchester. One act promoting \u00c6thelwold's cult was the translation of \u00c6thelwold's body to a new tomb in the cathedral at Winchester, which \u00c6lfheah presided over on 10 September 996.\nFollowing a Viking raid in 994, a peace treaty was agreed with one of the raiders, Olaf Tryggvason. Besides receiving danegeld, Olaf converted to Christianity and undertook never to raid or fight the English again. \u00c6lfheah may have played a part in the treaty negotiations, and it is certain that he confirmed Olaf in his new faith.\nIn 1006, \u00c6lfheah succeeded \u00c6lfric as Archbishop of Canterbury, taking Swithun's head with him as a relic for the new location. He went to Rome in 1007 to receive his pallium\u2014symbol of his status as an archbishop\u2014from Pope John XVIII, but was robbed during his journey. While at Canterbury, he promoted the cult of Dunstan, ordering the writing of the second \"Life of Dunstan\", which Adelard of Ghent composed between 1006 and 1011. He also introduced new practices into the liturgy, and was instrumental in the Witenagemot's recognition of Wulfsige of Sherborne as a saint in about 1012.\n\u00c6lfheah sent \u00c6lfric of Eynsham to Cerne Abbey to take charge of its monastic school. He was present at the council of May 1008 at which Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York, preached his \"Sermo Lupi ad Anglos\" (\"The Sermon of the Wolf to the English\"), castigating the English for their moral failings and blaming the latter for the tribulations afflicting the country.\nIn 1011, the Danes again raided England, and from 8\u201329 September they laid siege to Canterbury. Aided by the treachery of \u00c6lfmaer, whose life \u00c6lfheah had once saved, the raiders succeeded in sacking the city. \u00c6lfheah was taken prisoner and held captive for seven months. Godwine (Bishop of Rochester), Leofrun (abbess of St Mildrith's), and the king's reeve, \u00c6lfweard were captured also, but the abbot of St Augustine's Abbey, \u00c6lfm\u00e6r, managed to escape. Canterbury Cathedral was plundered and burned by the Danes following \u00c6lfheah's capture.\nDeath.\n\u00c6lfheah refused to allow a ransom to be paid for his freedom, and as a result was killed on 19 April 1012 at Greenwich, reputedly on the site of St Alfege's Church. The account of \u00c6lfheah's death appears in the E version of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\": \n\u00c6lfheah was the first Archbishop of Canterbury to die a violent death. A contemporary report tells that Thorkell the Tall attempted to save \u00c6lfheah from the mob about to kill him by offering everything he owned except for his ship, in exchange for \u00c6lfheah's life; Thorkell's presence is not mentioned in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", however. Some sources record that the final blow, with the back of an axe, was delivered as an act of kindness by a Christian convert known as \"Thrum\". \u00c6lfheah was buried in Old St Paul's Cathedral. In 1023, his body was moved by King Cnut to Canterbury, with great ceremony. Thorkell the Tall was appalled at the brutality of his fellow raiders, and switched sides to the English king \u00c6thelred the Unready following \u00c6lfheah's death.\nVeneration.\nPope Gregory VII canonised \u00c6lfheah in 1078, with a feast day of 19 April. Lanfranc, the first post-Conquest archbishop, was dubious about some of the saints venerated at Canterbury. He was persuaded of \u00c6lfheah's sanctity, but \u00c6lfheah and Augustine of Canterbury were the only pre-conquest Anglo-Saxon archbishops kept on Canterbury's calendar of saints. \u00c6lfheah's shrine, which had become neglected, was rebuilt and expanded in the early 12th century under Anselm of Canterbury, who was instrumental in retaining \u00c6lfheah's name in the church calendar. After the 1174 fire in Canterbury Cathedral, \u00c6lfheah's remains together with those of Dunstan were placed around the high altar, at which Thomas Becket is said to have commended his life into \u00c6lfheah's care shortly before his martyrdom during the Becket controversy. The new shrine was sealed in lead, and was north of the high altar, sharing the honour with Dunstan's shrine, which was located south of the high altar. A \"Life of Saint \u00c6lfheah\" in prose and verse was written by a Canterbury monk named Osbern, at Lanfranc's request. The prose version has survived, but the \"Life\" is very much a hagiography; many of the stories it contains have obvious Biblical parallels, making them suspect as a historical record.\nIn the late medieval period, \u00c6lfheah's feast day was celebrated in Scandinavia, perhaps because of the saint's connection with Cnut. Few church dedications to him are known, with most of them occurring in Kent and one each in London and Winchester; as well as St Alfege's Church in Greenwich, a nearby hospital (1931\u20131968) was named after him. In Kent, there are two 12th-century parish churches dedicated to St Alphege at Seasalter and Canterbury. Reputedly his body lay in these churches overnight on his way back to Canterbury Cathedral for burial. In the town of Solihull in the West Midlands, St Alphege Church is dedicated to \u00c6lfheah dating back to approximately 1277. In 1929, a new Roman Catholic church in Bath, the Church of Our Lady &amp; St Alphege, was designed by Giles Gilbert Scott in homage to the ancient Roman church of Santa Maria in Cosmedin, and dedicated to \u00c6lfheah under the name of Alphege. St George the Martyr with St Alphege &amp; St Jude stands in Borough in London.\nArtistic representations of \u00c6lfheah often depict him holding a pile of stones in his chasuble, a reference to his martyrdom."}
{"id": "2112", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2112", "title": "Associative algebra", "text": "In mathematics, an associative algebra \"A\" over a commutative ring (often a field) \"K\" is a ring \"A\" together with a ring homomorphism from \"K\" into the center of \"A\". This is thus an algebraic structure with an addition, a multiplication, and a scalar multiplication (the multiplication by the image of the ring homomorphism of an element of \"K\"). The addition and multiplication operations together give \"A\" the structure of a ring; the addition and scalar multiplication operations together give \"A\" the structure of a module or vector space over \"K\". In this article we will also use the term \"K\"-algebra to mean an associative algebra over \"K\". A standard first example of a \"K\"-algebra is a ring of square matrices over a commutative ring \"K\", with the usual matrix multiplication.\nA commutative algebra is an associative algebra for which the multiplication is commutative, or, equivalently, an associative algebra that is also a commutative ring.\nIn this article associative algebras are assumed to have a multiplicative identity, denoted 1; they are sometimes called unital associative algebras for clarification. In some areas of mathematics this assumption is not made, and we will call such structures non-unital associative algebras. We will also assume that all rings are unital, and all ring homomorphisms are unital.\nEvery ring is an associative algebra over its center and over the integers.\nDefinition.\nLet \"R\" be a commutative ring (so \"R\" could be a field). An associative \"R\"-algebra \"A (or more simply, an R\"-algebra \"A\") is a ring \"A\" \nthat is also an \"R\"-module in such a way that the two additions (the ring addition and the module addition) are the same operation, and scalar multiplication satisfies\nfor all \"r\" in \"R\" and \"x\", \"y\" in the algebra. (This definition implies that the algebra, being a ring, is unital, since rings are supposed to have a multiplicative identity.)\nEquivalently, an associative algebra \"A\" is a ring together with a ring homomorphism from \"R\" to the center of \"A\". If \"f\" is such a homomorphism, the scalar multiplication is (here the multiplication is the ring multiplication); if the scalar multiplication is given, the ring homomorphism is given by . (See also \"\" below).\nEvery ring is an associative Z-algebra, where Z denotes the ring of the integers.\nA is an associative algebra that is also a commutative ring.\nAs a monoid object in the category of modules.\nThe definition is equivalent to saying that a unital associative \"R\"-algebra is a monoid object in \"R\"-Mod (the monoidal category of \"R\"-modules). By definition, a ring is a monoid object in the category of abelian groups; thus, the notion of an associative algebra is obtained by replacing the category of abelian groups with the category of modules.\nPushing this idea further, some authors have introduced a \"generalized ring\" as a monoid object in some other category that behaves like the category of modules. Indeed, this reinterpretation allows one to avoid making an explicit reference to elements of an algebra \"A\". For example, the associativity can be expressed as follows. By the universal property of a tensor product of modules, the multiplication (the \"R\"-bilinear map) corresponds to a unique \"R\"-linear map\nThe associativity then refers to the identity:\nFrom ring homomorphisms.\nAn associative algebra amounts to a ring homomorphism whose image lies in the center. Indeed, starting with a ring \"A\" and a ring homomorphism whose image lies in the center of \"A\", we can make \"A\" an \"R\"-algebra by defining\nfor all and . If \"A\" is an \"R\"-algebra, taking , the same formula in turn defines a ring homomorphism whose image lies in the center.\nIf a ring is commutative then it equals its center, so that a commutative \"R\"-algebra can be defined simply as a commutative ring \"A\" together with a commutative ring homomorphism .\nThe ring homomorphism \"\u03b7\" appearing in the above is often called a structure map. In the commutative case, one can consider the category whose objects are ring homomorphisms for a fixed \"R\", i.e., commutative \"R\"-algebras, and whose morphisms are ring homomorphisms that are under \"R\"; i.e., is (i.e., the coslice category of the category of commutative rings under \"R\".) The prime spectrum functor Spec then determines an anti-equivalence of this category to the category of affine schemes over Spec \"R\".\nHow to weaken the commutativity assumption is a subject matter of noncommutative algebraic geometry and, more recently, of derived algebraic geometry. See also: \"Generic matrix ring\".\nAlgebra homomorphisms.\nA homomorphism between two \"R\"-algebras is an \"R\"-linear ring homomorphism. Explicitly, is an associative algebra homomorphism if\nThe class of all \"R\"-algebras together with algebra homomorphisms between them form a category, sometimes denoted \"R\"-Alg.\nThe subcategory of commutative \"R\"-algebras can be characterized as the coslice category \"R\"/CRing where CRing is the category of commutative rings.\nExamples.\nThe most basic example is a ring itself; it is an algebra over its center or any subring lying in the center. In particular, any commutative ring is an algebra over any of its subrings. Other examples abound both from algebra and other fields of mathematics.\nDual of an associative algebra.\nLet \"A\" be an associative algebra over a commutative ring \"R\". Since \"A\" is in particular a module, we can take the dual module \"A\"* of \"A\". A priori, the dual \"A\"* need not have a structure of an associative algebra. However, \"A\" may come with an extra structure (namely, that of a Hopf algebra) so that the dual is also an associative algebra.\nFor example, take \"A\" to be the ring of continuous functions on a compact group \"G\". Then, not only \"A\" is an associative algebra, but it also comes with the co-multiplication and co-unit . The \"co-\" refers to the fact that they satisfy the dual of the usual multiplication and unit in the algebra axiom. Hence, the dual \"A\"* is an associative algebra. The co-multiplication and co-unit are also important in order to form a tensor product of representations of associative algebras (see \"\" below).\nEnveloping algebra.\nGiven an associative algebra \"A\" over a commutative ring \"R\", the enveloping algebra \"A\"e of \"A\" is the algebra or , depending on authors.\nNote that a bimodule over \"A\" is exactly a left module over \"A\"e.\nSeparable algebra.\nLet \"A\" be an algebra over a commutative ring \"R\". Then the algebra \"A\" is a right module over with the action . Then, by definition, \"A\" is said to separable if the multiplication map splits as an \"A\"e-linear map, where is an \"A\"e-module by . Equivalently,\n\"A\" is separable if it is a projective module over ; thus, the -projective dimension of \"A\", sometimes called the bidimension of \"A\", measures the failure of separability.\nFinite-dimensional algebra.\nLet \"A\" be a finite-dimensional algebra over a field \"k\". Then \"A\" is an Artinian ring.\nCommutative case.\nAs \"A\" is Artinian, if it is commutative, then it is a finite product of Artinian local rings whose residue fields are algebras over the base field \"k\". Now, a reduced Artinian local ring is a field and thus the following are equivalent\nLet formula_24, the profinite group of finite Galois extensions of \"k\". Then formula_25 is an anti-equivalence of the category of finite-dimensional separable \"k\"-algebras to the category of finite sets with continuous formula_26-actions.\nNoncommutative case.\nSince a simple Artinian ring is a (full) matrix ring over a division ring, if \"A\" is a simple algebra, then \"A\" is a (full) matrix algebra over a division algebra \"D\" over \"k\"; i.e., . More generally, if \"A\" is a semisimple algebra, then it is a finite product of matrix algebras (over various division \"k\"-algebras), the fact known as the Artin\u2013Wedderburn theorem.\nThe fact that \"A\" is Artinian simplifies the notion of a Jacobson radical; for an Artinian ring, the Jacobson radical of \"A\" is the intersection of all (two-sided) maximal ideals (in contrast, in general, a Jacobson radical is the intersection of all left maximal ideals or the intersection of all right maximal ideals.)\nThe Wedderburn principal theorem states: for a finite-dimensional algebra \"A\" with a nilpotent ideal \"I\", if the projective dimension of as a module over the enveloping algebra is at most one, then the natural surjection splits; i.e., \"A\" contains a subalgebra \"B\" such that is an isomorphism. Taking \"I\" to be the Jacobson radical, the theorem says in particular that the Jacobson radical is complemented by a semisimple algebra. The theorem is an analog of Levi's theorem for Lie algebras.\nLattices and orders.\nLet \"R\" be a Noetherian integral domain with field of fractions \"K\" (for example, they can be Z, Q). A \"lattice\" \"L\" in a finite-dimensional \"K\"-vector space \"V\" is a finitely generated \"R\"-submodule of \"V\" that spans \"V\"; in other words, .\nLet \"A\"\"K\" be a finite-dimensional \"K\"-algebra. An \"order\" in \"A\"\"K\" is an \"R\"-subalgebra that is a lattice. In general, there are a lot fewer orders than lattices; e.g., Z is a lattice in Q but not an order (since it is not an algebra).\nA \"maximal order\" is an order that is maximal among all the orders.\nRelated concepts.\nCoalgebras.\nAn associative algebra over \"K\" is given by a \"K\"-vector space \"A\" endowed with a bilinear map having two inputs (multiplicator and multiplicand) and one output (product), as well as a morphism identifying the scalar multiples of the multiplicative identity. If the bilinear map is reinterpreted as a linear map (i.e., morphism in the category of \"K\"-vector spaces) (by the universal property of the tensor product), then we can view an associative algebra over \"K\" as a \"K\"-vector space \"A\" endowed with two morphisms (one of the form and one of the form ) satisfying certain conditions that boil down to the algebra axioms. These two morphisms can be dualized using categorial duality by reversing all arrows in the commutative diagrams that describe the algebra axioms; this defines the structure of a coalgebra.\nThere is also an abstract notion of \"F\"-coalgebra, where \"F\" is a functor. This is vaguely related to the notion of coalgebra discussed above.\nRepresentations.\nA representation of an algebra \"A\" is an algebra homomorphism from \"A\" to the endomorphism algebra of some vector space (or module) \"V\". The property of \"\u03c1\" being an algebra homomorphism means that \"\u03c1\" preserves the multiplicative operation (that is, for all \"x\" and \"y\" in \"A\"), and that \"\u03c1\" sends the unit of \"A\" to the unit of End(\"V\") (that is, to the identity endomorphism of \"V\").\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are two algebras, and and are two representations, then there is a (canonical) representation of the tensor product algebra on the vector space . However, there is no natural way of defining a tensor product of two representations of a single associative algebra in such a way that the result is still a representation of that same algebra (not of its tensor product with itself), without somehow imposing additional conditions. Here, by \"tensor product of representations\", the usual meaning is intended: the result should be a linear representation of the same algebra on the product vector space. Imposing such additional structure typically leads to the idea of a Hopf algebra or a Lie algebra, as demonstrated below.\nMotivation for a Hopf algebra.\nConsider, for example, two representations and . One might try to form a tensor product representation according to how it acts on the product vector space, so that\nHowever, such a map would not be linear, since one would have\nfor . One can rescue this attempt and restore linearity by imposing additional structure, by defining an algebra homomorphism , and defining the tensor product representation as\nSuch a homomorphism \u0394 is called a comultiplication if it satisfies certain axioms. The resulting structure is called a bialgebra. To be consistent with the definitions of the associative algebra, the coalgebra must be co-associative, and, if the algebra is unital, then the co-algebra must be co-unital as well. A Hopf algebra is a bialgebra with an additional piece of structure (the so-called antipode), which allows not only to define the tensor product of two representations, but also the Hom module of two representations (again, similarly to how it is done in the representation theory of groups).\nMotivation for a Lie algebra.\nOne can try to be more clever in defining a tensor product. Consider, for example,\nso that the action on the tensor product space is given by\nThis map is clearly linear in \"x\", and so it does not have the problem of the earlier definition. However, it fails to preserve multiplication:\nBut, in general, this does not equal\nThis shows that this definition of a tensor product is too naive; the obvious fix is to define it such that it is antisymmetric, so that the middle two terms cancel. This leads to the concept of a Lie algebra.\nNon-unital algebras.\nSome authors use the term \"associative algebra\" to refer to structures which do not necessarily have a multiplicative identity, and hence consider homomorphisms which are not necessarily unital.\nOne example of a non-unital associative algebra is given by the set of all functions whose limit as \"x\" nears infinity is zero.\nAnother example is the vector space of continuous periodic functions, together with the convolution product."}
{"id": "2113", "revid": "1272725432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2113", "title": "Axiom of regularity", "text": "In mathematics, the axiom of regularity (also known as the axiom of foundation) is an axiom of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory that states that every non-empty set \"A\" contains an element that is disjoint from \"A\". In first-order logic, the axiom reads:\nformula_1\nThe axiom of regularity together with the axiom of pairing implies that no set is an element of itself, and that there is no infinite sequence (\"an\") such that \"ai+1\" is an element of \"ai\" for all \"i\". With the axiom of dependent choice (which is a weakened form of the axiom of choice), this result can be reversed: if there are no such infinite sequences, then the axiom of regularity is true. Hence, in this context the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the sentence that there are no downward infinite membership chains.\nThe axiom was originally formulated by von Neumann; it was adopted in a formulation closer to the one found in contemporary textbooks by Zermelo. Virtually all results in the branches of mathematics based on set theory hold even in the absence of regularity. However, regularity makes some properties of ordinals easier to prove; and it not only allows induction to be done on well-ordered sets but also on proper classes that are well-founded relational structures such as the lexicographical ordering on formula_2\nGiven the other axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the axiom of induction. The axiom of induction tends to be used in place of the axiom of regularity in intuitionistic theories (ones that do not accept the law of the excluded middle), where the two axioms are not equivalent.\nIn addition to omitting the axiom of regularity, non-standard set theories have indeed postulated the existence of sets that are elements of themselves.\nElementary implications of regularity.\nNo set is an element of itself.\nLet \"A\" be a set, and apply the axiom of regularity to {\"A\"}, which is a set by the axiom of pairing. We see that there must be an element of {\"A\"} which is disjoint from {\"A\"}. Since the only element of {\"A\"} is \"A\", it must be that \"A\" is disjoint from {\"A\"}. So, since formula_3, we cannot have \"A\" an element of \"A\" (by the definition of disjoint).\nNo infinite descending sequence of sets exists.\nSuppose, to the contrary, that there is a function, \"f\", on the natural numbers with \"f\"(\"n\"+1) an element of \"f\"(\"n\") for each \"n\". Define \"S\" = {\"f\"(\"n\"): \"n\" a natural number}, the range of \"f\", which can be seen to be a set from the axiom schema of replacement. Applying the axiom of regularity to \"S\", let \"B\" be an element of \"S\" which is disjoint from \"S\". By the definition of \"S\", \"B\" must be \"f\"(\"k\") for some natural number \"k\". However, we are given that \"f\"(\"k\") contains \"f\"(\"k\"+1) which is also an element of \"S\". So \"f\"(\"k\"+1) is in the intersection of \"f\"(\"k\") and \"S\". This contradicts the fact that they are disjoint sets. Since our supposition led to a contradiction, there must not be any such function, \"f\".\nThe nonexistence of a set containing itself can be seen as a special case where the sequence is infinite and constant.\nNotice that this argument only applies to functions \"f\" that can be represented as sets as opposed to undefinable classes. The hereditarily finite sets, \"V\"\u03c9, satisfy the axiom of regularity (and all other axioms of ZFC except the axiom of infinity). So if one forms a non-trivial ultrapower of V\u03c9, then it will also satisfy the axiom of regularity. The resulting model will contain elements, called non-standard natural numbers, that satisfy the definition of natural numbers in that model but are not really natural numbers. They are \"fake\" natural numbers which are \"larger\" than any actual natural number. This model will contain infinite descending sequences of elements. For example, suppose \"n\" is a non-standard natural number, then formula_4 and formula_5, and so on. For any actual natural number \"k\", formula_6. This is an unending descending sequence of elements. But this sequence is not definable in the model and thus not a set. So no contradiction to regularity can be proved.\nSimpler set-theoretic definition of the ordered pair.\nThe axiom of regularity enables defining the ordered pair (\"a\",\"b\") as {\"a\",{\"a\",\"b\"}}; see ordered pair for specifics. This definition eliminates one pair of braces from the canonical Kuratowski definition (\"a\",\"b\") = .\nEvery set has an ordinal rank.\nThis was actually the original form of the axiom in von Neumann's axiomatization.\nSuppose \"x\" is any set. Let \"t\" be the transitive closure of {\"x\"}. Let \"u\" be the subset of \"t\" consisting of unranked sets. If \"u\" is empty, then \"x\" is ranked and we are done. Otherwise, apply the axiom of regularity to \"u\" to get an element \"w\" of \"u\" which is disjoint from \"u\". Since \"w\" is in \"u\", \"w\" is unranked. \"w\" is a subset of \"t\" by the definition of transitive closure. Since \"w\" is disjoint from \"u\", every element of \"w\" is ranked. Applying the axioms of replacement and union to combine the ranks of the elements of \"w\", we get an ordinal rank for \"w\", to wit formula_7. This contradicts the conclusion that \"w\" is unranked. So the assumption that \"u\" was non-empty must be false and \"x\" must have rank.\nFor every two sets, only one can be an element of the other.\nLet \"X\" and \"Y\" be sets. Then apply the axiom of regularity to the set {\"X\",\"Y\"} (which exists by the axiom of pairing). We see there must be an element of {\"X\",\"Y\"} which is also disjoint from it. It must be either \"X\" or \"Y\". By the definition of disjoint then, we must have either \"Y\" is not an element of \"X\" or vice versa.\nThe axiom of dependent choice and no infinite descending sequence of sets implies regularity.\nLet the non-empty set \"S\" be a counter-example to the axiom of regularity; that is, every element of \"S\" has a non-empty intersection with \"S\". We define a binary relation \"R\" on \"S\" by formula_8, which is entire by assumption. Thus, by the axiom of dependent choice, there is some sequence (\"an\") in \"S\" satisfying \"anRan+1\" for all \"n\" in N. As this is an infinite descending chain, we arrive at a contradiction and so, no such \"S\" exists.\nRegularity and the rest of ZF(C) axioms.\nRegularity was shown to be relatively consistent with the rest of ZF by Skolem and von Neumann, meaning that if ZF without regularity is consistent, then ZF (with regularity) is also consistent.\nThe axiom of regularity was also shown to be independent from the other axioms of ZFC, assuming they are consistent. The result was announced by Paul Bernays in 1941, although he did not publish a proof until 1954. The proof involves (and led to the study of) Rieger-Bernays permutation models (or method), which were used for other proofs of independence for non-well-founded systems.\nRegularity and Russell's paradox.\nNaive set theory (the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension and the axiom of extensionality) is inconsistent due to Russell's paradox. In early formalizations of sets, mathematicians and logicians have avoided that contradiction by replacing the axiom schema of comprehension with the much weaker axiom schema of separation. However, this step alone takes one to theories of sets which are considered too weak. So some of the power of comprehension was added back via the other existence axioms of ZF set theory (pairing, union, powerset, replacement, and infinity) which may be regarded as special cases of comprehension. So far, these axioms do not seem to lead to any contradiction. Subsequently, the axiom of choice and the axiom of regularity were added to exclude models with some undesirable properties. These two axioms are known to be relatively consistent.\nIn the presence of the axiom schema of separation, Russell's paradox becomes a proof that there is no set of all sets. The axiom of regularity together with the axiom of pairing also prohibit such a universal set. However, Russell's paradox yields a proof that there is no \"set of all sets\" using the axiom schema of separation alone, without any additional axioms. In particular, ZF without the axiom of regularity already prohibits such a universal set.\nIf a theory is extended by adding an axiom or axioms, then any (possibly undesirable) consequences of the original theory remain consequences of the extended theory. In particular, if ZF without regularity is extended by adding regularity to get ZF, then any contradiction (such as Russell's paradox) which followed from the original theory would still follow in the extended theory.\nThe existence of Quine atoms (sets that satisfy the formula equation \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0{\"x\"}, i.e. have themselves as their only elements) is consistent with the theory obtained by removing the axiom of regularity from ZFC. Various non-wellfounded set theories allow \"safe\" circular sets, such as Quine atoms, without becoming inconsistent by means of Russell's paradox.\nRegularity, the cumulative hierarchy, and types.\nIn ZF it can be proven that the class formula_9, called the von Neumann universe, is equal to the class of all sets. This statement is even equivalent to the axiom of regularity (if we work in ZF with this axiom omitted). From any model which does not satisfy the axiom of regularity, a model which satisfies it can be constructed by taking only sets in formula_9.\nHerbert Enderton wrote that \"The idea of rank is a descendant of Russell's concept of \"type\"\". Comparing ZF with type theory, Alasdair Urquhart wrote that \"Zermelo's system has the notational advantage of not containing any explicitly typed variables, although in fact it can be seen as having an implicit type structure built into it, at least if the axiom of regularity is included.\nDana Scott went further and claimed that:\nIn the same paper, Scott shows that an axiomatic system based on the inherent properties of the cumulative hierarchy turns out to be equivalent to ZF, including regularity.\nHistory.\nThe concept of well-foundedness and rank of a set were both introduced by Dmitry Mirimanoff. Mirimanoff called a set \"x\" \"regular\" () if every descending chain \"x\" \u220b \"x\"1 \u220b \"x\"2 \u220b ... is finite. Mirimanoff however did not consider his notion of regularity (and well-foundedness) as an axiom to be observed by all sets; in later papers Mirimanoff also explored what are now called non-well-founded sets ( in Mirimanoff's terminology).\nSkolem and von Neumann pointed out that non-well-founded sets are superfluous and in the same publication von Neumann gives an axiom which excludes some, but not all, non-well-founded sets. In a subsequent publication, von Neumann gave an equivalent but more complex version of the axiom of class foundation:\nformula_11\nThe contemporary and final form of the axiom is due to Zermelo.\nRegularity in the presence of urelements.\nUrelements are objects that are not sets, but which can be elements of sets. In ZF set theory, there are no urelements, but in some other set theories such as ZFA, there are. In these theories, the axiom of regularity must be modified. The statement \"formula_12\" needs to be replaced with a statement that formula_13 is not empty and is not an urelement. One suitable replacement is formula_14, which states that \"x\" is inhabited."}
{"id": "2114", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2114", "title": "IBM AIX", "text": "AIX (pronounced ) is a series of proprietary Unix operating systems developed and sold by IBM since 1986. The name stands for \"Advanced Interactive eXecutive\". Current versions are designed to work with Power ISA based server and workstation computers such as IBM's Power line.\nBackground.\nOriginally released for the IBM RT PC RISC workstation in 1986, AIX has supported a wide range of hardware platforms, including the IBM RS/6000 series and later Power and PowerPC-based systems, IBM System i, System/370 mainframes, PS/2 personal computers, and the Apple Network Server. Currently, it is supported on IBM Power Systems alongside IBM i and Linux.\nAIX is based on UNIX System V with 4.3BSD-compatible extensions. It is certified to the UNIX 03 and UNIX V7 specifications of the Single UNIX Specification, beginning with AIX versions 5.3 and 7.2 TL5, respectively. Older versions were certified to the UNIX 95 and UNIX 98 specifications.\nAIX was the first operating system to implement a journaling file system. IBM has continuously enhanced the software with features such as processor, disk, and network virtualization, dynamic hardware resource allocation (including fractional processor units), and reliability engineering concepts derived from its mainframe designs.\nHistory.\nUnix began in the early 1970s at AT&amp;T's Bell Labs research center, running on DEC minicomputers. By 1976, the operating system was used in various academic institutions, including Princeton, where Tom Lyon and others ported it to the S/370 to run as a guest OS under VM/370. This port later grew into UTS, a mainframe Unix offering from IBM's competitor Amdahl Corporation.\nIBM's involvement with Unix began in 1979 when it assisted Bell Labs in porting Unix to the S/370 platform to be used as a build host for the 5ESS switch's software. During this process, IBM made modifications to the TSS/370 Resident Supervisor to better support Unix.\nIn 1984, IBM introduced its own Unix variant for the S/370 platform called VM/IX, developed by Interactive Systems Corporation using Unix System III. However, VM/IX was only available as a PRPQ (Programming Request for Price Quotation) and was not a General Availability product. It was replaced in 1985 by IBM IX/370, a fully supported product based on AT&amp;T's Unix/360 6th Edition, later updated to Unix System V.\nIn 1986, IBM introduced AIX Version 1 for the IBM RT PC workstation. It was based on UNIX System V Releases 1 and 2, incorporating source code from 4.2 and 4.3 BSD UNIX.\nAIX Version 2 followed in 1987 for the RT PC.\nIn 1990, AIX Version 3 was released for the POWER-based RS/6000 platform. It became the primary operating system for the RS/6000 series, which was later renamed \"IBM eServer pSeries\", \"IBM System p\", and finally \"IBM Power Systems\".\nAIX Version 4, introduced in 1994, added symmetric multiprocessing and evolved through the 1990s, culminating with AIX 4.3.3 in 1999. A modified version of Version 4.1 was also used as the standard OS for the Apple Network Server line by Apple Computer.\nIn the late 1990s, under Project Monterey, IBM and the Santa Cruz Operation attempted to integrate AIX and UnixWare into a multiplatform Unix for Intel IA-64 architecture. The project was discontinued in 2002 after limited commercial success.\nIn 2003, the SCO Group filed a lawsuit against IBM, alleging misappropriation of UNIX System V source code in AIX. The case was resolved in 2010 when a jury ruled that Novell owned the rights to Unix, not SCO.\nAIX 6 was announced in May 2007 and became generally available on November 9, 2007. Key features included role-based access control, workload partitions, and Live Partition Mobility.\nAIX 7.1 was released in September 2010 with enhancements such as Cluster Aware AIX and support for large-scale memory and real-time application requirements.\nSupported hardware platforms.\nIBM RT PC.\nThe original AIX (sometimes called AIX/RT) was developed for the IBM RT PC workstation by IBM in conjunction with Interactive Systems Corporation, who had previously ported UNIX System III to the IBM PC for IBM as PC/IX. According to its developers, the AIX source (for this initial version) consisted of one million lines of code. Installation media consisted of eight 1.2M floppy disks. The RT was based on the IBM ROMP microprocessor, the first commercial RISC chip. This was based on a design pioneered at IBM Research (the IBM 801).\nOne of the novel aspects of the RT design was the use of a microkernel, called Virtual Resource Manager (VRM). The keyboard, mouse, display, disk drives and network were all controlled by a microkernel. One could \"hotkey\" from one operating system to the next using the Alt-Tab key combination. Each OS in turn would get possession of the keyboard, mouse and display. Besides AIX v2, the PICK OS also included this microkernel.\nMuch of the AIX v2 kernel was written in the PL.8 programming language, which proved troublesome during the migration to AIX v3. AIX v2 included full TCP/IP networking, as well as SNA and two networking file systems: NFS, licensed from Sun Microsystems, and Distributed Services (DS). DS had the distinction of being built on top of SNA, and thereby being fully compatible with DS on and on midrange systems running OS/400 through IBM i. For the graphical user interfaces, AIX v2 came with the X10R3 and later the X10R4 and X11 versions of the X Window System from MIT, together with the Athena widget set. Compilers for Fortran and C were available.\nIBM PS/2 series.\nAIX PS/2 (also known as AIX/386) was developed by Locus Computing Corporation under contract to IBM. AIX PS/2, first released in October 1988, ran on IBM PS/2 personal computers with Intel 386 and compatible processors.\nThe product was announced in September 1988 with a baseline tag price of $595, although some utilities, such as UUCP, were included in a separate Extension package priced at $250. nroff and troff for AIX were also sold separately in a Text Formatting System package priced at $200. The TCP/IP stack for AIX PS/2 retailed for another $300. The X Window System package was priced at $195, and featured a graphical environment called the AIXwindows Desktop, based on IXI's X.desktop. The C and FORTRAN compilers each had a price tag of $275. Locus also made available their DOS Merge virtual machine environment for AIX, which could run MS DOS 3.3 applications inside AIX; DOS Merge was sold separately for another $250. IBM also offered a $150 AIX PS/2 DOS Server Program, which provided file server and print server services for client computers running PC DOS 3.3.\nThe last version of PS/2 AIX is 1.3. It was released in 1992 and announced to add support for non-IBM (non-microchannel) computers as well. Support for PS/2 AIX ended in March 1995.\nIBM mainframes.\nIn 1988, IBM announced AIX/370, also developed by Locus Computing. AIX/370 was IBM's fourth attempt to offer Unix-like functionality for their mainframe line, specifically the System/370 (the prior versions were a TSS/370-based Unix system developed jointly with AT&amp;T c.1980, a VM/370-based system named VM/IX developed jointly with Interactive Systems Corporation c.1984, and a VM/370-based version of TSS/370 named IX/370 which was upgraded to be compatible with UNIX System V). AIX/370 was released in 1990 with functional equivalence to System V Release 2 and 4.3BSD as well as IBM enhancements. With the introduction of the ESA/390 architecture, AIX/370 was replaced by AIX/ESA in 1991, which was based on OSF/1, and also ran on the System/390 platform. This development effort was made partly to allow IBM to compete with Amdahl UTS. Unlike AIX/370, AIX/ESA ran both natively as the host operating system, and as a guest under VM. AIX/ESA, while technically advanced, had little commercial success, partially because UNIX functionality was added as an option to the existing mainframe operating system, MVS, as MVS/ESA SP Version 4 Release 3 OpenEdition in 1994, and continued as an integral part of MVS/ESA SP Version 5, OS/390 and z/OS, with the name eventually changing from \"OpenEdition\" to \"Unix System Services\". IBM also provided OpenEdition in VM/ESA Version 2 through z/VM.\nIA-64 systems.\nAs part of Project Monterey, IBM released a beta test version of AIX 5L for the IA-64 (Itanium) architecture in 2001, but this never became an official product due to lack of interest.\nApple Network Servers.\nThe Apple Network Server (ANS) systems were PowerPC-based systems designed by Apple Computer to have numerous high-end features that standard Apple hardware did not have, including swappable hard drives, redundant power supplies, and external monitoring capability. These systems were more or less based on the Power Macintosh hardware available at the time but were designed to use AIX (versions 4.1.4 or 4.1.5) as their native operating system in a specialized version specific to the ANS called AIX for Apple Network Servers.\nAIX was only compatible with the Network Servers and was not ported to standard Power Macintosh hardware. It should not be confused with A/UX, Apple's earlier version of Unix for 68k-based Macintoshes.\nPOWER ISA/PowerPC/Power ISA-based systems.\nThe release of AIX version 3 (sometimes called AIX/6000) coincided with the announcement of the first POWER1-based IBM RS/6000 models in 1990.\nAIX v3 innovated in several ways on the software side. It was the first operating system to introduce the idea of a journaling file system, JFS, which allowed for fast boot times by avoiding the need to ensure the consistency of the file systems on disks (see fsck) on every reboot. Another innovation was shared libraries which avoid the need for static linking from an application to the libraries it used. The resulting smaller binaries used less of the hardware RAM to run, and used less disk space to install. Besides improving performance, it was a boon to developers: executable binaries could be in the tens of kilobytes instead of a megabyte for an executable statically linked to the C library. AIX v3 also scrapped the microkernel of AIX v2, a contentious move that resulted in v3 containing no PL.8 code and being somewhat more \"pure\" than v2.\nOther notable subsystems included:\nIn addition, AIX applications can run in the PASE subsystem under IBM i.\nSource code.\nIBM formerly made the AIX for RS/6000 source code available to customers for a fee; in 1991, IBM customers could order the AIX 3.0 source code for a one-time charge of US$60,000; subsequently, IBM released the AIX 3.1 source code in 1992, and AIX 3.2 in 1993. These source code distributions excluded certain files (authored by third-parties) which IBM did not have rights to redistribute, and also excluded layered products such as the MS-DOS emulator and the C compiler. Furthermore, in order to be able to license the AIX source code, the customer first had to procure source code license agreements with AT&amp;T and the University of California, Berkeley.\nUser interfaces.\nThe default shell was Bourne shell up to AIX version 3, but was changed to KornShell (ksh88) in version 4 for XPG4 and POSIX compliance.\nGraphical.\nThe Common Desktop Environment (CDE) is AIX's default graphical user interface. As part of Linux Affinity and the free AIX Toolbox for Linux Applications (ATLA), open-source KDE Plasma Workspaces and GNOME desktop are also available.\nSystem Management Interface Tool.\nSMIT is the System Management Interface Tool for AIX. It allows a user to navigate a menu hierarchy of commands, rather than using the command line. Invocation is typically achieved with the command codice_1. Experienced system administrators make use of the codice_2 function key which generates the command line that SMIT will invoke to complete it.\nSMIT also generates a log of commands that are performed in the codice_3 file. The codice_3 file automatically records the commands with the command flags and parameters used. The codice_3 file can be used as an executable shell script to rerun system configuration tasks. SMIT also creates the codice_6 file, which contains additional detailed information that can be used by programmers in extending the SMIT system.\ncodice_1 and codice_8 refer to the same program, though codice_8 invokes the text-based version, while codice_1 will invoke an X Window System based interface if possible; however, if codice_1 determines that X Window System capabilities are not present, it will present the text-based version instead of failing. Determination of X Window System capabilities is typically performed by checking for the existence of the codice_12 variable.\nDatabase.\nObject Data Manager (ODM) is a database of system information integrated into AIX, analogous to the registry in Microsoft Windows. A good understanding of the ODM is essential for managing AIX systems.\nData managed in ODM is stored and maintained as objects with associated attributes. Interaction with ODM is possible via application programming interface (API) library for programs, and command-line utilities such as \"odmshow\", \"odmget\", \"odmadd\", \"odmchange\" and \"odmdelete\" for shell scripts and users. SMIT and its associated AIX commands can also be used to query and modify information in the ODM. ODM is stored on disk using Berkeley DB files.\nExample of information stored in the ODM database are:"}
{"id": "2115", "revid": "49131126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2115", "title": "AppleTalk", "text": "AppleTalk is a discontinued proprietary suite of networking protocols developed by Apple Computer for their Macintosh computers. AppleTalk includes a number of features that allow local area networks to be connected with no prior setup or the need for a centralized router or server of any sort. Connected AppleTalk-equipped systems automatically assign addresses, update the distributed namespace, and configure any required inter-networking routing.\nAppleTalk was released in 1985 and was the primary protocol used by Apple devices through the 1980s and 1990s. Versions were also released for the IBM PC and compatibles and the Apple IIGS. AppleTalk support was also available in most networked printers (especially laser printers), some file servers, and a number of routers.\nThe rise of TCP/IP during the 1990s led to a reimplementation of most of these types of support on that protocol, and AppleTalk became unsupported as of the release of Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009. Many of AppleTalk's more advanced autoconfiguration features have since been introduced in Bonjour, while Universal Plug and Play serves similar needs.\nHistory.\nAppleNet.\nAfter the release of the Apple Lisa computer in January 1983, Apple invested considerable effort in the development of a local area networking (LAN) system for the machines. Known as AppleNet, it was based on the seminal Xerox XNS protocol stack but running on a custom 1\u00a0Mbit/s coaxial cable system rather than Xerox's 2.94\u00a0Mbit/s Ethernet. AppleNet was announced early in 1983 with a full introduction at the target price of $500 for plug-in AppleNet cards for the Lisa and the Apple II.\nAt that time, early LAN systems were just coming to market, including Ethernet, Token Ring, Econet, and ARCNET. This was a topic of major commercial effort at the time, dominating shows like the National Computer Conference (NCC) in Anaheim in May 1983. All of the systems were jockeying for position in the market, but even at this time, Ethernet's widespread acceptance suggested it was to become a \"de facto\" standard. It was at this show that Steve Jobs asked Gursharan Sidhu a seemingly innocuous question: \"Why has networking not caught on?\"\nFour months later, in October, AppleNet was cancelled. At the time, they announced that \"Apple realized that it's not in the business to create a networking system. We built and used AppleNet in-house, but we realized that if we had shipped it, we would have seen new standards coming up.\" In January, Jobs announced that they would instead be supporting IBM's Token Ring, which he expected to come out in a \"few months\".\nAppleBus.\nThrough this period, Apple was deep in development of the Macintosh computer. During development, engineers had made the decision to use the Zilog 8530 serial controller chip (SCC) instead of the lower-cost and more common UART to provide serial port connections. The SCC cost about $5 more than a UART, but offered much higher speeds of up to 250\u00a0kilobits per second (or higher with additional hardware) and internally supported a number of basic networking-like protocols like IBM's Bisync.\nThe SCC was chosen because it would allow multiple devices to be attached to the port. Peripherals equipped with similar SCCs could communicate using the built-in protocols, interleaving their data with other peripherals on the same bus. This would eliminate the need for more ports on the back of the machine, and allowed for the elimination of expansion slots for supporting more complex devices. The initial concept was known as AppleBus, envisioning a system controlled by the host Macintosh polling \"dumb\" devices in a fashion similar to the modern Universal Serial Bus.\nAppleBus networking.\nThe Macintosh team had already begun work on what would become the LaserWriter and had considered a number of other options to answer the question of how to share these expensive machines and other resources. A series of memos from Bob Belleville clarified these concepts, outlining the Mac, LaserWriter, and a file server system which would become the Macintosh Office. By late 1983 it was clear that IBM's Token Ring would not be ready in time for the launch of the Mac, and might miss the launch of these other products as well. In the end, Token Ring would not ship until October 1985.\nJobs' earlier question to Sidhu had already sparked a number of ideas. When AppleNet was cancelled in October, Sidhu led an effort to develop a new networking system based on the AppleBus hardware. This new system would not have to conform to any existing preconceptions, and was designed to be worthy of the Mac \u2013 a system that was user-installable and required no configuration or fixed network addresses \u2013 in short, a true plug-and-play network. Considerable effort was needed, but by the time the Mac was released, the basic concepts had been outlined, and some of the low-level protocols were on their way to completion. Sidhu mentioned the work to Belleville only two hours after the Mac was announced.\nThe \"new\" AppleBus was announced in early 1984, allowing direct connection from the Mac or Lisa through a small box that is plugged into the serial port and connected via cables to the next computer upstream and downstream. Adaptors for Apple II and Apple III were also announced. Apple also announced that an AppleBus network could be attached to, and would appear to be a single node within, a Token Ring system. Details of how this would work were sketchy.\nAppleTalk Personal Network.\nJust prior to its release in early 1985, AppleBus was renamed AppleTalk. Initially marketed as AppleTalk Personal Network, it comprised a family of network protocols and a physical layer.\nThe physical layer had a number of limitations, including a speed of only 230.4\u00a0kbit/s, a maximum distance of from end to end, and only 32 nodes per LAN. But as the basic hardware was built into the Mac, adding nodes only cost about $50 for the adaptor box. In comparison, Ethernet or Token Ring cards cost hundreds or thousands of dollars. Additionally, the entire networking stack required only about 6\u00a0kB of RAM, allowing it to run on any Mac.\nThe relatively slow speed of AppleTalk allowed further reductions in cost. Instead of using RS-422's balanced transmit and receive circuits, the AppleTalk cabling used a single common electrical ground, which limited speeds to about 500\u00a0kbit/s, but allowed one conductor to be removed. This meant that common three-conductor cables could be used for wiring. Additionally, the adaptors were designed to be \"self-terminating\", meaning that nodes at the end of the network could simply leave their last connector unconnected. There was no need for the wires to be connected back together into a loop, nor the need for hubs or other devices.\nThe system was designed for future expansion; the addressing system allowed for expansion to 255 nodes in a LAN (although only 32 could be used at that time), and by using \"bridges\" (which came to be known as \"routers\", although technically not the same) one could interconnect LANs into larger collections. \"Zones\" allowed devices to be addressed within a bridge-connected internet. Additionally, AppleTalk was designed from the start to allow use with any potential underlying physical link, and within a few years, the physical layer would be renamed LocalTalk, so as to differentiate it from the AppleTalk protocols.\nThe main advantage of AppleTalk was that it was completely maintenance-free. To join a device to a network, a user simply plugged the adaptor into the machine, then connected a cable from it to any free port on any other adaptor. The AppleTalk network stack negotiated a network address, assigned the computer a human-readable name, and compiled a list of the names and types of other machines on the network so the user could browse the devices through the Chooser. AppleTalk was so easy to use that ad hoc networks tended to appear whenever multiple Macs were in the same room. Apple would later use this in an advertisement showing a network being created between two seats in an airplane.\nPhoneNet and other adaptors.\nA thriving third-party market for AppleTalk devices developed over the next few years. One particularly notable example was an alternate adaptor designed by BMUG and commercialised by Farallon as PhoneNET in 1987. This was essentially a replacement for Apple's connector that had conventional phone jacks instead of Apple's round connectors. PhoneNet allowed AppleTalk networks to be connected together using normal telephone wires, and with very little extra work, could run analog phones and AppleTalk on a single four-conductor phone cable.\nOther companies took advantage of the SCC's ability to read external clocks in order to support higher transmission speeds, up to 1 Mbit/s. In these systems, the external adaptor also included its own clock, and used that to signal the SCC's clock input pins. The best-known such system was Centram's FlashTalk, which ran at 768\u00a0kbit/s, and was intended to be used with their TOPS networking system. A similar solution was the 850\u00a0kbit/s DaynaTalk, which used a separate box that plugged in between the computer and a normal LocalTalk/PhoneNet box. Dayna also offered a PC expansion card that ran up to 1.7\u00a0Mbit/s when talking to other Dayna PC cards. Several other systems also existed with even higher performance, but these often required special cabling that was incompatible with LocalTalk/PhoneNet, and also required patches to the networking stack that often caused problems.\nAppleTalk over Ethernet.\nAs Apple expanded into more commercial and education markets, they needed to integrate AppleTalk into existing network installations. Many of these organisations had already invested in a very expensive Ethernet infrastructure and there was no direct way to connect a Macintosh to Ethernet. AppleTalk included a protocol structure for interconnecting AppleTalk subnets and so as a solution, EtherTalk was initially created to use the Ethernet as a backbone between LocalTalk subnets. To accomplish this, organizations would need to purchase a LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge and Apple left it to third parties to produce these products. A number of companies responded, including Hayes and a few newly formed companies like Kinetics.\nLocalTalk, EtherTalk, TokenTalk, and AppleShare.\nBy 1987, Ethernet was clearly winning the standards battle over Token Ring, and in the middle of that year, Apple introduced EtherTalk 1.0, an implementation of the AppleTalk protocol over the Ethernet physical layer. Introduced for the newly released Macintosh II computer, one of Apple's first two Macintoshes with expansion slots (the Macintosh SE had one slot of a different type), the operating system included a new Network control panel that allowed the user to select which physical connection to use for networking (from \"Built-in\" or \"EtherTalk\"). At introduction, Ethernet interface cards were available from 3Com and Kinetics that plugged into a Nubus slot in the machine. The new networking stack also expanded the system to allow a full 255 nodes per LAN. With EtherTalk's release, AppleTalk Personal Network was renamed LocalTalk, the name it would be known under for the bulk of its life. Token Ring would later be supported with a similar TokenTalk product, which used the same Network control panel and underlying software. Over time, many third-party companies would introduce compatible Ethernet and Token Ring cards that used these same drivers.\nThe appearance of a Macintosh with a direct Ethernet connection also magnified the Ethernet and LocalTalk compatibility problem: Networks with new and old Macs needed some way to communicate with each other. This could be as simple as a network of Ethernet Mac II's trying to talk to a LaserWriter that only connected to LocalTalk. Apple initially relied on the aforementioned LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge products, but contrary to Apple's belief that these would be low-volume products, by the end of 1987, 130,000 such networks were in use. AppleTalk was at that time the most used networking system in the world, with over three times the installations of any other vendor.\n1987 also marked the introduction of the AppleShare product, a dedicated file server that ran on any Mac with 512\u00a0kB of RAM or more. A common AppleShare machine was the Mac Plus with an external SCSI hard drive. AppleShare was the #3 network operating system in the late 1980s, behind Novell NetWare and Microsoft's MS-Net. AppleShare was effectively the replacement for the failed Macintosh Office efforts, which had been based on a dedicated file server device.\nAppleTalk Phase II and other developments.\nA significant re-design was released in 1989 as AppleTalk Phase II. In many ways, Phase II can be considered an effort to make the earlier version (never called Phase I) more generic. LANs could now support more than 255 nodes, and zones were no longer associated with physical networks but were entirely virtual constructs used simply to organize nodes. For instance, one could now make a \"Printers\" zone that would list all the printers in an organization, or one might want to place that same device in the \"2nd Floor\" zone to indicate its physical location. Phase II also included changes to the underlying inter-networking protocols to make them less \"chatty\", which had previously been a serious problem on networks that bridged over wide-area networks.\nBy this point, Apple had a wide variety of communications products under development, and many of these were announced along with AppleTalk Phase II. These included updates to EtherTalk and TokenTalk, AppleTalk software and LocalTalk hardware for the IBM PC, EtherTalk for Apple's A/UX operating system allowing it to use LaserWriters and other network resources, and the Mac X.25 and MacX products.\nEthernet had become almost universal by 1990, and it was time to build Ethernet into Macs direct from the factory. However, the physical wiring used by these networks was not yet completely standardized. Apple solved this problem using a single port on the back of the computer into which the user could plug an adaptor for any given cabling system. This FriendlyNet system was based on the industry-standard Attachment Unit Interface or AUI, but deliberately chose a non-standard connector that was smaller and easier to use, which they called \"Apple AUI\", or AAUI. FriendlyNet was first introduced on the Quadra 700 and Quadra 900 computers, and used across much of the Mac line for some time. As with LocalTalk, a number of third-party FriendlyNet adaptors quickly appeared.\nAs 10BASE-T became the de facto cabling system for Ethernet, second-generation Power Macintosh machines added a 10BASE-T port in addition to AAUI. The PowerBook 3400c and lower-end Power Macs also added 10BASE-T. The Power Macintosh 7300/8600/9600 were the final Macs to include AAUI, and 10BASE-T became universal starting with the Power Macintosh G3 and PowerBook G3.\nThe capital-I Internet.\nFrom the beginning of AppleTalk, users wanted to connect the Macintosh to TCP/IP network environments. In 1984, Bill Croft at Stanford University pioneered the development of IP packets encapsulated in DDP as part of the SEAGATE (Stanford Ethernet\u2013AppleTalk Gateway) project. SEAGATE was commercialized by Kinetics in their LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridge as an additional routing option. A few years later, MacIP was separated from the SEAGATE code and became the de facto method for IP packets to be routed over LocalTalk networks. By 1986, Columbia University released the first version of the Columbia AppleTalk Package (CAP) that allowed higher integration of Unix, TCP/IP, and AppleTalk environments. In 1988, Apple released MacTCP, a system that allowed the Mac to support TCP/IP on machines with suitable Ethernet hardware. However, this left many universities with the problem of supporting IP on their many LocalTalk-equipped Macs. It was soon common to include MacIP support in LocalTalk-to-Ethernet bridges. MacTCP would not become a standard part of the Classic Mac OS until 1994, by which time it also supported SNMP and PPP.\nFor some time in the early 1990s, the Mac was a primary client on the rapidly expanding Internet. Among the better-known programs in wide use were Fetch, Eudora, eXodus, NewsWatcher, and the NCSA packages, especially NCSA Mosaic and its offspring, Netscape Navigator. Additionally, a number of server products appeared that allowed the Mac to host Internet content. Through this period, Macs had about 2 to 3 times as many clients connected to the Internet as any other platform, despite the relatively small overall microcomputer market share.\nAs the world quickly moved to IP for both LAN and WAN uses, Apple was faced with maintaining two increasingly outdated code bases on an ever-wider group of machines as well as the introduction of the PowerPC-based machines. This led to the Open Transport efforts, which re-implemented both MacTCP and AppleTalk on an entirely new code base adapted from the Unix standard STREAMS. Early versions had problems and did not become stable for some time. By that point, Apple was deep in their ultimately doomed Copland efforts.\nLegacy and abandonment.\nWith the purchase of NeXT and subsequent development of Mac OS X, AppleTalk was strictly a legacy system. Support was added to Mac\u00a0OS\u00a0X in order to provide support for a large number of existing AppleTalk devices, notably laser printers and file shares, but alternate connection solutions common in this era, notably USB for printers, limited their demand. As Apple abandoned many of these product categories, and all new systems were based on IP, AppleTalk became less and less common. AppleTalk support was finally removed from the macOS line in Mac OS X v10.6 in 2009.\nHowever, the loss of AppleTalk did not reduce the desire for networking solutions that combined its ease of use with IP routing. Apple has led the development of many such efforts, from the introduction of the AirPort router to the development of the zero-configuration networking system and their implementation of it, Rendezvous, later renamed \"Bonjour\".\nAs of 2020, AppleTalk support has been completely removed from legacy support with macOS 11 Big Sur.\nDesign.\nThe AppleTalk design rigorously followed the OSI model of protocol layering. Unlike most of the early LAN systems, AppleTalk was not built using the archetypal Xerox XNS system. The intended target was not Ethernet, and it did not have 48-bit addresses to route. Nevertheless, many portions of the AppleTalk system have direct analogs in XNS.\nOne key differentiation for AppleTalk was it contained two protocols aimed at making the system completely self-configuring. The \"AppleTalk address resolution protocol\" (\"AARP\") allowed AppleTalk hosts to automatically generate their own network addresses, and the \"Name Binding Protocol\" (\"NBP\") was a dynamic system for mapping network addresses to user-readable names. Although systems similar to AARP existed in other systems, Banyan VINES for instance. Beginning about 2002 Rendezvous (the combination of DNS-based service discovery, Multicast DNS, and link-local addressing) provided capabilities and usability using IP that were similar to those of AppleTalk.\nBoth AARP and NBP had defined ways to allow \"controller\" devices to override the default mechanisms. The concept was to allow routers to provide the information or \"hardwire\" the system to known addresses and names. On larger networks where AARP could cause problems as new nodes searched for free addresses, the addition of a router could reduce \"chattiness.\" Together AARP and NBP made AppleTalk an easy-to-use networking system. New machines were added to the network by plugging them in and optionally giving them a name. The NBP lists were examined and displayed by a program known as the \"Chooser\" which would display a list of machines on the local network, divided into classes such as file-servers and printers.\nAddressing.\nAn AppleTalk address was a four-byte quantity. This consisted of a two-byte network number, a one-byte node number, and a one-byte socket number. Of these, only the network number required any configuration, being obtained from a router. Each node dynamically chose its own node number, according to a protocol (originally the LocalTalk Link Access Protocol LLAP and later, for Ethernet/EtherTalk, the AppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol, AARP) which handled contention between different nodes accidentally choosing the same number. For socket numbers, a few well-known numbers were reserved for special purposes specific to the AppleTalk protocol itself. Apart from these, all application-level protocols were expected to use dynamically assigned socket numbers at both the client and server end.\nBecause of this dynamism, users could not be expected to access services by specifying their address. Instead, all services had \"names\" which, being chosen by humans, could be expected to be meaningful to users, and also could be sufficiently long to minimize the chance of conflicts.\nAs NBP names translated to an address, which included a socket number as well as a node number, a name in AppleTalk mapped directly to a \"service\" being provided by a machine, which was entirely separate from the name of the machine itself. Thus, services could be moved to a different machine and, so long as they kept the same service name, there was no need for users to do anything different in order to continue accessing the service. And the same machine could host any number of instances of services of the same type, without any network connection conflicts.\nContrast this with \"A records\" in the DNS, in which a name translates to a machine's address, not including the port number that might be providing a service. Thus, if people are accustomed to using a particular machine name to access a particular service, their access will break when the service is moved to a different machine. This can be mitigated somewhat by insistence on using \"CNAME records\" indicating service rather than actual machine names to refer to the service, but there is no way of guaranteeing that users will follow such a convention. Some newer protocols, such as Kerberos and Active Directory use DNS SRV records to identify services by name, which is much closer to the AppleTalk model.\nProtocols.\nAppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Address Resolution Protocol (AARP) resolves AppleTalk addresses to link layer addresses. It is functionally equivalent to ARP and obtains address resolution by a method very similar to ARP.\nAARP is a fairly simple system. When powered on, an AppleTalk machine broadcasts an \"AARP probe packet\" asking for a network address, intending to hear back from controllers such as routers. If no address is provided, one is picked at random from the \"base subnet\", 0. It then broadcasts another packet saying \"I am selecting this address\", and then waits to see if anyone else on the network complains. If another machine has that address, the newly connecting machine will pick another address, and keep trying until it finds a free one. On a network with many machines it may take several tries before a free address is found, so for performance purposes the successful address is recorded in NVRAM and used as the default address in the future. This means that in most real-world setups where machines are added a few at a time, only one or two tries are needed before the address effectively becomes constant.\nAppleTalk Data Stream Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Data Stream Protocol (ADSP) was a comparatively late addition to the AppleTalk protocol suite, done when it became clear that a TCP-style reliable connection-oriented transport was needed. Significant differences from TCP were that:\nApple Filing Protocol.\nThe Apple Filing Protocol (AFP), formerly AppleTalk Filing Protocol, is the protocol for communicating with AppleShare file servers. Built on top of AppleTalk Session Protocol (for legacy AFP over DDP) or the Data Stream Interface (for AFP over TCP), it provides services for authenticating users (extensible to different authentication methods including two-way random-number exchange) and for performing operations specific to the Macintosh HFS filesystem. AFP is still in use in macOS, even though most other AppleTalk protocols have been deprecated.\nAppleTalk Session Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Session Protocol (ASP) was an intermediate protocol, built on top of AppleTalk Transaction Protocol (ATP), which in turn was the foundation of AFP. It provided basic services for requesting responses to arbitrary \"commands\" and performing out-of-band status queries. It also allowed the server to send asynchronous \"attention\" messages to the client.\nAppleTalk Transaction Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Transaction Protocol (ATP) was the original reliable transport-level protocol for AppleTalk, built on top of DDP. At the time it was being developed, a full, reliable connection-oriented protocol like TCP was considered to be too expensive to implement for most of the intended uses of AppleTalk. Thus, ATP was a simple request/response exchange, with no need to set up or tear down connections.\nAn ATP \"request\" packet could be answered by up to eight \"response\" packets. The requestor then sent an \"acknowledgement\" packet containing a bit mask indicating which of the response packets it received, so the responder could retransmit the remainder.\nATP could operate in either \"at-least-once\" mode or \"exactly-once\" mode. Exactly-once mode was essential for operations which were not idempotent; in this mode, the responder kept a copy of the response buffers in memory until successful receipt of a \"release\" packet from the requestor, or until a timeout elapsed. This way, it could respond to duplicate requests with the same transaction ID by resending the same response data, without performing the actual operation again.\nDatagram Delivery Protocol.\nThe Datagram Delivery Protocol (DDP) was the lowest-level data-link-independent transport protocol. It provided a datagram service with no guarantees of delivery. All application-level protocols, including the infrastructure protocols NBP, RTMP and ZIP, were built on top of DDP. AppleTalk's DDP corresponds closely to the Network layer of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) communication model.\nName Binding Protocol.\nThe Name Binding Protocol (NBP) was a dynamic, distributed system for managing AppleTalk names. When a service started up on a machine, it registered a name for itself as chosen by a human administrator. At this point, NBP provided a system for checking that no other machine had already registered the same name. Later, when a client wanted to access that service, it used NBP to query machines to find that service. NBP provided browsability (\"what are the names of all the services available?\") as well as the ability to find a service with a particular name. Names were human-readable, containing spaces and upper- and lower-case letters, and including support for searching.\nAppleTalk Echo Protocol.\nThe AppleTalk Echo Protocol (AEP) was a transport layer protocol designed to test the reachability of network nodes. AEP generates packets to be sent to the network node and is identified in the Type field of a packet as an AEP packet. The packet is first passed to the source DDP. After it is identified as an AEP packet, it is forwarded to the node where the packet is examined by the DDP at the destination. After the packet is identified as an AEP packet, the packet is then copied and a field in the packet is altered to create an AEP reply packet, and is then returned to the source node.\nPrinter Access Protocol.\nThe Printer Access Protocol (PAP) was the standard way of communicating with PostScript printers. It was built on top of ATP. When a PAP connection was opened, each end sent the other an ATP request which basically meant \"send me more data\". The client's response to the server was to send a block of PostScript code, while the server could respond with any diagnostic messages that might be generated as a result, after which another \"send-more-data\" request was sent. This use of ATP provided automatic flow control; each end could only send data to the other end if there was an outstanding ATP request to respond to.\nPAP also provided for out-of-band status queries, handled by separate ATP transactions. Even while it was busy servicing a print job from one client, a PAP server could continue to respond to status requests from any number of other clients. This allowed other Macintoshes on the LAN that were waiting to print to display status messages indicating that the printer was busy, and what the job was that it was busy with.\nRouting Table Maintenance Protocol.\nThe Routing Table Maintenance Protocol (RTMP) was the protocol by which routers kept each other informed about the topology of the network. This was the only part of AppleTalk that required periodic unsolicited broadcasts: every 10 seconds, each router had to send out a list of all the network numbers it knew about and how far away it thought they were.\nZone Information Protocol.\nThe Zone Information Protocol (ZIP) was the protocol by which AppleTalk network numbers were associated with zone names. A \"zone\" was a subdivision of the network that made sense to humans (for example, \"Accounting Department\"); but while a network number had to be assigned to a topologically contiguous section of the network, a zone could include several different discontiguous portions of the network.\nPhysical implementation.\nThe initial default hardware implementation for AppleTalk was a high-speed serial protocol known as \"LocalTalk\" that used the Macintosh's built-in RS-422 ports at 230.4\u00a0kbit/s. LocalTalk used a splitter box in the RS-422 port to provide an upstream and downstream cable from a single port. The topology was a bus: cables were daisy-chained from each connected machine to the next, up to the maximum of 32 permitted on any LocalTalk segment. The system was slow by today's standards, but at the time the additional cost and complexity of networking on PC machines was such that it was common that Macs were the only networked personal computers in an office. Other larger computers, such as UNIX or VAX workstations, would commonly be networked via Ethernet.\nOther physical implementations were also available. A very popular replacement for LocalTalk was \"PhoneNET\", a third-party solution from Farallon Computing, Inc. (renamed Netopia, acquired by Motorola in 2007) that also used the RS-422 port and was indistinguishable from LocalTalk as far as Apple's LocalTalk port drivers were concerned, but ran over very inexpensive standard phone cabling with four-wire, six-position modular connectors, the same cables used to connect landline telephones. Since it used the second pair of wires, network devices could even be connected through existing telephone jacks if a second line was not present. Foreshadowing today's network hubs and switches, Farallon provided solutions for PhoneNet to be used in \"star\" as well as \"bus\" configurations, with both \"passive\" star connections (with the phone wires simply bridged to each other at a central point), and \"active\" star with \"PhoneNet Star Controller\" hub hardware. In a star configuration, any wiring issue only affected one device, and problems were easy to pinpoint. PhoneNet's low cost, flexibility, and easy troubleshooting resulted in it being the dominant choice for Mac networks into the early 1990s.\nAppleTalk protocols also came to run over Ethernet (first coaxial and then twisted pair) and Token Ring physical layers, labeled by Apple as \"EtherTalk\" and \"TokenTalk\", respectively. EtherTalk gradually became the dominant implementation method for AppleTalk as Ethernet became generally popular in the PC industry throughout the 1990s. Besides AppleTalk and TCP/IP, any Ethernet network could also simultaneously carry other protocols such as DECnet and IPX.\nCross-platform solutions.\nWhen AppleTalk was first introduced, the dominant office computing platform was the PC compatible running MS-DOS. Apple introduced the AppleTalk PC Card in early 1987, allowing PCs to join AppleTalk networks and print to LaserWriter printers. A year later AppleShare PC was released, allowing PCs to access AppleShare file servers.\nThe \"TOPS Teleconnector\" MS-DOS networking system over AppleTalk system enabled MS-DOS PCs to communicate over AppleTalk network hardware; it comprised an AppleTalk interface card for the PC and a suite of networking software allowing such functions as file, drive and printer sharing. As well as allowing the construction of a PC-only AppleTalk network, it allowed communication between PCs and Macs with TOPS software installed. (Macs without TOPS installed could use the same network but only to communicate with other Apple machines.) The Mac TOPS software did not match the quality of Apple's own either in ease of use or in robustness and freedom from crashes, but the DOS software was relatively simple to use in DOS terms, and was robust.\nThe BSD and Linux operating systems support AppleTalk through an open source project called Netatalk, which implements the complete protocol suite and allows them to both act as native file or print servers for Macintosh computers, and print to LocalTalk printers over the network.\nThe Windows Server operating systems supported AppleTalk starting with Windows NT and ending after Windows Server 2003. Miramar included AppleTalk in its PC MacLAN product which was discontinued by CA in 2007. GroupLogic continues to bundle its AppleTalk protocol with its ExtremeZ-IP server software for Macintosh-Windows integration which supports Windows Server 2008 and Windows Vista as well prior versions. HELIOS Software GmbH offers a proprietary implementation of the AppleTalk protocol stack, as part of their HELIOS UB2 server. This is essentially a File and Print Server suite that runs on a whole range of different platforms.\nIn addition, Columbia University released the Columbia AppleTalk Package (CAP) which implemented the protocol suite for various Unix flavours including Ultrix, SunOS, BSD and IRIX. This package is no longer actively maintained."}
{"id": "2116", "revid": "567927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2116", "title": "Apple II", "text": "Apple II (\"apple two\") is a series of microcomputers manufactured by Apple Computer, Inc. from 1977 to 1993. The first Apple II model, that gave the series its name, was designed by Steve Wozniak, and was first sold on June 10, 1977. Its success led to it being followed by the Apple II Plus, Apple IIe, Apple IIc, and Apple IIc Plus, with the 1983 IIe being the most popular. The name is trademarked with square brackets as Apple\u00a0][, then, beginning with the IIe, as Apple\u00a0//.\nThe Apple II was a major advancement over its predecessor, the Apple I, in terms of ease of use, features, and expandability. It became one of several recognizable and successful computers during the 1980s and early 1990s, although this was mainly limited to the US. It was aggressively marketed through volume discounts and manufacturing arrangements to educational institutions, which made it the first computer in widespread use in American secondary schools, displacing the early leader Commodore PET. The effort to develop educational and business software for the Apple II, including the 1979 release of the popular VisiCalc spreadsheet, made the computer especially popular with business users and families.\nThe Apple II computers are based on the 6502 8-bit processor and can display text and two resolutions of color graphics. A software-controlled speaker provides one channel of low-fidelity audio. A model with more advanced graphics and sound and a 16-bit processor, the Apple II, was added in 1986. It remained compatible with earlier Apple II models, but the II has more in common with mid-1980s systems like the Atari ST, Amiga, and Acorn Archimedes.\nDespite the introduction of the Motorola 68000-based Macintosh in 1984, the Apple II series still reportedly accounted for 85% of the company's hardware sales in the first quarter of fiscal 1985. Apple continued to sell Apple II systems alongside the Macintosh until terminating the II in December 1992 and the IIe in November 1993. The last II-series Apple in production, the IIe card for Macintoshes, was discontinued on October 15, 1993; having been one of the longest running mass-produced home computer series, the total Apple II sales of all of its models during its 16-year production run were about 6 million units (including about 1.25\u00a0million Apple II models) with the peak occurring in 1983 when 1 million were sold. \nHardware.\nUnlike preceding home microcomputers, the Apple II was sold as a finished consumer appliance rather than as a kit (unassembled or preassembled). Apple marketed the Apple II as a durable product, including a 1981 ad in which an Apple II survived a fire started when a cat belonging to one early user knocked over a lamp.\nAll the machines in the series, except the IIc, share similar overall design elements. The plastic case was designed to look more like a home appliance than a piece of electronic equipment, and the case can be opened without the use of tools. All models in the Apple II series have a built-in keyboard, with the exception of the II which has a separate keyboard.\nApple IIs have color and high-resolution graphics modes, sound capabilities and a built-in BASIC programming language. The motherboard holds eight expansion slots and an array of random access memory (RAM) sockets that can hold up to 48\u00a0kilobytes. Over the course of the Apple II series' life, an enormous amount of first- and third-party hardware was made available to extend the capabilities of the machine. The IIc was designed as a compact, portable unit, not intended to be disassembled, and cannot use most of the expansion hardware sold for the other machines in the series.\nSoftware.\nThe original Apple II has the operating system in ROM along with a BASIC variant called Integer BASIC. Apple eventually released Applesoft BASIC, a more advanced variant of the language which users can run instead of Integer BASIC. The Apple II series eventually supported over 1,500 software programs.\nWhen the Disk II floppy disk drive was released in 1978, a new operating system, Apple DOS, was commissioned from Shepardson Microsystems and developed by Paul Laughton, adding support for the disk drive. The final and most popular version of this software was Apple DOS 3.3.\nApple DOS was superseded by ProDOS, which supported a hierarchical file system and larger storage devices. With an optional third-party Z80-based expansion card, the Apple II could boot into the CP/M operating system and run WordStar, dBase II, and other CP/M software. With the release of MousePaint in 1984 and the Apple II in 1986, the platform took on the look of the Macintosh user interface, including a mouse.\nMuch commercial Apple II software shipped on self-booting disks and does not use standard DOS disk formats. This discouraged the copying or modifying of the software on the disks, and improved loading speed.\nModels.\nApple II.\nThe first Apple II computers went on sale on June 10, 1977 with a MOS Technology 6502 (later Synertek) microprocessor running at 1.023\u00a0MHz, 4\u00a0KB of RAM, an audio cassette interface for loading programs and storing data, and the Integer BASIC programming language built into the ROMs. The video controller displayed 40 columns by 24 lines of monochrome, upper-case-only (the original character set matches ASCII characters 0x20 to 0x5F) text on the screen, with NTSC composite video output suitable for display on a TV monitor, or on a regular TV set by way of a separate RF modulator. The original retail price of the computer was (with 4\u00a0KB of RAM) and (with the maximum 48\u00a0KB of RAM). To reflect the computer's color graphics capability, the Apple logo on the casing was represented using rainbow stripes, which remained a part of Apple's corporate logo until early 1998. The earliest Apple IIs were assembled in Silicon Valley, and later in Texas; printed circuit boards were manufactured in Ireland and Singapore.\nAn external -inch floppy disk drive, the Disk II, attached via a controller card that plugged into one of the computer's expansion slots (usually slot 6), was used for data storage and retrieval to replace cassettes. The Disk II interface, created by Steve Wozniak, was regarded as an engineering masterpiece for its economy of electronic components.\nRather than having a dedicated sound-synthesis chip, the Apple II had a toggle circuit that could only emit a click through a built-in speaker; all other sounds (including two, three and, eventually, four-voice music and playback of audio samples and speech synthesis) were generated entirely by software that clicked the speaker at just the right times.\nThe Apple II's multiple expansion slots permitted a wide variety of third-party devices, including Apple II peripheral cards such as serial controllers, display controllers, memory boards, hard disks, networking components, and real-time clocks. There were plug-in expansion cards \u2013 such as the Z-80 SoftCard \u2013 that permitted the Apple to use the Z80 processor and run a multitude of programs developed under the CP/M operating system, including the dBase II database and the WordStar word processor. There was also a third-party 6809 card that would allow OS-9 Level One to be run. Third-party sound cards greatly improved audio capabilities, allowing simple music synthesis and text-to-speech functions. Eventually, Apple II accelerator cards were created to double or quadruple the computer's speed.\nRod Holt designed the Apple II's power supply. He employed a switched-mode power supply design, which was far smaller and generated less unwanted heat than the linear power supply some other home computers used.\nThe original Apple II was discontinued at the start of 1981, superseded by the Apple II+.\nApple II Plus.\nThe Apple II Plus, introduced in June 1979, included the Applesoft BASIC programming language in ROM. This Microsoft-authored dialect of BASIC, which was previously available as an upgrade, supported floating-point arithmetic, and became the standard BASIC dialect on the Apple II series (though it ran at a noticeably slower speed than Steve Wozniak's Integer BASIC).\nExcept for improved graphics and disk-booting support in the ROM, and the removal of the 2k 6502 assembler to make room for the floating point BASIC, the II+ was otherwise identical to the original II in terms of electronic functionality. There were small differences in the physical appearance and keyboard. RAM prices fell during 1980\u201381 and all II+ machines came from the factory with a full 48 KB of memory already installed.\nApple II Europlus and J-Plus.\nAfter the success of the first Apple II in the United States, Apple expanded its market to include Europe, Australia and the Far East in 1979, with the Apple II Europlus (Europe, Australia) and the Apple II J-Plus (Japan). In these models, Apple made the necessary hardware, software and firmware changes in order to comply to standards outside of the US.\nApple IIe.\nThe Apple II Plus was followed in 1983 by the Apple IIe, a cost-reduced yet more powerful machine that used newer chips to reduce the component count and add new features, such as the display of upper and lowercase letters and a standard 64\u00a0KB of RAM.\nThe IIe RAM was configured as if it were a 48\u00a0KB Apple II Plus with a language card. The machine had no slot 0, but instead had an auxiliary slot that could accept a 1\u00a0KB memory card to enable the 80-column display. This card contained only RAM; the hardware and firmware for the 80-column display was built into the Apple IIe. An \"extended 80-column card\" with more memory increased the machine's RAM to 128\u00a0KB.\nThe Apple IIe was the most popular machine in the Apple II series. It has the distinction of being the longest-lived Apple computer of all time\u2014it was manufactured and sold with only minor changes for nearly 11 years. The IIe was the last Apple II model to be sold, and was discontinued in November 1993.\nDuring its lifespan two variations were introduced: the Apple IIe Enhanced (four replacement chips to give it some of the features of the later model Apple IIc) and the Apple IIe Platinum (a modernized case color to match other Apple products of the era, along with the addition of a numeric keypad).\nSome of the feature of the IIe were carried over from the less successful \"Apple III\", among them the ProDOS operating system.\nApple IIc.\nThe Apple IIc was released in April 1984, billed as a portable Apple II because it could be easily carried due to its size and carrying handle, which could be flipped down to prop the machine up into a typing position. Unlike modern portables, it lacked a built-in display and battery. It was the first of three Apple II models to be made in the Snow White design language, and the only one that used its unique creamy off-white color.\nThe Apple IIc was the first Apple II to use the 65C02 low-power variant of the 6502 processor, and featured a built-in 5.25-inch floppy drive and 128\u00a0KB RAM, with a built-in disk controller that could control external drives, composite video (NTSC or PAL), serial interfaces for modem and printer, and a port usable by either a joystick or mouse. Unlike previous Apple II models, the IIc had no internal expansion slots at all.\nTwo different monochrome LC displays were sold for use with the IIc's video expansion port, although both were short-lived due to high cost and poor legibility. The IIc had an external power supply that converted AC power to 15\u00a0V DC, though the IIc itself will accept between 12\u00a0V and 17\u00a0V DC, allowing third parties to offer battery packs and automobile power adapters that connected in place of the supplied AC adapter.\nApple II.\nThe Apple II, released on September 15, 1986, is the penultimate and most advanced model in the Apple II series, and a radical departure from prior models. It uses a 16-bit microprocessor, the 65C816 operating at 2.8\u00a0MHz with 24-bit addressing, allowing expansion up to 8\u00a0MB of RAM. The graphics are significantly improved, with 4096 colors and new modes with resolutions of 320\u00d7200 and 640\u00d7400. The audio capabilities are vastly improved, with a built-in music synthesizer that far exceeded any other home computer.\nThe Apple II evolved the platform while still maintaining near-complete backward compatibility. Its Mega II chip contains the functional equivalent of an entire Apple IIe computer (sans processor). This, combined with the 65816's ability to execute 65C02 code directly, provides full support for legacy software, while also supporting 16-bit software running under a new OS.\nThe OS eventually included a Macintosh-like graphical Finder for managing disks and files and opening documents and applications, along with desk accessories. Later, the II gained the ability to read and write Macintosh disks and, through third-party software, a multitasking Unix-like shell and TrueType font support.\nThe GS includes a 32-voice Ensoniq 5503 DOC sample-based sound synthesizer chip with 64\u00a0KB dedicated RAM, 256\u00a0KB (or later 1.125\u00a0MB) of standard RAM, built-in peripheral ports (switchable between IIe-style card slots and IIc-style onboard controllers for disk drives, mouse, RGB video, and serial devices) and, built-in AppleTalk networking.\nApple IIc Plus.\nThe final Apple II model was the Apple IIc Plus introduced in 1988. It was the same size and shape as the IIc that came before it, but the 5.25-inch floppy drive had been replaced with a -inch drive, the power supply was moved inside the case, and the processor was a fast 4\u00a0MHz 65C02 processor that actually ran 8-bit Apple II software faster than the II.\nThe IIc Plus also featured a new keyboard layout that matched the Platinum IIe and II. Unlike the IIe IIc and II, the IIc Plus came only in one version (American) and was not officially sold anywhere outside the US. The Apple IIc Plus ceased production in 1990, with its two-year production run being the shortest of all the Apple II computers.\nApple IIe Card.\nAlthough not an extension of the Apple II line, in 1990 the Apple IIe Card, an expansion card for the Macintosh LC, was released. Essentially a miniaturized Apple IIe computer on a card (using the Mega II chip from the Apple II), it allowed the Macintosh to run 8-bit Apple IIe software through hardware emulation, with an option to run at roughly double the speed of the original IIe (about 1.8\u00a0MHz). However, the video output was emulated in software, and, depending on how much of the screen the currently running program was trying to update in a single frame, performance could be much slower compared to a real IIe. This is due to the fact that writes from the 65C02 on the IIe Card to video memory were caught by the additional hardware on the card, so the video emulation software running on the Macintosh side could process that write and update the video display. But, while the Macintosh was processing video updates, execution of Apple II code would be temporarily halted.\nWith a breakout cable which connected to the back of the card, the user could attach up to two UniDisk or Apple 5.25 Drives, up to one UniDisk 3.5 drive, and a DE-9 Apple II joystick. Many of the LC's built-in Macintosh peripherals could also be \"borrowed\" by the card when in Apple II mode, including extra RAM, the Mac's internal 3.5-inch floppy drives, AppleTalk networking, any ProDOS-formatted hard disk partitions, the serial ports, mouse, and real-time clock. The IIe card could not, however, run software intended for the 16-bit Apple II.\nAdvertising, marketing, and packaging.\nMike Markkula, a retired Intel marketing manager, provided the early critical funding for Apple Computer. From 1977 to 1981, Apple used the Regis McKenna agency for its advertisements and marketing. In 1981, Chiat-Day acquired Regis McKenna's advertising operations and Apple used Chiat-Day. At Regis McKenna Advertising, the team assigned to launch the Apple II consisted of Rob Janoff, art director, Chip Schafer, copywriter and Bill Kelley, account executive. Janoff came up with the Apple logo with a bite out of it. The design was originally an olive green with matching company logotype all in lowercase. Steve Jobs insisted on promoting the color capability of the Apple II by putting rainbow stripes on the Apple logo. In its letterhead and business card implementation, the rounded \"a\" of the logotype echoed the \"bite\" in the logo. This logo was developed simultaneously with an advertisement and a brochure; the latter being produced for distribution initially at the first West Coast Computer Faire.\nSince the original Apple II, Apple has paid high attention to its quality of packaging, partly because of Steve Jobs' personal preferences and opinions on packaging and final product appearance. All of Apple's packaging for the Apple II series looked similar, featuring much clean white space and showing the Apple rainbow logo prominently. For several years up until the late 1980s, Apple used the Motter Tektura font for packaging, until changing to the Apple Garamond font.\nApple ran the first advertisement for the Apple II, a two-page spread ad titled \"Introducing Apple II\", in \"BYTE\" in July 1977. The first brochure, was entitled \"Simplicity\" and the copy in both the ad and brochure pioneered \"demystifying\" language intended to make the new idea of a home computer more \"personal.\" The Apple II introduction ad was later run in the September 1977 issue of \"Scientific American\".\nApple later aired eight television commercials for the Apple II, emphasizing its benefits to education and students, along with some print ads.\nClones.\nThe Apple II was frequently cloned, both in the United States and abroad, in a similar way to the IBM PC. According to some sources (see below), more than 190 different models of Apple II clones were manufactured. Most could not be legally imported into the United States. Apple sued and sought criminal charges against clone makers in more than a dozen countries.\nData storage.\nCassette.\nOriginally the Apple II used Compact Cassette tapes for program and data storage. A dedicated tape recorder along the lines of the Commodore Datasette was never produced; Apple recommended using the Panasonic RQ309 in some of its early printed documentation. The uses of common consumer cassette recorders and a standard video monitor or television set (with a third-party RF modulator) made the total cost of owning an Apple II less expensive and helped contribute to the Apple II's success.\nCassette storage may have been inexpensive, but it was also slow and unreliable. The Apple II's lack of a disk drive was \"a glaring weakness\" in what was otherwise intended to be a polished, professional product. Recognizing that the II needed a disk drive to be taken seriously, Apple set out to develop a disk drive and a DOS to run it. Wozniak spent the 1977 Christmas holidays designing a disk controller that reduced the number of chips used by a factor of 10 compared to existing controllers. Still lacking a DOS, and with Wozniak inexperienced in operating system design, Jobs approached Shepardson Microsystems with the project. On April 10, 1978, Apple signed a contract for $13,000 with Shepardson to develop the DOS.\nEven after disk drives made the cassette tape interfaces obsolete they were still used by enthusiasts as simple one-bit audio input-output ports. Ham radio operators used the cassette input to receive slow scan TV (single frame images). A commercial speech recognition Blackjack program was available, after some user-specific voice training it would recognize simple commands (Hit, stand). Bob Bishop's \"Music Kaleidoscope\" was a simple program that monitored the cassette input port and based on zero-crossings created color patterns on the screen, a predecessor to current audio visualization plug-ins for media players. Music Kaleidoscope was especially popular on projection TV sets in dance halls.\nThe OS Disk.\nApple and many third-party developers made software available on tape at first, but after the Disk II became available in 1978, tape-based Apple II software essentially disappeared from the market. The initial price of the Disk II drive and controller was US$595, although a $100 off coupon was available through the Apple newsletter \"Contact\". The controller could handle two drives and a second drive (without controller) retailed for $495.\nThe Disk II single-sided floppy drive used 5.25-inch floppy disks; double-sided disks could be used, one side at a time, by turning them over and notching a hole for the write protect sensor. The first disk operating systems for the were and DOS\u00a03.2, which stored 113.75\u00a0KB on each disk, organized into 35 tracks of 13 256-byte sectors each. After about two years, DOS\u00a03.3 was introduced, storing 140\u00a0KB thanks to a minor firmware change on the disk controller that allowed it to store 16 sectors per track. (This upgrade was user-installable as two PROMs on older controllers.) After the release of DOS\u00a03.3, the user community discontinued use of except for running legacy software. Programs that required DOS\u00a03.2 were fairly rare; however, as DOS\u00a03.3 was not a major architectural change aside from the number of sectors per track, a program called MUFFIN was provided with DOS\u00a03.3 to allow users to copy files from DOS\u00a03.2 disks to DOS\u00a03.3 disks. It was possible for software developers to create a DOS\u00a03.2 disk which would also boot on a system with firmware.\nLater, double-sided drives, with heads to read both sides of the disk, became available from third-party companies. (Apple only produced double-sided 5.25-inch disks for the Lisa 1 computer).\nOn a DOS 3.x disk, tracks 0, 1, and most of track 2 were reserved to store the operating system. (It was possible, with a special utility, to reclaim most of this space for data if a disk did not need to be bootable.) A short ROM program on the disk controller had the ability to seek to track zero which it did without regard for the read/write head's current position, resulting in the characteristic \"chattering\" sound of a Disk II boot, which was the read/write head hitting the rubber stop block at the end of the rail \u2013 and read and execute code from sector 0. The code contained in there would then pull in the rest of the operating system. DOS stored the disk's directory on track 17, smack in the middle of the 35-track disks, in order to reduce the average seek time to the frequently used directory track. The directory was fixed in size and could hold a maximum of 105 files. Subdirectories were not supported.\nMost game publishers did not include DOS on their floppy disks, since they needed the memory it occupied more than its capabilities; instead, they often wrote their own boot loaders and read-only file systems. This also served to discourage \"crackers\" from snooping around in the game's copy-protection code, since the data on the disk was not in files that could be accessed easily.\nSome third-party manufacturers produced floppy drives that could write 40 tracks to most 5.25-inch disks, yielding 160\u00a0KB of storage per disk, but the format did not catch on widely, and no known commercial software was published on 40-track media. Most drives, even Disk IIs, could write 36 tracks; a two byte modification to DOS to format the extra track was common.\nThe Apple Disk II stored 140\u00a0KB on single-sided, \"single-density\" floppy disks, but it was very common for Apple II users to extend the capacity of a single-sided floppy disk to 280\u00a0KB by cutting out a second write-protect notch on the side of the disk using a \"disk notcher\" or hole puncher and inserting the disk flipped over. Double-sided disks, with notches on both sides, were available at a higher price, but in practice the magnetic coating on the reverse of nominally single-sided disks was usually of good enough quality to be used (both sides were coated in the same way to prevent warping, although only one side was certified for use). Early on, diskette manufacturers routinely warned that this technique would damage the read/write head of the drives or wear out the disk faster, and these warnings were frequently repeated in magazines of the day. In practice, however, this method was an inexpensive way to store twice as much data for no extra cost, and was widely used for commercially released floppies as well.\nLater, Apple IIs were able to use 3.5-inch disks with a total capacity of 800\u00a0KB and hard disks. did not support these drives natively; third-party software was required, and disks larger than about 400\u00a0KB had to be split up into multiple \"virtual disk volumes.\"\nDOS 3.3 was succeeded by ProDOS, a 1983 descendant of the Apple ///'s SOS. It added support for subdirectories and volumes up to 32\u00a0MB in size. ProDOS became the DOS of choice; AppleWorks and other newer programs required it.\nLegacy.\nThe Apple II series of computers had an enormous impact on the technology industry and expanded the role of microcomputers in society. The Apple II was the first personal computer many people ever saw. Its price was within the reach of many middle-class families, and a partnership with MECC helped make the Apple II popular in schools. By the end of 1980 Apple had already sold over 100,000 Apple IIs, and at the introduction of the II, models in the range had been sold. However, in other markets, the range saw rather more limited adoption, with only 120,000 units selling in the UK over this nine-year period.\nThe Apple II's popularity bootstrapped the computer game and educational software markets and began the boom in the word processor and computer printer markets. The first spreadsheet application, VisiCalc, was initially released for the Apple II, and many businesses bought them just to run VisiCalc. Its success drove IBM in part to create the IBM PC, which many businesses purchased to run spreadsheet and word processing software, at first ported from Apple II versions.\nThe Apple II's slots, allowing any peripheral card to take control of the bus and directly access memory, enabled an independent industry of card manufacturers who together created a flood of hardware products that let users build systems that were far more powerful and useful (at a lower cost) than any competing system, most of which were not nearly as expandable and were universally proprietary. The first peripheral card was a blank prototyping card intended for electronics enthusiasts who wanted to design their own peripherals for the Apple II.\nSpecialty peripherals kept the Apple II in use in industry and education environments for many years after Apple Computer stopped supporting the Apple II. Well into the 1990s every clean-room (the super-clean facility where spacecraft are prepared for flight) at the Kennedy Space Center used an Apple II to monitor the environment and air quality. Most planetariums used Apple IIs to control their projectors and other equipment.\nEven the game port was unusually powerful and could be used for digital and analog input and output. The early manuals included instructions for how to build a circuit with only four commonly available components (one transistor and three resistors) and a software routine to drive a common Teletype Model 33 machine. Don Lancaster used the game port I/O to drive a LaserWriter printer.\nModern use.\nToday, emulators for various Apple II models are available to run Apple II software on macOS, Linux, Microsoft Windows, homebrew enabled Nintendo DS and other operating systems. Numerous disk images of Apple II software are available free over the Internet for use with these emulators. AppleWin and MESS are among the best emulators compatible with most Apple II images. The MESS emulator supports recording and playing back of Apple II emulation sessions, as does Home Action Replay Page (a.k.a. HARP).\nThere is still a small annual convention, KansasFest, dedicated to the platform.\nIn 2017, the band 8 Bit Weapon released the world's first 100% Apple II-based music album entitled, \"Class Apples\". The album featured dance-oriented cover versions of classical music by Bach, Beethoven, and Mozart recorded directly off the Apple II motherboard."}
{"id": "2117", "revid": "49015438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2117", "title": "Apple III", "text": "The Apple III (styled as apple ///) is a business-oriented personal computer produced by Apple Computer and released in 1980. Running the Apple SOS operating system, it was intended as the successor to the Apple II, but was largely considered a failure in the market. It was designed to provide features business users wanted: a true typewriter-style keyboard with upper and lowercase letters (the Apple II only supported uppercase at the time) and an 80-column display.\nIt had the internal code name of \"Sara\", named after Wendell Sander's daughter. The system was announced on May 19, 1980, and released in late November that year. Serious stability issues required a design overhaul and a recall of the first 14,000 machines produced. The Apple III was formally reintroduced on November 9, 1981.\nDamage to the computer's reputation had already been done, however, and it failed to do well commercially. Development stopped, and the Apple III was discontinued on April 24, 1984. Its last successor, the III Plus, was dropped from the Apple product line in September 1985.\nAn estimated 65,000\u201375,000 Apple III computers were sold. The Apple III Plus brought this up to approximately 120,000. Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak stated that the primary reason for the Apple III's failure was that the system was designed by Apple's marketing department, unlike Apple's previous engineering-driven projects. The Apple III's failure led Apple to reevaluate its plan to phase out the Apple II, prompting the eventual continuation of development of the older machine. As a result, later Apple II models incorporated some hardware and software technologies of the Apple III.\nOverview.\nDesign.\nSteve Wozniak and Steve Jobs expected hobbyists to purchase the Apple II; however, because of VisiCalc and Disk II, small businesses purchased 90% of the computers. The Apple III was designed to be a business computer and successor. Though the Apple II contributed to the inspirations of several important business products, such as VisiCalc, Multiplan, and Apple Writer, the computer's hardware architecture, operating system, and developer environment are limited. Apple management intended to clearly establish market segmentation by designing the Apple III to appeal to the 90% business market, leaving the Apple II to home and education users. Management believed that \"once the Apple III was out, the Apple II would stop selling in six months\", Wozniak said.\nThe Apple III is powered by a 1.8 megahertz Synertek 6502A or 6502B 8-bit CPU and, like some of the later machines in the Apple II family, uses bank switching techniques to address memory beyond the 6502's traditional 64\u00a0KB limit, up to 256\u00a0KB in the III's case. Third-party vendors produced memory upgrade kits that allow the Apple III to reach up to 512\u00a0KB of random-access memory (RAM). Other Apple III built-in features include an 80-column, 24-line display with upper and lowercase characters, a numeric keypad, dual-speed (pressure-sensitive) cursor control keys, 6-bit (DAC) audio, and a built-in 140-kilobyte 5.25-inch floppy disk drive. Graphics modes include 560x192 in black and white, and 280x192 with 16 colors or shades of gray. Unlike the Apple II, the Disk III controller is part of the logic board.\nThe Apple III is the first Apple product to allow the user to choose both a screen font and a keyboard layout: either QWERTY or Dvorak. These choices cannot be changed while programs were running. This was unlike the Apple IIc, which has a keyboard switch directly above the keyboard, allowing the user to switch on the fly.\nSoftware.\nThe Apple III introduced an advanced operating system called Apple SOS, pronounced \"apple sauce\". Its ability to address resources by name allows the Apple III to be more scalable than the Apple II's addressing by physical location such as codice_1. Apple SOS allows the full capacity of a storage device to be used as a single volume, such as the Apple ProFile hard disk drive, and it supports a hierarchical file system. Some of the features and code base of Apple SOS were later adopted into the Apple II's ProDOS and GS/OS operating systems, as well as Lisa 7/7 and Mac OS.\nWith a starting price of $4,340 (equivalent to $17,356 as of 2024) and a maximum price of $7,800 (equivalent to $31,194 as of 2024), the Apple III was more expensive than many of the CP/M-based business computers that were available at the time. Few software applications other than VisiCalc are available for the computer; according to a presentation at KansasFest 2012, fewer than 50 Apple III-specific software packages were ever published, most shipping when the III Plus was released. Because Apple did not view the Apple III as suitable for hobbyists, it did not provide much of the technical software information that accompanies the Apple II. Originally intended as a direct replacement to the Apple II, it was designed to be backward compatible with Apple II software. However, since Apple did not want to encourage continued development of the II platform, Apple II compatibility exists only in a special Apple II Mode which is limited in its capabilities to the emulation of a basic Apple II Plus configuration with of RAM. Special chips were intentionally added to prevent access from Apple II Mode to the III's advanced features such as its larger amount of memory.\nPeripherals.\nThe Apple III has four expansion slots, a number that \"inCider\" in 1986 called \"miserly\"., also saying Apple II cards are compatible but risk violating government RFI regulations, and require Apple III-specific device drivers; \"BYTE\" stated that \"Apple provides virtually no information on how to write them\". As with software, Apple provided little hardware technical information with the computer but Apple III-specific products became available, such as one that made the computer compatible with the Apple IIe. Several new Apple-produced peripherals were developed for the Apple III. The original Apple III has a built-in real-time clock, which is recognized by Apple SOS. The clock was later removed from the \"revised\" model, and was instead made available as an add-on.\nAlong with the built-in floppy drive, the Apple III can also handle up to three additional external Disk III floppy disk drives. The Disk III is only officially compatible with the Apple III. The Apple III Plus requires an adaptor from Apple to use the Disk III with its DB-25 disk port.\nWith the introduction of the revised Apple III a year after launch, Apple began offering the ProFile external hard disk system. Priced at $3,499 for 5\u00a0MB of storage, it also required a peripheral slot for its controller card.\nBackward compatibility.\nThe Apple III has the built-in hardware capability to run Apple II software. In order to do so, an emulation boot disk is required that functionally turns the machine into a standard 48-kilobyte Apple II Plus, until it is powered off. The keyboard, internal floppy drive (and one external Disk III), display (color is provided through the 'B/W video' port) and speaker all act as Apple II peripherals. The paddle and serial ports can also function in Apple II mode, however with some limitations and compatibility issues.\nApple engineers added specialized circuitry with the sole purpose of blocking access to its advanced features when running in Apple II emulation mode. This was done primarily to discourage further development and interest in the Apple II line, and to push the Apple III as its successor. For example, no more than of RAM can be accessed, even if the machine has of RAM or higher present. Many Apple II programs require a minimum of of RAM, making them impossible to run on the Apple III. Similarly, access to lowercase support, 80 columns text, or its more advanced graphics and sound are blocked by this hardware circuitry, making it impossible for even skilled software programmers to bypass Apple's lockout. A third-party company, Titan Technologies, sold an expansion board called the III Plus II that allows Apple II mode to access more memory, a standard game port, and with a later released companion card, even emulate the Apple IIe.\nCertain Apple II slot cards can be installed in the Apple III and used in native III-mode with custom written SOS device drivers, including Grappler Plus and Liron 3.5 Controller.\nRevisions.\nAfter overheating issues were attributed to serious design flaws, a redesigned logic board was introduced in mid-December 1981 \u2013 which included a lower power supply requirement, wider circuit traces and better-designed chip sockets. The $3,495 revised model also includes 256\u00a0KB of RAM as the standard configuration. The 14,000 units of the original Apple III sold were returned and replaced with the entirely new revised model.\nApple III Plus.\nApple discontinued the III in October 1983 because it violated FCC regulations, and the FCC required the company to change the redesigned computer's name. It introduced the Apple III Plus in December 1983 at a price of US$2,995. This newer version includes a built-in clock, video interlacing, standardized rear port connectors, 55-watt power supply, 256\u00a0KB of RAM as standard, and a redesigned, Apple IIe-like keyboard.\nOwners of the Apple III could purchase individual III Plus upgrades, like the clock and interlacing feature, and obtain the newer logic board as a service replacement. A keyboard upgrade kit, dubbed \"Apple III Plus upgrade kit\" was also made available \u2013 which included the keyboard, cover, keyboard encoder ROM, and logo replacements. This upgrade had to be installed by an authorized service technician.\nDesign flaws.\nAccording to Wozniak, the Apple III \"had 100 percent hardware failures\". Former Apple executive Taylor Pohlman stated that:\nJobs insisted on the idea of having no fan or air vents, in order to make the computer run quietly. He would later push this same ideology onto almost all Apple models he had control of, from the Apple Lisa and Macintosh 128K to the iMac. To allow the computer to dissipate heat, the base of the Apple III was made of heavy cast aluminum, which supposedly acts as a heat sink. One advantage to the aluminum case was a reduction in RFI (Radio Frequency Interference), a problem which had plagued the Apple II series throughout its history. Unlike the Apple II, the power supply was mounted \u2013 without its own shell \u2013 in a compartment separate from the logic board. The decision to use an aluminum shell ultimately led to engineering issues which resulted in the Apple III's reliability problems. The lead time for manufacturing the shells was high, and this had to be done before the motherboard was finalized. Later, it was realized that there was not enough room on the motherboard for all of the components unless narrow traces were used.\nMany Apple IIIs were thought to have failed due to their inability to properly dissipate heat. \"inCider\" stated in 1986 that \"Heat has always been a formidable enemy of the Apple ///\", and some users reported that their Apple IIIs became so hot that the chips started dislodging from the board, causing the screen to display garbled data or their disk to come out of the slot \"melted\". \"BYTE\" wrote, \"the integrated circuits tended to wander out of their sockets\". It has been rumored Apple advised customers to tilt the front of the Apple III six inches above the desk and then drop it to reseat the chips as a temporary solution. Other analyses blame a faulty automatic chip insertion process, not heat.\nCase designer Jerry Manock denied the design flaw charges, insisting that tests proved that the unit adequately dissipated the internal heat. The primary cause, he claimed, was a major logic board design problem. The logic board used \"fineline\" technology that was not fully mature at the time, with narrow, closely spaced traces. When chips were \"stuffed\" into the board and wave-soldered, solder bridges would form between traces that were not supposed to be connected. This caused numerous short circuits, which required hours of costly diagnosis and hand rework to fix. Apple designed a new circuit board with more layers and normal-width traces. The new logic board was laid out by one designer on a huge drafting board, rather than using the costly CAD-CAM system used for the previous board, and the new design worked.\nEarlier Apple III units came with a built-in real time clock. The hardware, however, would fail after prolonged use. Assuming that National Semiconductor would test all parts before shipping them, Apple did not perform this level of testing. Apple was soldering chips directly to boards and could not easily replace a bad chip if one was found. Eventually, Apple solved this problem by removing the real-time clock from the Apple III's specification rather than shipping the Apple III with the clock pre-installed, and then sold the peripheral as a level 1 technician add-on.\nBASIC.\nMicrosoft and Apple each developed their own versions of BASIC for the Apple III. Apple III Microsoft BASIC was designed to run on the CP/M platform available for the Apple III. Apple Business BASIC shipped with the Apple III. Donn Denman ported Applesoft BASIC to SOS and reworked it to take advantage of the extended memory of the Apple III.\nBoth languages introduced a number of new or improved features over Applesoft BASIC. Both languages replaced Applesoft's single-precision floating-point variables using 5-byte storage with the somewhat-reduced-precision 4-byte variables, while also adding a larger numerical format. Apple III Microsoft BASIC provides double-precision floating-point variables, taking 8 bytes of storage, while Apple Business BASIC offers an extra-long integer type, also taking 8 bytes for storage. Both languages also retain 2-byte integers, and maximum 255-character strings.\nOther new features common to both languages include:\nSome features work differently in each language:\nMicrosoft BASIC additional features.\nThere is no support for graphics provided within the language, nor for reading analog controls or buttons; nor is there a means of defining the active window of the text screen.\nBusiness BASIC additional features.\nApple Business BASIC eliminates all references to absolute memory addresses. Thus, the POKE command and PEEK() function were not included in the language, and new features replaced the CALL statement and USR() function. The functionality of certain features in Applesoft that had been achieved with various PEEK and POKE locations is now provided by:\nExternal binary subroutines and functions are loaded into memory by a single INVOKE disk-command that loads separately-assembled code modules. A PERFORM statement is then used to call an INVOKEd procedure by name, with an argument-list. INVOKEd functions would be referenced in expressions by EXFN. (floating-point) or EXFN%. (integer), with the function name appended, plus the argument-list for the function.\nGraphics are supported with an INVOKEd module, with features including displaying text within graphics in various fonts, within four different graphics modes available on the Apple III.\nReception.\nDespite devoting the majority of its R&amp;D to the Apple III and so ignoring the II that for a while dealers had difficulty in obtaining the latter, the III's technical problems made marketing the computer difficult. Ed Smith, who after designing the APF Imagination Machine worked as a distributor's representative, described the III as \"a complete disaster\". He recalled that he \"was responsible for going to every dealership, setting up the Apple III in their showroom, and then explaining to them the functions of the Apple III, which in many cases didn't really work\".\nSales.\n\"BYTE\" reported in 1982 that Apple had sold only 10,000 of the original Apple III, compared to 350,000 Apple IIs sold by the end of 1981. Pohlman reported that Apple was only selling 500 units a month by late 1981, mostly as replacements. The company was able to eventually raise monthly sales to 5,000, but the IBM PC's successful launch had encouraged software companies to develop for it instead, prompting Apple to shift focus to the Lisa and Macintosh. The PC almost ended sales of the Apple III, the most closely comparable Apple computer model. By early 1984, sales were primarily to existing III owners, Apple itself\u2014its 4,500 employees were equipped with some 3,000-4,500 units\u2014and some small businesses. Apple finally discontinued the Apple III series on April 24, 1984, four months after introducing the III Plus, after selling only up to 75,000 units and replacing 14,000 defective units.\nJobs said the company lost \"incalculable amounts\" of money on the Apple III. Wozniak estimated that Apple had spent $100 million on the III instead of improving the II and better competing against IBM. Pohlman claimed that there was a \"stigma\" at Apple associated with having contributed to the computer. Most employees who worked on the III reportedly left Apple.\nLegacy.\nThe file system and some design ideas from Apple SOS, the Apple III's operating system, were part of Apple ProDOS and Apple GS/OS, the major operating systems for the Apple II following the demise of the Apple III, as well as the Apple Lisa, which was the de facto business-oriented successor to the Apple III. The hierarchical file system influenced the evolution of the Macintosh: while the original Macintosh File System (MFS) was a flat file system designed for a floppy disk without subdirectories, subsequent file systems were hierarchical. By comparison, the IBM PC's first file system (again designed for floppy disks) was also flat and later versions (designed for hard disks) were hierarchical.\nIn popular culture.\nAt the start of the Walt Disney Pictures film \"Tron\", lead character Kevin Flynn (played by Jeff Bridges) is seen hacking into the ENCOM mainframe using an Apple III."}
{"id": "2118", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2118", "title": "AVL tree", "text": "In computer science, an AVL tree (named after inventors Adelson-Velsky and Landis) is a self-balancing binary search tree. In an AVL tree, the heights of the two child subtrees of any node differ by at most one; if at any time they differ by more than one, rebalancing is done to restore this property. Lookup, insertion, and deletion all take time in both the average and worst cases, where formula_1 is the number of nodes in the tree prior to the operation. Insertions and deletions may require the tree to be rebalanced by one or more tree rotations.\nThe AVL tree is named after its two Soviet inventors, Georgy Adelson-Velsky and Evgenii Landis, who published it in their 1962 paper \"An algorithm for the organization of information\". It is the first self-balancing binary search tree data structure to be invented. \nAVL trees are often compared with red\u2013black trees because both support the same set of operations and take formula_2 time for the basic operations. For lookup-intensive applications, AVL trees are faster than red\u2013black trees because they are more strictly balanced. Similar to red\u2013black trees, AVL trees are height-balanced. Both are, in general, neither weight-balanced nor formula_3-balanced for any formula_4;\nAVL trees are more rigidly balanced than RB trees with an asymptotic relation AVL/RB \u22480.720 of the maximal heights. For insertions and deletions, Ben Pfaff shows in 79 measurements a relation of AVL/RB between 0.677 and 1.077 with median \u22480.947 and geometric mean \u22480.910."}
{"id": "2120", "revid": "2447337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2120", "title": "Aliphatic compound", "text": "In organic chemistry, hydrocarbons (compounds composed solely of carbon and hydrogen) are divided into two classes: aromatic compounds and aliphatic compounds (; G. \"aleiphar\", fat, oil). Aliphatic compounds can be saturated (in which all the C-C bonds are single requiring the structure to be completed, or 'saturated', by hydrogen) like hexane, or unsaturated, like hexene and hexyne. Open-chain compounds, whether straight or branched, and which contain no rings of any type, are always aliphatic. Cyclic compounds can be aliphatic if they are not aromatic.\nStructure.\nAliphatic compounds can be saturated, joined by single bonds (alkanes), or unsaturated, with double bonds (alkenes) or triple bonds (alkynes). If other elements (heteroatoms) are bound to the carbon chain, the most common being oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and chlorine, it is no longer a hydrocarbon, and therefore no longer an aliphatic compound. However, such compounds may still be referred to as aliphatic if the hydrocarbon portion of the molecule is aliphatic, e.g. aliphatic amines, to differentiate them from aromatic amines.\nThe least complex aliphatic compound is methane (CH4).\nProperties.\nMost aliphatic compounds are flammable, allowing the use of hydrocarbons as fuel, such as methane in natural gas for stoves or heating; butane in torches and lighters; various aliphatic (as well as aromatic) hydrocarbons in liquid transportation fuels like petrol/gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel; and other uses such as ethyne (acetylene) in welding.\nExamples of aliphatic compounds.\nThe most important aliphatic compounds are:\nImportant examples of low-molecular aliphatic compounds can be found in the list below (sorted by the number of carbon-atoms):"}
{"id": "2122", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2122", "title": "Astrology", "text": "Astrology is a range of divinatory practices, recognized as pseudoscientific since the 18th century, that propose that information about human affairs and terrestrial events may be discerned by studying the apparent positions of celestial objects. Different cultures have employed forms of astrology since at least the 2nd millennium BCE, these practices having originated in calendrical systems used to predict seasonal shifts and to interpret celestial cycles as signs of divine communications. Most, if not all, cultures have attached importance to what they observed in the sky, and some\u2014such as the Hindus, Chinese, and the Maya\u2014developed elaborate systems for predicting terrestrial events from celestial observations. Western astrology, one of the oldest astrological systems still in use, can trace its roots to 19th\u201317th century BCE Mesopotamia, from where it spread to Ancient Greece, Rome, the Islamic world, and eventually Central and Western Europe. Contemporary Western astrology is often associated with systems of horoscopes that purport to explain aspects of a person's personality and predict significant events in their lives based on the positions of celestial objects; the majority of professional astrologers rely on such systems.\nThroughout its history, astrology has had its detractors, competitors and skeptics who opposed it for moral, religious, political, and empirical reasons. Nonetheless, prior to the Enlightenment, astrology was generally considered a scholarly tradition and was common in learned circles, often in close relation with astronomy, meteorology, medicine, and alchemy. It was present in political circles and is mentioned in various works of literature, from Dante Alighieri and Geoffrey Chaucer to William Shakespeare, Lope de Vega, and Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca. During the Enlightenment, however, astrology lost its status as an area of legitimate scholarly pursuit. Following the end of the 19th century and the wide-scale adoption of the scientific method, researchers have successfully challenged astrology on both theoretical and experimental grounds, and have shown it to have no scientific validity or explanatory power. Astrology thus lost its academic and theoretical standing in the western world, and common belief in it largely declined, until a continuing resurgence starting in the 1960s.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"astrology\" comes from the early Latin word \"astrologia\", which derives from the Greek \u2014from \u1f04\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \"astron\" (\"star\") and -\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1 \"-logia\", (\"study of\"\u2014\"account of the stars\"). The word entered the English language via Latin and medieval French, and its use overlapped considerably with that of \"astronomy\" (derived from the Latin \"astronomia\"). By the 17th century, \"astronomy\" became established as the scientific term, with \"astrology\" referring to divinations and schemes for predicting human affairs.\nHistory.\nMany cultures have attached importance to astronomical events, and the Indians, Chinese, and Maya developed elaborate systems for predicting terrestrial events from celestial observations. A form of astrology was practised in the Old Babylonian period of Mesopotamia, . \"Ved\u0101\u1e45ga Jyoti\u1e63a\" is one of earliest known Hindu texts on astronomy and astrology (\"Jyotisha\"). The text is dated between 1400 BCE to final centuries BCE by various scholars according to astronomical and linguistic evidences. Chinese astrology was elaborated in the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BCE). Hellenistic astrology after 332 BCE mixed Babylonian astrology with Egyptian Decanic astrology in Alexandria, creating horoscopic astrology. Alexander the Great's conquest of Asia allowed astrology to spread to Ancient Greece and Rome. In Rome, astrology was associated with \"Chaldean wisdom\". After the conquest of Alexandria in the 7th century, astrology was taken up by Islamic scholars, and Hellenistic texts were translated into Arabic and Persian. In the 12th century, Arabic texts were imported to Europe and translated into Latin. Major astronomers including Tycho Brahe, Johannes Kepler and Galileo practised as court astrologers. Astrological references appear in literature in the works of poets such as Dante Alighieri and Geoffrey Chaucer, and of playwrights such as Christopher Marlowe and William Shakespeare.\nThroughout most of its history, astrology was considered a scholarly tradition. It was accepted in political and academic contexts, and was connected with other studies, such as astronomy, alchemy, meteorology, and medicine. At the end of the 17th century, new scientific concepts in astronomy and physics (such as heliocentrism and Newtonian mechanics) called astrology into question. Astrology thus lost its academic and theoretical standing, and common belief in astrology has largely declined.\nAncient world.\nAstrology, in its broadest sense, is the search for meaning in the sky. Early evidence for humans making conscious attempts to measure, record, and predict seasonal changes by reference to astronomical cycles, appears as markings on bones and cave walls, which show that lunar cycles were being noted as early as 25,000 years ago. This was a first step towards recording the Moon's influence upon tides and rivers, and towards organising a communal calendar. Farmers addressed agricultural needs with increasing knowledge of the constellations that appear in the different seasons\u2014and used the rising of particular star-groups to herald annual floods or seasonal activities. By the 3rd millennium BCE, civilisations had sophisticated awareness of celestial cycles, and may have oriented temples in alignment with heliacal risings of the stars.\nScattered evidence suggests that the oldest known astrological references are copies of texts made in the ancient world. The Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa is thought to have been compiled in Babylon around 1700 BCE. A scroll documenting an early use of electional astrology is doubtfully ascribed to the reign of the Sumerian ruler Gudea of Lagash ( \u2013 2124 BCE). This describes how the gods revealed to him in a dream the constellations that would be most favourable for the planned construction of a temple. However, there is controversy about whether these were genuinely recorded at the time or merely ascribed to ancient rulers by posterity. The oldest undisputed evidence of the use of astrology as an integrated system of knowledge is therefore attributed to the records of the first dynasty of Babylon (1950\u20131651 BCE). This astrology had some parallels with Hellenistic Greek (western) astrology, including the zodiac, a norming point near 9 degrees in Aries, the trine aspect, planetary exaltations, and the dodekatemoria (the twelve divisions of 30 degrees each). The Babylonians viewed celestial events as possible signs rather than as causes of physical events.\nThe system of Chinese astrology was elaborated during the Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013256 BCE) and flourished during the Han dynasty (2nd century BCE to 2nd century CE), during which all the familiar elements of traditional Chinese culture \u2013 the Yin-Yang philosophy, theory of the five elements, Heaven and Earth, Confucian morality \u2013 were brought together to formalise the philosophical principles of Chinese medicine and divination, astrology, and alchemy.\nThe ancient Arabs that inhabited the Arabian Peninsula before the advent of Islam used to profess a widespread belief in fatalism (\"\u1e33adar\") alongside a fearful consideration for the sky and the stars, which they held to be ultimately responsible for every phenomena that occurs on Earth and for the destiny of humankind. Accordingly, they shaped their entire lives in accordance with their interpretations of astral configurations and phenomena.\nAncient objections.\nThe Hellenistic schools of philosophical skepticism criticized the rationality of astrology. Criticism of astrology by academic skeptics such as Cicero, Carneades, and Favorinus; and Pyrrhonists such as Sextus Empiricus has been preserved.\nCarneades argued that belief in fate denies free will and morality; that people born at different times can all die in the same accident or battle; and that contrary to uniform influences from the stars, tribes and cultures are all different.\nCicero, in \"De Divinatione\", leveled a critique of astrology that some modern philosophers consider to be the first working definition of pseudoscience and the answer to the demarcation problem. Philosopher of Science Massimo Pigliucci, building on the work of Historian of Science, Damien Fernandez-Beanato, argues that Cicero outlined a \"convincing distinction between astrology and astronomy that remains valid in the twenty-first century.\" Cicero stated the twins objection (that with close birth times, personal outcomes can be very different), later developed by Augustine. He argued that since the other planets are much more distant from the Earth than the Moon, they could have only very tiny influence compared to the Moon's. He also argued that if astrology explains everything about a person's fate, then it wrongly ignores the visible effect of inherited ability and parenting, changes in health worked by medicine, or the effects of the weather on people.\nFavorinus argued that it was absurd to imagine that stars and planets would affect human bodies in the same way as they affect the tides, and equally absurd that small motions in the heavens cause large changes in people's fates.\nSextus Empiricus argued that it was absurd to link human attributes with myths about the signs of the zodiac, and wrote an entire book, \"Against the Astrologers\" (\u03a0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u1f00\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2, \"Pros astrologous\"), compiling arguments against astrology. \"Against the Astrologers\" was the fifth section of a larger work arguing against philosophical and scientific inquiry in general, \"Against the Professors\" (\u03a0\u03c1\u1f78\u03c2 \u03bc\u03b1\u03b8\u03b7\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2, \"Pros mathematikous\").\nPlotinus, a neoplatonist, argued that since the fixed stars are much more distant than the planets, it is laughable to imagine the planets' effect on human affairs should depend on their position with respect to the zodiac. He also argues that the interpretation of the Moon's conjunction with a planet as good when the moon is full, but bad when the moon is waning, is clearly wrong, as from the Moon's point of view, half of its surface is always in sunlight; and from the planet's point of view, waning should be better, as then the planet sees some light from the Moon, but when the Moon is full to us, it is dark, and therefore bad, on the side facing the planet in question.\nHellenistic Egypt.\nIn 525 BCE, Egypt was conquered by the Persians. The 1st century BCE Egyptian Dendera Zodiac shares two signs \u2013 the Balance and the Scorpion \u2013 with Mesopotamian astrology.\nWith the occupation by Alexander the Great in 332 BCE, Egypt became Hellenistic. The city of Alexandria was founded by Alexander after the conquest, becoming the place where Babylonian astrology was mixed with Egyptian Decanic astrology to create Horoscopic astrology. This contained the Babylonian zodiac with its system of planetary exaltations, the triplicities of the signs and the importance of eclipses. It used the Egyptian concept of dividing the zodiac into thirty-six decans of ten degrees each, with an emphasis on the rising decan, and the Greek system of planetary Gods, sign rulership and four elements. 2nd century BCE texts predict positions of planets in zodiac signs at the time of the rising of certain decans, particularly Sothis. The astrologer and astronomer Ptolemy lived in Alexandria. Ptolemy's work the \"Tetrabiblos\" formed the basis of Western astrology, and, \"...enjoyed almost the authority of a Bible among the astrological writers of a thousand years or more.\"\nGreece and Rome.\nThe conquest of Asia by Alexander the Great exposed the Greeks to ideas from Syria, Babylon, Persia and central Asia. Around 280 BCE, Berossus, a priest of Bel from Babylon, moved to the Greek island of Kos, teaching astrology and Babylonian culture. By the 1st century BCE, there were two varieties of astrology, one using horoscopes to describe the past, present and future; the other, theurgic, emphasising the soul's ascent to the stars. Greek influence played a crucial role in the transmission of astrological theory to Rome.\nThe first definite reference to astrology in Rome comes from the orator Cato, who in 160 BCE warned farm overseers against consulting with Chaldeans, who were described as Babylonian 'star-gazers'. Among both Greeks and Romans, Babylonia (also known as Chaldea) became so identified with astrology that 'Chaldean wisdom' became synonymous with divination using planets and stars. The 2nd-century Roman poet and satirist Juvenal complains about the pervasive influence of Chaldeans, saying, \"Still more trusted are the Chaldaeans; every word uttered by the astrologer they will believe has come from Hammon's fountain.\"\nOne of the first astrologers to bring Hermetic astrology to Rome was Thrasyllus, astrologer to the emperor Tiberius, the first emperor to have had a court astrologer, though his predecessor Augustus had used astrology to help legitimise his Imperial rights.\nMedieval world.\nHindu.\nThe main texts upon which classical Indian astrology is based are early medieval compilations, notably the \"\", and \"S\u0101r\u0101val\u012b\" by .\nThe \"Hor\u0101shastra\" is a composite work of 71 chapters, of which the first part (chapters 1\u201351) dates to the 7th to early 8th centuries and the second part (chapters 52\u201371) to the later 8th century. The \"S\u0101r\u0101val\u012b\" likewise dates to around 800 CE. English translations of these texts were published by N.N. Krishna Rau and V.B. Choudhari in 1963 and 1961, respectively.\nIslamic.\nAstrology was taken up by Islamic scholars following the collapse of Alexandria to the Arabs in the 7th century, and the founding of the Abbasid empire in the 8th. The second Abbasid caliph, Al Mansur (754\u2013775) founded the city of Baghdad to act as a centre of learning, and included in its design a library-translation centre known as \"Bayt al-Hikma\" 'House of Wisdom', which continued to receive development from his heirs and was to provide a major impetus for Arabic-Persian translations of Hellenistic astrological texts. The early translators included Mashallah, who helped to elect the time for the foundation of Baghdad, and Sahl ibn Bishr, (\"a.k.a.\" \"Zael\"), whose texts were directly influential upon later European astrologers such as Guido Bonatti in the 13th century, and William Lilly in the 17th century. Knowledge of Arabic texts started to become imported into Europe during the Latin translations of the 12th century.\nEurope.\nIn the seventh century, Isidore of Seville argued in his \"Etymologiae\" that astronomy described the movements of the heavens, while astrology had two parts: one was scientific, describing the movements of the Sun, the Moon and the stars, while the other, making predictions, was theologically erroneous.\nThe first astrological book published in Europe was the \"Liber Planetis et Mundi Climatibus\" (\"Book of the Planets and Regions of the World\"), which appeared between 1010 and 1027 AD, and may have been authored by Gerbert of Aurillac. Ptolemy's second century AD \"Tetrabiblos\" was translated into Latin by Plato of Tivoli in 1138. The Dominican theologian Thomas Aquinas followed Aristotle in proposing that the stars ruled the imperfect 'sublunary' body, while attempting to reconcile astrology with Christianity by stating that God ruled the soul. The thirteenth century mathematician Campanus of Novara is said to have devised a system of astrological houses that divides the prime vertical into 'houses' of equal 30\u00b0 arcs, though the system was used earlier in the East. The thirteenth century astronomer Guido Bonatti wrote a textbook, the \"Liber Astronomicus\", a copy of which King Henry VII of England owned at the end of the fifteenth century.\nIn \"Paradiso\", the final part of the \"Divine Comedy\", the Italian poet Dante Alighieri referred \"in countless details\" to the astrological planets, though he adapted traditional astrology to suit his Christian viewpoint, for example using astrological thinking in his prophecies of the reform of Christendom.\nJohn Gower in the fourteenth century defined astrology as essentially limited to the making of predictions. The influence of the stars was in turn divided into natural astrology, with for example effects on tides and the growth of plants, and judicial astrology, with supposedly predictable effects on people. The fourteenth-century sceptic Nicole Oresme however included astronomy as a part of astrology in his \"Livre de divinacions\". Oresme argued that current approaches to prediction of events such as plagues, wars, and weather were inappropriate, but that such prediction was a valid field of inquiry. However, he attacked the use of astrology to choose the timing of actions (so-called interrogation and election) as wholly false, and rejected the determination of human action by the stars on grounds of free will. The friar Laurens Pignon (c. 1368\u20131449) similarly rejected all forms of divination and determinism, including by the stars, in his 1411 \"Contre les Devineurs\". This was in opposition to the tradition carried by the Arab astronomer Albumasar (787\u2013886) whose \"Introductorium in Astronomiam\" and \"De Magnis Coniunctionibus\" argued the view that both individual actions and larger scale history are determined by the stars.\nIn the late 15th century, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola forcefully attacked astrology in \"Disputationes contra Astrologos\", arguing that the heavens neither caused, nor heralded earthly events. His contemporary, Pietro Pomponazzi, a \"rationalistic and critical thinker\", was much more sanguine about astrology and critical of Pico's attack.\nRenaissance and Early Modern.\nRenaissance scholars commonly practised astrology. Gerolamo Cardano cast the horoscope of king Edward VI of England, while John Dee was the personal astrologer to queen Elizabeth I of England. Catherine de Medici paid Michael Nostradamus in 1566 to verify the prediction of the death of her husband, king Henry II of France made by her astrologer Lucus Gauricus. Major astronomers who practised as court astrologers included Tycho Brahe in the royal court of Denmark, Johannes Kepler to the Habsburgs, Galileo Galilei to the Medici, and Giordano Bruno who was burnt at the stake for heresy in Rome in 1600. The distinction between astrology and astronomy was not entirely clear. Advances in astronomy were often motivated by the desire to improve the accuracy of astrology. Kepler, for example, was driven by a belief in harmonies between Earthly and celestial affairs, yet he disparaged the activities of most astrologers as \"evil-smelling dung\".\nEphemerides with complex astrological calculations, and almanacs interpreting celestial events for use in medicine and for choosing times to plant crops, were popular in Elizabethan England. In 1597, the English mathematician and physician Thomas Hood made a set of paper instruments that used revolving overlays to help students work out relationships between fixed stars or constellations, the midheaven, and the twelve astrological houses. Hood's instruments also illustrated, for pedagogical purposes, the supposed relationships between the signs of the zodiac, the planets, and the parts of the human body adherents believed were governed by the planets and signs. While Hood's presentation was innovative, his astrological information was largely standard and was taken from Gerard Mercator's astrological disc made in 1551, or a source used by Mercator. Despite its popularity, Renaissance astrology had what historian Gabor Almasi calls \"elite debate\", exemplified by the polemical letters of Swiss physician Thomas Erastus who fought against astrology, calling it \"vanity\" and \"superstition.\" Then around the time of the new star of 1572 and the comet of 1577 there began what Almasi calls an \"extended epistemological reform\" which began the process of excluding religion, astrology and anthropocentrism from scientific debate. By 1679, the yearly publication La Connoissance des temps eschewed astrology as a legitimate topic.\nEnlightenment period and onwards.\nDuring the Enlightenment, intellectual sympathy for astrology fell away, leaving only a popular following supported by cheap almanacs. One English almanac compiler, Richard Saunders, followed the spirit of the age by printing a derisive \"Discourse on the Invalidity of Astrology\", while in France Pierre Bayle's \"Dictionnaire\" of 1697 stated that the subject was puerile. The Anglo-Irish satirist Jonathan Swift ridiculed the Whig political astrologer John Partridge.\nIn the second half of the 17th century, the Society of Astrologers (1647\u20131684), a trade, educational, and social organization, sought to unite London's often fractious astrologers in the task of revitalizing astrology. Following the template of the popular \"Feasts of Mathematicians\" they endeavored to defend their art in the face of growing religious criticism. The Society hosted banquets, exchanged \"instruments and manuscripts\", proposed research projects, and funded the publication of sermons that depicted astrology as a legitimate biblical pursuit for Christians. They commissioned sermons that argued Astrology was divine, Hebraic, and scripturally supported by Bible passages about the Magi and the sons of Seth. According to historian Michelle Pfeffer, \"The society's public relations campaign ultimately failed.\" Modern historians have mostly neglected the Society of Astrologers in favor of the still extant Royal Society (1660), even though both organizations initially had some of the same members.\nAstrology saw a popular revival starting in the 19th century, as part of a general revival of spiritualism and\u2014later, New Age philosophy, and through the influence of mass media such as newspaper horoscopes. Early in the 20th century the psychiatrist Carl Jung developed some concepts concerning astrology, which led to the development of psychological astrology.\nPrinciples and practice.\nAdvocates have defined astrology as a symbolic language, an art form, a science, and a method of divination. Though most cultural astrology systems share common roots in ancient philosophies that influenced each other, many use methods that differ from those in the West. These include Hindu astrology (also known as \"Indian astrology\" and in modern times referred to as \"Vedic astrology\") and Chinese astrology, both of which have influenced the world's cultural history.\nWestern.\nWestern astrology is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact moment, such as a person's birth. It uses the tropical zodiac, which is aligned to the equinoctial points.\nWestern astrology is founded on the movements and relative positions of celestial bodies such as the Sun, Moon and planets, which are analysed by their movement through signs of the zodiac (twelve spatial divisions of the ecliptic) and by their aspects (based on geometric angles) relative to one another. They are also considered by their placement in houses (twelve spatial divisions of the sky). Astrology's modern representation in western popular media is usually reduced to sun sign astrology, which considers only the zodiac sign of the Sun at an individual's date of birth, and represents only 1/12 of the total chart.\nThe horoscope visually expresses the set of relationships for the time and place of the chosen event. These relationships are between the seven 'planets', signifying tendencies such as war and love; the twelve signs of the zodiac; and the twelve houses. Each planet is in a particular sign and a particular house at the chosen time, when observed from the chosen place, creating two kinds of relationship. A third kind is the aspect of each planet to every other planet, where for example two planets 120\u00b0 apart (in 'trine') are in a harmonious relationship, but two planets 90\u00b0 apart ('square') are in a conflicted relationship. Together these relationships and their interpretations are said to form \"...the language of the heavens speaking to learned men.\"\nAlong with tarot divination, astrology is one of the core studies of Western esotericism, and as such has influenced systems of magical belief not only among Western esotericists and Hermeticists, but also belief systems such as Wicca, which have borrowed from or been influenced by the Western esoteric tradition. Tanya Luhrmann has said that \"all magicians know something about astrology,\" and refers to a table of correspondences in Starhawk's \"The Spiral Dance\", organised by planet, as an example of the astrological lore studied by magicians.\nHindu.\nThe earliest Vedic text on astronomy is the \"Vedanga Jyotisha\"; Vedic thought later came to include astrology as well.\nHindu natal astrology originated with Hellenistic astrology by the 3rd century BCE, though incorporating the Hindu lunar mansions. The names of the signs (e.g. Greek 'Krios' for Aries, Hindi 'Kriya'), the planets (e.g. Greek 'Helios' for Sun, astrological Hindi 'Heli'), and astrological terms (e.g. Greek 'apoklima' and 'sunaphe' for declination and planetary conjunction, Hindi 'apoklima' and 'sunapha' respectively) in Varaha Mihira's texts are considered conclusive evidence of a Greek origin for Hindu astrology. The Indian techniques may also have been augmented with some of the Babylonian techniques.\nChinese and East Asian.\nChinese astrology has a close relation with Chinese philosophy (theory of the three harmonies: heaven, earth and man) and uses concepts such as yin and yang, the Five phases, the 10 Celestial stems, the 12 Earthly Branches, and shichen (\u6642\u8fb0 a form of timekeeping used for religious purposes). The early use of Chinese astrology was mainly confined to political astrology, the observation of unusual phenomena, identification of portents and the selection of auspicious days for events and decisions.\nThe constellations of the Zodiac of western Asia and Europe were not used; instead the sky is divided into Three Enclosures (\u4e09\u57a3 s\u0101n yu\u00e1n), and Twenty-Eight Mansions (\u4e8c\u5341\u516b\u5bbf \u00e8rsh\u00edb\u0101 xi\u00f9) in twelve Ci (). The Chinese zodiac of twelve animal signs is said to represent twelve different types of personality. It is based on cycles of years, lunar months, and two-hour periods of the day (the shichen). The zodiac traditionally begins with the sign of the Rat, and the cycle proceeds through 11 other animal signs: the Ox, Tiger, Rabbit, Dragon, Snake, Horse, Goat, Monkey, Rooster, Dog, and Pig. Complex systems of predicting fate and destiny based on one's birthday, birth season, and birth hours, such as \"ziping\" and Zi Wei Dou Shu () are still used regularly in modern-day Chinese astrology. They do not rely on direct observations of the stars.\nThe Korean zodiac is identical to the Chinese one. The Vietnamese zodiac is almost identical to the Chinese, except for second animal being the \"Water Buffalo\" instead of the \"Ox\", and the fourth animal the \"Cat\" instead of the \"Rabbit\". The Japanese have since 1873 celebrated the beginning of the new year on 1 January as per the Gregorian calendar. The Thai zodiac begins, not at Chinese New Year, but either on the first day of the fifth month in the Thai lunar calendar, or during the Songkran festival (now celebrated every 13\u201315 April), depending on the purpose of the use.\nTheological viewpoints.\nAncient.\nAugustine (354430) believed that the determinism of astrology conflicted with the Christian doctrines of man's free will and responsibility, and God not being the cause of evil, but he also grounded his opposition philosophically, citing the failure of astrology to explain twins who behave differently although conceived at the same moment and born at approximately the same time.\nMedieval.\nSome of the practices of astrology were contested on theological grounds by medieval Muslim astronomers such as Al-Farabi (Alpharabius), Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) and Avicenna. They said that the methods of astrologers conflicted with orthodox religious views of Islamic scholars, by suggesting that the Will of God can be known and predicted. For example, Avicenna's 'Refutation against astrology', \"Ris\u0101la f\u012b ib\u1e6d\u0101l a\u1e25k\u0101m al-noj\u016bm\", argues against the practice of astrology while supporting the principle that planets may act as agents of divine causation. Avicenna considered that the movement of the planets influenced life on earth in a deterministic way, but argued against the possibility of determining the exact influence of the stars. Essentially, Avicenna did not deny the core dogma of astrology, but denied our ability to understand it to the extent that precise and fatalistic predictions could be made from it. Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya (1292\u20131350), in his \"Miftah Dar al-SaCadah\", also used physical arguments in astronomy to question the practice of judicial astrology. He recognised that the stars are much larger than the planets, and argued: And if you astrologers answer that it is precisely because of this distance and smallness that their influences are negligible, then why is it that you claim a great influence for the smallest heavenly body, Mercury? Why is it that you have given an influence to [the head] and [the tail], which are two imaginary points [ascending and descending nodes]?\nModern.\nMartin Luther denounced astrology in his \"Table Talk\". He asked why twins like Esau and Jacob had two different natures yet were born at the same time. Luther also compared astrologers to those who say their dice will always land on a certain number. Although the dice may roll on the number a couple of times, the predictor is silent for all the times the dice fails to land on that number.\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church maintains that divination, including predictive astrology, is incompatible with modern Catholic beliefs such as free will:\nScientific analysis and criticism.\nThe scientific community rejects astrology as having no explanatory power for describing the universe, and considers it a pseudoscience. Scientific testing of astrology has been conducted, and no evidence has been found to support any of the premises or purported effects outlined in astrological traditions. There is no proposed mechanism of action by which the positions and motions of stars and planets could affect people and events on Earth that does not contradict basic and well understood aspects of biology and physics. Those who have faith in astrology have been characterised by scientists including Bart J. Bok as doing so \"...in spite of the fact that there is no verified scientific basis for their beliefs, and indeed that there is strong evidence to the contrary\".\nConfirmation bias is a form of cognitive bias, a psychological factor that contributes to belief in astrology. Astrology believers tend to selectively remember predictions that turn out to be true, and do not remember those that turn out false. Another, separate, form of confirmation bias also plays a role, where believers often fail to distinguish between messages that demonstrate special ability and those that do not. Thus there are two distinct forms of confirmation bias that are under study with respect to astrological belief.\nDemarcation.\nUnder the criterion of falsifiability, first proposed by the philosopher of science Karl Popper, astrology is a pseudoscience. Popper regarded astrology as \"pseudo-empirical\" in that \"it appeals to observation and experiment,\" but \"nevertheless does not come up to scientific standards.\" In contrast to scientific disciplines, astrology has not responded to falsification through experiment.\nIn contrast to Popper, the philosopher Thomas Kuhn argued that it was not lack of falsifiability that makes astrology unscientific, but rather that the process and concepts of astrology are non-empirical. Kuhn thought that, though astrologers had, historically, made predictions that categorically failed, this in itself does not make astrology unscientific, nor do attempts by astrologers to explain away failures by saying that creating a horoscope is very difficult. Rather, in Kuhn's eyes, astrology is not science because it was always more akin to medieval medicine; astrologers followed a sequence of rules and guidelines for a seemingly necessary field with known shortcomings, but they did no research because the fields are not amenable to research, and so \"they had no puzzles to solve and therefore no science to practise.\" While an astronomer could correct for failure, an astrologer could not. An astrologer could only explain away failure but could not revise the astrological hypothesis in a meaningful way. As such, to Kuhn, even if the stars could influence the path of humans through life, astrology is not scientific.\nThe philosopher Paul Thagard asserts that astrology cannot be regarded as falsified in this sense until it has been replaced with a successor. In the case of predicting behaviour, psychology is the alternative. To Thagard a further criterion of demarcation of science from pseudoscience is that the state-of-the-art must progress and that the community of researchers should be attempting to compare the current theory to alternatives, and not be \"selective in considering confirmations and disconfirmations.\" Progress is defined here as explaining new phenomena and solving existing problems, yet astrology has failed to progress having only changed little in nearly 2000 years. To Thagard, astrologers are acting as though engaged in normal science believing that the foundations of astrology were well established despite the \"many unsolved problems\", and in the face of better alternative theories (psychology). For these reasons Thagard views astrology as pseudoscience.\nFor the philosopher Edward W. James, astrology is irrational not because of the numerous problems with mechanisms and falsification due to experiments, but because an analysis of the astrological literature shows that it is infused with fallacious logic and poor reasoning.\nEffectiveness.\nAstrology has not demonstrated its effectiveness in controlled studies and has no scientific validity. Where it has made falsifiable predictions under controlled conditions, they have been falsified. One famous experiment included 28 astrologers who were asked to match over a hundred natal charts to psychological profiles generated by the California Psychological Inventory (CPI) questionnaire. The double-blind experimental protocol used in this study was agreed upon by a group of physicists and a group of astrologers nominated by the National Council for Geocosmic Research, who advised the experimenters, helped ensure that the test was fair and helped draw the central proposition of natal astrology to be tested. They also chose 26 out of the 28 astrologers for the tests (two more volunteered afterwards). The study, published in \"Nature\" in 1985, found that predictions based on natal astrology were no better than chance, and that the testing \"...clearly refutes the astrological hypothesis.\"\nIn 1955, the astrologer and psychologist Michel Gauquelin stated that though he had failed to find evidence that supported indicators like zodiacal signs and planetary aspects in astrology, he did find positive correlations between the diurnal positions of some planets and success in professions that astrology traditionally associates with those planets. The best-known of Gauquelin's findings is based on the positions of Mars in the natal charts of successful athletes and became known as the \"Mars effect\". A study conducted by seven French scientists attempted to replicate the claim, but found no statistical evidence. They attributed the effect to selective bias on Gauquelin's part, accusing him of attempting to persuade them to add or delete names from their study.\nGeoffrey Dean has suggested that the effect may be caused by self-reporting of birth dates by parents rather than any issue with the study by Gauquelin. The suggestion is that a small subset of the parents may have had changed birth times to be consistent with better astrological charts for a related profession. The number of births under astrologically undesirable conditions was also lower, indicating that parents choose dates and times to suit their beliefs. The sample group was taken from a time where belief in astrology was more common. Gauquelin had failed to find the Mars effect in more recent populations, where a nurse or doctor recorded the birth information.\nDean, a scientist and former astrologer, and psychologist Ivan Kelly conducted a large scale scientific test that involved more than one hundred cognitive, behavioural, physical, and other variables\u2014but found no support for astrology. Furthermore, a meta-analysis pooled 40 studies that involved 700 astrologers and over 1,000 birth charts. Ten of the tests\u2014which involved 300 participants\u2014had the astrologers pick the correct chart interpretation out of a number of others that were not the astrologically correct chart interpretation (usually three to five others). When date and other obvious clues were removed, no significant results suggested there was any preferred chart.\nLack of mechanisms and consistency.\nTesting the validity of astrology can be difficult, because there is no consensus amongst astrologers as to what astrology is or what it can predict. Most professional astrologers are paid to predict the future or describe a person's personality and life, but most horoscopes only make vague untestable statements that can apply to almost anyone.\nMany astrologers believe that astrology is scientific, while some have proposed conventional causal agents such as electromagnetism and gravity. Scientists reject these mechanisms as implausible since, for example, the magnetic field, when measured from Earth, of a large but distant planet such as Jupiter is far smaller than that produced by ordinary household appliances.\nWestern astrology has taken the earth's axial precession (also called precession of the equinoxes) into account since Ptolemy's \"Almagest\", so the \"first point of Aries\", the start of the astrological year, continually moves against the background of the stars. The tropical zodiac has no connection to the stars; tropical astrologers distinguish the constellations from their historically associated sign, thereby avoiding complications involving precession. Charpak and Broch, noting this, referred to astrology based on the tropical zodiac as being \"...empty boxes that have nothing to do with anything and are devoid of any consistency or correspondence with the stars.\" Sole use of the tropical zodiac is inconsistent with references made, by the same astrologers, to the Age of Aquarius, which depends on when the vernal point enters the constellation of Aquarius.\nAstrologers usually have only a small knowledge of astronomy, and often do not take into account basic principles\u2014such as the precession of the equinoxes, which changes the position of the sun with time. They commented on the example of \u00c9lizabeth Teissier, who wrote that, \"The sun ends up in the same place in the sky on the same date each year\", as the basis for the idea that two people with the same birthday, but a number of years apart, should be under the same planetary influence. Charpak and Broch noted that, \"There is a difference of about twenty-two thousand miles between Earth's location on any specific date in two successive years\", and that thus they should not be under the same influence according to astrology. Over a 40-year period there would be a difference greater than 780,000 miles.\nReception in the social sciences.\nThe general consensus of astronomers and other natural scientists is that astrology is a pseudoscience which carries no predictive capability, with many philosophers of science considering it a \"paradigm or prime example of pseudoscience.\" Some scholars in the social sciences have cautioned against categorizing astrology, especially ancient astrology, as \"just\" a pseudoscience or projecting the distinction backwards into the past. Thagard, while demarcating it as a pseudoscience, notes that astrology \"should be judged as not pseudoscientific in classical or Renaissance times...Only when the historical and social aspects of science are neglected does it become plausible that pseudoscience is an unchanging category.\" Historians of science such as Tamsyn Barton, Roger Beck, Francesca Rochberg, and Wouter J. Hanegraaff argue that such a wholesale description is anachronistic when applied to historical contexts, stressing that astrology was not pseudoscience before the 18th century and the importance of the discipline to the development of medieval science. R. J. Hakinson writes in the context of Hellenistic astrology that \"the belief in the possibility of [astrology] was, at least some of the time, the result of careful reflection on the nature and structure of the universe.\"\nNicholas Campion, both an astrologer and academic historian of astrology, argues that Indigenous astronomy is largely used as a synonym for astrology in academia, and that modern Indian and Western astrology are better understood as modes of cultural astronomy or ethnoastronomy. Roy Willis and Patrick Curry draw a distinction between propositional ' and metaphoric ' in the ancient world, identifying astrology with the latter and noting that the central concern of astrology \"is not knowledge (factual, let alone scientific) but (ethical, spiritual and pragmatic)\". Similarly, historian of science Justin Niermeier-Dohoney writes that astrology was \"more than simply a science of prediction using the stars and comprised a vast body of beliefs, knowledge, and practices with the overarching theme of understanding the relationship between humanity and the rest of the cosmos through an interpretation of stellar, solar, lunar, and planetary movement.\" Scholars such as Assyriologist Matthew Rutz have begun using the term \"astral knowledge\" rather than astrology \"to better describe a category of beliefs and practices much broader than the term 'astrology' can capture.\"\nCultural impact.\nWestern politics and society.\nIn the West, political leaders have sometimes consulted astrologers. For example, the British intelligence agency MI5 employed Louis de Wohl as an astrologer after it was reported that Adolf Hitler used astrology to time his actions. The War Office was \"...interested to know what Hitler's own astrologers would be telling him from week to week.\" In fact, de Wohl's predictions were so inaccurate that he was soon labelled a \"complete charlatan\", and later evidence showed that Hitler considered astrology \"complete nonsense\". After John Hinckley's attempted assassination of US President Ronald Reagan, first lady Nancy Reagan commissioned astrologer Joan Quigley to act as the secret White House astrologer. However, Quigley's role ended in 1988 when it became public through the memoirs of former chief of staff, Donald Regan.\nThere was a boom in interest in astrology in the late 1960s. The sociologist Marcello Truzzi described three levels of involvement of \"Astrology-believers\" to account for its revived popularity in the face of scientific discrediting. He found that most astrology-believers did not think that it was a scientific explanation with predictive power. Instead, those superficially involved, knowing \"next to nothing\" about astrology's 'mechanics', read newspaper astrology columns, and could benefit from \"tension-management of anxieties\" and \"a cognitive belief-system that transcends science.\" Those at the second level usually had their horoscopes cast and sought advice and predictions. They were much younger than those at the first level, and could benefit from knowledge of the language of astrology and the resulting ability to belong to a coherent and exclusive group. Those at the third level were highly involved and usually cast horoscopes for themselves. Astrology provided this small minority of astrology-believers with a \"\"meaningful\" view of their universe and [gave] them an \"understanding\" of their place in it.\" This third group took astrology seriously, possibly as an overarching religious worldview (a \"sacred canopy\", in Peter L. Berger's phrase), whereas the other two groups took it playfully and irreverently.\nIn 1953, the sociologist Theodor W. Adorno conducted a study of the astrology column of a Los Angeles newspaper as part of a project examining mass culture in capitalist society. Adorno believed that popular astrology, as a device, invariably leads to statements that encouraged conformity\u2014and that astrologers who go against conformity, by discouraging performance at work etc., risk losing their jobs. Adorno concluded that astrology is a large-scale manifestation of systematic irrationalism, where individuals are subtly led\u2014through flattery and vague generalisations\u2014to believe that the author of the column is addressing them directly. Adorno drew a parallel with the phrase opium of the people, by Karl Marx, by commenting, \"occultism is the metaphysic of the dopes.\"\nA 2005 Gallup poll and a 2009 survey by the Pew Research Center reported that 25% of US adults believe in astrology, while a 2018 Pew survey found a figure of 29%. According to data released in the National Science Foundation's 2014 \"Science and Engineering Indicators\" study, \"Fewer Americans rejected astrology in 2012 than in recent years.\" The NSF study noted that in 2012, \"slightly more than half of Americans said that astrology was 'not at all scientific,' whereas nearly two-thirds gave this response in 2010. The comparable percentage has not been this low since 1983.\" Astrology apps became popular in the late 2010s, some receiving millions of dollars in Silicon Valley venture capital.\nIndia and Japan.\nIn India, there is a long-established and widespread belief in astrology. It is commonly used for daily life, particularly in matters concerning marriage and career, and makes extensive use of electional, horary and karmic astrology. Indian politics have also been influenced by astrology. It is still considered a branch of the Vedanga. In 2001, Indian scientists and politicians debated and critiqued a proposal to use state money to fund research into astrology, resulting in permission for Indian universities to offer courses in Vedic astrology.\nIn February 2011, the Bombay High Court reaffirmed astrology's standing in India when it dismissed a case that challenged its status as a science.\nIn Japan, strong belief in astrology has led to dramatic changes in the fertility rate and the number of abortions in the years of Fire Horse. Adherents believe that women born in \"hinoeuma\" years are unmarriageable and bring bad luck to their father or husband. In 1966, the number of babies born in Japan dropped by over 25% as parents tried to avoid the stigma of having a daughter born in the hinoeuma year.\nLiterature and music.\nThe fourteenth-century English poets John Gower and Geoffrey Chaucer both referred to astrology in their works, including Gower's \"Confessio Amantis\" and Chaucer's \"The Canterbury Tales\". Chaucer commented explicitly on astrology in his \"Treatise on the Astrolabe\", demonstrating personal knowledge of one area, judicial astrology, with an account of how to find the ascendant or rising sign.\nIn the fifteenth century, references to astrology, such as with similes, became \"a matter of course\" in English literature.\nIn the sixteenth century, John Lyly's 1597 play, \"The Woman in the Moon\", is wholly motivated by astrology, while Christopher Marlowe makes astrological references in his plays \"Doctor Faustus\" and \"Tamburlaine\" (both c. 1590), and Sir Philip Sidney refers to astrology at least four times in his romance \"The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia\" (c. 1580). Edmund Spenser uses astrology both decoratively and causally in his poetry, revealing \"...unmistakably an abiding interest in the art, an interest shared by a large number of his contemporaries.\" George Chapman's play, \"Byron's Conspiracy\" (1608), similarly uses astrology as a causal mechanism in the drama. William Shakespeare's attitude towards astrology is unclear, with contradictory references in plays including \"King Lear\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", and \"Richard II\". Shakespeare was familiar with astrology and made use of his knowledge of astrology in nearly every play he wrote, assuming a basic familiarity with the subject in his commercial audience. Outside theatre, the physician and mystic Robert Fludd practised astrology, as did the quack doctor Simon Forman. In Elizabethan England, \"The usual feeling about astrology\u00a0... [was] that it is the most useful of the sciences.\"\nIn seventeenth century Spain, Lope de Vega, with a detailed knowledge of astronomy, wrote plays that ridicule astrology. In his pastoral romance \"La Arcadia\" (1598), it leads to absurdity; in his novela \"Guzman el Bravo\" (1624), he concludes that the stars were made for man, not man for the stars. Calder\u00f3n de la Barca wrote the 1641 comedy \"Astrologo Fingido\" (The Pretended Astrologer); the plot was borrowed by the French playwright Thomas Corneille for his 1651 comedy \"Feint Astrologue\".\nThe most famous piece of music influenced by astrology is the orchestral suite \"The Planets\". Written by the British composer Gustav Holst (1874\u20131934), and first performed in 1918, the framework of \"The Planets\" is based upon the astrological symbolism of the planets. Each of the seven movements of the suite is based upon a different planet, though the movements are not in the order of the planets from the Sun. The composer Colin Matthews wrote an eighth movement entitled \"Pluto, the Renewer\", first performed in 2000, as the suite was written prior to Pluto's discovery. In 1937, another British composer, Constant Lambert, wrote a ballet on astrological themes, called \"Horoscope\". In 1974, the New Zealand composer Edwin Carr wrote \"The Twelve Signs: An Astrological Entertainment\" for orchestra without strings. Camille Paglia acknowledges astrology as an influence on her work of literary criticism \"Sexual Personae\" (1990). The American comedian Harvey Sid Fisher is best known for his comedic songs about astrology.\nAstrology features strongly in Eleanor Catton's \"The Luminaries\", recipient of the 2013 Man Booker Prize."}
{"id": "2123", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2123", "title": "Abyssinia (disambiguation)", "text": "Abyssinia is a historical name for the Ethiopian Empire.\nAbyssinia may also refer to:"}
{"id": "2125", "revid": "2821695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2125", "title": "Algebraic extension", "text": "In mathematics, an algebraic extension is a field extension such that every element of the larger field is algebraic over the smaller field ; that is, every element of is a root of a non-zero polynomial with coefficients in . A field extension that is not algebraic, is said to be transcendental, and must contain transcendental elements, that is, elements that are not algebraic.\nThe algebraic extensions of the field formula_1 of the rational numbers are called algebraic number fields and are the main objects of study of algebraic number theory. Another example of a common algebraic extension is the extension formula_2 of the real numbers by the complex numbers.\nSome properties.\nAll transcendental extensions are of infinite degree. This in turn implies that all finite extensions are algebraic. The converse is not true however: there are infinite extensions which are algebraic. For instance, the field of all algebraic numbers is an infinite algebraic extension of the rational numbers.\nLet be an extension field of , and . The smallest subfield of that contains and is commonly denoted formula_3 If is algebraic over , then the elements of can be expressed as polynomials in with coefficients in \"K\"; that is, formula_4, the smallest ring containing and . In this case, formula_5 is a finite extension of and all its elements are algebraic over . In particular, formula_5 is a -vector space with basis formula_7, where \"d\" is the degree of the minimal polynomial of . These properties do not hold if is not algebraic. For example, formula_8 and they are both infinite dimensional vector spaces over formula_9\nAn algebraically closed field \"F\" has no proper algebraic extensions, that is, no algebraic extensions \"E\" with \"F\" &lt; \"E\". An example is the field of complex numbers. Every field has an algebraic extension which is algebraically closed (called its algebraic closure), but proving this in general requires some form of the axiom of choice.\nAn extension \"L\"/\"K\" is algebraic if and only if every sub \"K\"-algebra of \"L\" is a field.\nProperties.\nThe following three properties hold:\nThese finitary results can be generalized using transfinite induction:\nThis fact, together with Zorn's lemma (applied to an appropriately chosen poset), establishes the existence of algebraic closures.\nGeneralizations.\nModel theory generalizes the notion of algebraic extension to arbitrary theories: an embedding of \"M\" into \"N\" is called an algebraic extension if for every \"x\" in \"N\" there is a formula \"p\" with parameters in \"M\", such that \"p\"(\"x\") is true and the set\nis finite. It turns out that applying this definition to the theory of fields gives the usual definition of algebraic extension. The Galois group of \"N\" over \"M\" can again be defined as the group of automorphisms, and it turns out that most of the theory of Galois groups can be developed for the general case.\nRelative algebraic closures.\nGiven a field \"k\" and a field \"K\" containing \"k\", one defines the relative algebraic closure of \"k\" in \"K\" to be the subfield of \"K\" consisting of all elements of \"K\" that are algebraic over \"k\", that is all elements of \"K\" that are a root of some nonzero polynomial with coefficients in \"k\"."}
{"id": "2126", "revid": "2690473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2126", "title": "Ani DiFranco", "text": "Angela Maria \"Ani\" DiFranco (; born September 23, 1970) is an American-Canadian singer-songwriter. She has released more than 20 albums. DiFranco's music has been classified as folk rock and alternative rock, although it has additional influences from punk, funk, hip hop and jazz. She has released all her albums on her own record label, Righteous Babe.\nDiFranco supports many social and political movements by performing benefit concerts, appearing on benefit albums and speaking at rallies. Through the Righteous Babe Foundation, DiFranco has backed grassroots cultural and political organizations supporting causes including abortion rights and LGBT visibility. She counts American folk singer and songwriter Pete Seeger among her mentors.\nDiFranco released a memoir, \"No Walls and the Recurring Dream\", on May 7, 2019, via Viking Books and made \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nOn February 9, 2024, DiFranco made her Broadway debut in \"Hadestown\" as Persephone, reprising the role she played in the concept album of the same name.\nEarly life and education.\nDiFranco was born in Buffalo, New York, on September 23, 1970, the daughter of Elizabeth (Ross) and Dante Americo DiFranco, who had met while attending the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Her father was of Italian descent, and her mother was from Montreal. DiFranco started playing Beatles covers at local bars and busking with her guitar teacher, Michael Meldrum, at the age of nine. By 14 she was writing her own songs. She played them at bars and coffee houses throughout her teens. DiFranco graduated from the Buffalo Academy for Visual and Performing Arts high school at 16 and began attending classes at Buffalo State College. She was living by herself, having moved out of her mother's apartment after she became an emancipated minor when she was 15.\nCareer.\nDiFranco started her own record company, Righteous Babe Records, in 1989 at age 19. She released her self-titled debut album in the winter of 1990, shortly after relocating to New York City. There, she took poetry classes at The New School, where she met poet Sekou Sundiata, who was to become a friend and mentor. She toured steadily for the next 15 years, pausing only to record albums. Appearances at Canadian folk festivals and increasingly larger venues in the U.S. reflected her increasing popularity on the North American folk and roots scene. Throughout the early and mid-1990s DiFranco toured solo and also as a duo with Canadian drummer Andy Stochansky.\nIn September 1995, DiFranco participated in a concert at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland Ohio, inaugurating the opening of the Woody Guthrie Archives in New York City. She later released a CD on Righteous Babe of the concert \"Til We Outnumber Em\" featuring artists such as DiFranco, Billy Bragg, Ramblin' Jack Elliott, Arlo Guthrie, Indigo Girls, Dave Pirner, Tim Robbins, and Bruce Springsteen with 100 percent of proceeds going to the Woody Guthrie Foundation and Archives and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Museum educational department.\nIn 1996, bassist Sara Lee joined the touring group, whose live rapport is showcased on the 1997 album \"Living in Clip\". DiFranco would later release Lee's solo album \"Make It Beautiful\" on Righteous Babe. In 1998, Stochansky left to pursue a solo career as a singer-songwriter. A new touring ensemble consisting of Jason Mercer on bass, Julie Wolf on keyboards, and Daren Hahn on drums, augmented at times by a horn section, accompanied DiFranco on tour between 1998 and 2002.\nThe 1990s were a period of heightened exposure for DiFranco, as she continued playing ever larger venues around the world and attracted international attention of the press, including cover stories in \"Spin\", \"Ms.\", and \"Magnet\", among others, as well as appearances on MTV and VH1. Her playfully ironic cover of the Bacharach/David song \"Wishin' and Hopin'\" appeared under the opening titles of the film \"My Best Friend's Wedding\".\nShe guest starred on a 1998 episode of the Fox sitcom \"King of the Hill\", as the voice of Peggy's feminist guitar teacher, Emily.\nBeginning in 1999, Righteous Babe Records began releasing albums by other artists including Sara Lee, Sekou Sundiata, Arto Lindsay, Bitch and Animal, That One Guy, Utah Phillips, Hamell on Trial, Andrew Bird, Kurt Swinghammer, Buddy Wakefield, Ana\u00efs Mitchell and Nona Hendryx.\nOn September 11, 2001, DiFranco was in Manhattan and later penned the poem \"Self Evident\" about the experience. The poem was featured in the book \"It's a Free Country: Personal Freedom in America After September 11\". The poem's title also became the name of DiFranco's first book of poetry released exclusively in Italy by Minimum Fax. It was later also featured in \"Verses\", a book of her poetry published in the U.S. by Seven Stories press. DiFranco has written and performed many spoken-word pieces throughout her career and was showcased as a poet on the HBO series \"Def Poetry\" in 2005.\nSince her 2005 release \"Knuckle Down\" (co-produced by Joe Henry) DiFranco's touring band and recordings have featured bass player Todd Sickafoose and in turns other musicians such as Allison Miller, Andy Borger, Herlin Riley, and Terence Higgins on drums and Mike Dillon on percussion and vibes.\nOn September 11, 2007, she released the first retrospective of her career, a two-disc compilation entitled \"Canon\" and simultaneously a retrospective collection of poetry book \"Verses\". On September 30, 2008, she released \"Red Letter Year\".\nIn 2009, DiFranco appeared at Pete Seeger's 90th birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden, debuting her revamped version of the 1930s labor anthem \"Which Side Are You On?\" in a duet with Bruce Cockburn and also duetting with Kris Kristofferson on the folk classic \"There's a Hole in the Bucket\".\nDiFranco released an album on January 17, 2012, \"\u00bfWhich Side Are You On?\". It includes collaborations with Pete Seeger, Ivan Neville, Cyril Neville, Skerik, Adam Levy, Righteous Babe recording artist Ana\u00efs Mitchell, CC Adcock, and a host of New Orleans\u2013based horn players known for their work in such outfits as Galactic, Bonerama, and Rebirth Brass Band.\nIn 2014, she released her eighteenth album, \"Allergic to Water\". In 2017, she released her nineteenth, \"Binary\".\nOn May 7, 2019, DiFranco released a memoir, \"No Walls and the Recurring Dream\", via Viking Books. It is described as a \"coming-of-age story\".\nIn 2021, DiFranco released the album \"Revolutionary Love\" which was largely inspired by Valarie Kaur's book \"See No Stranger.\"\nDiFranco signed the October 2023 Artists4Ceasefire open letter to Joe Biden calling for a ceasefire during the Israeli bombardment of Gaza.\nPersonal life.\nDiFranco came out as bisexual in her twenties, and has written songs about love and sex with women and men. She addressed the controversy about her sexuality in the song \"In or Out\" on the album \"Imperfectly\" (1992). However, in 2015 she told the blog GoPride.com that she was \"not so queer anymore, but definitely a woman-centered woman and just a human rights-centered artist.\" In a 2019 interview with \"Jezebel\", she stated that she preferred the term \"queer\" because \"bisexual\" \"always sounded very medical, like something you do to a frog in 9th grade science or something\", and further added that \"the irony is I'm pretty fuckin' hetero, which is unfortunate for me because many of my deepest connections are with women. But, naw, I just like what's in boys' pants better.\" In 1998, she married her sound engineer Andrew Gilchrist in a Unitarian Universalist service in Canada. DiFranco and Gilchrist divorced in 2003.\nIn 1990, she wrote \"Lost Woman Song\", which was inspired by abortions she had at ages eighteen and twenty.\nDiFranco's father died in the summer of 2004. In July 2005, DiFranco developed tendinitis and took a nine-month hiatus from touring. In January 2007 DiFranco gave birth to her first child, a daughter, at her Buffalo home. She married the child's father, Mike Napolitano, also her regular producer, in 2009. In an interview on September 13, 2012, DiFranco mentioned that she was pregnant with her second child. In April 2013, she gave birth to her second child, a son.\nDiFranco has resided in the Bywater, New Orleans, neighborhood since 2008.\nDiFranco has described herself as an atheist. On the subject of religion, DiFranco has stated:\nDiFranco has spoken critically of cancel culture, saying it is \"just gonna get us nowhere\" and \"The human family can't divorce each other\". DiFranco herself has received criticism for planning a 2013 songwriting retreat at Nottoway, a former slave plantation. She cancelled the retreat three days after the news broke, writing on her website, \"I needed a wake-up call and you gave it to me.\" In a 2019 interview, she said of her choices at the time, \"I should have found the ultimate humility to put down my own hurt, and all of the misconceptions or mis-truths out there. You have to make yourself accountable. There's a greater pain that's bigger than me, and it's more important.\"\nDiFranco wrote in her memoir that she \"[sympathized] with both sides\" regarding the controversial trans-exclusionary policies of the Michigan Womyn's Music Festival. In a 2019 interview, she elaborated on this statement, discussing her perception that cisgender women were being \"asked again ... to move over and make room for somebody else,\" and later expressed that she understood the difficulty \"for anybody outside of a very specific group to experience it the way that group does,\" saying that \"maybe [women's spaces] should be a little more [inclusive]\".\nCritical reception.\nDiFranco has been a critical success for much of her career, with a career album average of 55 on Metacritic. \"Living in Clip\", DiFranco's 1998 double live album, is the only one to achieve gold record status to date. DiFranco was praised by \"The Buffalo News\" in 2006 as \"Buffalo's leading lady of rock music\".\nStarting in 2003, DiFranco was nominated four consecutive times for Best Recording Package at the Grammy Awards, winning in 2004 for \"Evolve\".\nOn July 21, 2006, DiFranco received the Woman of Courage Award at the National Organization for Women (NOW) Conference and Young Feminist Summit in Albany, New York. DiFranco was one of the first musicians to receive the award, given each year to a woman who has set herself apart by her contributions to the feminist movement.\nIn 2009, DiFranco received the Woody Guthrie Award for being a voice of positive social change.\nMusic.\nStyle.\nDiFranco's guitar playing is often characterized by a signature staccato style, rapid fingerpicking and many alternate tunings. She delivers many of her lines in a speaking style notable for its rhythmic variation. Her lyrics, which often include alliteration, metaphor, word play and a more or less gentle irony, have also received praise for their sophistication.\nAlthough DiFranco's music has been classified as both folk rock and alternative rock, she has reached across genres since her earliest albums incorporating first punk, then funk, hiphop, and jazz influences.\nWhile primarily an acoustic guitarist she has used a variety of instruments and styles: brass instrumentation was prevalent in 1998's \"Little Plastic Castle\"; a simple walking bass in her 1997 cover of Hal David and Burt Bacharach's \"Wishin' and Hopin'; strings on the 1997 live album \"Living in Clip\" and 2004's \"Knuckle Down\"; and electronics and synthesizers in 1999's \"To the Teeth\" and 2006's \"Reprieve\".\nDiFranco has stated that \"folk music is not an acoustic guitar\u00a0\u2013 that's not where the heart of it is. I use the word 'folk' in reference to punk music and rap music. It's an attitude, it's an awareness of one's heritage, and it's a community. It's subcorporate music that gives voice to different communities and their struggle against authority.\"\nMusical collaborations, cover versions, and samples.\nDiFranco has collaborated with a wide range of artists. In 1997, she appeared on Canadian songwriter Bruce Cockburn's \"Charity of Night\" album. In 1998, she produced fellow folksinger Dan Bern's album \"Fifty Eggs\".\nShe developed a deep association with folksinger and social activist Utah Phillips throughout the mid-1990s, sharing her stage and her audience with the older musician until his death in 2008 and resulting in two collaborative albums: \"The Past Didn't Go Anywhere\" (1996) and \"Fellow Workers\" (1999, with liner notes by Howard Zinn). \"The Past\" is built around Phillips's storytelling, an important part of his art that had not previously been documented on recordings; on the album, DiFranco provides musical settings for his speaking voice. The followup, \"Fellow Workers\", was recorded live in Daniel Lanois's Kingsway Studio in New Orleans and features Phillips fronting DiFranco's touring band for a collection of songs and stories.\nPrince recorded two songs with DiFranco in 1999, \"Providence\" on her \"To the Teeth\" album, and \"Eye Love U, But Eye Don't Trust U Anymore\" on Prince's \"Rave Un2 the Joy Fantastic\" album. Funk and soul jazz musician Maceo Parker and rapper Corey Parker have both appeared on DiFranco's albums and featured appearances by her on theirs. Parker and DiFranco toured together in 1999.\nShe has appeared on several compilations of the songs of Pete Seeger and frequented his Hudson Clearwater Revival Festival. In 2001, she appeared on Brazilian artist Lenine's album \"Falange Canibal\". In 2002, her rendition of Greg Brown's \"The Poet Game\" appeared on \"Going Driftless: An Artist's Tribute to Greg Brown\". Also in 2002 she recorded a duet with Jackie Chan of the Irving Gordon song \"Unforgettable\" for a record of unlikely collaborations, \"When Pigs Fly: Songs You Never Thought You'd Hear\".\nIn 2005, she appeared on Dar Williams' record \"My Better Self\", duetting on William's cover of Pink Floyd's \"Comfortably Numb\". She performed with Cyndi Lauper on \"Sisters of Avalon\" a track from Lauper's 2005 \"The Body Acoustic\" album. In 2006, she produced Hamell on Trial's album \"Songs for Parents Who Enjoy Drugs\". In 2008, she appeared on Todd Sickafoose's album \"Tiny Resisters\". In 2010, she co-produced a track with Margaret Cho called \"Captain Cameltoe\" for the comedian's \"Cho Dependant\" album. In 2011, she appeared on Rob Wasserman's album \"Note of Hope\", an exploration of the writings of Woody Guthrie with musical accompaniment, though the track in which she appeared, \"Voice\", was actually recorded 13 years earlier. Also in 2011 she duetted with Greg Dulli on the Twilight Singers record \"Dynamite Steps\".\nOther artists have covered and sampled DiFranco's work throughout the years. Her spoken word poem \"Self Evident\" was covered by Public Enemy founder Chuck D's group called Impossebulls. Alana Davis had some commercial success with DiFranco's song \"32 Flavors\".\nSamples from the track \"Coming Up\" were used by DJ Spooky in his album \"Live Without Dead Time\", produced for AdBusters Magazine in 2003.\nIn 2010, DiFranco played Persephone on Ana\u00efs Mitchell's album Hadestown.\nDiFranco was approached by Zoe Boekbinder to work on their \"Prison Music Project\", an album of collaborations between incarcerated and formerly incarcerated writers and musicians on the outside. DiFranco co-produced the project with Boekbinder and co-wrote and performed \"Nowhere but Barstow and Prison.\" The album \"Long Time Gone\" was released on Righteous Babe Records in 2020 after ten years in the making.\nLyrical content.\nAlthough much of DiFranco's material is autobiographical, it is often also strongly political. Many of her songs are concerned with contemporary social issues such as racism, sexism, sexual abuse, homophobia, reproductive rights, poverty, and war. In 2008, she donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD to assist with the restoration of the devastation done to Southeast Asia from the 2004 tsunami.\nThe combination of personal and political is partially responsible for DiFranco's early popularity among politically active college students, particularly those of the left wing, some of whom set up fan pages on the web to document DiFranco's career as early as 1994. DiFranco's rapid rise in popularity in the mid-1990s was fueled mostly by personal contact and word of mouth rather than mainstream media.\nLabel independence.\nDiFranco cites her anti-corporate ethos for the main reason she decided to start her own label. This has allowed her a considerable degree of creative freedom over the years, including, for example, providing all instrumentals and vocals and recording the album herself at her home on an analog 8-track reel to reel, and handling much of the artwork and packaging design for her 2004 album \"Educated Guess\". She has referenced this independence from major labels in song more than once, including \"The Million You Never Made\" (\"Not a Pretty Girl\"), which discusses the act of turning down a lucrative contract, \"The Next Big Thing\" (\"Not So Soft\"), which describes an imagined meeting with a label head-hunter who evaluates the singer based on her looks, and \"Napoleon\" (\"Dilate\"), which sympathizes sarcastically with an unnamed friend who did sign with a label.\nThe business grew organically starting in 1990 with the first cassette tape. Connections were made when women in colleges started duplicating and sharing tapes. Offers to play at colleges started coming in and her popularity grew largely by word of mouth and through women's groups or organizations. Zango and Goldenrod, two music distributors specializing in women's music, started carrying DiFranco's music. In general they sold music to independent music stores and women's book stores. In 1995, Righteous Babe Records signed with Koch International for DiFranco's release of \"Not a Pretty Girl\". Her records could then be found in large and small record stores alike.\nDiFranco has occasionally joined with Prince in discussing publicly the problems associated with major record companies. Righteous Babe Records employs a number of people in her hometown of Buffalo. In a 1997 open letter to \"Ms.\" magazine she expressed displeasure that what she considers a way to ensure her own artistic freedom was seen by others solely in terms of its financial success.\nActivism.\nFrom the earliest days of her career, DiFranco has lent her voice and her name to a broad range of social movements, performing benefit concerts, appearing on benefit albums, speaking at rallies, and offering info table space to organizations at her concerts and the virtual equivalent on her website, among other methods and actions. In 1999, she created her own not-for-profit organization; as the Buffalo News has reported, \"Through the Righteous Babe Foundation, DiFranco has backed various grassroots cultural and political organizations, supporting causes ranging from abortion rights to gay visibility.\"\nDuring the first Gulf War, DiFranco participated in the anti-war movement. In early 1993 she played Pete Seeger's Clearwater Folk Festival for the first time. In 1998, she was a featured performer in the Dead Man Walking benefit concert series raising money for Sister Helen Prejean's \"Not in Our Name\" anti-death penalty organization. DiFranco's commitment to opposing the death penalty is longstanding; she has also been a long time supporter of the Southern Center for Human Rights.\nDuring the 2000 U.S. presidential election, she actively supported and voted for Green Party candidate Ralph Nader, though in an open letter she made clear that if she lived in a swing state, she would vote for Al Gore to prevent George W. Bush from being elected.\nIn 2004, DiFranco visited Burma in order to learn about the Burmese resistance movement and the country's fight for democracy. During her travels she met with then-detained resistance leader Aung San Suu Kyi. Her song \"In The Way\" was later featured on \"For the Lady\", a benefit CD that donated all proceeds to the United States Campaign for Burma.\nDuring the 2004 presidential primaries, she supported liberal, anti-war Democrat Dennis Kucinich, who appeared on stage with her during several of her concerts. After the primary season ended, and John Kerry was the clear Democratic candidate, DiFranco launched a \"Vote Dammit!\" tour of swing states encouraging audience members to vote. In 2005, she lobbied Congress against the proliferation of nuclear power in general and the placement of nuclear waste dumps on Indian land in particular. In 2008, she again backed Kucinich in his bid for the presidency.\nIn 2002, Righteous Babe Records established the \"Aiding Buffalo's Children\" program in conjunction with members of the local community to raise funds for Buffalo's public school system. To kick off the program, DiFranco donated \"a day's pay\"\u2014the performance fee from her concert that year at Shea's Performing Arts Center\u2014 to ABC and challenged her fans to do the same. Aiding Buffalo's Children has since been folded into the Community Foundation of Greater Buffalo, contributing to a variety of charitable funds.\nIn 2005, when Hurricane Katrina devastated DiFranco's newly adopted home town of New Orleans, she collected donations from fans around the world through The Righteous Babe Store website for the Katrina Piano Fund, helping musicians replace instruments lost in the hurricane, raising over $47,500 for the cause.\nIn 2010, after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, she performed at the \"For Our Coast\" benefit concert joining Marianne Faithfull, C.\u00a0C. Adcock and others at the Acadiana Center for the Arts Theater in Lafayette, raising money for Gulf Aid Acadiana, and the Gulf Aid show with Lenny Kravitz, Mos Def, and others at Mardi Gras World River City in New Orleans, both shows raising money to help protect the wetlands, clean up the coast and to assist the fishermen and their families affected by the spill.\nDiFranco also sits on the board for The Roots of Music, founded by Rebirth Brass Band drummer Derrick Tabb. The organization provides free marching band instruction to children in the New Orleans area in addition to academic tutoring and mentoring.\nDiFranco joined about 500,000 people at the March for Women's Lives in DC in April 2004. As an honored guest she marched in the front row for the three-mile route, along with Margaret Cho, Janeane Garofalo, Whoopi Goldberg, Gloria Steinem and others. Later in the day, DiFranco played a few songs on the main stage in front of the Capitol, including \"Your Next Bold Move\".\nScot Fisher, formerly Righteous Babe label president and DiFranco's manager for many years, has been a longtime advocate of the preservation movement in Buffalo. In 1999, he and DiFranco purchased a decaying church on the verge of demolition in downtown Buffalo and began the lengthy process of restoring it. In 2006, the building opened its doors again, first briefly as \"The Church\" and then as \"Babeville,\" housing two concert venues, the record label's business office, and Hallwalls Contemporary Arts Center.\nDiFranco is also a member of the Toronto-based charity Artists Against Racism for which she participated in a radio PSA.\nIn October 2023, DiFranco signed an open letter to Joe Biden, President of the United States, of artists calling for a ceasefire of the Israeli bombardment of Gaza."}
{"id": "2127", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2127", "title": "Arene (disambiguation)", "text": "An Arene, or aromatic hydrocarbon, is a hydrocarbon with alternating double and single bonds between carbon atoms forming rings.\nArene may also refer to:"}
{"id": "2128", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2128", "title": "Anaheim Angels", "text": ""}
{"id": "2129", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2129", "title": "Arizona Diamondbacks", "text": "The Arizona Diamondbacks are an American professional baseball team based in Phoenix, Arizona. The Diamondbacks compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) West Division. The franchise was established on March 9, 1995, and began play in 1998 as an expansion team. The team plays its home games at Chase Field. Along with the Tampa Bay Rays, the Diamondbacks are one of the newest teams in the MLB and are the youngest team to win a World Series.\nAfter a fifth-place finish in their inaugural season, the Diamondbacks made several off-season acquisitions, including future Hall of Fame pitcher Randy Johnson, who won four consecutive Cy Young Awards in his first four seasons with the team. In 1999, Arizona won 100 games and their first division championship. In 2001, they won the World Series over the three-time defending champion New York Yankees, becoming the fastest expansion team in major league history to win the World Series and the first and only men's major professional sports team in the State of Arizona to win a championship. 22 years later, they would return to the World Series, only to lose to the Texas Rangers in five games, thus earning the Diamondbacks their first World Series loss in team history.\nFrom 1998 to 2024, the Diamondbacks had an overall record of ().\nHistory.\nOn March 9, 1995, Phoenix was awarded an expansion franchise to begin play for the season. A $130 million franchise fee was paid to Major League Baseball and on January 16, 1997, the Diamondbacks were voted into the National League. The Diamondbacks' first major league game was played against the Colorado Rockies on March 31, 1998, at Bank One Ballpark. The ballpark was renamed Chase Field in 2005, as a result of Bank One Corporation's merger with JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co.\nSince their debut, the Diamondbacks have won two Wild Card Series, five NL West division titles, two NL pennants, and the 2001 World Series.\nThey later became the fastest expansion franchise in baseball history to win a World Series. The Diamondbacks defeated the Yankees in Game 7 during the 2001 postseason. \nAfter beating the Philadelphia Phillies 4\u20132 in Game 7 of the 2023 NLCS at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia, the Arizona Diamondbacks returned to the World Series for the first time since 2001 \u2013 against the Texas Rangers on October 27, 2023.\nThey lost the series 4\u20131 at home in Arizona on November 1, 2023.\nLogos and uniforms.\n1998\u20132006.\nThe Diamondbacks' original colors were purple, black, teal and copper. Their logo was an italicized block letter \"A\" with a diamond pattern, with the crossbar represented by a snake's tongue. This period saw the Diamondbacks wear several uniform combinations.\nAt home, the Diamondbacks wore cream uniforms with purple pinstripes. The primary sleeved uniform, worn from 1998 to 2000, featured the full team name (\"Diamond\" and \"Backs\" stacked together) in front and chest numbers. The alternate sleeveless version contained the \"A\" logo on the right chest, and was paired with purple undershirts. Before the 2001 season, the sleeved uniform was changed to feature the \"A\" logo. In all three uniforms, player names were teal with purple trim, and numbers were purple with white with teal trim.\nThe Diamondbacks' primary road gray uniform also had purple pinstripes. The first version featured \"Arizona\" in purple with white and teal trim along with black drop shadows, with chest numbers added. Player names were in purple with white trim, and numbers were teal with white and purple trim. In 2001, the uniform became sleeveless with black undershirts, and the lettering scheme was changed to purple with white, copper and black accents.\nThe alternate home purple uniform featured \"Arizona\" in teal with white and copper trim and black drop shadows. The letters were rendered in teal with copper and white trim, but were changed to copper with teal and white trim after only one season. This set was worn until 2002.\nThe alternate road black uniform featured the \"A\" logo on the right chest, while letters were purple with white trim and numbers were teal with white and purple trim. A zigzag pattern of teal, copper and purple was featured on the sleeves. In 2001, the uniform was changed to feature \"Arizona\" in front. The letters became purple with white and copper trim.\nThe Diamondbacks initially wore four different cap versions. The primary home cap is all-purple, while the road cap is black with a teal brim. They also wore a cream cap with purple brim, and a teal cap with purple brim. All designs featured the primary \"A\" logo. In 1999, the road cap became all-black and contained the alternate \"D-snake\" logo rendered in copper. Also, the teal and cream alternate caps were dropped.\nThe left sleeve of all four uniforms contained the snake logo with the full team name until the 2004 season, when it became exclusive to the road black uniform.\n2007\u20132015.\nThe franchise unveiled new uniforms and colors of Sedona red, Sonoran sand and black on November 8, 2006. The red shade is named for the sandstone canyon at Red Rock State Park near Sedona, while the beige (sand) shade is named for the Sonoran Desert. A sleeve patch was added featuring a lowercase \"d\" and \"b\" configured to look like a snake's head. The team also kept the \"D\" logo, which was slightly altered and put on an all-red cap to be used as their game cap. They kept the \"A\" logo with the new colors applied to it, with a solid black cap used as the alternate cap. Arizona's updated color scheme bore a striking resemblance to the Houston Astros' color scheme (brick red, sand and black) that the Astros used until 2012, as well as the NHL's Phoenix Coyotes, whose adoption of those colors predated the Diamondbacks by four years.\nThe white home uniform featured \"D-Backs\" in red with sand and black trim. The road gray uniform featured \"Arizona\" in red with sand and black trim. Player names were red with black trim while numbers were black with red trim.\nThe alternate red uniform contained \"D-Backs\" in sand with red and black trim, with player names in sand with black trim and numbers in black with sand trim.\nThere were two versions of the alternate black uniform. One design has the alternate \"A\" logo on the right chest, while the other has \"Arizona\" written in red with black and sand trim. The latter was introduced in 2013 as a tribute to the victims of the Yarnell Hill Fire. On both uniforms, player names were sand with red trim, and numbers in red with sand trim.\n2016\u20132023.\nBefore the 2016 season, the Diamondbacks reincorporated teal into its color scheme while keeping Sedona Red, Sonoran Sand and black. They also unveiled eight different uniform combinations, including two separate home white and away grey uniforms. One major difference between the two sets is that the non-teal uniforms feature a snakeskin pattern on the shoulders, while the teal-trimmed uniforms include a charcoal/grey snakeskin pattern on the back. Arizona also kept the throwback pinstriped sleeveless uniforms from their 2001 championship season for use during Thursday home games.\nStarting with the 2020 season, the Diamondbacks made slight redesigns to their uniforms. The snakeskin patterns were removed while the teal-trimmed grey uniforms were retired. The team also reverted to a standard grey uniform after wearing a darker shade on the previous set. Two home white uniforms remain in use: the primary Sedona Red and the alternate teal. They would also wear two black uniforms: one with the primary \"A\" logo on the left chest and the other with \"Los D-Backs\" trimmed in teal. Three cap designs were also unveiled, all with a black base: the primary \"A\" cap, the teal-trimmed \"snake\" cap (paired exclusively on the teal alternates), and the sand-trimmed \"snake\" cap with red brim (paired exclusively on the Sedona Red alternates). The Nike swoosh logo is also placed on the right chest near the shoulder. In 2022, the Diamondbacks introduced a red \"A\" cap with black brim.\nIn 2021, the Diamondbacks were one of seven teams to wear Nike \"City Connect\" uniforms. The design is primarily sand and has \"Serpientes\" in black script lettering emblazoned in front. The first \"S\" in \"Serpientes\" was shaped to resemble a rattlesnake. The right sleeve has the flag of Arizona patch recolored to the Diamondbacks' red, sand and black scheme, and the left sleeve has the \"A\" logo recolored to black and sand. Numerals are in red. The cap is primarily sand with black brim and has the \"A\" logo in black and sand; the regular batting helmet is used with the uniform. Initially, the Diamondbacks wore white pants with this uniform, but has since switched to sand pants.\nBefore the 2023 season, the Diamondbacks promoted the alternate white uniform with teal accents to its primary home uniform and retired the previous Sedona Red white uniform. This is due to a new Nike rule that limits teams to four regular uniforms plus the \"City Connect\" uniform.\nSince 2024.\nComing off their second World Series appearance in , the Diamondbacks unveiled refreshed uniform designs starting in 2024. Turquoise returned full-time as an accent color on all uniforms along with Sedona red and black, but sand was removed except on the \"City Connect\" uniform. The home uniform is now a cream base with black piping, featuring the \"A\" logo on the left chest. The road grey uniform with black piping featured \"Arizona\" in Sedona red with teal and black outlines. The alternate black uniform with teal piping shared the same features as the home uniform. The alternate Sedona red uniform incorporated the full \"Diamondbacks\" wordmark in black with teal and Sedona red outlines, along with teal numbers trimmed in black on the left chest. All uniforms featured the snake head alternate logo on either sleeve, with the sponsor logo (Avnet since 2023) on the other sleeve. The home cap is Sedona red with black brim and featured the \"A\" logo, and its all-black counterpart is worn with both the home and black alternate uniform. The road cap is black with Sedona red trim and featured the return of the \"D-snake\" logo and is worn with both the road and alternate Sedona red uniform. The all-Sedona red alternate cap shared the same features as the road cap and is worn with the Sedona red uniform.\nRadio and television.\nOn July 18, 2023, a federal bankruptcy court granted Bally Sports' parent company Diamond Sports Group a motion to decline its contract with the Diamondbacks as part of its chapter 11 bankruptcy. As a result, Major League Baseball's local media division assumed production of the Diamondbacks' regional telecasts (maintaining staff such as commentators) and distributed them via local television providers and MLB.tv. As of 2024, these games are branded as DBacks.TV. Games air on the following cable providers and networks:\nThe primary television play-by-play voice for the team's first nine seasons of play was Thom Brennaman, who also broadcast baseball and college football games nationally for Fox Television. Brennaman was the TV announcer for the Chicago Cubs and Cincinnati Reds (along with his father Marty Brennaman) before being hired by Diamondbacks founder Jerry Colangelo in 1996, two years before the team would begin play.\nIn October 2006, Brennaman left the Diamondbacks to call games with his father for the Reds beginning in 2007, signing a four-year deal.\nOn November 1, 2006, the team announced that the TV voice of the Milwaukee Brewers since 2002, Daron Sutton, would be hired as the Diamondbacks primary TV play-by-play voice. Sutton was signed to a five-year contract with a team option for three more years. Sutton's signature chants included \"let's get some runs\" when the D-backs trail in late innings.\nFormer Diamondbacks and Chicago Cubs first baseman Mark Grace and knuckleballer Tom Candiotti were the Diamondbacks primary color analysts for the 2006 and 2007 seasons. Former Diamondbacks third baseman Matt Williams also did color commentary on occasion, as did Cardinals and NBC broadcast legend Joe Garagiola, a longtime Phoenix-area resident and father of Joe Garagiola Jr., the first GM of the Diamondbacks.\nThe Diamondbacks announced in July 2007 that for the 2008 season, all regionally broadcast Diamondbacks TV games would be shown exclusively on Fox Sports Arizona (now Bally Sports Arizona) and a few could possibly be shown on the national \"MLB on Fox\" telecasts. Bally Sports Arizona is seen in 2.8\u00a0million households in Arizona and New Mexico. The previous flagship station since the inaugural 1998 season was KTVK (Channel 3), a popular over-the-air independent station (and former longtime ABC affiliate) in Phoenix.\nFrom 2009 to 2012, Grace and Sutton were tagged as the main broadcasters of the Diamondbacks with pre-game and postgame shows on Fox Sports Arizona, being hosted by Joe Borowski.\nOn June 21, 2012, Sutton was suspended indefinitely amid rumors of insubordination. On August 24, the team announced that Grace had requested an indefinite leave of absence after being arrested for his second DUI in less than two years. Grace was later indicted on four DUI counts.) For the remainder of the 2012 season, Sutton was replaced by Greg Schulte (Jeff Munn replaced Schulte on the radio broadcast) and Grace was replaced by Luis Gonzalez. At the end of the 2012 season, the team announced that neither Sutton nor Grace would return for the 2013 season.\nOn October 18, 2012, the team announced that Bob Brenly would return as a broadcaster to replace Grace and that he would be joined by then-ESPN personality Steve Berthiaume.\nThe English language flagship radio station is KTAR. Greg Schulte was the regular radio play-by-play voice, a 25-year veteran of sports radio in the Phoenix market, also well known for his previous work on Phoenix Suns, Arizona Cardinals and Arizona State University (ASU) broadcasts. It was announced in February 2023 that he would be retiring after the 2023 MLB season. He would call games with analyst Tom Candiotti.\nJeff Munn served as a backup radio play-by-play announcer until 2016; he served as the regular public address announcer at Chase Field in the early days of the franchise. He previously served as the public address announcer for the Suns in the 1990s at what became Footprint Center. He is also the play-by-play radio voice for ASU women's basketball. Mike Ferrin served in the same role for six years before parting ways with the team, and he was replaced by Chris Garagiola in December 2021.\nSpanish broadcasts.\nThe flagship Spanish language radio station is KHOV-FM 105.1 with Oscar Soria, Rodrigo L\u00f3pez, and Richard Saenz.\nGames were televised in Spanish on KPHE-LP\u2014with Oscar Soria and Jerry Romo as the announcers, but this arrangement ended prior to the 2009 season due to the team switching fully to Fox Sports Arizona and the lack of carriage of KPHE-LP on the Cox cable system.\nRivalry with the Los Angeles Dodgers.\nThe rivalry between the Diamondbacks and the Los Angeles Dodgers has been one of the fiercest divisional matchups for several years. Animosity between the two teams began to escalate during the 2010s in multiple incidents involving either team throwing pitches at one another or instigating into large-scale brawls between both benches. After eliminating the Diamondbacks and clinching the division on September 19, 2013, multiple Dodgers players celebrated the win by jumping into the pool at Chase Field. The two sides met during the 2017 National League Division Series as the Diamondbacks were swept 3\u20130 by the Dodgers en route to their appearance in the World Series that season. The Dodgers led the series 257\u2013191 with a 3\u20130 lead in the postseason. After clinching the 2023 NL Wild Card berth and defeating the Milwaukee Brewers in the National League Wild Card Series, the Diamondbacks played the Dodgers again in the 2023 NLDS. There, the Diamondbacks emphatically swept the Dodgers to even the all-time postseason record between the two clubs at 3\u20133.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Arizona Diamondbacks farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates."}
