{"id": "4880", "revid": "8361722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4880", "title": "Bildungsroman", "text": "In literary criticism, a bildungsroman (, plural bildungsromane, ) is a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from childhood to adulthood (coming of age), in which character change is important. The term comes from the German words ('education', alternatively 'forming') and ('novel').\nOrigin.\nThe term was coined in 1819 by philologist Johann Karl Simon Morgenstern in his university lectures, and was later famously reprised by Wilhelm Dilthey, who legitimized it in 1870 and popularized it in 1905. The genre is further characterized by a number of formal, topical, and thematic features. The term \"coming-of-age novel\" is sometimes used interchangeably with bildungsroman, but its use is usually wider and less technical.\nThe birth of the bildungsroman is normally dated to the publication of \"Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship\" by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in 1795\u201396, or, sometimes, to Christoph Martin Wieland's of 1767. Although the bildungsroman arose in Germany, it has had extensive influence first in Europe and later throughout the world. Thomas Carlyle's English translation of Goethe's novel (1824) and his own \"Sartor Resartus\" (1833\u201334), the first English bildungsroman, inspired many British novelists. In the 20th century, it spread to France and several other countries around the globe.\nBarbara Whitman noted that the \"Iliad\" might be the first bildungsroman. It is not just \"the story of the Trojan War. The Trojan War is in effect the backdrop for the story of Achilles' development. At the beginning Achilles is still a rash youth, making rash decisions which cost dearly to himself and all around him. (...) The story reaches its conclusion when Achilles has reached maturity and allows King Priam to recover Hector's body\".\nThe genre translates fairly directly into the cinematic form, the coming-of-age film.\nPlot outline.\nA bildungsroman is a growing up or \"coming of age\" of a generally naive person who goes in search of answers to life's questions with the expectation that these will result in gaining experience of the world. The genre evolved from folklore tales of a dunce or youngest child going out in the world to seek their fortune. Usually in the beginning of the story, there is an emotional loss which makes the protagonist leave on their journey. In a bildungsroman, the goal is maturity, and the protagonist achieves it gradually and with difficulty. The genre often features a main conflict between the main character and society. Typically, the values of society are gradually accepted by the protagonist, and they are ultimately accepted into society\u2014the protagonist's mistakes and disappointments are over. In some works, the protagonist is able to reach out and help others after having achieved maturity.\nFranco Moretti \"argues that the main conflict in the bildungsroman is the myth of modernity with its overvaluation of youth and progress as it clashes with the static teleological vision of happiness and reconciliation found in the endings of Goethe's \"Wilhelm Meister\" and even Jane Austen's \"Pride and Prejudice\"\".\nThere are many variations and subgenres of bildungsroman that focus on the growth of an individual. An \"Entwicklungsroman\" ('development novel') is a story of general growth rather than self-cultivation. An \"Erziehungsroman\" (\"education novel\") focuses on training and formal schooling, while a \"K\u00fcnstlerroman\" (\"artist novel\") is about the development of an artist and shows a growth of the self. Furthermore, some memoirs and published journals can be regarded as bildungsroman although claiming to be predominantly factual (e.g. \"The Dharma Bums\" by Jack Kerouac or\" The Motorcycle Diaries\" by Ernesto \"Che\" Guevara). The term is also more loosely used to describe coming-of-age films and related works in other genres."}
{"id": "4881", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4881", "title": "Bachelor", "text": "A bachelor is a man who is not and never has been married.\nEtymology.\nA bachelor is first attested as the 12th-century \"bacheler\": a knight bachelor, a knight too young or poor to gather vassals under his own banner. The Old French ' presumably derives from Proven\u00e7al ' and Italian ', but the ultimate source of the word is uncertain. The proposed Medieval Latin * (\"vassal\", \"field hand\") is only attested late enough that it may have derived from the vernacular languages, rather than from the southern French and northern Spanish Latin . Alternatively, it has been derived from Latin ' (\"a stick\"), in reference to the wooden sticks used by knights in training.\nHistory.\nFrom the 14th century, the term \"bachelor\" was also used for a junior member of a guild (otherwise known as \"yeomen\") or university and then for low-level ecclesiastics, as young monks and recently appointed canons. As an inferior grade of scholarship, it came to refer to one holding a \"bachelor's degree\". This sense of ' or ' is first attested at the University of Paris in the 13th century in the system of degrees established under the auspices of Pope Gregory IX as applied to scholars still '. There were two classes of ': the ', theological candidates passed for admission to the divinity course, and the ', who had completed the course and were entitled to proceed to the higher degrees.\nIn the Victorian era, the term \"eligible bachelor\" was used in the context of upper class matchmaking, denoting a young man who was not only unmarried and eligible for marriage, but also considered \"eligible\" in financial and social terms for the prospective bride under discussion. Also in the Victorian era, the term \"confirmed bachelor\" denoted a man who desired to remain single.\nBy the later 19th century, the term \"bachelor\" had acquired the general sense of \"unmarried man\". The expression bachelor party is recorded 1882. In 1895, a feminine equivalent \"bachelor-girl\" was coined, replaced in US English by \"bachelorette\" by the mid-1930s. This terminology is now generally seen as antiquated, and has been largely replaced by the gender-neutral term \"single\" (first recorded 1964). In England and Wales, the term \"bachelor\" remained the official term used for the purpose of marriage registration until 2005, when it was abolished in favor of \"single.\"\nBachelors have been subject to penal laws in many countries, most notably in Ancient Sparta and Rome. At Sparta, men unmarried after a certain age were subject to various penalties (, \"atim\u00eda\"): they were forbidden to watch women's gymnastics; during the winter, they were made to march naked through the agora singing a song about their dishonor; and they were not provided with the traditional respect due to the elderly. Some Athenian laws were similar.\nOver time, some punishments developed into no more than a teasing game. In some parts of Germany, for instance, men who were still unmarried by their 30th birthday were made to sweep the stairs of the town hall until kissed by a \"virgin\". In a 1912 Pittsburgh Press article, there was a suggestion that local bachelors should wear a special pin that identified them as such, or a black necktie to symbolize that \"...they [bachelors] should be in perpetual mourning because they are so foolish as to stay unmarried and deprive themselves of the comforts of a wife and home.\"\nThe idea of a tax on bachelors has existed throughout the centuries. Bachelors in Rome fell under the Lex Julia of 18\u00a0BC and the Lex Papia Poppaea of AD\u00a09: these lay heavy fines on unmarried or childless people while providing certain privileges to those with several children. A law known as the Marriage Duty Act 1695 was imposed on single males over 25 years old by the English Crown to help generate income for the Nine Years' War. In Britain, taxes occasionally fell heavier on bachelors than other persons: examples include 6 &amp; 7 Will. 3, the 1785 Tax on Servants, and the 1798 Income Tax.\nA study that was conducted by professor Charles Waehler at the University of Akron in Ohio on non-married heterosexual males deduced that once non-married men hit middle age, they will be less likely to marry and remain unattached later into their lives. The study concluded that there is only a 1-in-6 chance that men older than 40 will leave the single life, and that after the age 45, the odds fall to 1-in-20.\nIn certain Gulf Arab countries, \"bachelor\" can refer to men who are single as well as immigrant men married to a spouse residing in their country of origin (due to the high added cost of sponsoring a spouse onsite).\nBachelorette.\nThe term \"bachelorette\" is sometimes used to refer to a woman who has never been married.\nThe traditional female equivalent to bachelor is spinster, which is considered pejorative and implies unattractiveness (i.e. old maid, cat lady). The term \"bachelorette\" has been used in its place, particularly in the context of bachelorette parties and reality TV series \"The Bachelorette\"."}
{"id": "4882", "revid": "40976397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4882", "title": "Background radiation", "text": "Background radiation is a measure of the level of ionizing radiation present in the environment at a particular location which is due to deliberate introduction of radiation sources.\nBackground radiation originates from a variety of sources, both natural and artificial. These include both cosmic radiation and environmental radioactivity from naturally occurring radioactive materials (such as radon and radium), as well as man-made medical X-rays, fallout from nuclear weapons testing and nuclear accidents.\nDefinition.\nBackground radiation is defined by the International Atomic Energy Agency as \"Dose or the dose rate (or an observed measure related to the dose or dose rate) attributable to all sources other than the one(s) specified. A distinction is thus made between the dose which is already in a location, which is defined here as being \"background\", and the dose due to a deliberately introduced and specified source. This is important where radiation measurements are taken of a specified radiation source, where the existing background may affect this measurement. An example would be measurement of radioactive contamination in a gamma radiation background, which could increase the total reading above that expected from the contamination alone.\nHowever, if no radiation source is specified as being of concern, then the total radiation dose measurement at a location is generally called the background radiation, and this is usually the case where an ambient dose rate is measured for environmental purposes.\nBackground dose rate examples.\nBackground radiation varies with location and time, and the following table gives examples:\nNatural background radiation.\nRadioactive material is found throughout nature. Detectable amounts occur naturally in soil, rocks, water, air, and vegetation, from which it is inhaled and ingested into the body. In addition to this \"internal exposure\", humans also receive \"external exposure\" from radioactive materials that remain outside the body and from cosmic radiation from space. The worldwide average natural dose to humans is about per year. This is four times the worldwide average artificial radiation exposure, which in 2008 amounted to about per year. In some developed countries, like the US and Japan, artificial exposure is, on average, greater than the natural exposure, due to greater access to medical imaging. In Europe, average natural background exposure by country ranges from under annually in the United Kingdom to more than annually for some groups of people in Finland.\nThe International Atomic Energy Agency states:\nTerrestrial sources.\nTerrestrial background radiation, for the purpose of the table above, only includes sources that remain external to the body. The major radionuclides of concern are potassium, uranium and thorium and their decay products, some of which, like radium and radon are intensely radioactive but occur in low concentrations. Most of these sources have been decreasing, due to radioactive decay since the formation of the Earth, because there is no significant amount currently transported to the Earth. Thus, the present activity on Earth from uranium-238 is only half as much as it originally was because of its 4.5\u00a0billion year half-life, and potassium-40 (half-life 1.25 billion years) is only at about 8% of original activity. But during the time that humans have existed the amount of radiation has decreased very little.\nMany shorter half-life (and thus more intensely radioactive) isotopes have not decayed out of the terrestrial environment because of their on-going natural production. Examples of these are radium-226 (decay product of thorium-230 in decay chain of uranium-238) and radon-222 (a decay product of radium-226 in said chain).\nThorium and uranium (and their daughters) primarily undergo alpha and beta decay, and are not easily detectable. However, many of their daughter products are strong gamma emitters. Thorium-232 is detectable via a 239\u00a0keV peak from lead-212, 511, 583 and 2614\u00a0keV from thallium-208, and 911 and 969\u00a0keV from actinium-228. Uranium-238 manifests as 609, 1120, and 1764\u00a0keV peaks of bismuth-214 (\"cf.\" the same peak for atmospheric radon). Potassium-40 is detectable directly via its 1461\u00a0keV gamma peak.\nThe level over the sea and other large bodies of water tends to be about a tenth of the terrestrial background. Conversely, coastal areas (and areas by the side of fresh water) may have an additional contribution from dispersed sediment.\nAirborne sources.\nThe biggest source of natural background radiation is airborne radon, a radioactive gas that emanates from the ground. Radon and its isotopes, parent radionuclides, and decay products all contribute to an average inhaled dose of 1.26\u00a0mSv/a (millisievert per year). Radon is unevenly distributed and varies with weather, such that much higher doses apply to many areas of the world, where it represents a significant health hazard. Concentrations over 500 times the world average have been found inside buildings in Scandinavia, the United States, Iran, and the Czech Republic. Radon is a decay product of uranium, which is relatively common in the Earth's crust, but more concentrated in ore-bearing rocks scattered around the world. Radon seeps out of these ores into the atmosphere or into ground water or infiltrates into buildings. It can be inhaled into the lungs, along with its decay products, where they will reside for a period of time after exposure.\nAlthough radon is naturally occurring, exposure can be enhanced or diminished by human activity, notably house construction. A poorly sealed dwelling floor, or poor basement ventilation, in an otherwise well insulated house can result in the accumulation of radon within the dwelling, exposing its residents to high concentrations. The widespread construction of well insulated and sealed homes in the northern industrialized world has led to radon becoming the primary source of background radiation in some localities in northern North America and Europe. Basement sealing and suction ventilation reduce exposure. Some building materials, for example lightweight concrete with alum shale, phosphogypsum and Italian tuff, may emanate radon if they contain radium and are porous to gas.\nRadiation exposure from radon is indirect. Radon has a short half-life (4 days) and decays into other solid particulate radium-series radioactive nuclides. These radioactive particles are inhaled and remain lodged in the lungs, causing continued exposure. Radon is thus assumed to be the second leading cause of lung cancer after smoking, and accounts for 15,000 to 22,000 cancer deaths per year in the US alone. However, the discussion about the opposite experimental results is still going on.\nAbout 100,000\u00a0Bq/m3 of radon was found in Stanley Watras's basement in 1984. He and his neighbours in Boyertown, Pennsylvania, United States may hold the record for the most radioactive dwellings in the world. International radiation protection organizations estimate that a committed dose may be calculated by multiplying the equilibrium equivalent concentration (EEC) of radon by a factor of 8 to 9 and the EEC of thoron by a factor of 40 .\nMost of the atmospheric background is caused by radon and its decay products. The gamma spectrum shows prominent peaks at 609, 1120, and 1764\u00a0keV, belonging to bismuth-214, a radon decay product. The atmospheric background varies greatly with wind direction and meteorological conditions. Radon also can be released from the ground in bursts and then form \"radon clouds\" capable of traveling tens of kilometers.\nCosmic radiation.\nThe Earth and all living things on it are constantly bombarded by radiation from outer space. This radiation primarily consists of positively charged ions from protons to iron and larger nuclei derived from outside the Solar System. This radiation interacts with atoms in the atmosphere to create an air shower of secondary radiation, including X-rays, muons, protons, alpha particles, pions, electrons, and neutrons. The immediate dose from cosmic radiation is largely from muons, neutrons, and electrons, and this dose varies in different parts of the world based largely on the geomagnetic field and altitude. For example, the city of Denver in the United States (at 1650 meters elevation) receives a cosmic ray dose roughly twice that of a location at sea level. This radiation is much more intense in the upper troposphere, around 10\u00a0km altitude, and is thus of particular concern for airline crews and frequent passengers, who spend many hours per year in this environment. During their flights airline crews typically get an additional occupational dose between per year and 2.19 mSv/year, according to various studies.\nSimilarly, cosmic rays cause higher background exposure in astronauts than in humans on the surface of Earth. Astronauts in low orbits, such as in the International Space Station or the Space Shuttle, are partially shielded by the magnetic field of the Earth, but also suffer from the Van Allen radiation belt which accumulates cosmic rays and results from the Earth's magnetic field. Outside low Earth orbit, as experienced by the Apollo astronauts who traveled to the Moon, this background radiation is much more intense, and represents a considerable obstacle to potential future long term human exploration of the Moon or Mars.\nCosmic rays also cause elemental transmutation in the atmosphere, in which secondary radiation generated by the cosmic rays combines with atomic nuclei in the atmosphere to generate different nuclides. Many so-called cosmogenic nuclides can be produced, but probably the most notable is carbon-14, which is produced by interactions with nitrogen atoms. These cosmogenic nuclides eventually reach the Earth's surface and can be incorporated into living organisms. The production of these nuclides varies slightly with short-term variations in solar cosmic ray flux, but is considered practically constant over long scales of thousands to millions of years. The constant production, incorporation into organisms and relatively short half-life of carbon-14 are the principles used in radiocarbon dating of ancient biological materials, such as wooden artifacts or human remains.\nThe cosmic radiation at sea level usually manifests as 511\u00a0keV gamma rays from annihilation of positrons created by nuclear reactions of high energy particles and gamma rays. At higher altitudes there is also the contribution of continuous bremsstrahlung spectrum.\nFood and water.\nTwo of the essential elements that make up the human body, namely potassium and carbon, have radioactive isotopes that add significantly to our background radiation dose. An average human contains about 17 milligrams of potassium-40 (40K) and about 24 nanograms (10\u22129\u00a0g) of carbon-14 (14C), (half-life 5,730 years). Excluding internal contamination by external radioactive material, these two are the largest components of internal radiation exposure from biologically functional components of the human body. About 4,000 nuclei of 40K decay per second, and a similar number of 14C. The energy of beta particles produced by 40K is about 10 times that from the beta particles from 14C decay.\n14C is present in the human body at a level of about 3700 Bq (0.1\u00a0\u03bcCi) with a biological half-life of 40 days. This means there are about 3700 beta particles per second produced by the decay of 14C. However, a 14C atom is in the genetic information of about half the cells, while potassium is not a component of DNA. The decay of a 14C atom inside DNA in one person happens about 50 times per second, changing a carbon atom to one of nitrogen.\nThe global average internal dose from radionuclides other than radon and its decay products is 0.29\u00a0mSv/a, of which 0.17\u00a0mSv/a comes from 40K, 0.12\u00a0mSv/a comes from the uranium and thorium series, and 12\u00a0\u03bcSv/a comes from 14C.\nAreas with high natural background radiation.\nSome areas have greater dosage than the country-wide averages. In the world in general, exceptionally high natural background locales include Ramsar in Iran, Guarapari in Brazil, Karunagappalli in India, Arkaroola in Australia and Yangjiang in China.\nThe highest level of purely natural radiation ever recorded on the Earth's surface was 90\u00a0\u03bcGy/h on a Brazilian black beach (\"areia preta\" in Portuguese) composed of monazite. This rate would convert to 0.8 Gy/a for year-round continuous exposure, but in fact the levels vary seasonally and are much lower in the nearest residences. The record measurement has not been duplicated and is omitted from UNSCEAR's latest reports. Nearby tourist beaches in Guarapari and Cumuruxatiba were later evaluated at 14 and 15\u00a0\u03bcGy/h. Note that the values quoted here are in Grays. To convert to Sieverts (Sv) a radiation weighting factor is required; these weighting factors vary from 1 (beta &amp; gamma) to 20 (alpha particles).\nThe highest background radiation in an inhabited area is found in Ramsar, primarily due to the use of local naturally radioactive limestone as a building material. The 1000 most exposed residents receive an average external effective radiation dose of per year, six times the ICRP recommended limit for exposure to the public from artificial sources. They additionally receive a substantial internal dose from radon. Record radiation levels were found in a house where the effective dose due to ambient radiation fields was per year, and the internal committed dose from radon was per year. This unique case is over 80 times higher than the world average natural human exposure to radiation.\nEpidemiological studies are underway to identify health effects associated with the high radiation levels in Ramsar. It is much too early to draw unambiguous statistically significant conclusions. While so far support for beneficial effects of chronic radiation (like longer lifespan) has been observed in few places only, a protective and adaptive effect is suggested by at least one study whose authors nonetheless caution that data from Ramsar are not yet sufficiently strong to relax existing regulatory dose limits. However, the recent statistical analyses discussed that there is no correlation between the risk of negative health effects and elevated level of natural background radiation.\nPhotoelectric.\nBackground radiation doses in the immediate vicinity of particles of high atomic number materials, within the human body, have a small enhancement due to the photoelectric effect.\nNeutron background.\nMost of the natural neutron background is a product of cosmic rays interacting with the atmosphere. The neutron energy peaks at around 1\u00a0MeV and rapidly drops above. At sea level, the production of neutrons is about 20 neutrons per second per kilogram of material interacting with the cosmic rays (or, about 100\u2013300 neutrons per square meter per second). The flux is dependent on geomagnetic latitude, with a maximum near the magnetic poles. At solar minimums, due to lower solar magnetic field shielding, the flux is about twice as high vs the solar maximum. It also dramatically increases during solar flares. In the vicinity of larger heavier objects, e.g. buildings or ships, the neutron flux measures higher; this is known as \"cosmic ray induced neutron signature\", or \"ship effect\" as it was first detected with ships at sea.\nArtificial background radiation.\nAtmospheric nuclear testing.\nFrequent above-ground nuclear explosions between the 1940s and 1960s scattered a substantial amount of radioactive contamination. Some of this contamination is local, rendering the immediate surroundings highly radioactive, while some of it is carried longer distances as nuclear fallout; some of this material is dispersed worldwide. The increase in background radiation due to these tests peaked in 1963 at about 0.15\u00a0mSv per year worldwide, or about 7% of average background dose from all sources. The Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 prohibited above-ground tests, thus by the year 2000 the worldwide dose from these tests has decreased to only 0.005\u00a0mSv per year.\nThis global fallout has caused up to 2.4 million deaths by 2020.\nOccupational exposure.\nThe International Commission on Radiological Protection recommends limiting occupational radiation exposure to 50\u00a0mSv (5 rem) per year, and 100\u00a0mSv (10 rem) in 5 years.\nHowever, background radiation for occupational doses includes radiation that is not measured by radiation dose instruments in potential occupational exposure conditions. This includes both offsite \"natural background radiation\" and any medical radiation doses. This value is not typically measured or known from surveys, such that variations in the total dose to individual workers is not known. This can be a significant confounding factor in assessing radiation exposure effects in a population of workers who may have significantly different natural background and medical radiation doses. This is most significant when the occupational doses are very low.\nAt an IAEA conference in 2002, it was recommended that occupational doses below 1\u20132 mSv per year do not warrant regulatory scrutiny.\nNuclear accidents.\nUnder normal circumstances, nuclear reactors release small amounts of radioactive gases, which cause small radiation exposures to the public. Events classified on the International Nuclear Event Scale as incidents typically do not release any additional radioactive substances into the environment. Large releases of radioactivity from nuclear reactors are extremely rare. To the present day, there were two major \"civilian\" accidents \u2013 the Chernobyl accident and the Fukushima I nuclear accidents \u2013 which caused substantial contamination. The Chernobyl accident was the only one to cause immediate deaths.\nTotal doses from the Chernobyl accident ranged from 10 to 50 mSv over 20 years for the inhabitants of the affected areas, with most of the dose received in the first years after the disaster, and over 100 mSv for liquidators. There were 28 deaths from acute radiation syndrome.\nTotal doses from the Fukushima I accidents were between 1 and 15 mSv for the inhabitants of the affected areas. Thyroid doses for children were below 50 mSv. 167 cleanup workers received doses above 100 mSv, with 6 of them receiving more than 250 mSv (the Japanese exposure limit for emergency response workers).\nThe average dose from the Three Mile Island accident was 0.01 mSv.\nNon-civilian: In addition to the civilian accidents described above, several accidents at early nuclear weapons facilities \u2013 such as the Windscale fire, the contamination of the Techa River by the nuclear waste from the Mayak compound, and the Kyshtym disaster at the same compound \u2013 released substantial radioactivity into the environment. The Windscale fire resulted in thyroid doses of 5\u201320 mSv for adults and 10\u201360 mSv for children. The doses from the accidents at Mayak are unknown.\nNuclear fuel cycle.\nThe Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and other U.S. and international agencies, require that licensees limit radiation exposure to individual members of the public to 1\u00a0mSv (100 mrem) per year.\nEnergy sources.\nPer UNECE life-cycle assessment, nearly all sources of energy result in some level of occupational and public exposure to radionuclides as result of their manufacturing or operations. The following table uses man\u00b7Sievert/GW-annum:\nCoal burning.\nCoal plants emit radiation in the form of radioactive fly ash which is inhaled and ingested by neighbours, and incorporated into crops. A 1978 paper from Oak Ridge National Laboratory estimated that coal-fired power plants of that time may contribute a whole-body committed dose of 19\u00a0\u03bcSv/a to their immediate neighbours in a radius of 500 m. The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation's 1988 report estimated the committed dose 1\u00a0km away to be 20\u00a0\u03bcSv/a for older plants or 1\u00a0\u03bcSv/a for newer plants with improved fly ash capture, but was unable to confirm these numbers by test. When coal is burned, uranium, thorium and all the uranium daughters accumulated by disintegration\u00a0\u2013 radium, radon, polonium\u00a0\u2013 are released. Radioactive materials previously buried underground in coal deposits are released as fly ash or, if fly ash is captured, may be incorporated into concrete manufactured with fly ash.\nOther sources of dose uptake.\nMedical.\nThe global average human exposure to artificial radiation is 0.6\u00a0mSv/a, primarily from medical imaging. This medical component can range much higher, with an average of 3\u00a0mSv per year across the USA population. Other human contributors include smoking, air travel, radioactive building materials, historical nuclear weapons testing, nuclear power accidents and nuclear industry operation.\nA typical chest x-ray delivers 20\u00a0\u03bcSv (2 mrem) of effective dose. A dental x-ray delivers a dose of 5 to 10 \u03bcSv. A CT scan delivers an effective dose to the whole body ranging from 1 to 20 mSv (100 to 2000 mrem). The average American receives about 3\u00a0mSv of diagnostic medical dose per year; countries with the lowest levels of health care receive almost none. Radiation treatment for various diseases also accounts for some dose, both in individuals and in those around them.\nConsumer items.\nCigarettes contain polonium-210, originating from the decay products of radon, which stick to tobacco leaves. Heavy smoking results in a radiation dose of 160 mSv/year to localized spots at the bifurcations of segmental bronchi in the lungs from the decay of polonium-210. This dose is not readily comparable to the radiation protection limits, since the latter deal with whole body doses, while the dose from smoking is delivered to a very small portion of the body.\nRadiation metrology.\nIn a radiation metrology laboratory, background radiation refers to the measured value from any incidental sources that affect an instrument when a specific radiation source sample is being measured. This background contribution, which is established as a stable value by multiple measurements, usually before and after sample measurement, is subtracted from the rate measured when the sample is being measured.\nThis is in accordance with the International Atomic Energy Agency definition of background as being \"Dose or dose rate (or an observed measure related to the dose or dose rate) attributable to all sources other than the one(s) specified.\nThe same issue occurs with radiation protection instruments, where a reading from an instrument may be affected by the background radiation. An example of this is a scintillation detector used for surface contamination monitoring. In an elevated gamma background the scintillator material will be affected by the background gamma, which will add to the reading obtained from any contamination which is being monitored. In extreme cases it will make the instrument unusable as the background swamps the lower level of radiation from the contamination. In such instruments the background can be continually monitored in the \"Ready\" state, and subtracted from any reading obtained when being used in \"Measuring\" mode.\nRegular Radiation measurement is carried out at multiple levels. Government agencies compile radiation readings as part of environmental monitoring mandates, often making the readings available to the public and sometimes in near-real-time. Collaborative groups and private individuals may also make real-time readings available to the public. Instruments used for radiation measurement include the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube and the Scintillation detector. The former is usually more compact and affordable and reacts to several radiation types, while the latter is more complex and can detect specific radiation energies and types. Readings indicate radiation levels from all sources including background, and real-time readings are in general unvalidated, but correlation between independent detectors increases confidence in measured levels.\nList of near-real-time government radiation measurement sites, employing multiple instrument types:\nList of international near-real-time collaborative/private measurement sites, employing primarily Geiger-Muller detectors:"}
{"id": "4884", "revid": "1182770355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4884", "title": "Balmoral", "text": "Balmoral may refer to:"}
{"id": "4885", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4885", "title": "Bannock", "text": "Bannock may mean:"}
{"id": "4886", "revid": "1268825035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4886", "title": "Banquo", "text": "Lord Banquo , the Thane of Lochaber, is a semi-historical character in William Shakespeare's 1606 play \"Macbeth\". In the play, he is at first an ally of Macbeth (both are generals in the King's army) and they meet the Three Witches together. After prophesying that Macbeth will become king, the witches tell Banquo that he will not be king himself, but that his descendants will be. Later, Macbeth in his lust for power sees Banquo as a threat and has him murdered by three hired assassins; Banquo's son, Fleance, escapes. Banquo's ghost returns in a later scene, causing Macbeth to react with alarm in public during a feast.\nShakespeare borrowed the character Banquo from \"Holinshed's Chronicles\", a history of Britain published by Raphael Holinshed in 1587. In \"Chronicles\", Banquo is an accomplice to Macbeth in the murder of the king, rather than a loyal subject of the king who is seen as an enemy by Macbeth. Shakespeare may have changed this aspect of his character to please King James, who was thought at the time to be a descendant of the real Banquo. Critics often interpret Banquo's role in the play as being a foil to Macbeth, resisting evil whereas Macbeth embraces it. Sometimes, however, his motives are unclear, and some critics question his purity. He does nothing to accuse Macbeth of murdering the king, even though he has reason to believe Macbeth is responsible.\nSources.\nShakespeare often used Raphael Holinshed's \"Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland\", commonly known as \"Holinshed's Chronicles\", as a source for his plays, and in \"Macbeth\", he borrows from several of the tales in that work. Holinshed portrays Banquo as a historical figure, who is an accomplice in the murder by Mac Bethad mac Findla\u00edch (Macbeth) of Donnchad mac Cr\u00edn\u00e1in (King Duncan) and plays an important part in ensuring that Macbeth, not M\u00e1el Coluim mac Donnchada (Malcolm), takes the throne in the coup that follows. Holinshed in turn used an earlier work, the \"Scotorum Historiae\" (1526\u20137) by Hector Boece, as his source. Boece's work is the first known record of Banquo and his son Fleance (spelled \"Banquho\" and \"Fleancho\" in the Latin); and scholars such as David Bevington generally consider them fictional characters invented by Boece. In Shakespeare's day, however, they were considered historical figures of great repute, and the king, James I, based his claim to the throne in part on a descent from Banquo.\nWithin the literature there exists various claims surrounding Thane Banquo's ancestry. According to the 17th century historian Frederic van Bossen, Thane Banquo (which he wrote as Banqwho and sometimes as Banchou) was the son of Dunclina, the daughter of Albanach ap Crinan, the thane of the Isles, and her husband Kenneth. Kenneth was the son of Fferqwhart, who was the son of son of Murdoch the Thane of \"Lochabar\", the son of Prince Dorus, who was the son of a King named Erlus, whose kingdom was not identified. According to Frederic van Bossen, Banquo married his 4th cousin Mauldvina the daughter of Thalus the Thane of Atholl, and together they were the parents of Fleance, a daughter called Castisa who married Frederic the Lord of Cromartie, and a number of other sons who were murdered by King Macbeth.\nIt is known that the House of Stuart descends from Walter fitz Alan, Steward of Scotland, and in some studies he is believed to have been the grandson of Fleance and Gruffydd ap Llywelyn's daughter, Nesta ferch Gruffydd. However, in Frederic van Bossen's handwritten notes, which were created from numerous resources he collected in his travels through Europe, Fleance's wife is identified as Nesta's sister, Marjoretta the daughter of \"griffin ap Livlein\". In reality, Walter fitz Alan was the son of Alan fitz Flaad, a Breton knight.\nUnlike his sources, Shakespeare gives Banquo no role in the King's murder, making it a deed committed solely by Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth. Why Shakespeare's Banquo is so different from the character described by Holinshed and Boece is not known, though critics have proposed several possible explanations. First among them is the risk associated with portraying the king's ancestor as a murderer and conspirator in the plot to overthrow a rightful king, as well as the author's desire to flatter a powerful patron. But Shakespeare may also simply have altered Banquo's character because there was no dramatic need for another accomplice to the murder. There was, however, a need to provide a dramatic contrast to Macbeth; a role that many scholars argue is filled by Banquo. Similarly, when Jean de Schelandre wrote about Banquo in his \"Stuartide\" in 1611, he also changed the character by portraying him as a noble and honourable man\u2014the critic D.W. Maskell describes him as \"...Schelandre's paragon of valour and virtue\"\u2014probably for reasons similar to Shakespeare's.\nBanquo's role in the coup that follows the murder is harder to explain. Banquo's loyalty to Macbeth, rather than Malcolm, after Duncan's death makes him a passive accomplice in the coup: Malcolm, as Prince of Cumberland, is the rightful heir to the throne and Macbeth a usurper. Daniel Amneus argued that \"Macbeth\" as it survives is a revision of an earlier play, in which Duncan granted Macbeth not only the title of Thane of Cawdor, but the \"greater honor\" of Prince of Cumberland (i.e. heir to the throne of Scotland). Banquo's silence may be a survival from the posited earlier play, in which Macbeth was the legitimate successor to Duncan.\nRole in the play.\nBanquo is in a third of the play's scenes, as both a human and a ghost. As significant as he is to the plot, he has fewer lines than the relatively insignificant Ross, a Scottish nobleman who survives the play. In the second scene of the play, a wounded soldier describes the manner in which Macbeth, Thane of Glamis, and Banquo, Thane of Lochaber, resisted invading forces, fighting side by side. In the next scene, Banquo and Macbeth, returning from the battle together, encounter the Three Witches, who predict that Macbeth will become Thane of Cawdor, and then king. Banquo, sceptical of the witches, challenges them to predict his own future, and they foretell that Banquo will never himself take the throne, but will beget a line of kings. Banquo remains sceptical after the encounter, wondering aloud if evil can ever speak the truth. He warns Macbeth that evil will offer men a small, hopeful truth only to catch them in a deadly trap.\nWhen Macbeth kills the king and takes the throne, Banquo\u2014the only one aware of this encounter with the witches\u2014reserves judgment for God. He is unsure whether Macbeth committed regicide to gain the throne, but muses in a soliloquy that \"I fear / Thou play'dst most foully for 't\". He offers his respects to the new King Macbeth and pledges loyalty. Later, worried that Banquo's descendants and not his own will rule Scotland, Macbeth sends two men, and then a Third Murderer, to kill Banquo and his son Fleance. During the melee, Banquo holds off the assailants so that Fleance can escape, but is himself killed. The ghost of Banquo later returns to haunt Macbeth at the banquet in Act Three, Scene Four. A terrified Macbeth sees him, while the apparition is invisible to his guests. He appears again to Macbeth in a vision granted by the Three Witches, wherein Macbeth sees a long line of kings descended from Banquo.\nAnalysis.\nFoil to Macbeth.\nMany scholars see Banquo as a foil and a contrast to Macbeth. Macbeth, for example, eagerly accepts the Three Witches' prophecy as true and seeks to help it along. Banquo, on the other hand, doubts the prophecies and the intentions of these seemingly evil creatures. Whereas Macbeth places his hope in the prediction that he will be king, Banquo argues that evil only offers gifts that lead to destruction. Banquo steadily resists the temptations of evil within the play, praying to heaven for help, while Macbeth seeks darkness, and prays that evil powers will aid him. This is visible in act two; after Banquo sees Duncan to bed, he says: \"There's husbandry in heaven, / Their candles are all out\". This premonition of the coming darkness in association with Macbeth's murders is repeated just before Banquo is killed: \"it will be rain to-night\", Banquo tells his son Fleance.\nBanquo's status as a contrast to Macbeth makes for some tense moments in the play. In act two, scene one, Banquo meets his son Fleance and asks him to take both his sword and his dagger (\"Hold, take my sword\u00a0... Take thee that too\"). He also explains that he has been having trouble sleeping due to \"cursed thoughts that nature / gives way to in repose!\" On Macbeth's approach, he demands the sword returned to him quickly. Scholars have interpreted this to mean that Banquo has been dreaming of murdering the king as Macbeth's accomplice to take the throne for his own family, as the Three Witches prophesied to him. In this reading, his good nature is so revolted by these thoughts that he gives his sword and dagger to Fleance to be sure they do not come true, but is so nervous at Macbeth's approach that he demands them back. Other scholars have responded that Banquo's dreams have less to do with killing the king and more to do with Macbeth. They argue that Banquo is merely setting aside his sword for the night. Then, when Macbeth approaches, Banquo, having had dreams about Macbeth's deeds, takes back his sword as a precaution in this case.\nMacbeth eventually sees that Banquo can no longer be trusted to aid him in his evil, and considers his friend a threat to his newly acquired throne; thus, he has him murdered. Banquo's ability to live on in different ways is another oppositional force, in this case to Macbeth's impending death. His spirit lives on in Fleance, his son, and in his ghostly presence at the banquet.\nGhost scenes.\nWhen Macbeth returns to the witches later in the play, they show him an apparition of the murdered Banquo, along with eight of his descendants. The scene carries deep significance: King James, on the throne when \"Macbeth\" was written, was believed to be separated from Banquo by nine generations. What Shakespeare writes here thus amounts to a strong support of James' right to the throne by lineage, and for audiences of Shakespeare's day, a very real fulfilment of the witches' prophecy to Banquo that his sons would take the throne. This apparition is also deeply unsettling to Macbeth, who not only wants the throne for himself, but also desires to father a line of kings.\nBanquo's other appearance as a ghost during the banquet scene serves as an indicator of Macbeth's conscience returning to plague his thoughts. Banquo's triumph over death appears symbolically, insofar as he literally takes Macbeth's seat during the feast. Shocked, Macbeth uses words appropriate to the metaphor of usurpation, describing Banquo as \"crowned\" with wounds. The spirit drains Macbeth's manhood along with the blood from his cheeks; as soon as Banquo's form vanishes, Macbeth announces: \"Why, so; being gone, / I am a man again.\"\nLike the vision of Banquo's lineage, the banquet scene has also been the subject of criticism. Critics have questioned whether not one, but perhaps two ghosts appear in this scene: Banquo and Duncan. Scholars arguing that Duncan attends the banquet state that Macbeth's lines to the Ghost could apply equally well to the slain king. \"Thou canst not say I did it\", for example, can mean that Macbeth is not the man who actually killed Banquo, or it can mean that Duncan, who was asleep when Macbeth killed him, cannot claim to have seen his killer. To add to the confusion, some lines Macbeth directs to the ghost, such as \"Thy bones are marrowless\", cannot rightly be said of Banquo, who has only recently died.\nScholars debate whether Macbeth's vision of Banquo is real or a hallucination. Macbeth had already seen a hallucination before murdering Duncan: a knife hovering in the air. Several performances of the play have even ignored the stage direction to have the Ghost of Banquo enter at all, heightening the sense that Macbeth is growing mad, since the audience cannot see what he claims to see. Scholars opposing this view claim that while the dagger is unusual, ghosts of murdered victims are more believable, having a basis in the audience's superstitions. Spirits in other Shakespeare plays\u2014notably \"Hamlet\" and \"Midsummer Night's Dream\"\u2014exist in ambiguous forms, occasionally even calling into question their own presence.\nThe concept of a character being confronted at a triumphant feast with a reminder of their downfall is not unique to Shakespeare and may originate from Belshazzar's feast, as portrayed in the Bible. The term 'ghost at the feast' has entered popular culture, and is often used as a metaphor for a subject a person would rather avoid considering, or (considering the general plot of \"Macbeth\") a reminder of a person's unpleasant past or likely future.\nPerformances and interpretations.\nBanquo's role, especially in the banquet ghost scene, has been subject to a variety of mediums and interpretations. Shakespeare's text states: \"Enter Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth's place.\" Several television versions have altered this slightly, having Banquo appear suddenly in the chair, rather than walking onstage and into it. Special effects and camera tricks also allow producers to make the ghost disappear and reappear, highlighting the fact that \"only\" Macbeth can see it.\nStage directors, unaided by post-production effects and camera tricks, have used other methods to depict the ghost. In the late 19th century, elaborate productions of the play staged by Henry Irving employed a wide variety of approaches for this task. In 1877 a green silhouette was used to create a ghostlike image; ten years later a trick chair was used to allow an actor to appear in the middle of the scene, and then again from the midst of the audience. In 1895 a shaft of blue light served to indicate the presence of Banquo's spirit. In 1933 a Russian director Theodore Komisarjevsky staged a modern retelling of the play (Banquo and Macbeth were told of their future through palmistry); he used Macbeth's shadow as the ghost. In 1936, Orson Welles directed the Federal Theatre Project production of the play, with an African-American cast that included Canada Lee in the role of Banquo.\nFilm adaptations have approached Banquo's character in a variety of ways. Akira Kurosawa's 1957 adaptation \"Throne of Blood\" makes the character into Capitan Miki (played by Minoru Chiaki), slain by Macbeth's equivalent (Captain Washizu) when his wife explains that she is with child. News of Miki's death does not reach Washizu until after he has seen the ghost in the banquet scene. In Roman Polanski's 1971 adaptation, Banquo is played by acclaimed stage actor Martin Shaw, in a style reminiscent of earlier stage performances. Polanski's version also emphasises Banquo's objection to Macbeth's ascendency by showing him remaining silent as the other thanes around him hail Macbeth as king. In the 1990 film \"Men of Respect\", a reimagining of \"Macbeth\" as taking place among a New York Mafia crime family, the character of Banquo is named \"Bankie Como\" and played by American actor Dennis Farina."}
{"id": "4887", "revid": "1217584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4887", "title": "British Army", "text": "The British Army is the principal land warfare force of the United Kingdom, British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies, a part of the British Armed Forces along with the Naval Service and the Royal Air Force. the British Army comprises 74,296 regular full-time personnel, 4,244 Gurkhas, 25,934 volunteer reserve personnel and 4,612 \"other personnel\", for a total of 109,086.\nThe British Army traces back to 1707 and the formation of the united Kingdom of Great Britain which joined the Kingdoms of England and Scotland into a single state and, with that, united the English Army and the Scots Army as the \"British Army\". Members of the British Army swear allegiance to the monarch as their commander-in-chief, since both the English Bill of Rights of 1689 and Scottish Claim of Right Act 1689 require parliamentary consent for the Crown to maintain a peacetime standing army. The army is administered by the Ministry of Defence and commanded by the Chief of the General Staff.\nAt its inception, being composed primarily of cavalry and infantry, the British Army was one of two \"Regular\" Forces (there were also separate \"Reserve Forces\") within the British military (those parts of the British Armed Forces tasked with land warfare, as opposed to the naval forces), with the other having been the \"Ordnance Military Corps\" (made up of the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, and the Royal Sappers and Miners) of the Board of Ordnance, which along with the originally civilian Commissariat Department, stores and supply departments, as well as barracks and other departments, were absorbed into the British Army when the Board of Ordnance was abolished in 1855. Various other civilian departments of the board were absorbed into the War Office.\nThe British Army has seen action in major wars between the world's great powers, including the Seven Years' War, the American Revolutionary War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War and the First and Second World Wars. Britain's victories in most of these decisive wars allowed it to influence world events and establish itself as one of the world's leading military and economic powers. Since the end of the Cold War, the British Army has been deployed to a number of conflict zones, often as part of an expeditionary force, a coalition force or part of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nUntil the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, neither England or Scotland had had a standing army with professional officers and career corporals and sergeants. England relied on militia organised by local officials or private forces mobilised by the nobility, or on hired mercenaries from Europe. From the later Middle Ages until the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, when a foreign expeditionary force was needed, such as the one that Henry V of England took to France and that fought at the Battle of Agincourt (1415), the army, a professional one, was raised for the duration of the expedition.\nDuring the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, the members of the English Long Parliament realised that the use of county militia organised into regional associations (such as the Eastern Association), often commanded by local members of Parliament (both from the House of Commons and the House of Lords), while more than able to hold their own in the regions which Parliamentarians ('Roundheads\") controlled, were unlikely to win the war. So Parliament initiated two actions. The Self-denying Ordinance forbade members of Parliament (with the notable exception of Oliver Cromwell, then a member of parliament and future Lord Protector) from serving as officers in the Parliamentary armies. This created a distinction between the civilians in Parliament, who tended to be Presbyterian and conciliatory to the Royalists (\"Cavaliers\") in nature, and a corps of professional officers, who tended to be Independent (Congregational) in theology. The second action was legislation for the creation of a Parliamentary-funded army, commanded by Lord General Thomas Fairfax, which became known as the New Model Army (originally phrased \"new-modelled Army\").\nWhile this proved to be a war-winning formula, the New Model Army, being organised and politically active, went on to dominate the politics of the Interregnum and by 1660 was widely disliked. The New Model Army was paid off and disbanded at the later Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 with the accession of King Charles II. For many decades the alleged excesses of the New Model Army under the Protectorate / Commonwealth under Oliver Cromwell were used as propaganda (and still feature in Irish folklore) and the Whig Party element recoiled from allowing a standing army to continue with the agreed-upon rights and privileges under the return of a king. The militia acts of 1661 and 1662 prevented local authorities from calling up militia and oppressing their own local opponents. Calling up the militia was possible only if the king and local elites agreed to do so.\nKing Charles II and his \"Cavalier\" / Royalist supporters favoured a new army under royal control, and immediately after the Restoration of 1660 to 1661 began working on its establishment. The first English Army regiments, including elements of the disbanded New Model Army, were formed between November 1660 and January 1661 and became a standing military force for England (financed by Parliament). The Royal Scots and Irish Armies were financed by the parliaments of Scotland and Ireland. Parliamentary control was established by the Bill of Rights 1689 and Claim of Right Act 1689, although the monarch continued to influence aspects of army administration until at least the end of the 19th century.\nAfter the Restoration, King Charles II pulled together four regiments of infantry and cavalry, calling them his guards, at a cost of \u00a3122,000 from his general budget. This became the foundation of the permanent English Army. By 1685, it had grown to number 7,500 soldiers in marching regiments, and 1,400 men permanently stationed in garrisons. A Monmouth Rebellion in 1685 allowed successor King James II to raise the forces to 20,000 men. There were 37,000 in 1678, when England played a role in the closing stage of the cross-channel Franco-Dutch War. After Protestant dual Monarchs William III, formerly William of the Dutch House of Orange, and his wife Mary II's joint accession to the throne after a short constitutional crisis with Parliament sending Mary's father, predecessor King James II, (who remained a Catholic) during his brief controversial reign, off the throne and into exile. England then involved itself in the War of the Grand Alliance on the Continent, primarily to prevent a possible French Catholic monarch organizing invasion restoring the exiled James II (Queen Mary's father and still a Roman Catholic). Later in 1689, William III to solidify his and Mary's hold on the monarchy, expanded the new English army to 74,000, and then a few years later to 94,000 in 1694. Parliament was very nervous and reduced the cadre to 70,000 in 1697. Scotland and Ireland had theoretically separate military establishments, but they were unofficially merged with the English Crown force.\nBy the time of the 1707 Acts of Union, many regiments of the English and Scottish armies were combined under one operational command and stationed in the Netherlands for the War of the Spanish Succession. Although all the regiments were now part of the new British military establishment, they remained under the old operational-command structure and retained much of the institutional ethos, customs and traditions of the standing armies created shortly after the Restoration of the Monarchy 47 years earlier. The order of seniority of the most-senior British Army line regiments is based on that of the earlier English army. Although technically the Scots Royal Regiment of Foot was raised in 1633 and is the oldest Regiment of the Line, Scottish and Irish regiments were only allowed to take a rank in the English army on the date of their arrival in England (or the date when they were first placed on the English establishment). In 1694, a board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of English, Irish and Scots regiments serving in the Netherlands; the regiment which became known as the Scots Greys were designated the 4th Dragoons because there were three English regiments raised prior to 1688 when the Scots Greys were first placed in the English establishment. In 1713, when a new board of general officers was convened to decide the rank of several regiments, the seniority of the Scots Greys was reassessed and based on their June 1685 entry into England. At that time there was only one English regiment of dragoons, and the Scots Greys eventually received the British Army rank of 2nd Dragoons.\nBritish Empire (1700\u20131914).\nAfter 1700, British continental policy was to contain expansion by competing powers such as France and Spain. Although Spain was the dominant global power during the previous two centuries and the chief threat to England's early trans-Atlantic colonial ambitions, its influence was now waning. The territorial ambitions of the French, however, led to the War of the Spanish Succession and the later Napoleonic Wars.\nAlthough the Royal Navy is widely regarded as vital to the rise of the British Empire, the British Army played an important role in the formation of colonies, protectorates and dominions in the Americas, Africa, Asia, India and Australasia. British soldiers captured strategically important sites and territories, with the army involved in wars to secure the empire's borders, internal safety and support friendly governments and princes. Among these actions were the French and Indian War / Seven Years' War, the American Revolutionary War, the Napoleonic Wars, the First and Second Opium Wars, the Boxer Rebellion, the New Zealand Wars, the Australian frontier wars, the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the first and second Boer Wars, the Fenian raids, the Irish War of Independence, interventions in Afghanistan (intended to maintain a buffer state between British India and the Russian Empire) and the Crimean War (to keep the Russian Empire to the north on the Black Sea at a safe distance by aiding the Ottoman Empire). Like the English Army, the British Army fought the kingdoms of Spain, France (including the First French Empire) and the Netherlands (Dutch Republic) for supremacy in North America and the West Indies. With native and provincial and colonial assistance, the Army conquered New France in the French and Indian War (North American theatre) of the parallel Seven Years' War and suppressed a Native / Indian North Americans uprising in Pontiac's War around the Great Lakes. The British Army was defeated in the American Revolutionary War, losing the Thirteen Colonies but retaining The Canadas and The Maritimes as in British North America, including Bermuda (originally part of the Colony of Virginia, and which had been originally strongly sympathetic to the American colonial rebels early in the war).\nHalifax, Nova Scotia and Bermuda were to become Imperial fortresses (although Bermuda, being safer from attack over water and impervious to attack overland, quickly became the most important in British North America), along with Malta and Gibraltar, providing bases in the eastern Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea for Royal Navy squadrons to control the oceans and trade routes, and heavily garrisoned by the British Army both for defence of the bases and to provide mobile military forces to work with the Navy in amphibious operations throughout their regions.\nThe British Army was heavily involved in the Napoleonic Wars, participating in a number of campaigns in Europe (including continuous deployment in the Peninsular War), the Caribbean, North Africa and North America. The war between the British and the First French Empire of Napoleon Bonaparte stretched around the world; at its peak in 1813, the regular army contained over 250,000 men. A coalition of Anglo-Dutch and Prussian armies under the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal von Bl\u00fccher finally defeated Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.\nThe English were involved politically and militarily in Ireland. The campaign of English republican Protector Oliver Cromwell involved uncompromising treatment of the Irish towns (most notably Drogheda and Wexford) which supported the Royalists during the English Civil War. The English Army (and the subsequent British Army) remained in Ireland primarily to suppress Irish revolts or disorder. In addition to its conflict with Irish nationalists, it was faced with the prospect of battling Anglo-Irish and Ulster Scots in Ireland who were angered by unfavourable taxation of Irish produce imported into Britain. With other Irish groups, they raised a volunteer army and threatened to emulate the American colonists if their conditions were not met. Learning from their experience in America, the British government sought a political solution. The British Army fought Irish rebels\u2014Protestant and Catholic\u2014primarily in Ulster and Leinster (Wolfe Tone's United Irishmen) in the 1798 rebellion.\nIn addition to battling the armies of other European empires (and its former colonies, the United States, in the American War of 1812), the British Army fought the Chinese in the First and Second Opium Wars and the Boxer Rebellion, M\u0101ori tribes in the first of the New Zealand Wars, Nawab Shiraj-ud-Daula's forces and British East India Company mutineers in the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the Boers in the first and second Boer Wars, Irish Fenians in Canada during the Fenian raids and Irish separatists in the Anglo-Irish War. The increasing demands of imperial expansion and the inadequacy and inefficiency of the underfunded British Army, Militia, Ordnance Military Corps, Yeomanry and Volunteer Force after the Napoleonic Wars led to series of reforms following the failures of the Crimean War.\nInspired by the successes of the Prussian Army (which relied on short-term conscription of all eligible young men to maintain a large reserve of recently discharged soldiers, ready to be recalled on the outbreak of war to immediately bring the small peacetime regular army up to strength), the \"Regular Reserve\" of the British Army was originally created in 1859 by Secretary of State for War Sidney Herbert, and re-organised under the Reserve Force Act 1867. Prior to this, a soldier was generally enlisted into the British Army for a 21-year engagement, following which (should he survive so long) he was discharged as a Pensioner. Pensioners were sometimes still employed on garrison duties, as were younger soldiers no longer deemed fit for expeditionary service who were generally organised in invalid units or returned to the regimental depot for home service. The cost of paying pensioners, and the obligation the government was under to continue to employ invalids as well as soldiers deemed by their commanding officers as detriments to their units were motivations to change this system. The long period of engagement also discouraged many potential recruits. The long service enlistments were consequently replaced with short service enlistments, with undesirable soldiers not permitted to re-engage on the completion of their first engagement. The size of the army also fluctuated greatly, increasing in war time, and drastically shrinking with peace. Battalions posted on garrison duty overseas were allowed an increase on their normal peacetime establishment, which resulted in their having surplus men on their return to a \"Home\" station. Consequently, soldiers engaging on short term enlistments were enabled to serve several years with the colours and the remainder in the Regular Reserve, remaining liable for recall to the colours if required. Among the other benefits, this thereby enabled the British Army to have a ready pool of recently trained men to draw upon in an emergency. The name of the Regular Reserve (which for a time was divided into a \"First Class\" and a \"Second Class\") has resulted in confusion with the \"Reserve Forces\", which were the pre-existing part-time, local-service home-defence forces that were auxiliary to the British Army (or \"Regular Force\"), but not originally part of it: the Yeomanry, Militia (or \"Constitutional Force\") and Volunteer Force. These were consequently also referred to as \"Auxiliary Forces\" or \"Local Forces\".\nThe late-19th-century Cardwell and Childers Reforms gave the army its modern shape and redefined its regimental system. The 1907 Haldane Reforms created the Territorial Force as the army's volunteer reserve component, merging and reorganising the Volunteer Force, Militia and Yeomanry.\nWorld Wars (1914\u20131945).\nGreat Britain was challenged by other powers, primarily the German Empire and Nazi Germany, during the 20th century. A century earlier it vied with Napoleonic France for global pre-eminence, and Hanoverian Britain's natural allies were the kingdoms and principalities of northern Germany. By the middle of the 19th century, Britain and France were allies in preventing Russia's appropriation of the Ottoman Empire, although the fear of French invasion led shortly afterwards to the creation of the Volunteer Force. By the first decade of the 20th century, the United Kingdom was allied with France (by the Entente Cordiale) and Russia (which had a secret agreement with France for mutual support in a war against the Prussian-led German Empire and the Austro-Hungarian Empire).\nWhen the First World War broke out in August 1914 the British Army sent the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), consisting mainly of regular army troops, to France and Belgium. The fighting bogged down into static trench warfare for the remainder of the war. In 1915 the army created the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force to invade the Ottoman Empire via Gallipoli, an unsuccessful attempt to capture Constantinople and secure a sea route to Russia.\nThe First World War was the most devastating in British military history, with nearly 800,000 men killed and over two\u00a0million wounded. Early in the war, the BEF was virtually destroyed and was replaced first by volunteers and then by a conscript force. Major battles included those at the Somme and Passchendaele. Advances in technology saw the advent of the tank (and the creation of the Royal Tank Regiment) and advances in aircraft design (and the creation of the Royal Flying Corps) which would be decisive in future battles. Trench warfare dominated Western Front strategy for most of the war, and the use of chemical weapons (disabling and poison gases) added to the devastation.\nThe Second World War broke out in September 1939 with the Soviet and German Army's invasion of Poland. British assurances to the Poles led the British Empire to declare war on Germany. As in the First World War, a relatively small BEF was sent to France but then hastily evacuated from Dunkirk as the German forces swept through the Low Countries and across France in May 1940.\nAfter the British Army recovered from its earlier defeats, it defeated the Germans and Italians at the Second Battle of El Alamein in North Africa in 1942\u20131943 and helped drive them from Africa. It then fought through Italy and, with the help of American, Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, Indian and Free French forces, was the principal organiser and participant in the D-Day invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944; nearly half the Allied soldiers were British. In the Far East, the British Army rallied against the Japanese in the Burma Campaign and regained the British Far Eastern colonial possessions.\nPostcolonial era (1945\u20132000).\nAfter the Second World War the British Army was significantly reduced in size, although National Service continued until 1960. This period saw decolonisation begin with the partition and independence of India and Pakistan, followed by the independence of British colonies in Africa and Asia.\nThe Corps Warrant, which is the official list of which bodies of the British Military (not to be confused with \"naval\") Forces were to be considered Corps of the British Army for the purposes of the Army Act, the Reserve Forces Act, 1882, and the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act, 1907, had not been updated since 1926 (Army Order 49 of 1926), although amendments had been made up to and including Army Order 67 of 1950. A new Corps Warrant was declared in 1951.\nAlthough the British Army was a major participant in Korea in the early 1950s and Suez in 1956, during this period Britain's role in world events was reduced and the army was downsized. The British Army of the Rhine, consisting of I (BR) Corps, remained in Germany as a bulwark against Soviet invasion. The Cold War continued, with significant technological advances in warfare, and the army saw the introduction of new weapons systems. Despite the decline of the British Empire, the army was engaged in Aden, Indonesia, Cyprus, Kenya and Malaya. In 1982, the British Army and the Royal Marines helped liberate the Falkland Islands during the conflict with Argentina after that country's invasion of the British territory.\nIn the three decades following 1969, the army was heavily deployed in Northern Ireland's Operation Banner to support the Royal Ulster Constabulary (later the Police Service of Northern Ireland) in their conflict with republican paramilitary groups. The locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment was formed, becoming home-service battalions of the Royal Irish Regiment in 1992 before it was disbanded in 2006. Over 700 soldiers were killed during the Troubles. Following the 1994\u20131996 IRA ceasefires and since 1997, demilitarisation has been part of the peace process and the military presence has been reduced. On 25 June 2007 the 2nd Battalion of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment left the army complex in Bessbrook, County Armagh, ending the longest operation in British Army history.\nPersian Gulf War.\nThe British Army contributed 50,000 troops to the coalition which fought Iraq in the Persian Gulf War, and British forces controlled Kuwait after its liberation. Forty-seven British military personnel died during the war.\nBalkan conflicts.\nThe army was deployed to former Yugoslavia in 1992. Initially part of the United Nations Protection Force, in 1995 its command was transferred to the Implementation Force (IFOR) and then to the Stabilisation Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR); the commitment rose to over 10,000 troops. In 1999, British forces under SFOR command were sent to Kosovo and the contingent increased to 19,000 troops. Between early 1993 and June 2010, 72 British military personnel died during operations in the former Yugoslavian countries of Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia.\nThe Troubles.\nAlthough there have been permanent garrisons in Northern Ireland throughout its history, the British Army was deployed as a peacekeeping force from 1969 to 2007 in Operation Banner. Initially, this was (in the wake of unionist attacks on nationalist communities in Derry and Belfast) to prevent further loyalist attacks on Catholic communities; it developed into support of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) and its successor, the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) against the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA). Under the 1998 Good Friday Agreement, there was a gradual reduction in the number of soldiers deployed. In 2005, after the PIRA declared a ceasefire, the British Army dismantled posts, withdrew many troops and restored troop levels to those of a peacetime garrison.\nOperation Banner ended at midnight on 31 July 2007 after about 38 years of continuous deployment, the longest in British Army history. According to an internal document released in 2007, the British Army had failed to defeat the IRA but made it impossible for them to win by violence. Operation Helvetic replaced Operation Banner in 2007, maintaining fewer service personnel in a more-benign environment. Of the 300,000 troops who served in Northern Ireland since 1969, there were 763 British military personnel killed and 306 killed by the British military, mostly civilians. An estimated 100 soldiers committed suicide during Operation Banner or soon afterwards and a similar number died in accidents. A total of 6,116 were wounded.\nSierra Leone\nThe British Army deployed to Sierra Leone for Operation Palliser in 1999, under United Nations resolutions, to aid the government in quelling violent uprisings by militiamen. British troops also provided support during the 2014 West African Ebola virus epidemic.\nRecent history (2000\u2013present).\nWar in Afghanistan.\nIn November 2001, as part of Operation Enduring Freedom with the United States, the United Kingdom deployed forces in Afghanistan to topple the Taliban in Operation Herrick. The 3rd Division were sent to Kabul to assist in the liberation of the capital and defeat Taliban forces in the mountains. In 2006 the British Army began concentrating on fighting Taliban forces and bringing security to Helmand Province, with about 9,500 British troops (including marines, airmen and sailors) deployed at its peak\u2014the second-largest force after that of the US. In December 2012 Prime Minister David Cameron announced that the combat mission would end in 2014, and troop numbers gradually fell as the Afghan National Army took over the brunt of the fighting. Between 2001 and 26 April 2014 a total of 453 British military personnel died in Afghan operations. Operation Herrick ended with the handover of Camp Bastion on 26 October 2014, but the British Army maintained a deployment in Afghanistan as part of Operation Toral.\nFollowing an announcement by the US Government of the end of their operations in the Afghanistan, the Ministry of Defence announced in April 2021 that British forces would withdraw from the country by 11 September 2021. It was later reported that all UK troops would be out by early July. Following the collapse of the Afghan Army, and the completion of the withdrawal of civilians, all British troops had left by the end of August 2021.\nIraq War.\nIn 2003, the United Kingdom was a major contributor to the invasion of Iraq, sending a force of over 46,000 military personnel. The British Army controlled southern Iraq, and maintained a peace-keeping presence in Basra. All British troops were withdrawn from Iraq by 30 April 2009, after the Iraqi government refused to extend their mandate. One hundred and seventy-nine British military personnel died in Iraqi operations. The British Armed Forces returned to Iraq in 2014 as part of Operation Shader to counter the Islamic State (ISIL).\nRecent military aid.\nThe British Army maintains a standing liability to support the civil authorities in certain circumstances, usually in either niche capabilities (e.g. explosive ordnance removal) or in general support of the civil authorities when their capacity is exceeded. In recent years this has been seen as army personnel supporting the civil authorities in the face of the 2001 United Kingdom foot-and-mouth outbreak, the 2002 firefighters strike, widespread flooding in 2005, 2007, 2009, 2013 and 2014, Operation Temperer following the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017 and, most recently, Operation Rescript during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nBaltic States.\nSince 2016, the British Army has maintained a presence in the Baltic States in support of the NATO Enhanced Forward Presence strategy which responded to the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. The British Army leads a multinational armoured battlegroup in Estonia under Operation Cabrit and contributes troops to another military battle group in Poland. As part of the NATO plans, Britain has committed a full mechanized infantry brigade to be on a high state of readiness to defend Estonia.\nUkraine.\nBetween 2015 and 2022, the British Army deployed Short Term Training Teams (STTTs) to Ukraine under Operation Orbital to help train the Armed Forces of Ukraine against further Russian aggression. This operation was succeeded by Operation Interflex in July 2022.\nModern army.\nPersonnel.\nThe British Army has been a volunteer force since national service ended during the 1960s. Since the creation of the part-time, reserve Territorial Force in 1908 (renamed the Army Reserve in 2014), the full-time British Army has been known as the Regular Army. In July 2020 there were just over 78,800 Regulars, with a target strength of 82,000, and just over 30,000 Army Reservists, with a target strength of 30,000. All former Regular Army personnel may also be recalled to duty in exceptional circumstances during the 6-year period following completion of their Regular service, which creates an additional force known as the Regular Reserve.\nThe table below illustrates British Army personnel figures from 1710 to 2024.\nEquipment.\nInfantry.\nThe British Army's basic weapon is the 5.56\u00a0mm L85A2 or L85A3 assault rifle, with some specialist personnel using the L22A2 carbine variant (pilots and some tank crew). The weapon was traditionally equipped with either iron sights or an optical SUSAT, although other optical sights have been subsequently purchased to supplement these. The weapon can be enhanced further utilising the Picatinny rail with attachments such as the L17A2 under-barrel grenade launcher. In 2023, the Army Special Operations Brigade, which includes the Ranger Regiment, began using the L403A1, an AR-pattern rifle also used by the Royal Marines.\nSome soldiers are equipped with the 7.62mm L129A1 sharpshooter rifle, which in 2018 formally replaced the L86A2 Light Support Weapon. Support fire is provided by the L7 general-purpose machine gun (GPMG), and indirect fire is provided by L16 81mm mortars. Sniper rifles include the L118A1\u00a07.62\u00a0mm, L115A3 and the AW50F, all manufactured by Accuracy International. The British Army utilises the Glock 17 as its side arm.\nAnti tank guided weapons include the Javelin, the medium range anti-tank guided weapon replacement for Milan, with overfly and direct attack modes of operation, and the NLAW. The Next-generation Light Anti-tank Weapon (NLAW) is the first, non-expert, short-range, anti-tank missile that rapidly knocks out any main battle tank in just one shot by striking it from above.\nArmour.\nThe army's main battle tank is the Challenger 2, which is being upgraded to Challenger 3. It is supported by the Warrior tracked armoured vehicle as the primary infantry fighting vehicle, (which will soon be replaced by the Boxer 8x8 armoured fighting vehicle) and the Bulldog armoured personnel carrier. Light armoured units often utilise the Supacat \"Jackal\" MWMIK and Coyote tactical support vehicle for reconnaissance and fire support.\nArtillery.\nThe army has three main artillery systems: the M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS), the AS-90 and the L118 light gun. The MLRS, first used in Operation Granby, has an standard range, or with the PrSM, up to 500\u00a0km. The AS-90 is a 155\u00a0mm self-propelled armoured gun with a range. The L118 light gun is a 105\u00a0mm towed gun, which is typically towed by a Pinzgauer all-terrain vehicle. To identify artillery targets, the army operates the TAIPAN artillery detection radar and utilises artillery sound ranging. For air defence it uses the new Sky Sabre system, which in 2021 replaced the Rapier. It also deploys the Very Short-Range Air Defence (VSHORAD) Starstreak HVM (high-velocity missile) launched by a single soldier or from a Stormer HVM vehicle-mounted launcher.\nProtected mobility.\nWhere armour is not required or mobility and speed are favoured the British Army utilises protected patrol vehicles, such as the Panther variant of the Iveco LMV, the Foxhound, and variants of the Cougar family (such as the Ridgeback, Husky and Mastiff). For day-to-day utility work the army commonly uses the Land Rover Wolf, which is based on the Land Rover Defender.\nEngineers, utility and signals.\nSpecialist engineering vehicles include bomb-disposal robots such as the T7 Multi-Mission Robotic System and the modern variants of the Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers, including the Titan bridge-layer, Trojan armoured engineer vehicle, Terrier armoured digger. Day-to-day utility work uses a series of support vehicles, including six-, nine- and fifteen-tonne MAN trucks, Oshkosh heavy-equipment transporters (HET), close-support tankers, quad bikes and ambulances. Tactical communication uses the Bowman radio system, and operational or strategic communication is controlled by the Royal Corps of Signals.\nAviation.\nThe Army Air Corps (AAC) provides direct aviation support, with the Royal Air Force providing support helicopters. The primary attack helicopter is the Boeing AH-64E Apache which replaced the AgustaWestland Apache AH-1 in the anti-tank, anti-air defence, and anti-armour role. The AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat is a dedicated intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance (ISTAR) helicopter. The Eurocopter AS 365N Dauphin is used for special operations aviation, primarily counter terrorism operations, within the UK. The army operates two unmanned aerial vehicles in a surveillance role: the small Lockheed Martin Desert Hawk III and the larger Thales Watchkeeper WK450, which will be retired from service in March 2025.\nStructure.\nArmy Headquarters is located in Andover, Hampshire, and is responsible for providing forces at operational readiness for employment by the Permanent Joint Headquarters. The command structure is hierarchical, with overall command residing with the Chief of the General Staff (CGS), who is immediately subordinate to The Chief of Defence Staff, the head of the British Armed Services. The CGS is supported by the Deputy Chief of the General Staff. Army Headquarters is further organised into two subordinate commands, Field Army and Home Command, each commanded by a lieutenant general. These two Commands serve distinct purposes and are divided into a structure of divisions and brigades, which themselves consist of a complex mix of smaller units such as Battalions. British Army units are either full-time 'Regular' units, or part-time Army Reserve units.\nAllied Rapid Reaction Corps.\nLed by a British Army three-star general, one of NATO's High Readiness (Land) Forces based in Gloucestershire, UK, with the following British units under its command:\nField Army.\nLed by Commander Field Army, the Field Army is responsible for generating and preparing forces for current and contingency operations. The Field Army comprises:\nHome Command.\nHome Command is the British Army's supporting command; a generating, recruiting and training force that supports the Field Army and delivers UK resilience. It comprises\nSpecial Forces.\nThe British Army contributes two of the three special forces formations to the United Kingdom Special Forces directorate: the Special Air Service (SAS) and Special Reconnaissance Regiment (SRR). The SAS consists of one regular and two reserve regiments. The regular regiment, 22 SAS, has its headquarters at Stirling Lines, Credenhill, Herefordshire. It consists of 5 squadrons (A, B, D, G and Reserve) and a training wing. 22 SAS is supported by 2 reserve regiments, 21 SAS and 23 SAS, which collectively form the Special Air Service (Reserve) (SAS [R]), who in 2020 were transferred back under the command of Director of Special Forces after previously being under the command of the 1st Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Brigade. The SRR, formed in 2005, performs close reconnaissance and special surveillance tasks. The Special Forces Support Group, under the operational control of the Director of Special Forces, provides operational manoeuvring support to the United Kingdom Special Forces.\nColonial units.\nThe British Army historically included many units from what are now separate Commonwealth realms. When the English Empire was established in North America (including Bermuda), and the West Indies in the early 17th century there was no standing English Army, only the Militia, Yeomanry, and Royal bodyguards, of which the Militia, as the primary home-defence force, was immediately extended to the colonies. Colonial militias defended colonies single-handedly at first against indigenous peoples and European competitors. Once the standing English Army, later the British Army, came into existence and began to garrison the colonies, the colonial militias fought side by side with it in a number of wars, including the Seven Years' War. Some of the colonial militias rebelled during the American War of Independence. The militia fought alongside the regular British Army (and native allies) in defending British North America from their former countrymen during the War of 1812.\nLocally raised units in strategically located Imperial fortress colonies (including: Nova Scotia before the Canadian Confederation; Bermuda \u2013 which was treated as part of The Maritimes under the Commander-in-Chief at Nova Scotia until Canadian Confederation; Gibraltar; and Malta) and the Channel Islands were generally maintained from army funds and more fully integrated into the British Army as evident from their placements in British Army lists, unlike units such as the King's African Rifles.\nThe larger colonies (Australia, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, etc.) mostly achieved Commonwealth Dominion status before or after the First World War and were granted full legislative independence in 1931. While remaining within the British Empire, this placed their governments on a par with the British government, and hence their military units comprised separate armies (e.g. the Australian Army), although Canada retained the term \"militia\" for its military forces until the Second World War. From the 1940s, these dominions and many colonies chose full independence, usually becoming Commonwealth realms (as member states of the Commonwealth are known today).\nUnits raised in self-governing and Crown colonies (those without local elected Legislatures, as was the case with British Hong Kong) that are part of the British realm remain under British Government control. As the territorial governments are delegated responsibility only for internal government, the UK Government, as the government of the Sovereign state, retains responsibility for national security and the defence of the fourteen remaining British Overseas Territories, of which six have locally raised regiments:\nLevels of Command.\nThe structure of the British Army beneath the level of Divisions and Brigades is also hierarchical and command is based on rank. The table below details how many units within the British Army are structured, although there can be considerable variation between individual units:\nWhilst many units are organised as Battalions or Regiments administratively, the most common fighting unit is the combined arms unit known as a Battlegroup. This is formed around a combat unit and supported by units (or sub-units) from other capabilities. An example of a battlegroup would be two companies of armoured infantry (e.g. from the 1st Battalion of the Mercian Regiment), one squadron of heavy armour (e.g. A Squadron of the Royal Tank Regiment), a company of engineers (e.g. B Company of the 22nd Engineer Regiment), a Battery of artillery (e.g. D Battery of the 1st Regiment of the Royal Horse Artillery) and smaller attachments from medical, logistic and intelligence units. Typically organised and commanded by a battlegroup headquarters and named after the unit which provided the most combat units, in this example, it would be the 1 Mercian Battlegroup. This creates a self-sustaining mixed formation of armour, infantry, artillery, engineers and support units, commanded by a lieutenant colonel.\nRecruitment.\nThe British Army primarily recruits from within the United Kingdom, but accept applications from all British citizens. It also accepts applications from Irish citizens and Commonwealth citizens, with certain restrictions. Since 2018 the British Army has been an equal-opportunity employer (with some legal exceptions due to medical standards), and does not discriminate based on race, religion or sexual orientation. Applicants for the Regular Army must be a minimum age of 16, although soldiers under 18 may not serve in operations, and the maximum age is 36. Applicants for the Army Reserve must be a minimum of 17 years and 9 months, and a maximum age of 43. Different age limits apply for Officers and those in some specialist roles. Applicants must also meet several other requirements, notably regarding medical health, physical fitness, past-criminal convictions, education, and regarding any tattoos and piercings.\nSoldiers and officers in the Regular Army now enlist for an initial period of 12 years, with options to extend if they meet certain requirements. Soldiers and officers are normally required to serve for a minimum of 4 years from date of enlistment and must give 12 months' notice before leaving; soldiers who joined before the age of 18 years old are normally required to serve for a minimum of 6 years.\nOath of allegiance.\nAll soldiers and commissioned officers must take an oath of allegiance upon joining the Army, a process known as attestation. Those who wish to swear by God use the following words:\nOthers replace the words \"swear by Almighty God\" with \"solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm\".\nTraining.\nCandidates for the Army undergo common training, beginning with initial military training, to bring all personnel to a similar standard in basic military skills, which is known as Phase 1 training. They then undertake further specialist trade-training for their specific Regiment or Corps, known as Phase 2 training. After completing Phase 1 training a soldier is counted against the Army's trained strength, and upon completion of Phase 2 are counted against the Army's fully trained trade strength.\nSoldiers under the age of 17 and 6 months will complete Phase 1 training at the Army Foundation College. Infantry Soldiers will complete combined Phase 1 &amp; 2 training at the Infantry Training Centre, Catterick, whilst all other Soldiers will attend Phase 1 training at the Army Training Centre Pirbright or Army Training Regiment, Winchester, and then complete Phase 2 training at different locations depending on their specialism. Officers conduct their initial training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (RMAS), before also completing their Phase 2 training at multiple different locations.\nFlags and ensigns.\nThe British Army's official flag is the Union Jack. The Army also has a non-ceremonial flag that is often seen flying from military buildings and is used at recruiting and military events and exhibitions. Traditionally most British Army units had a set of flags, known as the colours\u2014normally a Regimental Colour and a King's Colour (the Union Jack). Historically these were carried into battle as a rallying point for the soldiers and were closely guarded. In modern units the colours are often prominently displayed, decorated with battle honours, and act as a focal point for Regimental pride. A soldier re-joining a regiment (upon recall from the reserve) is described as \"re-called to the Colours\".\nRanks and insignia.\nMost ranks across the British Army are known by the same name regardless of which Regiment they are in. However, the Household Cavalry call many ranks by different names, the Royal Artillery refer to Corporals as Bombardiers, the Rifles spell Sergeant as Serjeant, and Private soldiers are known by a wide variety of titles; notably trooper, gunner, guardsman, kingsman, sapper, signaller, fusilier, craftsman and rifleman dependant on the Regiment they belong to. These names do not affect a soldier's pay or role.\nReserve forces.\nThe oldest of the Reserve Forces was the Militia Force (also referred to as the \"Constitutional Force\"), which (in the Kingdom of England, prior to 1707) was originally the main military defensive force (until the 1745 creation of the New Model Army, there otherwise were originally only Royal bodyguards, including the Yeomen Warders and the Yeomen of the Guard, with armies raised only temporarily for expeditions overseas), made up of civilians embodied for annual training or emergencies, which had used various schemes of compulsory service during different periods of its long existence. From the 1850s it recruited volunteers who engaged for terms of service. The Militia was originally an all-infantry force, though Militia coastal artillery, field artillery, and engineers units were introduced from the 1850s.\nVolunteer Force units were also frequently raised during wartime and disbanded upon peace. This was re-established as a permanent (i.e., in war and peace) part of the Reserve Forces in 1859. It differed from the Militia in a number of ways, most particularly in that volunteers did not commit to a term service, and were able to resign with fourteen days notice (except while embodied). As volunteer soldiers were originally expected to fund the cost of their own equipment, few tended to come from the labouring class among whom the Militia primarily recruited.\nThe Yeomanry Force was made up of mounted units, organised similarly to the Volunteer Force, first raised during the two decades of war with France that followed the French Revolution. As with the Volunteers, members of the Yeomanry were expected to foot much of the cost of their own equipment, including their horses, and the make-up of the units tended to be from more affluent classes.\nAlthough Militia regiments were linked with British Army regiments during the course of the Napoleonic Wars to feed volunteers for service abroad into the regular army, and volunteers from the Reserve Forces served abroad either individually or in contingents, service companies, or battalions in a succession of conflicts from the Crimean War to the Second Boer War, personnel did not normally move between forces unless re-attested as a member of the new force, and units did not normally move from the Reserve Forces to become part of the Regular Forces, or vice versa. There were exceptions, however, as with the \"New Brunswick Regiment of Fencible Infantry\", raised in 1803, which became the 104th (New Brunswick) Regiment of Foot when it was transferred to the British Army on 13 September 1810.\nAnother type of reserve force was created during the period between the French Revolution and the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Called Fencibles, these were disbanded after the Napoleonic Wars and not raised again, although the Royal Malta Fencible Regiment, later the \"Royal Malta Fencible Artillery\", existed from 1815 until the 1880s when it became the Royal Malta Artillery, and the Royal New Zealand Fencible Corps was formed in 1846.\nThe Reserve Forces were raised locally (in Britain, under the control of Lords-Lieutenant of counties, and, in British colonies, under the colonial governors, and members originally were obliged to serve only within their locality (which, in the United Kingdom, originally meant within the county or other recruitment area, but was extended to anywhere in Britain, though not overseas). They have consequently also been referred to as \"Local Forces\". As they were (and in some cases \"are\") considered separate forces from the British Army, though still within the British military, they have also been known as \"Auxiliary Forces\". The Militia and Volunteer units of a colony were generally considered to be separate forces from the \"Home\" Militia Force and Volunteer Force in the United Kingdom, and from the Militia Forces and Volunteer Forces of other colonies. Where a colony had more than one Militia or Volunteer unit, they would be grouped as a Militia or Volunteer Force for that colony, such as the Jamaica Volunteer Defence Force. Officers of the Reserve Forces could not sit on Courts Martial of regular forces personnel. The Mutiny Act did not apply to members of the Reserve Forces. The \"Reserve Forces\" within the British Isles were increasingly integrated with the British Army through a succession of reforms (beginning with the Cardwell Reforms) of the British military forces over the last two decades of the Nineteenth Century and the early years of the Twentieth Century, whereby the Reserve Forces units mostly lost their own identities and became numbered Militia or Volunteer battalions of regular British Army corps or regiments.\nIn 1908, the Yeomanry and Volunteer Force were merged to create the Territorial Force (changed to \"Territorial Army\" after the First World War), with terms of service similar to the army and Militia, and the Militia was renamed the \"Special Reserve\", After the First World War the Special Reserve was renamed the Militia, again, but permanently suspended (although a handful of Militia units survived in the United Kingdom, its colonies, and the Crown Dependencies). Although the Territorial Force was nominally still a separate force from the British Army, by the end of the century, at the latest, any unit wholly or partly funded from Army Funds was considered part of the British Army. Outside the United Kingdom-proper, this was generally only the case for those units in the Channel Islands or the Imperial fortress colonies (Nova Scotia, before Canadian confederation; Bermuda; Gibraltar; and Malta).\nThe Bermuda Militia Artillery, Bermuda Militia Infantry, Bermuda Volunteer Engineers, and the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps, by example were paid for by the War Office and considered part of the British Army, with their officers appearing as such in the \"Army List\" unlike those of many other colonial units deemed auxiliaries. Today, the British Army is the only Home British military force, including the various other forces it has absorbed, though British military units organised on Territorial Army lines remain in British Overseas Territories that are still not considered formally part of the British Army, with only the Royal Gibraltar Regiment and the Royal Bermuda Regiment (an amalgam of the old Bermuda Militia Artillery and Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps) appearing on the British Army order-of-precedence and in the Army List, as well as on the Corps Warrant (the official list of those British military forces that are considered corps of the British Army).\nIn October 2012 the Ministry of Defence announced that the Territorial Army was to be renamed the Army Reserve.\nUniforms.\nThe British Army uniform has sixteen categories, ranging from ceremonial uniforms to combat dress to evening wear. No. 8 Dress, the day-to-day uniform, is known as \"Personal Clothing System \u2013 Combat Uniform\" (PCS-CU) and consists of a Multi-Terrain Pattern (MTP) windproof smock, a lightweight jacket and trousers with ancillary items such as thermals and waterproofs. The army has introduced tactical recognition flashes (TRFs); worn on the right arm of a combat uniform, the insignia denotes the wearer's regiment or corps. In addition to working dress, the army has a number of parade uniforms for ceremonial and non-ceremonial occasions. The most-commonly-seen uniforms are No. 1 Dress (full ceremonial, seen at formal occasions such as at the changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace) and No. 2 Dress (Service Dress), a brown khaki uniform worn for non-ceremonial parades.\nWorking headdress is typically a beret, whose colour indicates its wearer's type of regiment. Beret colours are:"}
{"id": "4888", "revid": "36942950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4888", "title": "Bruin", "text": "Bruin, (from Dutch for \"brown\"), is an English folk term for brown bear.\nBruin, Bruins or BRUIN may also refer to:"}
{"id": "4889", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4889", "title": "Big rig", "text": ""}
{"id": "4890", "revid": "32521649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4890", "title": "Bayesian probability", "text": "Bayesian probability ( or ) is an interpretation of the concept of probability, in which, instead of frequency or propensity of some phenomenon, probability is interpreted as reasonable expectation representing a state of knowledge or as quantification of a personal belief.\nThe Bayesian interpretation of probability can be seen as an extension of propositional logic that enables reasoning with hypotheses; that is, with propositions whose truth or falsity is unknown. In the Bayesian view, a probability is assigned to a hypothesis, whereas under frequentist inference, a hypothesis is typically tested without being assigned a probability.\nBayesian probability belongs to the category of evidential probabilities; to evaluate the probability of a hypothesis, the Bayesian probabilist specifies a prior probability. This, in turn, is then updated to a posterior probability in the light of new, relevant data (evidence). The Bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation.\nThe term \"Bayesian\" derives from the 18th-century mathematician and theologian Thomas Bayes, who provided the first mathematical treatment of a non-trivial problem of statistical data analysis using what is now known as Bayesian inference. Mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace pioneered and popularized what is now called Bayesian probability.\nBayesian methodology.\nBayesian methods are characterized by concepts and procedures as follows:\nObjective and subjective Bayesian probabilities.\nBroadly speaking, there are two interpretations of Bayesian probability. For objectivists, who interpret probability as an extension of logic, \"probability\" quantifies the reasonable expectation that everyone (even a \"robot\") who shares the same knowledge should share in accordance with the rules of Bayesian statistics, which can be justified by Cox's theorem. For subjectivists, \"probability\" corresponds to a personal belief. Rationality and coherence allow for substantial variation within the constraints they pose; the constraints are justified by the Dutch book argument or by decision theory and de Finetti's theorem. The objective and subjective variants of Bayesian probability differ mainly in their interpretation and construction of the prior probability.\nHistory.\nThe term \"Bayesian\" derives from Thomas Bayes (1702\u20131761), who proved a special case of what is now called Bayes' theorem in a paper titled \"An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances\". In that special case, the prior and posterior distributions were beta distributions and the data came from Bernoulli trials. It was Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749\u20131827) who introduced a general version of the theorem and used it to approach problems in celestial mechanics, medical statistics, reliability, and jurisprudence. Early Bayesian inference, which used uniform priors following Laplace's principle of insufficient reason, was called \"inverse probability\" (because it infers backwards from observations to parameters, or from effects to causes). After the 1920s, \"inverse probability\" was largely supplanted by a collection of methods that came to be called frequentist statistics.\nIn the 20th century, the ideas of Laplace developed in two directions, giving rise to \"objective\" and \"subjective\" currents in Bayesian practice.\nHarold Jeffreys' \"Theory of Probability\" (first published in 1939) played an important role in the revival of the Bayesian view of probability, followed by works by Abraham Wald (1950) and Leonard J. Savage (1954). The adjective \"Bayesian\" itself dates to the 1950s; the derived \"Bayesianism\", \"neo-Bayesianism\" is of 1960s coinage. In the objectivist stream, the statistical analysis depends on only the model assumed and the data analysed. No subjective decisions need to be involved. In contrast, \"subjectivist\" statisticians deny the possibility of fully objective analysis for the general case.\nIn the 1980s, there was a dramatic growth in research and applications of Bayesian methods, mostly attributed to the discovery of Markov chain Monte Carlo methods and the consequent removal of many of the computational problems, and to an increasing interest in nonstandard, complex applications. While frequentist statistics remains strong (as demonstrated by the fact that much of undergraduate teaching is based on it ), Bayesian methods are widely accepted and used, e.g., in the field of machine learning.\nJustification.\nThe use of Bayesian probabilities as the basis of Bayesian inference has been supported by several arguments, such as Cox axioms, the Dutch book argument, arguments based on decision theory and de Finetti's theorem.\nAxiomatic approach.\nRichard T. Cox showed that Bayesian updating follows from several axioms, including two functional equations and a hypothesis of differentiability. The assumption of differentiability or even continuity is controversial; Halpern found a counterexample based on his observation that the Boolean algebra of statements may be finite. Other axiomatizations have been suggested by various authors with the purpose of making the theory more rigorous.\nDutch book approach.\nBruno de Finetti proposed the Dutch book argument based on betting. A clever bookmaker makes a Dutch book by setting the odds and bets to ensure that the bookmaker profits\u2014at the expense of the gamblers\u2014regardless of the outcome of the event (a horse race, for example) on which the gamblers bet. It is associated with probabilities implied by the odds not being coherent.\nHowever, Ian Hacking noted that traditional Dutch book arguments did not specify Bayesian updating: they left open the possibility that non-Bayesian updating rules could avoid Dutch books. For example, Hacking writes \"And neither the Dutch book argument, nor any other in the personalist arsenal of proofs of the probability axioms, entails the dynamic assumption. Not one entails Bayesianism. So the personalist requires the dynamic assumption to be Bayesian. It is true that in consistency a personalist could abandon the Bayesian model of learning from experience. Salt could lose its savour.\"\nIn fact, there are non-Bayesian updating rules that also avoid Dutch books (as discussed in the literature on \"probability kinematics\" following the publication of Richard C. Jeffrey's rule, which is itself regarded as Bayesian). The additional hypotheses sufficient to (uniquely) specify Bayesian updating are substantial and not universally seen as satisfactory.\nDecision theory approach.\nA decision-theoretic justification of the use of Bayesian inference (and hence of Bayesian probabilities) was given by Abraham Wald, who proved that every admissible statistical procedure is either a Bayesian procedure or a limit of Bayesian procedures. Conversely, every Bayesian procedure is admissible.\nPersonal probabilities and objective methods for constructing priors.\nFollowing the work on expected utility theory of Ramsey and von Neumann, decision-theorists have accounted for rational behavior using a probability distribution for the agent. Johann Pfanzagl completed the \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\" by providing an axiomatization of subjective probability and utility, a task left uncompleted by von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern: their original theory supposed that all the agents had the same probability distribution, as a convenience. Pfanzagl's axiomatization was endorsed by Oskar Morgenstern: \"Von Neumann and I have anticipated ... [the question whether probabilities] might, perhaps more typically, be subjective and have stated specifically that in the latter case axioms could be found from which could derive the desired numerical utility together with a number for the probabilities (cf. p. 19 of The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior). We did not carry this out; it was demonstrated by Pfanzagl ... with all the necessary rigor\".\nRamsey and Savage noted that the individual agent's probability distribution could be objectively studied in experiments. Procedures for testing hypotheses about probabilities (using finite samples) are due to Ramsey (1931) and de Finetti (1931, 1937, 1964, 1970). Both Bruno de Finetti and Frank P. Ramsey acknowledge their debts to pragmatic philosophy, particularly (for Ramsey) to Charles S. Peirce.\nThe \"Ramsey test\" for evaluating probability distributions is implementable in theory, and has kept experimental psychologists occupied for a half century.\nThis work demonstrates that Bayesian-probability propositions can be falsified, and so meet an empirical criterion of Charles S. Peirce, whose work inspired Ramsey. (This falsifiability-criterion was popularized by Karl Popper.)\nModern work on the experimental evaluation of personal probabilities uses the randomization, blinding, and Boolean-decision procedures of the Peirce-Jastrow experiment. Since individuals act according to different probability judgments, these agents' probabilities are \"personal\" (but amenable to objective study).\nPersonal probabilities are problematic for science and for some applications where decision-makers lack the knowledge or time to specify an informed probability-distribution (on which they are prepared to act). To meet the needs of science and of human limitations, Bayesian statisticians have developed \"objective\" methods for specifying prior probabilities.\nIndeed, some Bayesians have argued the prior state of knowledge defines \"the\" (unique) prior probability-distribution for \"regular\" statistical problems; cf. well-posed problems. Finding the right method for constructing such \"objective\" priors (for appropriate classes of regular problems) has been the quest of statistical theorists from Laplace to John Maynard Keynes, Harold Jeffreys, and Edwin Thompson Jaynes. These theorists and their successors have suggested several methods for constructing \"objective\" priors (Unfortunately, it is not always clear how to assess the relative \"objectivity\" of the priors proposed under these methods):\nEach of these methods contributes useful priors for \"regular\" one-parameter problems, and each prior can handle some challenging statistical models (with \"irregularity\" or several parameters). Each of these methods has been useful in Bayesian practice. Indeed, methods for constructing \"objective\" (alternatively, \"default\" or \"ignorance\") priors have been developed by avowed subjective (or \"personal\") Bayesians like James Berger (Duke University) and Jos\u00e9-Miguel Bernardo (Universitat de Val\u00e8ncia), simply because such priors are needed for Bayesian practice, particularly in science. The quest for \"the universal method for constructing priors\" continues to attract statistical theorists.\nThus, the Bayesian statistician needs either to use informed priors (using relevant expertise or previous data) or to choose among the competing methods for constructing \"objective\" priors."}
{"id": "4891", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4891", "title": "Ballet dance", "text": ""}
{"id": "4892", "revid": "16761480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4892", "title": "Bert Bell", "text": "De Benneville \"Bert\" Bell (February 25, 1895 \u2013 October 11, 1959) was an American professional football executive and coach. He was the fifth chief executive and second commissioner of the National Football League (NFL) from 1946 until his death in 1959. As commissioner, he introduced competitive parity into the NFL to improve the league's commercial viability and promote its popularity.\nWhereas Bell had become the chief executive in a sport that was largely seen as second-rate and heading a league still plagued by franchise instability, by his death the NFL was a financially sound sports enterprise and seriously challenging Major League Baseball for preeminence among sports attractions in the United States. Bell was posthumously inducted into the charter class of the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nBell played football at the University of Pennsylvania, where as quarterback, he led his team to an appearance in the 1917 Rose Bowl. After being drafted into the US Army during World War I, he returned to complete his collegiate career at Penn and went on to become an assistant football coach with the Quakers in the 1920s. During the Great Depression, he was an assistant coach for the Temple Owls and a co-founder and co-owner of the Philadelphia Eagles.\nWith the Eagles, Bell led the way in cooperating with the other NFL owners to establish the NFL draft in order to afford the weakest teams the first opportunity to sign the best available players. He subsequently became sole proprietor of the Eagles, but the franchise suffered financially. Eventually, he sold the team and bought a share in the Pittsburgh Steelers. During World War II, Bell argued against the league suspending operations until the war's conclusion.\nAfter the war, he was elected NFL commissioner and sold his ownership in the Steelers. As commissioner, he implemented a proactive anti-gambling policy, negotiated a merger with the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), and unilaterally crafted the entire league schedule with an emphasis on enhancing the dramatic effect of late-season matches. During the Golden Age of Television, he tailored the game's rules to strengthen its appeal to mass media and enforced a policy of blacking out local broadcasts of home contests to safeguard ticket receipts. Amid criticism from franchise owners and under pressure from Congress, he unilaterally recognized the NFLPA and facilitated in the development of the first pension plan for the players. He survived to oversee the \"Greatest Game Ever Played\" and to envision what the league would become in the future.\nAs commissioner, Bell oversaw the integration of the NFL. Although Fritz Pollard was the first African American to play in the NFL, appearing with three teams from 1922 to 1926, a \u201cgentleman\u2019s agreement\u201d among the owners kept the sport segregated for another 20 years. In 1946, four black players began playing in the NFL.\nEarly life (1895\u20131932).\nBell was born De Benneville Bell, on February 25, 1895, in Philadelphia to John C. Bell and Fleurette de Benneville Myers. His father was an attorney who served a term as the Pennsylvania Attorney General. His older brother, John C., Jr., was born in 1892. Bert's parents were very wealthy, and his mother's lineage predated the American Revolutionary War. His father, a Quaker of the University of Pennsylvania (class of 1884) during the early days of American football, accompanied him to his first football game when Bell was six years old. Thereafter, Bell regularly engaged in football games with childhood friends.\nIn 1904, Bell matriculated at the Episcopal Academy, the Delancey School from 1909 to 1911 and then the Haverford School until 1914. About this time, his father was installed as athletics director at Penn and helped form the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). At Haverford, Bell captained the school's football, basketball, and baseball teams, and \"was awarded The Yale Cup [for being] 'The pupil who has done the most to promote athletics in the school.'\" Although he excelled at baseball, his devotion was to football. His father, who was named a trustee at Penn in 1911, said of Bell's plans for college, \"Bert will go to Penn or he will go to hell.\"\nUniversity of Pennsylvania (1914\u20131919).\nBell entered the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia in the fall of 1914. He majored in English and joined the Phi Kappa Sigma fraternity. In a rare accomplishment for a sophomore, he was named the starting quarterback by Penn coach George H. Brooke. He also was a defender, punter, and punt returner. After the team's 3\u20130 start, Bell temporarily shared possession of his quarterbacking duties until he subsequently reclaimed them later in the season, as Penn finished with a record of 3\u20135\u20132.\nPrior to Penn's 1916 season, Bell's mother died while he was en route to her bedside. He started the first game for the Quakers under new coach Bob Folwell, but mixed results left him platooned for the rest of the season. Penn finished with a record of 7\u20132\u20131. However, the Quakers secured an invitation to the 1917 Rose Bowl against the Oregon Ducks. Bell had the best offensive gain for Penn during their 0\u201314 loss to Oregon, a 20-yard run, but was replaced late in the game at quarterback after throwing an interception. In the 1917 season, Bell led Penn to a 9\u20132 record.\nFollowing the 1917 season, Bell registered with a Mobile Hospital Unit of the United States Army for World War I and was deployed to France in May 1918. As a result of his unit participating in hazardous duty, it received a congratulatory letter for bravery from General John J. Pershing, and Bell was promoted to first sergeant. After the war, Bell returned to the United States in March 1919. He returned to Penn as captain of the team in the fall and again performed erratically. The Quakers finished 1919 with a 6\u20132\u20131 record. Academically, his aversion to attending classes forced him to withdraw from Penn without a degree in early 1920. His collegiate days ended with his having been a borderline All-American, but this period of his life had proven that he \"possessed the qualities of a leader.\"\nEarly career (1920\u20131932).\nBell assembled the Stanley Professionals in Chicago in 1920, but he disbanded it prior to playing any games because of negative publicity received by Chicago due to the Black Sox Scandal. He joined John Heisman's staff at Penn as an assistant coach in 1920, where he remained for several years. At Penn, he was well regarded as a football coach, and after its 1924 season, he drew offers for, but declined, head-coaching assignments at other universities. At least as early as 1926, his avocation was socializing and frequenting Saratoga Race Course, where he counted as friends Tim Mara, Art Rooney, and George Preston Marshall. In 1928, Bell tendered his resignation at Penn in protest over the emphasis on in-season scrimmages during practices by Lud Wray, a fellow assistant coach. Bell's resignation was accommodated prior to the start of the 1929 season.\nBell was then an employee of the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia. At one point, he tried his hand as a stock broker and lost $50,000 () during the Wall Street Crash of 1929. His father bailed him out of his deprivation, and he returned to working at the Ritz. From 1930 until 1932, he was a backfield coach for Temple in Philadelphia. In 1932, Marshall tried to coax Bell into buying the rights to an NFL franchise, but Bell disparaged the league and ridiculed the idea. When Pop Warner was hired to coach Temple for the 1933 season, Warner chose to hire his own assistants, and Bell was let go by Temple.\nNFL career.\nPhiladelphia Eagles (1933\u20131940).\nBy early 1933, Bell's opinion on the NFL had changed, and he wanted to become an owner of a team based in Philadelphia. After being advised by the NFL that a prerequisite to a franchise being rendered in Philadelphia was that the Pennsylvania Blue Laws would have to be mollified, he was the \"force majeure\" in lobbying to getting the laws deprecated. He borrowed funds from Frances Upton, partnered with Wray, and he procured the rights to a franchise in Philadelphia, purchasing the Frankford Yellow Jackets which he christened as the Philadelphia Eagles, inspired by Franklin Delano Roosevelt's use of the American eagle symbol in choosing that name.\nAfter the inaugural 1933 Philadelphia Eagles season, Bell married Upton at St. Madeleine Sophie Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia. Days later, his suggestion to bestow the winner of the NFL championship game with the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy was affirmed. In 1934, the Eagles finished with a 4\u20137 record, The Eagles' inability to seriously challenge other teams made it difficult to sell tickets, and his failure to sign a talented college prospect led him to adduce that the only way to bring stability to the league was to institute a draft to ensure the weakest teams had an advantage in signing the preeminent players. In 1935, his proposal for a draft was accepted, and in February 1936, the first draft kicked off, at which he acted as Master of Ceremonies. Later that month, his first child, Bert Jr., was born.\nIn the Eagles' first three years, the partners exhausted $85,000 (), and at a public auction, Bell became sole owner of the Eagles with a bid of $4,500 (). Austerity measures forced him to supplant Wray as head coach of the Eagles, wherein Bell led the Eagles to a 1\u201311 finish, their worst record ever. In December, an application for a franchise in Los Angeles was obstructed by Bell and Pittsburgh Steelers owner Rooney as they deemed it too far of a distance to travel for games. During the Eagles' 2\u20138\u20131 1937 season, his second child, John \"Upton\", was born. In the Eagles' first profitable season, 1938, they posted a 5\u20136 record. The Eagles finished 1\u20139\u20131 in 1939 and 1\u201310 in 1940.\nPittsburgh Steelers (1940\u20131945).\nIn December 1940, Bell conciliated the sale of Rooney's Steelers to Alexis Thompson, and then Rooney acquired half of Bell's interest in the Eagles. In a series of events known as the \"Pennsylvania Polka\", Rooney and Bell exchanged their entire Eagles roster and their \"territorial rights\" in Philadelphia to Thompson for his entire Steelers roster and his rights in Pittsburgh. Ostensibly, Rooney had provided assistance to Bell by rewarding him with a 20% commission on the sale of the Steelers. Bell became the Steelers head coach and Rooney became the general manager.\nDuring the training camp of Pittsburgh's inaugural season with the nickname Steelers, Bell was buoyant with optimism about the team's prospect, but he became crestfallen after Rooney denigrated the squad and flippantly remarked that they looked like the \"[s]ame old Steelers\" (SOS). After losing the first two games of the 1941 season, Rooney compelled Bell to resign as head coach. Bell's coaching career ended with a 10\u201346\u20132 record, his 0.179 winning percentage is second-lowest in NFL history to only Phil Handler's 0.105 for coaches with at least five seasons. And at 36 games under .500 he held the record for futility until John McKay passed him in 1983 and Marion Campbell passed him in 1988. His first daughter and last child, Jane Upton, was born several months after the season's conclusion.\nBy 1943, 40% of the NFL rosters had been drafted into the United States Armed Forces for World War II. The resulting difficulty in fielding a full-strength squad led some owners to recommend the league should shut down until the war ended. Bell auspiciously argued against this as he feared they might not be able to resume operations easily after the war, and since Major League Baseball was continuing unabated, then they should also.\nThroughout Bell's affiliation with the Steelers, he suffered monetarily and Rooney bought an increasing allotment of the franchise from him. Compounding Bell's problems, Arch Ward organized the All-America Football Conference (AAFC) in 1944 to displace the NFL's sovereignty in professional football. Ward's AAFC promptly began luring players to join the league, which resulted in salaries being driven up drastically. In Bill Dudley's contract proceedings with the Steelers, he attributed Bell's anxiety during the negotiations to the rivalry from the AAFC. Furthermore, by the end of 1945, the Steelers were in their most economically perilous situation in its history.\nNFL commissioner (1946\u20131959).\nElection, Hapes-Filchock, and the NFL schedule (1946\u20131948).\nElmer Layden was appointed the first NFL commissioner in 1941, but Ward appeared as dictating his hiring. Layden tendered his resignation for personal reasons January 1946. Bell, who was not well respected in Pittsburgh, was elected to replace him. He received a three-year contract at $20,000 per year (), and transacted a sale of his stake in the Steelers to Rooney, albeit for a price Bell did not construe was full-value. He was then immediately placed at the center of a controversy wherein the owners denied Dan Reeves permission to relocate the Cleveland Rams to Los Angeles. Bell moderated a settlement, and, as a result, the Los Angeles Rams were formed. As a precondition to the Rams leasing the Los Angeles Coliseum, they signed Kenny Washington, which marked the beginning of the end of racial segregation on the field, but also caused \"'all hell to break loose'\" amidst the owners.\nThe drawing up of a regular-season schedule had been a perennial source of contention among the NFL owners since the league's inception. The crux of the problem was the scheduling of games meant weighing the interest of owners who, early in the season, wanted their franchises to confront teams that drew the largest crowds, versus owners who wanted to play the weaker franchises to pad their team's win\u2013loss record. The resultant impasse coerced the owners, in 1946, to confer upon Bell the sole discretion in developing the league's schedule. He utilized this responsibility to, early in the season, pit the weaker teams against other weak teams, and the strong teams against other strong teams. His goal was to augment game attendances by keeping the difference in team standings to a minimum as deep into the season as possible.\nOn the eve of the 1946 championship game, Bell was notified that Merle Hapes and Frank Filchock of the New York Giants had been implicated in a bribing scandal. Filchock was sanctioned by Bell to play in the game but Hapes was suspended. At the next NFL owners' meeting, Bell was worried the repercussions from this event would lead to his firing. However, he was pleasantly surprised to learn that his contract would be elevated to five years at $30,000 per year. Reinvigorated with renewed support, he persuaded the owners to allow him to put sudden-death overtime into the playoffs.\nSubsequently, he wrote an anti-gambling resolution into the league constitution, which empowered him with the ability to permanently ban any NFL associated personnel for betting on a game or for withholding information on a game being possibly fixed. Furthermore, to obstruct gamblers from getting inside information, he secreted the names of officials he would assign to games, and he directed each team to promulgate a precursory injury report which listed anyone who might not participate in a game. Eventually, he lobbied to get every state in the US to criminalize the fixing of sporting events and put employees on the payroll of the NFL to investigate potential betting scams.\nAAFC\u2013NFL merger (1948\u20131950).\nThe NFL's struggle against the AAFC generated stress on wages, attendance, marketing, and by 1949, it had prevented the NFL for showing a profit for three consecutive years. Bell and representatives from both leagues met to attempt a merger, but their efforts were fruitless. In an unrelated matter, he apprised the owners that attendance records had shown televising games locally had a negative impact on the sale of home tickets. Nevertheless, he actualized the NFL's first television contract\u2014the 1949 championship game. Simultaneously, he dealt with a lawsuit from Bill Radovich, who had been blacklisted for leaving the Lions and gaining employment with the AAFC. Bell and the owners were advised by John C. Jr. that this lawsuit was potentially not winnable, and the ramifications from the outcome of the case weighed heavily on Bell.\nOne of the primary impediments in an AAFC\u2013NFL merger was the supposed violation of \"territorial rights\" claimed by Marshall. Eventually, Bell gathered enough support to effectuate a compromise with the AAFC. In late 1949, the leagues merged, as three AAFC teams (the Cleveland Browns, San Francisco 49ers, and Baltimore Colts) joined the NFL; a fourth AAFC team (Los Angeles Dons) merged with the Los Angeles Rams, and the other AAFC teams disbanded. Bell stayed on as commissioner with his contract extended from five to ten years Seeking to capitalize on the publicity of the residual AAFC\u2013NFL rivalry, he utilized \"exquisite dramatic\" and business sense and allocated the 1950 opening game to a contest between the 1949 champion Eagles versus the perennial AAFC champion Browns. Feeling financially secure after the merger, he purchased his first home for himself and his family in Narberth, Pennsylvania.\nMarketing of the NFL (1950\u20131956).\nIn 1950, Bell originated a blackout rule into the NFL which forbid all teams to televise their home games within a 75-mile radius of their stadium \u2013 except for the Rams. Consequently, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) opened an investigation into a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. Rams attendance for 1950 dropped off by 50%, and this signaled a potential financial disaster. In 1951, he licensed the DuMont Television Network to air the championship games for the next five years, and he stipulated that teams were free to develop their own television contracts independently.\nHowever, preceding the 1951 season, he reimposed the blackout rule on all teams in the league. The DOJ filed suit over this and Bell publicly retorted, \"You can't give fans a game for free on TV and also expect them to go to the ballpark\"; nevertheless, the suit was ordered to trial for January 1952. After the 1951 season ended, he gained unilateral control over the setting of a television strategy for the NFL. He negotiated a deal with DuMont, which granted it the rights to nationally broadcast one regular-season game every week, and he directed that the income from this contract was to be shared equally between all the teams. In the DOJ's case, the judge ruled that the blackout policy was legal, but both Bell, and the franchises collectively, were enjoined from negotiating a TV contract; Bell was ecstatic. Later that year, Bell forced one of the owners of the Cleveland Browns to sell all of his shares in the team after Bell determined the owner had bet on Browns' football games. Although he hated to fly, at some indeterminate point, he visited the training camps of every team and lectured on the danger gamblers posed to the league.\nBell authorized a Pro Bowl to be held at the end of each season in order to showcase the talents of the best players. But in the early 1950s, on the field activities sometimes denigrated to borderline \"assault and battery\" with teams' star players being viciously targeted by opposing players. He answered charges the league was too savage by saying, \"'I have never seen a maliciously dirty football player in my life and I don't believe there are any.'\" Nevertheless, he ordered broadcasts to follow a strict rule of conduct whereby TV announcers would not be permitted to criticize the game, and neither fights, nor injuries, could be televised by virtue in his belief that announcers were \"'salesman for professional football [and] we do not want kids believing that engaging in fights is the way to play football.'\"\nBell was criticized for censoring TV broadcasts, a charge he dismissed as not pertinent because he believed he was not impeding the print media but only advertising a product. After CBS and NBC gained the rights to broadcast the games in 1956, he advised the franchises to avoid criticizing the games or the officials, and forewarned that TV would give \"'us our greatest opportunity to sell the NFL and everyone must present to the public the greatest games\u00a0... combined with the finest sportsmanship.'\" This relationship with television was the beginning of the NFL's rise to becoming America's most popular sport.\nCompromise with the NFLPA (1956\u20131957).\nIn Radovich v. National Football League, the Supreme Court ruled in Radovich's favor and declared the NFL was subject to antitrust laws, and the implication was that the legality of the draft and reserve clause were dubious. Bell pressed a case in the media that the NFL should be exempted from antitrust regulations and proffered the league was a sport and not a business. He invited an investigation from Congress with respect to the court's ruling. The House Judiciary committee, chaired by Emanuel Celler\u2014who believed the draft was illegal and should be abolished, convened in July 1957 to discuss the ramifications of the Radovich decision. Red Grange and Bell testified at the committee's solicitation and argued the draft was essential to the sport's success. Representatives of the NFLPA contradicted these statements and said the draft and the reserve clause were anti-labor, and it seemed as if Congress was going to accept their position. Faced with Congressional opposition, Bell formally recognized the NFLPA and declared he would negotiate with its representatives.\nHowever, Bell was speaking only for himself and without the auspices of the owners. At the next owners' meeting, Rooney admonished they either had to recognize the NFLPA or remove Bell as commissioner. In order to do this, they had to agree in a vote that required a \"super-majority\". Bell unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the owners to permit the NFLPA to act as a bargaining agent for the players. However, he did reach a compromise with the owners to get them to acquiesce to some of the NFLPA's requests for salary standards and health benefits.\nFinal days (1958\u20131959).\nFor the 1958 season, the duration of timeouts was extended from 60 to 90 seconds and Bell mandated officials call a few \"TV timeouts\" during each game \u2014 a change which triggered criticism from sportswriters. The 1958 championship game became the first NFL championship game decided in overtime, and it was considered to be the greatest football game ever played. The game further increased football's marketability to television advertising, and the drama associated with overtime was the catalyst. Years later, after witnessing Bell openly crying after the game, Raymond Berry attributed it to Bell's realization of the impact the game would have on the prevalence of the sport.\nThe death of Mara in February unsettled Bell and he experienced a heart attack later that month. He converted to Catholicism that summer because of the lifelong urging of his wife, Mara's death, and his enduring friendship with Rooney, a practicing Catholic. Bell was advised by his doctor to avoid going to football games, to which he quipped, \"I'd rather die watching football than in my bed with my boots off.\" Bell and his children attended an Eagles game on October 11 at Franklin Field against the Steelers (both his old teams). The Eagles held complimentary box seats for him and guests to watch the game, but he preferred to buy his own tickets and sit with the other fans. Sitting towards the end of the field near the end zone during the fourth quarter of the game, he suffered a fatal heart attack and died later that day at the nearby university hospital. League Treasurer Austin Gunsel was named interim NFL commissioner for the rest of the season.\nAfterwards, he was remembered as \"a man of buoyant joviality, with a rough and ready wit, laughter and genuine humility and honesty, clearly innocent of pretense and [pretension].\" His funeral was held at Narberth's St. Margaret Roman Catholic Church and Monsignor Cornelius P. Brennan delivered the eulogy, as close friends and admirers attended the mass. Dominic Olejniczak and all the extant owners of the NFL franchises were pallbearers. Bell was interred at Calvary Cemetery in West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, northwest of Philadelphia.\nBell had named Baltimore Colts owner Carroll Rosenbloom as his executor. Bell had been Rosenbloom's backfield coach at Penn in the early 1950s, and later had convinced Rosenbloom to purchase the Colts after becoming commissioner. Rosenbloom owned the Colts in 1958 when they won the greatest game ever played, and brought greater national attention to the NFL. After Bell's death, Rosenbloom hired Bell's sons Upton and Bert Jr. to work for the Colts. \nLegacy and honors.\nBell was inducted into the Professional Football Hall of Fame, the Penn Athletics Hall of Fame, the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame, and Haverford's Athletic Hall of Fame. The Maxwell Football Club, which he founded in 1937, has presented the best NFL player of the year with the Bert Bell Award since 1959. The Bert Bell Benefit Bowl was exhibited in his honor from 1960 through 1969. A statue of Bell will be unveiled on October 25, 2024, at the University of Pennsylvania's Franklin Field. The historical maker to Bell in Narberth, Pennsylvania is within blocks of his family's home at 323 Haverford Avenue. \nAlthough he did not have the wherewithal to prevent the wholesale betting on games, he was proactive in ensuring games were not tampered with by gamblers, and he created the foundation of the contemporary NFL anti-gambling policy.\nBell was criticized as being too strict with his refusal to let sold-out games to be televised locally. Nevertheless, his balancing of television broadcasts against protecting game attendance made the NFL the \"healthiest professional sport in America\", and he was the \"leading protagonist in pro football's evolution into America's major sport.\" He had understood that the league needed a cooperative television contract with revenue-sharing, but he failed to overcome the obstacles to achieve it. He was portrayed by sportswriters as ensuring the owners treated the players fairly, and his decision to recognize the NFLPA in the face of adversity from owners was a \"master stroke\" in thwarting Congressional intervention. After he initiated terms for a pension plan with the players in 1959, little progress was made with the NFLPA, however, the first players' pension plan \u2013 the Bert Bell National Football League Retirement Plan \u2013 was approved in 1962.\nBell's implementation of the draft did not show immediate results, but it was \"the single greatest contributor to the [league]'s prosperity\" in its first eighty-four years. His original version of the draft was later ruled unconstitutional, but his anchoring of the success of the league to competitive balance has been \"hailed by contemporaries and sports historians\".\nBell's belief in the efficacy of parity for the financial health of the league is best summarized by his most famous quotation, made to the press in November 1952 to explain an uptick in stadium attendance:"}
{"id": "4893", "revid": "48128642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4893", "title": "Bob Costas", "text": "Robert Quinlan Costas (born March 22, 1952) is an American sportscaster who is known for his long tenure with NBC Sports, from 1980 through 2019. He has received 28 Emmy awards for his work and was the prime-time host of 12 Olympic Games from 1988 until 2016. He is currently employed by TNT Sports, where he does play-by-play and studio work for MLB on TBS and commentary on CNN. He is also employed by MLB Network, where he does play-by-play and once hosted an interview show called \"Studio 42 with Bob Costas\".\nEarly life and education.\nCostas is the son of a Greek father, John George Costas, and an Irish mother, Jayne Costas (n\u00e9e Quinlan). He grew up in Commack, New York, and attended Commack High School South.\nHe attended the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University, but dropped out in 1974. Costas got his first radio experience as a freshman at WAER, a student run radio station. In the mid-1980s, he established the Robert Costas Scholarship at the Newhouse School, of which the first recipient was Mike Tirico in 1987.\nBroadcasting career.\nEarly career.\nWhile studying communications in college, Costas began his professional career in 1973, at WSYR-TV (now WSTM-TV) and WSYR-FM radio in Syracuse. He called for the minor league Syracuse Blazers of the Eastern Hockey League.\nAfter leaving school in 1974, he joined KMOX radio in St. Louis. He covered games of the American Basketball Association (ABA). Costas would call Missouri Tigers basketball and co-host KMOX's \"Open Line\" call-in program. He did play-by-play for Chicago Bulls broadcasts on WGN-TV during the 1979\u20131980 NBA season.\nNBC Sports.\nIn 1980, Costas was hired by NBC. Don Ohlmeyer, who at the time ran NBC's sports division, told 28-year-old Costas he looked like a 14-year-old. \nFor many years, Costas hosted NBC's National Football League (NFL) coverage and National Basketball Association (NBA) coverage. He also did play-by-play for NBA and Major League Baseball (MLB) coverage. With the introduction of the NBC Sports Network, Costas also became the host of the new monthly interview program \"Costas Tonight\".\nBoxing.\nOn March 30, 2015, it was announced that Costas would join forces with Marv Albert (blow-by-blow) and Al Michaels (host) on the April 11, 2015, edition of NBC's primetime \"PBC on NBC\" boxing series. Costas was added to serve as a special contributor for the event from Barclays Center in Brooklyn. He would narrate and write a feature on the storied history of boxing in New York City.\nGolf.\nCostas hosted NBC's coverage of the U.S. Open golf tournament from 2003 to 2014.\nMajor League Baseball.\nFor baseball telecasts, Costas teamed with Sal Bando (1982), Tony Kubek (from 1983 to 1989), and Joe Morgan and Bob Uecker (from 1994 to 2000). One of his most memorable broadcasts occurred on June 23, 1984 (in what would go down in baseball lore as \"The Sandberg Game\"). Costas, along with Tony Kubek, was calling the Saturday baseball \"Game of the Week\" from Chicago's Wrigley Field. The game between the Chicago Cubs and St. Louis Cardinals in particular was cited for putting Ryne Sandberg (as well as the 1984 Cubs in general, who would go on to make their first postseason appearance since 1945) \"on the map\". In the ninth inning, the Cubs, trailing 9\u20138, faced the premier relief pitcher of the time, Bruce Sutter. Sandberg, then not known for his power, slugged a home run to left field against the Cardinals' ace closer. Despite this dramatic act, the Cardinals scored two runs in the top of the tenth. Sandberg came up again in the tenth inning, facing a determined Sutter with one man on base. Sandberg then shocked the national audience by hitting a second home run, even farther into the left field bleachers, to tie the game again. The Cubs went on to win in the 11th inning. When Sandberg hit that second home run, Costas said, \"Do you believe it?!\" The Cardinals' Willie McGee also hit for the cycle in the same game.\nWhile hosting Game 4 of the 1988 World Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and Oakland Athletics on NBC, Costas angered many members of the Dodgers (especially the team's manager, Tommy Lasorda) by commenting before the start of the game that the Dodgers quite possibly were about to put up the weakest-hitting lineup in World Series history. That comment ironically fired up the Dodgers' competitive spirit, to the point where a chant of \"Kill Costas!\" began among the clubhouse, while the Dodgers eventually rolled to a 4\u20131 series victory.\nBesides calling the 1989 American League Championship Series for NBC, Costas also filled in for a suddenly ill Vin Scully, who had come down with laryngitis, for Game2 of the 1989 National League Championship Series alongside Tom Seaver. Game2 of the NLCS took place on Thursday, October 5, which was an off day for the ALCS. NBC then decided to fly Costas from Toronto to Chicago to substitute for Scully on Thursday night. Afterward, Costas flew back to Toronto, where he resumed work on the ALCS the next night.\nCostas anchored NBC's pre- and post-game shows for NFL broadcasts and the pre and post-game shows for numerous World Series and Major League Baseball All-Star Games during the 1980s (the first being for the 1982 World Series). Costas did not get a shot at doing play-by-play (as the games on NBC were previously called by Vin Scully) for an All-Star Game until 1994 and a World Series until 1995 (when NBC split the coverage with ABC under \"The Baseball Network\" umbrella), when NBC regained Major League Baseball rights after a four-year hiatus (when the broadcast network television contract moved over to CBS, exclusively). It was not until 1997 when Costas finally got to do play-by-play for a World Series from start to finish. Costas ended up winning a Sports Emmy Award for Outstanding Sports Personality, Play-by-Play.\nIn 1999, Costas teamed with his then-NBC colleague Joe Morgan to call two weekday night telecasts for ESPN. The first was on Wednesday, August 25 with the Detroit Tigers playing against the Seattle Mariners.\nOn August 3, 2019, Costas alongside Paul O'Neill and David Cone called both games of a double-header between the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox for the YES Network. Costas was filling in for Michael Kay, who was recovering from vocal cord surgery.\nOn August 20, 2021, reports emerged that TBS was nearing an agreement with Costas to host their coverage of that year's NLCS This became true when TBS announce his role on October 7, 2021.\nOn October 31, 2024, Costas announced that he was officially retiring from Major League Baseball play-by-play calling after 44 years. This means that his final Major League Baseball broadcast as a play-by-play announcer was Game 4 of the 2024 American League Division Series between the New York Yankees and Kansas City Royals, airing on TBS.\nNASCAR.\nIn November 2017, it was announced that Costas would co-anchor alongside Krista Voda on NBC's pre-race coverage leading into the NASCAR Cup Series finale from Homestead. In addition to hosting pre-race coverage, Costas would conduct a live interview with incoming NBC broadcaster Dale Earnhardt Jr., who was running his final race.\nNational Basketball Association.\nCostas served as NBC's lead play-by-play announcer for their National Basketball Association (NBA) broadcasts from 1997-2000. In that time frame, Costas called three NBA Finals including the 1998 installment (which set an all-time ratings record for the NBA) between the Chicago Bulls and Utah Jazz. Costas was paired with Isiah Thomas and Doug Collins on NBC's NBA telecast. Following the 2000 NBA Finals, he was replaced by Marv Albert as the lead play-by-play announcer, who incidentally, the man he directly replaced on the \"NBA on NBC\" in the first place.\nCostas had previously presided as host of NBC's pre-game show, \"NBA Showtime\", while also providing play-by-play as a fill-in when necessary. Costas later co-anchored (with Hannah Storm) NBC's NBA Finals coverage in 2002, which was their last to-date (before the NBA's network television contract moved to ABC).\nProfessional football.\nCostas began as a play-by-play announcer, working with analyst Bob Trumpy. In 1984, he would replace Len Berman as studio host. Among his NFL colleagues was O.J. Simpson, who had called 30 Rockefeller Plaza asking to speak to Costas during Simpson's infamous police chase through the freeways of Los Angeles. However, Costas was several blocks away at Madison Square Garden covering Game 5 of the 1994 NBA Finals. Costas learned of the attempted contact when visiting Simpson in prison later that year. Costas remained NFL studio host until 1992, when he was replaced by Jim Lampley.\nNBC Sports allowed Costas to opt out from having to cover the XFL. He publicly denigrated the league throughout its existence and remains a vocal critic of the XFL and its premise.\nIn 2006, Costas returned to NFL studio hosting duties for NBC's new \"Sunday Night Football\", hosting its pre-game show \"Football Night in America\".\nCostas is nicknamed \"Rapping Roberto\" by New York City's \"Daily News\" sports media columnist Bob Raissman. Al Michaels also called him \"Rapping Roberto\" during the telecast between the Indianapolis Colts and the New York Giants on September 10, 2006, in response to Costas calling him \"Alfalfa\".\nOlympics (1988\u20132016).\nCostas has frontlined many Olympics broadcasts for NBC. They include Seoul in 1988, Barcelona in 1992, Atlanta in 1996, Sydney in 2000, Salt Lake City in 2002, Athens in 2004, Torino in 2006, Beijing in 2008, Vancouver in 2010, London in 2012, Sochi in 2014 and Rio in 2016. He discusses his work on the Olympic telecasts extensively in a book by Andrew Billings entitled \"Olympic Media: Inside the Biggest Show on Television\". A personal influence on Costas has been legendary ABC Sports broadcaster Jim McKay, who hosted many Olympics for ABC from the 1960s to the 1980s.\nDuring the 1992 Barcelona and 1996 Atlanta Opening Ceremonies, Costas's remarks on China's teams' possible drug use caused an uproar among the American Chinese and international communities. Thousands of dollars were raised to purchase ads in \"The Washington Post\" and Sunday \"The New York Times\", featuring an image of the head of a statue of Apollo and reading: \"Costas Poisoned Olympic Spirit, Public Protests NBC\". However, Costas's comments were made subsequent to the suspension of Chinese coach Zhou Ming after seven of his swimmers were caught using steroids in 1994. Further evidence of Chinese athletes' drug use came in 1997 when Australian authorities confiscated 13 vials of Somatropin, a human growth hormone, from the bag of Chinese swimmer Yuan Yuan upon her arrival for the 1997 World Swimming Championships. At the World Championships, four Chinese swimmers tested positive for the banned substance Triamterene, a diuretic used to dilute urine samples to mask the presence of anabolic steroids. Including these failed drug tests, 27 Chinese swimmers were caught using performance-enhancing drugs from 1990 through 1997; more than the rest of the world combined.\nAlong with co-host Meredith Vieira and Matt Lauer, Costas's commentary of the 2012 Summer Olympics Opening Ceremonies came under fierce criticism, with Costas being described as making \"a series of jingoistic remarks, including a joke about dictator Idi Amin when Uganda's team appeared\" and the combined commentary as being \"ignorant\" and \"banal\".\nFollowing the Olympics, Costas appeared on Conan O'Brien's talk show and jokingly criticized his employer for its decision to air a preview of the upcoming series \"Animal Practice\" over a performance by The Who during the London closing ceremonies. \"So here is the balance NBC has to consider: The Who, 'Animal Practice'. Roger Daltrey, Pete Townshend\u2014monkey in a lab coat. I'm sure you'd be the first to attest, Conan, that when it comes to the tough calls, NBC usually gets 'em right,\" Costas said, alluding at the end to O'Brien's involvement in the 2010 \"Tonight Show\" conflict.\nAn eye infection Costas had at the start of the 2014 Winter Olympics forced him, on February 11, 2014, to cede his Olympic hosting duties to Matt Lauer (four nights) and Meredith Vieira (two nights), the first time Costas had not done so at all since the 1998 Winter Olympics (as the rights were not held by NBC).\nThoroughbred racing.\nFrom 2001 until 2018, Costas co-hosted the Kentucky Derby. In 2009, he hosted Bravo's coverage of the 2009 Kentucky Oaks. After Costas officially departed from NBC Sports, his role on NBC's thoroughbred racing coverage was essentially filled-in by Rebecca Lowe, beginning with the 2019 Kentucky Derby.\nDeparture from NBC Sports.\nOn February 9, 2017, Costas announced during \"Today\" that he had begun the process of stepping down from his main on-air roles at NBC Sports, announcing in particular that he would cede his role as primetime host for NBC's Olympics coverage to Mike Tirico (who joined the network from ESPN in 2016), and that he would host Super Bowl LII as his final Super Bowl. However, Costas ultimately dropped out of the coverage entirely.\n\"USA Today\" reported that he would similarly step down from \"Football Night in America\" in favor of Tirico. Costas explained that he was not outright retiring and expected to take on a role at NBC Sports similar to that of Tom Brokaw, being an occasional special correspondent to the division. He explained that his decision \"opens up more time to do the things that I feel I'm most connected to; there will still be events, features, and interviews where I can make a significant contribution at NBC, but it will also leave more time for baseball (on MLB Network), and then, at some point down the road, I'll have a chance to do more of the long-form programming I enjoy.\" Costas told \"USA Today\" his gradual retirement was planned in advance, and that he did not want to announce it during the 2016 Summer Olympics or the NFL season because it would be too disruptive, and joked: \"I'm glad that Sochi wasn't the last one. You wouldn't want your pink-eye Olympics to be your last Olympics.\"\nCostas's final major on-air broadcast for NBC was hosting the 2018 Belmont Stakes, where Justify won the Triple Crown.\nOn January 15, 2019, it was announced that Costas had officially departed from NBC Sports after 40 years.\nOn August 11, 2024, Costas made a rare guest appearance on NBC's coverage of the 2024 Summer Olympics for a segment previewing the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, joining Tirico and Al Michaels in a discussion of notable moments from past Olympics hosted by the United States.\nTalk show hosting.\nCostas hosted the syndicated radio program \"Costas Coast to Coast\" from 1986 to 1996, which was revived as \"Costas on the Radio\". \"Costas on the Radio\", which ended its three-year run on May 31, 2009, aired on 200 stations nationwide each weekend and syndicated by the Clear Channel\u2013owned Premiere Radio Networks. During that period, Costas also served as the imaging voice of Clear Channel\u2013owned KLOU in St. Louis, Missouri, during that station's period as \"My 103.3\". Like \"Later\", Costas's radio shows have focused on a wide variety of topics and have not been limited to sports discussion.\nLater with Bob Costas aired on NBC from 1988 to 1994. Costas decided to leave \"Later\" after six seasons, having grown tired of the commute to New York City from his home in St. Louis and wishing to lighten his workload in order to spend more time with his family. He also turned down an offer from David Letterman, who moved to CBS in 1995, to follow him there and become the first host of \"The Late Late Show\", which was being developed by Letterman's company to air at 12:30 after the \"Late Show with David Letterman\".\nIn June 2005, Costas was named by CNN president Jonathan Klein as a regular substitute anchor for Larry King's \"Larry King Live\" for one year. Costas, as well as Klein, have said Costas was not trying out for King's position on a permanent basis. Nancy Grace was also named a regular substitute host for the show. On August 18, 2005, Costas refused to host a \"Larry King Live\" broadcast where the subject was missing teenager Natalee Holloway. Costas said that because there were no new developments in the story, he felt it had no news value, and he was uncomfortable with television's drift in the direction of tabloid-type stories.\nBeginning in October 2011, Costas was a correspondent for \"Rock Center with Brian Williams\". He gained acclaim for his November 2011 live interview of former Pennsylvania State University assistant coach Jerry Sandusky concerning charges of sexual abuse of minors, in which Sandusky called in to deny the charges.\nCostas hosted a monthly talk show \"Costas Tonight\" on NBC Sports Network.\nHBO Sports.\nIn 2001, Costas was hired by HBO to host a 12-week series called \"On the Record with Bob Costas\".\nIn 2002, Costas began a stint as co-host of HBO's long-running series \"Inside the NFL\". Costas remained host of \"Inside the NFL\" through the end of the 2007 NFL season. He hosted the show with Cris Collinsworth and former NFL legends Dan Marino and Cris Carter. The program aired each week during the NFL season.\nCostas left HBO to sign with MLB Network in February 2009.\nOn April 23, 2021, it was announced that Costas would be returning to HBO to host a quarter-yearly interview show called \"Back on the Record\".\nMLB Network.\nAt the channel's launch on January 1, 2009, Costas hosted the premiere episode of \"All Time Games\", a presentation of the recently discovered kinescope of Game5 of the 1956 World Series. During the episode, he held a forum with Don Larsen, who pitched MLB's only postseason perfect game during that game, and Yogi Berra, who caught the game.\nCostas joined the network full-time on February 3, 2009. He hosted a regular interview show titled \"MLB Network Studio 42 with Bob Costas\" as well as special programming and provides play-by-play for select live baseball game telecasts. In 2017, Costas called Game1 of the American League Division Series between the Boston Red Sox and the Houston Astros on MLB Network. The Astros went on to win 8\u20132. Costas and his color commentator Jim Kaat received criticism for their \"bantering about minutia\" and misidentification of plays. Costas also went on to become an internet meme after using the term the \"sacks were juiced\" to describe the bases being loaded.\nNFL Network.\nAs aforementioned, Costas hosted \"Thursday Night Football\" on NBC and NFL Network in 2016, having returned to broadcasting after a brief absence. He was replaced by Liam McHugh in 2017.\nCNN and TNT Sports.\nIn July 2020, it was announced that Costas would join CNN as a contributor. According to CNN, Costas would provide commentary \"on a wide range of sports-related issues as the industry adapts to new challenges posed by the coronavirus and the frequent intersection of sports with larger societal issues.\" Costas, who would continue working on MLB Network, said of joining CNN: \u201cCNN\u2019s willingness to devote time and attention to sports related topics, makes it a good fit for me.\u201d\nOn August 20, 2021, Andrew Marchand of the \"New York Post\" reported that TBS\u2014a sister property via CNN parent WarnerMedia\u2014was nearing an agreement with Costas which would have him hosting the network's National League Championship Series coverage. On October 7, 2021, Turner Sports announced that Costas would be joining TBS for their postseason baseball coverage starting on October 16.\nAs of the 2022 MLB season, Costas currently provides play-by-play for TBS's Tuesday night baseball package during the regular season. He was the studio host for TBS's ALCS postseason coverage and also provided play-by-play for TBS's ALDS postseason coverage between the Cleveland Guardians and New York Yankees. This marked the first time since the 2000 ALCS on NBC that Costas would provide play-by-play for a postseason baseball series in its entirety.\nCostas provided the play-by-play commentary on TBS for the 2024 American League Division Series between the New York Yankees and Kansas City Royals, receiving criticism for his monotonic delivery and perceived lack of interest in the events on the field.\nOther appearances.\nCostas provided significant contributions to the Ken Burns, PBS miniseries \"Baseball\" as well as its follow-up \"The 10th Inning\". He also appears in another PBS film, \"A Time for Champions\", produced by St. Louis's Nine Network of Public Media.\nNotable calls.\nJune 23, 1984: Costas called NBC's \"Game of the Week\" with Tony Kubek, where Ryne Sandberg hit two separate home runs in the 9th and 10th innings against Bruce Sutter to tie the game. This game is known as \"The Sandberg Game\".\nCostas's call of the first home run:\nInto left center field, and deep. This is a tie ball game!\nCostas's call of the second home run:\nCostas: 1\u20131 pitch. [Sandberg swings]\nKubek: OHHH BOY!\nCostas: [Over Kubek] And he hits it to deep left center! Look out! Do you believe it, it's gone! We will go to the 11th, tied at 11.\nOctober 28, 1995: Costas called Game 6 of the 1995 World Series, where the Atlanta Braves finally won their first ever World Series championship since moving to Atlanta in 1966.\nLeft-center field, Grissom on the run. The team of the '90s has its World Championship!\nOctober 26, 1997: Costas called Game 7 of the 1997 World Series, where \u00c9dgar Renter\u00eda hit a walk off single to give the Florida Marlins their first World Series championship. Costas's call:\nThe 0\u20131 pitch. A liner, off Nagy's glove, into center field! The Florida Marlins, have won the World Series!\nJune 14, 1998: Costas called Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals, Michael Jordan and Phil Jackson's final game with the Chicago Bulls where Jordan hit a 20-foot jumpshot to put the Bulls up 87\u201386 with 5.2 seconds remaining. The Bulls would win the game by that score, giving them their sixth championship and third consecutive. Costas's call:\nJordan with 43. Malone is doubled. They swat at him and steal it! Here comes Chicago. 17 seconds. 17 seconds, from Game 7, or from championship #6. Jordan, open, CHICAGO WITH THE LEAD! Timeout Utah, 5.2 seconds left. Michael Jordan, running on fumes, with 45 points.\nJune 4, 2000: Costas called Game 7 of the 2000 Western Conference Finals for NBC's NBA coverage. Kobe Bryant threw an alley oop pass to Shaquille O'Neal to give the Lakers a six-point lead with 41.3 seconds remaining. Costas's call of the play:\nPortland has three timeouts left, the Lakers have two. Bryant... TO SHAQ!\nSeptember 25, 2014: Costas called Derek Jeter's final game at Yankee Stadium for MLB Network, where he hit an RBI single to win the game. Costas's call:\nA base hit to right! Here comes Richardson, they're waving him home! The throw, it's close but he scores! On a walk off hit by Derek Jeter!\nInterests.\nLove of baseball.\nCostas is a devoted baseball fan. He's been suggested as a potential commissioner and wrote \"Fair Ball: A Fan's Case for Baseball\" in 2000. For his 40th birthday, then Oakland Athletics manager Tony La Russa allowed Costas to manage the club during a spring training game. The first time Costas visited baseball legend Stan Musial's St. Louis eatery, he left a $3.31 tip on a ten dollar tab in homage to Musial's lifetime batting average (.331). Costas delivered the eulogy at Mickey Mantle's funeral. In eulogizing Mantle, Costas described the baseball legend as \"\"a fragile hero to whom we had an emotional attachment so strong and lasting that it defied logic\".\" Costas has even carried a 1958 Mickey Mantle baseball card in his wallet. Costas also delivered the eulogy for Musial after his death in early 2013.\nCostas was outspoken about his disdain for Major League Baseball instituting a playoff wild card. Costas believed it diminishes the significance and drama of winning a divisional championship. He prefers a system in which winning the wild card puts a team at some sort of disadvantage, as opposed to an equal level with teams who outplayed them over a 162-game season. Or, as explained in his book \"Fair Ball\", have only the three division winners in each league go to the postseason, with the team with the best record receiving a bye to the League Championship Series. Once, on the air on HBO's \"Inside the NFL\", he mentioned that the NFL regular season counted for something, but baseball's was beginning to lose significance. With the advent of the second wild card, Costas has said he feels the format has improved, since there is now a greater premium placed on finishing first. He has suggested a further tweak: Make the wild card round a best two of three, instead of a single game, with all three games, if necessary, on the homefield of the wild card of the better record.\nHe also has disdained the Designated Hitter rule, saying baseball would be a better game without it.\nCostas serves as a member of the advisory board of the Baseball Assistance Team, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization dedicated to helping former Major League, Minor League, and Negro league players through financial and medical difficulties.\nPolitical views.\nCostas considers himself left of center but has said that he has voted for Republican candidates at times as well. On May 26, 2007, Costas discussed the presidency of George W. Bush on his radio show, stating he liked Bush personally, and had been optimistic about his presidency, but said the course of the Iraq War, and other mis-steps have led him to conclude Bush's presidency had \"tragically failed\" and considered it \"overwhelmingly evident, even if you're a conservative Republican, if you're honest about it, this is a failed administration.\" The following summer, Costas interviewed Bush during the president's appearance at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing.\nControversies.\nFastest man in the world.\nOn August 1, 1996, the night of Michael Johnson's 200 m Olympic win, Costas stated on-air during Olympics coverage of the 1996 Olympics that Johnson's gold-medal performance in the 200 m (19.32 seconds) was faster than Donovan Bailey's 100 m performance (9.84 seconds) five days earlier in that 19.32 divided by two is 9.66. Bailey later dismissed Costas' comments as \"a person who knew nothing about track talking about it with a lot of people listening\"; nonetheless, the sportscaster's remarks touched a nerve. \nThe unofficial \"world's fastest man\" title typically goes to the Olympic 100 metre champion.\nThe 200 metre time almost always yields a \"faster\" average speed than a 100-metre race time, since the initial slow speed at the start is spread out over the longer distance. In other words, the second 100 metres is run with a \"flying start\", without the slow acceleration phase of the first 100 metres and without the greater than 0.10 s reaction time of the start. In fact, each 200 metre gold medalist from 1968, when fully electronic timing was introduced, to 1996 had a \"faster\" average speed at the Olympics, save one, yet there had been no controversy over the title of \"world's fastest man\" previously, until Bob Costas' remarks during the 1996 Olympics. \nAmid continuous verbal sparring between the pair of athletes, this led to an unsanctioned 150-metre race between Bailey and Johnson in Toronto. \nGun culture controversy.\nDuring a segment on the \"Sunday Night Football\" halftime show on December 2, 2012, Costas paraphrased Fox Sports columnist Jason Whitlock in regard to Jovan Belcher's murder-suicide the day prior, saying the United States' gun culture was causing more domestic disputes to result in death, and that it was likely Belcher and his girlfriend would not have died had he not possessed a gun.\nCritics interpreted his remarks as support for gun control. Many (including former Republican presidential candidates Mike Huckabee and Herman Cain) felt Costas should not have used a program typically viewed as entertainment to publicize political views on sensitive topics. Lou Dobbs criticized his remarks for supporting the abolition of the Second Amendment by quoting a sports writer, while Andrew Levy remarked that he had been given a civics lecture by someone who had \"gotten rich thanks in part to a sport that destroys men's bodies and brains\". However, reporter Erik Wemple of \"The Washington Post\" praised Costas for speaking out for gun control on the broadcast, commenting that the incident's connection to the NFL provided him with an obligation to acknowledge the incident during the halftime show, stating that \"the things that [NFL players] do affect the public beyond whether their teams cover the point spread. And few cases better exemplify that dynamic as powerfully as the Belcher incident.\"\nDuring the following week, Costas defended his remarks in an appearance on MSNBC's program \"The Last Word with Lawrence O'Donnell\", where he said the remarks were related to the country's gun culture, and not about gun control as critics had inferred. Costas did suggest that more regulation be placed on America's gun culture:\nNow, do I believe that we need more comprehensive and more sensible gun control legislation? Yes I do. That doesn't mean repeal the Second Amendment. That doesn't mean a prohibition on someone having a gun to protect their home and their family. It means sensible and more comprehensive gun control legislation. But even if you had that, you would still have the problem of what Jason Whitlock wrote about, and what I agree with. And that is a gun culture in this country.\n2014 Winter Olympics.\nDuring his coverage of the 2014 Winter Olympics, Costas was criticized by some conservative members of the media, including Michelle Malkin and Glenn Beck, for allegedly praising Russian president Vladimir Putin's role in defusing tensions surrounding Syria and Iran. Other conservative media commentators, including Bill O'Reilly and Bernard Goldberg, defended Costas's remarks as factually correct and pointed out that Costas had also voiced considerable criticism of both Russia and Putin while broadcasting from Sochi. During an interview on Fox News, Goldberg said \"...the idea that Costas somehow portrayed Vladimir Putin as a benign figure is ridiculous.\" Costas defended himself on O'Reilly's broadcast on March 3, reiterating that he criticized Putin immediately preceding and following the statements that were questioned. O'Reilly then aired a portion of an Olympic commentary in which Costas was pointedly critical of the Russian leader. Costas also indicated that Senator John McCain, who had been among those who had initially criticized Costas, had called Costas to apologize after hearing the full segment in context.\nFootball's future.\nWhile visiting the University of Maryland in November 2017 for a roundtable discussion on various sports topics, Costas said the sport of football was in a decline, with evidence mounting that the repetition of concussions \"destroys people's brains\" and he would not allow a son with athletic talent to play it. Costas had been scheduled to work Super Bowl LII, his eighth as a host (despite stepping down from \"Football Night in America\" in favor of his successor Mike Tirico, Costas was to return while Tirico prepped to lead NBC's coverage of the 2018 Winter Olympics, set to begin a few days later). However, the network announced shortly before the game that Liam McHugh would instead join Dan Patrick as a co-host, leading to speculation that NBC removed Costas from the NFL's biggest game over his comments. Costas originally denied such, saying it made more sense for McHugh, who had been hosting Thursday night games on NBC, to serve in that capacity. However, he later admitted in an interview with ESPN's \"Outside the Lines\" that the comments were indeed the basis of his removal, ultimately resulting in his departure from the network after forty years.\nPersonal life.\nCostas was married from 1983 to 2001 to Carole \"Randy\" Randall Krummenacher. They had two children, son Keith (born 1986) and daughter Taylor (born 1989). Costas once jokingly promised Minnesota Twins center fielder Kirby Puckett that, if he was batting over .350 by the time his child was born, he would name the baby Kirby. Kirby was hitting better than .350, but Bob's son initially was not given a first (or second) name of Kirby. After Puckett reminded Costas of the agreement, the birth certificate was changed to \"Keith Michael Kirby Costas\".\nOn March 12, 2004, Costas married his second wife, Jill Sutton. Costas and his wife now reside primarily in Newport Beach, California. Although Costas was born and raised in the New York area, he has often said he thinks of St. Louis as his hometown.\nCostas's children have also won Sports Emmys: Keith has won two as an associate producer on MLB Network's \"MLB Tonight\", and Taylor as an associate producer on NBC's coverage of the 2012 Summer Olympics.\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nIn 1994, Costas appeared as the play-by-play announcer for the World Series (working alongside Tim McCarver) in the movie \"The Scout\". In 1998, he appeared as himself along with his rival/counterpart Al Michaels from ABC in the movie \"BASEketball\". Costas voiced an animated car version of himself named Bob Cutlass in the movies \"Cars\" (2006) and \"Cars 3\" (2017). He also appeared as himself in the 2001 movie \"Pootie Tang\", where he remarks that he saw \"the longest damn clip ever\".\nCostas's voice appeared in the 2011 documentary film \"Legendary: When Baseball Came to the Bluegrass\", which detailed the humble beginnings of the Lexington Legends, a minor league baseball team located in Lexington, Kentucky.\nIn 2021, Costas played himself in \"Here Today\" directed by Billy Crystal.\nPopular culture.\nCostas has been alluded to several times in popular music. The songs \"Mafioso\" by Mac Dre, \"We Major\" by Domo Genesis and \"The Last Huzzah\" by Mr. Muthafuckin' eXquire, all refer to Costas. He was also mentioned in a Ludacris song after Costas mentioned the rapper on the late night talk show \"Last Call with Carson Daly\".\nIn June 2013, Costas provided the voice of God in the Monty Python musical \"Spamalot\" at The Muny Repertory in St. Louis.\nTelevision guest roles.\nApart from his normal sportscasting duties, Costas has also presented periodic sports blooper reels, and announced dogsled and elevator races, on \"Late Night with David Letterman\".\nIn 1985, Costas appeared on \"The War to Settle the Score\", a pre-\"WrestleMania\" program that the World Wrestling Federation aired on MTV.\nIn 1993, Costas hosted the \"pregame\" show for the final episode of \"Cheers\". Costas once appeared on the television program \"NewsRadio\" as himself. He hosted an award show and later had some humorous encounters with the crew of WNYX. He also had a recurring guest role as himself on the HBO series \"Arli$$\".\nCostas has been impersonated several times by Darrell Hammond on \"Saturday Night Live\". Costas was \"supposed\" to appear in the fourth-season premiere of \"Celebrity Deathmatch\" (ironically titled \"Where is Bob Costas?\") as a guest-commentator, but about halfway through the episode it was revealed that John Tesh had killed him before the show to take his place. This was likely in response for Tesh not being invited back to NBC for its gymnastics coverage at the 2000 Olympics.\nIn 1999, Costas appeared as a guest on \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\" during its sixth season.\nOn June 13, 2008, Costas appeared on MSNBC's commercial-free special coverage of \"Remembering Tim Russert (1950\u20132008)\".\nOn January 30, 2009, Costas guest-starred as himself on the television series \"Monk\" in an episode titled \"Mr. Monk Makes the Playoffs\"'. He mentions to Captain Stottlemeyer about how Adrian Monk once helped him out of a problem several years ago with regards to a demented cat salesman. He apparently sold Costas a cat that allegedly tried to kill him with a squeeze toy. (In fact when he signs off he says, \"The cat was definitely trying to kill me.\")\nCostas guest-voiced as himself in 2010 \"Simpsons\" episode, \"Boy Meets Curl\", when Homer and Marge make the U.S. Olympic curling team. Costas also guest-voiced as himself on the \"Family Guy\" episode \"Turban Cowboy\" in an interview with Peter after he wins the Boston Marathon by hitting everyone with his car.\nOn February 11, 2010, Stephen Colbert jokingly expressed his desire to stab Costas with an ice pick at the upcoming 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver so Colbert could take over as host. Costas later made a cameo appearance on the February 25, 2010, edition of Colbert's show.\nIn January 2013, Costas appeared as himself in the \"Go On\" episode \"Win at All Costas\" with Matthew Perry, wherein Ryan King auditions with him for a TV show.\nReal footage of Costas from NBC's pregame show before Game5 of the 1994 NBA Finals was used in the second episode of \"\".\nCostas appeared on the September 22, 2017, episode of \"Real Time with Bill Maher\" to discuss issues such as concussions and the role of political activism in professional sports (namely by Colin Kaepernick).\nVideo games.\nIn 2002, Costas was the play-by-play announcer, alongside Harold Reynolds, for \"Triple Play 2002\" during the ballgame for PlayStation 2 and Xbox.\nExternal links.\n \n \n \n \n \n "}
{"id": "4896", "revid": "1272597290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4896", "title": "Bamberg", "text": "Bamberg (, , ; East Franconian: \"Bamb\u00e4rch\") is a town in Upper Franconia district in Bavaria, Germany, on the river Regnitz close to its confluence with the river Main. Bamberg had 79,000 inhabitants in 2022. The town dates back to the 9th century, when its name was derived from the nearby \"\" castle. Cited as one of Germany's most beautiful towns, with medieval streets and buildings, the old town of Bamberg with around 2,400 timber houses has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993.\nFrom the 10th century onwards, Bamberg became a key link with the Western Slavic peoples, notably those of Poland and Pomerania. It experienced a period of great prosperity from the 12th century onwards, during which time it was briefly the centre of the Holy Roman Empire. Emperor Henry II was buried in the old town, alongside his wife Kunigunde. The town's architecture from this period strongly influenced that in Northern Germany and Hungary. From the middle of the 13th century onwards, the bishops were princes of the Empire and ruled Bamberg, overseeing the construction of monumental buildings. This growth was complemented by the obtaining of large portions of the estates of the Counts of Meran in 1248 and 1260 by the sea, partly through purchase and partly through the appropriation of extinguished fiefs.\nBamberg lost its independence in 1802, following the secularization of church lands, becoming part of Bavaria in 1803. The town was first connected to the German rail system in 1844, which has been an important part of its infrastructure ever since. After a communist uprising took control over Bavaria in the years following World War I, the state government fled to Bamberg and stayed there for almost two years before the Bavarian capital of Munich was retaken by \"Freikorps\" units (see Bavarian Soviet Republic). The first republican constitution of Bavaria was passed in Bamberg, becoming known as the \"Bamberger Verfassung\" (Bamberg Constitution).\nFollowing the Second World War, Bamberg was an important base for the Bavarian, German, and then American military stationed at Warner Barracks, until closing in 2014.\nHistory.\nDuring the post-Roman centuries of Germanic migration and settlement, the region later included in the Diocese of Bamberg was inhabited for the most part by Slavs. The town, first mentioned in 902, grew up by the castle \"\" which gave its name to the Babenberg family. On their extinction, it passed to the Saxon house. The area was Christianized chiefly by the monks of the Benedictine Fulda Abbey, and the land was under the spiritual authority of the Diocese of W\u00fcrzburg. In 1007, Holy Roman Emperor Henry II made Bamberg a family inheritance, the seat of a separate diocese. The Emperor's purpose in this was to make the Diocese of W\u00fcrzburg less unwieldy in size and to give Christianity a firmer footing in the districts of Franconia, east of Bamberg.\nIn 1008, after long negotiations with the Bishops of W\u00fcrzburg and Eichst\u00e4tt, who were to cede portions of their dioceses, the boundaries of the new diocese were defined, and Pope John XVIII granted the papal confirmation in the same year. Henry II ordered the building of a new cathedral, which was consecrated on 6 May 1012. The church was enriched with gifts from the pope, and Henry had it dedicated in honor of him. In 1017, Henry founded Michaelsberg Abbey on the Michaelsberg (\"Mount St Michael\"), near Bamberg, a Benedictine abbey for the training of the clergy. The emperor and his wife, Kunigunde, gave large temporal possessions to the new diocese, and it received many privileges out of which grew the secular power of the bishop. Pope Benedict VIII visited Bamberg in 1020 to meet Henry II for discussions concerning the Holy Roman Empire. While he was there he placed the diocese in direct dependence on the Holy See. He also personally consecrated some of Bamberg's churches. For a short time Bamberg was the centre of the Holy Roman Empire. Henry and Kunigunde were both buried in the cathedral.\nFrom the middle of the 13th century onwards, the bishops were princes of the Empire and ruled Bamberg, overseeing the construction of monumental buildings. In 1248 and 1260, the see obtained large portions of the estates of the Counts of Meran, partly through purchase and partly through the appropriation of extinguished fiefs.\nThe old Bishopric of Bamberg was composed of an unbroken territory extending from Schl\u00fcsselfeld in a northeasterly direction to the Franconian Forest, and possessed in addition estates in the Duchies of Carinthia and Salzburg, in the Nordgau (the present Upper Palatinate), in Thuringia, and on the Danube. By the changes resulting from the Reformation, the territory of this see was reduced by nearly one half in extent. Since 1279 the coat of arms of the city of Bamberg is known in the form of a seal.\nThe witch trials of the 17th century claimed about one thousand victims in Bamberg, reaching a climax between 1626 and 1631, under the rule of Prince-Bishop Johann Georg II Fuchs von Dornheim. The famous \"Drudenhaus\" (witch prison), built in 1627, is no longer standing today; however, detailed accounts of some cases, such as that of Johannes Junius, remain.\nIn 1647, the University of Bamberg was founded as \".\nBambrzy (\") are German Poles who are descended from settlers from the Bamberg area who settled in villages around Pozna\u0144 in the years 1719\u20131753. In 1759, the possessions and jurisdictions of the diocese situated in Austria were sold to that state. When the secularization of church lands took place (1802) the diocese covered and had a population of 207,000. Bamberg thus lost its independence in 1802, becoming part of Bavaria in 1803. The free state of Bavaria and the Federal Republic of Germany gave protections to Bamberg, though the city does handle its own management of properties.\nBamberg was first connected to the German rail system in 1844, which has been an important part of its infrastructure ever since. After a communist uprising took control over Bavaria in the years following World War I, the state government fled to Bamberg and stayed there for almost two years before the Bavarian capital of Munich was retaken by \"Freikorps\" units (see Bavarian Soviet Republic). The first republican constitution of Bavaria was passed in Bamberg, becoming known as the \"Bamberger Verfassung\" (Bamberg Constitution).\nIn February 1926 Bamberg served as the venue for the Bamberg Conference, convened by Adolf Hitler in his attempt to foster unity and to stifle dissent within the then-young Nazi party. Bamberg was chosen for its location in Upper Franconia, reasonably close to the residences of the members of the dissident northern Nazi faction but still within Bavaria.\nDuring the Bombing of Bamberg, the city was hit a total of nine times by Allied warplanes between 1944 and 1945. While Bamberg was not attacked as badly as nearby Nuremberg, 4.4% of the city ended up being destroyed and 378 civilians died. The biggest and deadliest bombing run happened on February 22 1945. In the afternoon, American planes attacked the Bamberg railway station and surroundings with bombs. Because of poor visibility, the bombs were also dropped over residential houses, killing a total of 216 civilians and causing many houses between Oberer Stephansberg and Oberer Kaulberg to be damaged or destroyed as a result. The inner city was also hit, particularly in the Obstmarkt, Lange Stra\u00dfe, Gr\u00fcner Markt and Ke\u00dflerstra\u00dfe. Three significant landmarks in the city were hit: the Erl\u00f6serkirche or \"Church of the Redeemer\" at the Kunigundendamm which was almost completely destroyed (only the tower remained), the historic Altane on the Gr\u00fcner Markt and the Alte Maut or Old Toll. A follow-up attack was planned for February 23, but ultimately cancelled due to bad weather. After that, low-flying Allied aircraft continued to attack Bamberg, threatening large gatherings of people and sometimes also dropping leaflets mocking National Socialism and its propaganda. Another 67 people died as a result of these attacks. The city fell with little resistance to American troops on April 14 despite the Nazi's blowing up all the bridges to the city. After the war had ended, reconstruction efforts began.\nGeography.\nBamberg is located in Franconia, north of Nuremberg by railway and east of W\u00fcrzburg, also by rail. It is situated on the Regnitz river, before it flows into the Main river.\nIts geography is shaped by the Regnitz and by the foothills of the Steigerwald, part of the German uplands. From northeast to southwest, the town is divided into first the Regnitz plain, then one large and several small islands formed by two arms of the Regnitz ('), and finally the part of town on the hills, the \"Hill Town\" (').\nThe seven hills of Bamberg.\nBamberg extends over seven hills, each crowned by a church. This has led to Bamberg being called the \"Franconian Rome\" \u2014 although a running joke among Bamberg's tour guides is to refer to Rome instead as the \"Italian Bamberg\". The hills are Cathedral Hill, Michaelsberg, Kaulberg/Obere Pfarre, Stefansberg, Jakobsberg, Altenburger Hill and Abtsberg.\nClimate.\nClimate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The K\u00f6ppen climate classification subtype for this climate is \"\" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate), with a certain continental influence as indicated by average winter nighttime temperatures well below zero.\nEconomy.\nBamberg is considered an important economic center and is one of the 15 strongest economic regions in Bavaria compared to the other 95 districts and independent cities. Central locations for industry, manufacturing and trade can be found in the north and east of the city. In the north, around the Bamberg harbor, there is a large industrial area that partly extends into the Hallstadt urban area. Bosch operates its largest plant in Germany in the east and is also the city's most important employer.\nRelevant economic sectors in Bamberg are the automotive supply industry, electrical engineering and the food industry. The traditional industry of market gardening with large inner-city cultivation areas, which has characterized the city since its beginnings, is still present. Due to its UNESCO World Heritage status and the more than 800,000 overnight guests a year in the city alone, tourism, hotels and gastronomy also play a central role in the city's economy.\nKey economic figures.\nIn the 2010s, Bamberg's gross domestic product increased by a total of 17.7%. The city of Bamberg generated \u20ac5.1 billion in 2021 (\u20ac66,543 per capita).\nIn the 2016 Future Atlas, Bamberg was ranked 32nd out of 402 districts, municipal associations and independent cities in Germany, making it one of the places with \"very high future prospects\".\nThe number of business registrations in the city of Bamberg remains at a high level. In the independent city of Bamberg, the number of business registrations in 2023 was 682, compared to 655 registrations the year before. In 2021, 702 new companies were registered with the city of Bamberg. The number of businesses in the city of Bamberg for 2023 is 2,624 companies. 87 of these businesses employ more than 100 people. Of these, almost half (969) are craft businesses.\nLabour market and employment figures.\nAs the population in the city has grown, the number of employees has also risen continuously in recent years: Between 2005 and 2022, the number of employees increased by almost 20%.\nThere are around 56,500 people in employment in the city in 2022. The unemployment rate in December 2022 was 4.3%, above the Bavarian average of 3.1%. In the neighboring district of Bamberg, the unemployment rate was 2.3%.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nImportant sectors of the manufacturing industry in Bamberg are drive technologies and electrical engineering. Bosch has been operating a production facility in Bamberg with over 6000 employees since 1939. The company produces energy, mobility and drive systems, in particular spark plugs for the automotive industry. Due to its dependence on the combustion engine, the company announced in 2019 that it would be switching to fuel cells,[145] although around 1000 jobs are to be transferred to other locations from 2026. Coburg-based automotive supplier Brose has had an administration building with 600 employees on Berliner Ring since 2016. Together with the plant in Hallstadt, the region is the company's second-largest location with more than 2,000 employees.\nAnother important company is Wieland Electric in the field of electrical engineering. The company was founded in Bamberg in 1910 and is considered a pioneer in electrical connection technology and is still the world market leader for pluggable installation technology in the building sector.\nRudolf Zimmermann Bamberg (RZB), with over 800 employees worldwide, produces lights and lighting systems near the port of Bamberg. Over 70 companies are located on the 100 hectares of the port. In 2023, over 416,000 tons of goods were loaded at the port, especially foodstuffs and bulk goods. In addition, over 700 river cruise ships docked here. The Bamberg asphalt mixing plant and a Schwenk concrete plant are also located in the immediate vicinity.\nBamberg is also home to numerous small and medium-sized companies in other sectors. One special feature here is the centuries-old tradition of instrument making. Organ building, which is currently being continued by master craftsman Thomas Eichfelder, is particularly noteworthy, as is the construction of violins, clarinets and other woodwind instruments.\nTourism and retail.\nBamberg's city centre is characterized by a diverse retail sector, partly due to tourism. This generated a turnover of 682 million euros in 2023. In the 2018 shopping mile ranking by real estate company Jones Lang LaSalle (JLL), Bamberg was ranked first in Germany for cities with fewer than 100,000 inhabitants. With an average of 5,155 visitors per hour, the Gr\u00fcner Markt was the 52nd most popular shopping street in Germany. In 2023, the Gr\u00fcner Markt had almost 8.5 million passers-by, an increase of 130,000 visitors compared to the previous year.\nBamberg recorded 807,294 overnight stays in 2023, an increase of 11% compared to 2022. 85% of overnight guests came from Germany, 15% from abroad. The proportion of travelers from abroad rose particularly sharply in 2023 at 22%. The most important tourist countries of origin are the US, the Netherlands, Poland and Austria. Tourism generates around 330 million euros in gross revenue in Bamberg every year - in the hospitality, retail and service sectors. This results in an income of 153 million euros.\nAttractions.\nThe Town of Bamberg was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1993 due to its medieval layout and its well preserved historic buildings. Since the Middle Ages, urban gardening has been practiced in Bamberg. The Market Gardeners\u2019 District together with the City on the Hills and the Island District is an integral part of the World Heritage site. In 2005, the Municipality established a unit to coordinate the implementation of the World Heritage Convention in Bamberg. In 2019, a visitor and interpretation centre opened for the World Heritage site.\nSome of the main sights are:\nBamberg Cathedral is a late Romanesque building with four towers. It was founded in 1004 by Emperor Henry II, finished in 1012 and consecrated on 6 May 1012. It was later partially destroyed by fire in 1081. The new cathedral, built by Saint Otto of Bamberg, was consecrated in 1111 and in the 13th century received its present late-Romanesque form.\nThe cathedral is long, wide, high, and the four towers are each about high. It contains many historic works of art, such as the marble tomb of the founder and his wife, considered one of the greatest works of the sculptor Tilman Riemenschneider, and carved between 1499 and 1513. Another treasure of the cathedral is an equestrian statue known as the Bamberg Horseman (\"\"). This statue, possibly depicting the emperor Conrad III, most likely dates to the second quarter of the 13th century. The statue also serves as a symbol of the town of Bamberg.\nThe ' (New Residence) (1698\u20131704) was initially occupied by the prince-bishops, and from 1864 to 1867 by the deposed King Otto of Greece. Its ' (Rose Garden) overlooks the town. It has over 4500 roses.\nThe is located on the highest of Bamberg's seven hills. It was mentioned for the first time in 1109. Between 1251 and 1553 it was the residence of Bamberg's bishops. Destroyed in 1553 by Albert Alcibiades, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach, it was used after scant repairs only as a prison, and increasingly fell into decay.\nIn 1801, A. F. Marcus bought the castle and completely repaired it. His friend, the famous German writer E.T.A. Hoffmann, who was very impressed by the building, lived there for a while. The next owner, Anton von Greifenstein, in 1818 founded an association to preserve the castle. This society still maintains the entire property today. The Altenburg today houses a restaurant.\nOther churches are the ', an 11th-century Romanesque basilica; the '; the ' or ' (1320\u20131387), which has now been restored to its original pure Gothic style. The ', 12th century Romanesque (restored), on the Michaelsberg, was formerly the church of the Benedictine Michaelsberg Abbey secularized in 1803 and now contains the ', or almshouse, and the museum and municipal art collections.\nOf the bridges connecting the sections of the lower town the ' was completed in 1455. Halfway across this, on an island, is the ' or town hall (rebuilt 1744\u20131756). The lyceum, formerly a Jesuit college, contains a natural history museum. The old palace (\"\") was built in 1591 on the site of an old residence of the counts of Babenberg. Monuments include the Maximilian fountain (1880), with statues of King Maximilian I of Bavaria, the emperor Henry II and his wife, Conrad III and Saint Otto, bishop of Bamberg.\nThere are also tunnels beneath the town. These were originally constructed as mines which supplied sandstone which could be used for construction or as an abrasive cleaner. Mining came to an end in 1920 but a tunnel network remained. The tunnels were used as an air raid shelter during World War II. A part of the network can be visited on a guided tour.\nBeer.\nBamberg is known for its smoked Rauchbier and is home to 11 breweries, including , , Brauerei Heller-Trum (Schlenkerla), Brauerei Kaiserdom, , Klosterbr\u00e4u, , , Gasthausbrauerei Ambr\u00e4usianum, Kron Prinz, and Weyermann R\u00f6stmalzbierbrauerei. Weyermann Specialty Malting, founded in Bamberg in 1879, supplies breweries around the world. Every August there is a five-day \"\", a kirmess celebrated with beers. The Franconia region surrounding Bamberg is home to more than 200 breweries. In October and early November many of the 70 breweries in and around Bamberg celebrate Bockbieranstiche with special releases of Bock beer.\nEducation.\nThe University of Bamberg, named Otto-Friedrich University, offers higher education in the areas of social science, business studies and the humanities, and is attended by more than 12,000 students. The University of Applied Sciences Bamberg offers higher education in the areas of public health. Bamberg is also home to eight secondary schools (gymnasiums):\nThere are also numerous other institutes for primary, secondary, technical, vocational and adult education.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nThe InterCityExpress main line No. 28 (Munich \u2013 Nuremberg \u2013 Leipzig \u2013 Berlin / \u2013 Hamburg) and the main line No. 18 (Munich \u2013 Nuremberg \u2013 Halle \u2013 Berlin / \u2013 Hamburg) run on the Nuremberg\u2013Bamberg and the Bamberg\u2013Hof lines through the Bamberg station. It takes less than two hours to Munich on the train and with the Nuremberg\u2013Erfurt high-speed railway through the Thuringian mountains finished in 2017 less than three hours to Berlin. Two intercity trains of line no. 17 (Vienna \u2013 Warnem\u00fcnde) and line no. 61 (Leipzig \u2013 Nuremberg \u2013 Karlsruhe) also run through Bamberg.\nEast-west connections are poorer. Bamberg is connected to other towns in eastern Upper Franconia such as Bayreuth, Coburg, and Kronach via the Bamberg\u2013Hof line with trains usually running at least every hour. Connections on the W\u00fcrzburg\u2013Bamberg line to the west are hourly regional trains to W\u00fcrzburg, which is fully connected to the ICE network. Tourists arriving at Frankfurt International Airport can take advantage of the new direct connection from Frankfurt's main station.\nMotorways.\nBamberg is not near any of the major (i.e. single-digit) autobahns. But it is nevertheless well connected to the network in all directions: the A70 from Schweinfurt (connecting to the A7 there) to Bayreuth (connecting to the A9) runs along the northern edge of the town. The A73 on the eastern side of town connects Bamberg to Nuremberg (connecting to the A9) and Thuringia, ending at Suhl.\nAir transport.\nBamberg is served by . Mostly public aircraft operate there. It used to be a military airport. (IATA-Code: ZCD, ICAO-Code: EDQA) It is also possible to charter public flights to and from this airport.\nMost international tourists who travel by plane arrive at Frankfurt International Airport or Munich Airport. The nearest major airport is Nuremberg Airport which can be reached within 45mins by car or one hour by train and subway.\nWater transport.\nBoth the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal and its predecessor, the Ludwig Canal, begin near Bamberg. The Ludwig Canal was opened in 1846 but closed in 1950 after damage during the second world war. With the completion of the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal in 1992, uninterrupted water transport was again made possible between the North Sea and the Black Sea.\nLocal public transport.\nLocal public transport within Bamberg relies exclusively on buses. More than 20 routes connect the outlying quarters and some villages in the vicinity to the central bus station. In addition, there are several \"Night Lines\" (the last of these, though, tend to run around midnight) and some park-and-ride lines from parking lots on the periphery to the town centre.\nA short-lived tram system existed in the 1920s.\nMilitary bases.\nBamberg was an important base for the Bavarian, German, and then American military stationed at Warner Barracks. Warner Barracks was closed in the fall of 2014, with the last battalion leaving being the 54th Engineer Battalion, and the grounds returned to the German government. In 2016, a large part of the facility was taken over by the German Federal Police for training purposes. Muna Kasserne was a small base occupied by the 504th Maintenance Company, 71st Maintenance Bn. It was part of Warner Barracks although located separately.\nGovernance.\nBamberg is an urban district, or \"kreisfreie Stadt\". Its town council (\"Stadtrat\") and its mayor (\"Oberb\u00fcrgermeister\") are elected every six years, though not in the same year. Thus, the last municipal election for the town council was in 2014, for the mayor in 2012. As an exception to the six-year term, the term starting in 2012 will take eight years to synchronize the elections with those in the rest of Bavaria.\nAs of the elections of 16 March 2014, the 44 member strong town council comprises 12 CSU councillors, 10 SPD councillors, 8 Green councillors, 4 councillors of the \"Bamberger B\u00fcrger-Block\" and 4 of the \"Freie W\u00e4hler\" (Free Voters), both local political movements. These five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a parliamentary group. In addition, there are 3 councillors of the \"Bamberger Unabh\u00e4ngige B\u00fcrger\" and the 1 councillor each of the \"Bamberger Realisten\", the FDP and the \"Bamberger Linke Liste\".\nThe previous council, elected on 2 March 2008, was composed of 15 CSU councillors, 10 SPD councillors, 7 Green councillors, 5 councillors of the Bamberger B\u00fcrger-Block and 3 of the Freie W\u00e4hler (Free Voters), both local political movements. These five parties achieved the number of councillors necessary to form a parliamentary group. In addition, there were 2 councillors of the \"Bamberger Realisten\" and one of the FDP and the Republikaner, making them ineligible for caucus status.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBamberg is twinned with:"}
{"id": "4898", "revid": "1155701497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4898", "title": "Black cow", "text": "Black cow or Black Cow can refer to:"}
{"id": "4900", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4900", "title": "Bloody Mary", "text": "Bloody Mary most commonly refers to:\nBloody Mary may also refer to:"}
{"id": "4901", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4901", "title": "Banana daiquiri", "text": ""}
{"id": "4903", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4903", "title": "Bosons", "text": ""}
{"id": "4904", "revid": "1272212248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4904", "title": "Bill Mumy", "text": "Charles William Mumy Jr. (; born February 1, 1954) is an American actor, writer, producer, and musician. He came to prominence in the 1960s as a child actor whose work included television appearances on \"Bewitched\", \"I Dream of Jeannie\", \"The Twilight Zone\", \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\", and a role in the film \"Dear Brigitte\", followed by a three-season role as Will Robinson in the 1960s sci-fi series \"Lost in Space\". Mumy later appeared as lonely teenager Sterling North in the film \"Rascal\" (1969) and Teft in the film \"Bless the Beasts and Children\" (1971).\nIn the 1990s, Mumy performed the role of Lennier in all five seasons of the sci-fi TV series \"Babylon 5\" and narrated the Emmy Award\u2013winning series \"Biography\".\nMumy is also known for his musical career as a guitarist, singer, songwriter and composer: he is an Emmy nominee for original music in \"Adventures in Wonderland\" (1992). As a musician Mumy performs as a solo artist, an occasional guest performer, and formerly as half of the duo Barnes &amp; Barnes before classmate/bandmate Robert Haimer died in 2023. From 1988 through the 90s he performed at San Diego Comic-Con and other comics-related events as part of the band Seduction of the Innocent (named after the titular book by Fredric Wertham). The band released one CD, \"The Golden Age\".\nEarly life and career.\nMumy was born in San Gabriel, California, to Charles William Mumy, a cattle rancher, and Muriel Gertrude Mumy (). He began his professional career at age seven and has worked on more than four hundred television episodes, eighteen films, various commercials, and scores of voice-over projects. He has also worked as a musician, songwriter, recording artist, and writer.\nTelevision and film career.\nAmong Mumy's earliest television roles was six-year-old Willy in the \"Donald's Friend\" (1960) episode of the NBC-TV family drama series \"National Velvet\", starring Lori Martin. He starred in three episodes of CBS-TV's original \"Twilight Zone\": \"It's a Good Life\" (S3 E8 November 1961), as six-year-old Anthony, who terrorizes his town with psychic powers (a role he later reprised along with his daughter Liliana in the \"It's Still a Good Life\" episode of the second revival series); \"In Praise of Pip\" (September 1963), as a vision of Jack Klugman's long-neglected dying son; and \"Long Distance Call\" (March 1961) as Billy Bayles, who talks to his dead grandmother through a toy telephone.\nIn 1961, Mumy was cast on CBS-TV's \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\" series in \"The Door Without a Key\", featuring John Larch, who played his father in \"It's a Good Life\". The same year, Mumy starred as little Jackie in the episode \"Bang! You're Dead\", featuring Marta Kristen, who later played his sister Judy on \"Lost in Space\". Mumy was cast as Mark Murdock in the \"Keep an Eye on Santa Claus\" (1962) episode of the ABC-TV drama series \"Going My Way\", starring Gene Kelly. His fellow guest stars were Cloris Leachman (who played his mother in \"It's a Good Life\"), Steve Brodie, and Frank McHugh.\nAt age eight, Mumy appeared in Jack Palance's ABC-TV circus drama \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" (1963); he was cast as Miles, a parentless boy, in the \"Perry Mason\" episode \"The Case of the Shifty Shoebox\" (1963), and he portrayed Freddy in the \"End of an Image\" (1963) episode of NBC-TV's modern Western series \"Empire\", starring Richard Egan.\nIn 1964, he was cast as Richard Kimble's nephew in ABC-TV's \"The Fugitive\" episode, \"Home Is the Hunted\"; as Barry in the NBC-TV medical drama \"The Eleventh Hour\" episode \"Sunday Father\"; as himself three times in the ABC sitcom \"The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet\"; in the Disney film \"For the Love of Willadena\"; and as a troubled orphan taken in by the Stephenses in the \"Bewitched\" fantasy sitcom episode \"A Vision of Sugarplums\" (December 1964), on ABC-TV.\nMumy was reportedly the first choice to portray Eddie Munster in the 1964 CBS situation comedy \"The Munsters\", but his parents objected to the extensive makeup requirements. The role instead went to Butch Patrick. Mumy appeared in one episode as a friend of Eddie.\nMumy guest starred in an episode of NBC-TV's \"I Dream of Jeannie\", \"Whatever Became of Baby Custer?\" (1965). That same year, he also appeared in an episode of \"Bewitched\" titled \"Junior Executive\" (1965), in which he played a young Darrin Stephens.\nMumy starred in \"Dear Brigitte\" (1965), a film adaptation of the novel \"Erasmus with Freckles\", as Erasmus Leaf, a child mathematical genius who develops a crush on Brigitte Bardot (played by herself in the film). His parents, played by James Stewart and Glynis Johns, attempt to manage his obsession.\n\"Lost in Space\" and beyond.\nFrom 1965 to 1968, Mumy portrayed Will Robinson in \"Lost in Space\", the recipient of numerous warnings (including \"Danger, Will Robinson\") from the show's robot character, voiced by Dick Tufeld.\nMumy was later cast in \"Bless the Beasts and Children\" (1971) as Teft, a leader in a group of misfit teenage boys resolved to save a herd of bison from hunters. He also played a musician friend of Cliff DeYoung's character in the television film \"Sunshine\" (1973), later reprising the role in \"Sunshine Christmas\" and in the TV series \"Sunshine\". In 1974, Mumy played Nick Butler in the pilot episode of NBC's \"The Rockford Files\" and made an appearance in a later episode in season 1 as a sidewalk artist. In 1988, he played Ben Matlock's genius nephew, Dr. Irwin Bruckner, on \"Matlock\".\nIn 1996, Mumy was a writer and co-creator of \"Space Cases\", a Nickelodeon television show with themes similar to those of \"Lost in Space\". Between 1994 and 1998, he played the ambassadorial aide Lennier in the syndicated science fiction series \"Babylon 5\". In November 1998, he played Kellin, a Starfleet officer, in the \"\" episode \"The Siege of AR-558\", in which he assists in defeating a Jem'Hadar detachment. To Mumy's delight, his character was human this time due to makeup time and his distaste as being known as an \"alien actor\"; while playing Lennier in \"Babylon 5\", he was required to wear prosthetic makeup. Mumy later appeared in a 2006 episode of \"Crossing Jordan\" and in the Syfy original film \"A.I. Assault\".\nIn 2018, Mumy appeared in the pilot episode of the Netflix remake series \"Lost in Space\". His character's name is Dr. Z. Smith, in homage to the character played by Jonathan Harris in the 1965 television series.\nVoice acting career.\nMumy has narrated over 50 episodes of the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network's \"Biography\" series, as well as hosted and narrated several other documentaries and specials for A&amp;E, Animal Planet, The Sci-Fi Channel, and E!. He has also worked on animated shows such as \"Ren and Stimpy\", \"Scooby-Doo\", \"\", Steven Spielberg's \"Animaniacs\", \"Bravest Warriors\", \"The Oz Kids\" and Disney's \"Buzz Lightyear of Star Command\" and \"Doc McStuffins\".\nMumy's work also includes voice overs in national commercials for Bud Ice, Farmers Insurance, Ford, Blockbuster, Twix, Oscar Mayer and McDonald's.\nMusic.\nMumy is an accomplished musician who plays the banjo, bass, guitar, harmonica, keyboards, mandolin, and percussion. His various musical credits include songs he has written and recorded with America, performed on tour with Shaun Cassidy, and played with Rick Springfield's band in the film \"Hard to Hold\". He created the band The Be Five with other \"Babylon 5\" actors.\nHe and Marta Kristen performed \"Sloop John B\" in the \"Lost in Space\" S3E14 episode \"Castles In Space\".\nMumy has released a number of solo CDs, including \"Dying to Be Heard\", \"In the Current\", \"Pandora's Box\", \"After Dreams Come True\", \"Los Angeles Times\" and \"Ghosts\", as well as nine albums with music partner Robert Haimer as Barnes and Barnes. Their most famous hit is the song \"Fish Heads\", which \"Rolling Stone\" named one of the top 100 videos of all time. He also performs with the Jenerators, a blues-rock band based in Los Angeles featuring Tom Hebenstreit on vocals, electric guitars, and keyboards; Mumy on vocals, acoustic and electric guitars, harmonica, keyboards and percussion; Gary Stockdale on vocals and bass; Miguel Ferrer on vocals, percussion and drums; David Jolliffe on guitar, percussion and vocals; and Chris Ross on drums and percussion. Additionally, Mumy released a Byrds tribute song, \"When Roger Was Jim\" (2012). In 2017, along with John Cowsill (The Cowsills) and Vicki Peterson (The Bangles) he founded the Action Skulls. Their first CD, \"Angels Hear\", which also included posthumous contributions from the bassist Rick Rosas, was released on September 27, 2017.\nMumy produces and hosts \"The Real Good Radio Hour\", a weekly series on KSAV Internet Radio focusing on various styles of music and the artists who pioneered them.\n\"Lost in Space\" activities in later years.\nIn 1996, Mumy and his \"Lost in Space\" costar Jonathan Harris were reunited at a Walt Disney convention in Orlando, Florida. Mumy worked again with Harris on the retrospective special \"Lost In Space: Forever\" (1998), where they reprised their roles in a scene written by Mumy (Harris rewrote his own lines). This occurred the year after the rest of the cast (including both Mumy and Harris) stated in a \"TV Guide\" article that the Sci Fi Channel planned to do a \"Lost in Space\" marathon while promoting a new film. Harris was to appear in the planned television film \"Lost in Space: The Journey Home\", but died before production was scheduled to start, in 2002, and it was subsequently cancelled. Mumy read the eulogy at Harris' funeral and was asked to narrate an account of his longtime friend's life on A&amp;E \"Biography\" that year.\nIn a 2010 interview on \"Blog Talk Radio\"'s \"Lessons Learned\", Rick Tocquigny was asked if Mumy was a Jonathan Harris fan before they appeared together on \"Lost in Space\". Tocquigny said that at age five, Mumy was too young to watch his mentor's show \"The Third Man\", which would have been aired late at night, but he was old enough to see \"The Bill Dana Show\".\nOn June 14, 2006, Mumy got to work with Harris one last time, though posthumously. Years before Harris died, he recorded voice work for the animated short \"The Bolt Who Screwed Christmas,\" narrating the film and playing the part of The Bolt. As a tribute to Harris, writer-director John Wardlaw added a scene that reunited \"Lost in Space\" cast members Mumy, Marta Kristen, and Angela Cartwright as the animated Ratchett family.\nMumy appears in two episodes of the 2018 series \"Lost in Space\" on Netflix. He plays the role of Dr. Smith, whose identity is stolen by June Harris, the villain.\nMumy attends \"Lost in Space\" reunions and shows, and co-authored a 2015 book, \"Lost (and Found) in Space\" with Angela Cartwright. He and Cartwright co-authored the 2021 book, \"Lost (and Found) in Space 2: Blast Off into the Expanded Edition\".\nOther work.\nMumy and co-author Peter David published a short story, \"The Black '59\" (1992), in the anthology \"Shock Rock\", edited by F. Paul Wilson.\nHe has also written a number of comics. With his friend, the late Miguel Ferrer, Mumy created Comet Man and Trypto the Acid Dog. They also co-wrote the Marvel Graphic Novel \"The Dreamwalker\".\nPersonal life.\nMumy married Eileen Joy Davis on October 9, 1986. They live in Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles with their two children, Seth (b. 1989) and Liliana (b. 1994)."}
{"id": "4905", "revid": "1272744189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4905", "title": "House of Bonaparte", "text": "The House of Bonaparte (originally \"Buonaparte\") is a former imperial and royal European dynasty of French and Italian origin. It was founded in 1804 by Napoleon I, the son of Corsican nobleman Carlo Buonaparte and Letizia Buonaparte (n\u00e9e Ramolino). Napoleon was a French military leader who rose to power during the French Revolution and who, in 1804, transformed the French First Republic into the First French Empire, five years after his \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" of November 1799 (18 Brumaire). Napoleon and the \"Grande Arm\u00e9e\" had to fight against every major European power (except for the ones he was allied with, including Denmark-Norway) and dominated continental Europe through a series of military victories during the Napoleonic Wars. He installed members of his family on the thrones of client states, expanding the power of the dynasty.\nThe House of Bonaparte formed the Imperial House of France during the French Empire, together with some non-Bonaparte family members. In addition to holding the title of Emperor of the French, the Bonaparte dynasty held various other titles and territories during the Napoleonic Wars, including the Kingdom of Italy, the Kingdom of the Spain and the Indies, the Kingdom of Westphalia, the Kingdom of Holland, and the Kingdom of Naples. The dynasty held power for around a decade until the Napoleonic Wars began to take their toll. Making very powerful enemies, such as Austria, Britain, Russia, and Prussia, as well as royalist (particularly Bourbon) restorational movements in France, Spain, the Two Sicilies, and Sardinia, the dynasty eventually collapsed due to the final defeat of Napoleon I at the Battle of Waterloo and the restoration of the Bourbon dynasty by the Congress of Vienna.\nDuring the reign of Napoleon I, the Imperial Family consisted of the Emperor's immediate relations \u2013 his wife, son, siblings, and some other close relatives, namely his brother-in-law Joachim Murat, his uncle Joseph Fesch, and his stepson Eug\u00e8ne de Beauharnais.\nBetween 1852 and 1870, there was a Second French Empire, when a member of the Bonaparte dynasty again ruled France: Napoleon III, the youngest son of Louis Bonaparte. However, during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u20131871, the dynasty was again ousted from the Imperial Throne. Since that time, there has been a series of pretenders. Supporters of the Bonaparte family's claim to the throne of France are known as Bonapartists. Current head Jean-Christophe, Prince Napol\u00e9on has a Bourbon mother.\nItalian origins.\nThe Bonaparte (originally ) family were patricians in the Italian towns of Sarzana, San Miniato, and Florence. The name derives from Italian: \"buona\" (\"good\") and \"parte\" (\"part\" or \"side\"). In Italian, the phrase \"buona parte\" is used to identify a fraction of considerable, but undefined, size in a .\nGianfaldo Buonaparte was the first known Buonaparte at Sarzana around 1200. His descendant Giovanni Buonaparte in 1397 married Isabella Calandrini, a cousin of later cardinal Filippo Calandrini. Giovanni became mayor of Sarzana and was named commissioner of the Lunigiana by Giovanni Maria Visconti in 1408. His daughter, Agnella Berni, was the great-grandmother of Italian poet Francesco Berni and their great-grandson Francesco Buonaparte was an equestrian mercenary at the service of the Genoese Bank of Saint George. In 1490, Francesco Buonaparte went to the island of Corsica, which was controlled by the bank. In 1493, he married the daughter of Guido da Castelletto, representative of the Bank of Saint George in Ajaccio, Corsica. Most of their descendants during subsequent generations were members of the Ajaccio town council. Napoleon's father, Carlo Buonaparte, received a patent of nobility from the King of France in 1771.\nThere also existed a Buonaparte family in Florence; however, its eventual relation with the Sarzana and San Miniato families is unknown. Jacopo Buonaparte of San Miniato was a friend and advisor to Medici Pope Clement VII. Jacopo was also a witness to and wrote an account of the sack of Rome, which is one of the most important historical documents recounting that event. Two of Jacopo's nephews, Pier Antonio Buonaparte and Giovanni Buonaparte, however, took part in the 1527 Medici rebellion, after which they were banished from Florence and later were restored by Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence. Jacopo's brother Benedetto Buonaparte maintained political neutrality. The San Miniato branch extinguished with Jacopo in 1550. The last member of the Florence family was a canon named Gregorio Bonaparte, who died in 1803, leaving Napoleon as heir.\nA Buonaparte tomb lies in the Church of San Francesco in San Miniato. A second tomb, the \"Chapelle Imp\u00e9riale\", was built by Napoleon III in Ajaccio 1857.\nImperial House of France.\nIn 1793 Corsica formally seceded from France and sought protection from the British government, prompting Pasquale Paoli to compel the Bonapartes to relocate to the mainland. Napoleon I is the most prominent name associated with the Bonaparte family because he conquered much of Europe during the early 19th century. Due to his indisputable popularity in France both among the people and in the army, he staged the Coup of 18 Brumaire and overthrew the Directory with the help of his brother Lucien Bonaparte, president of the Council of Five Hundred. Napoleon then oversaw the creation of a new Constitution that made him the First Consul of France on 10 November 1799. On 2 December 1804, he crowned himself Emperor of the French and ruled from 1804 to 1814, and again in 1815 during the Hundred Days after his return from Elba.\nFollowing his conquest of most of Western Europe, Napoleon I made his elder brother Joseph first King of Naples and then of Spain, his younger brother Louis King of Holland (subsequently forcing his abdication in 1810 after his failure to subordinate Dutch interests to those of France), and his youngest brother J\u00e9r\u00f4me as King of Westphalia, a short-lived realm created from several states of northwestern Germany.\nNapoleon's son Napol\u00e9on Fran\u00e7ois Charles Joseph was made King of Rome and was later styled as Napoleon II by loyalists of the dynasty, though he only ruled for two weeks after his father's abdication.\nLouis-Napol\u00e9on, son of Louis, was President of France and then Emperor of the French from 1852 to 1870, reigning as Napoleon III. His son, Napol\u00e9on, Prince Imperial, died fighting the Zulus in Natal, today the South African province of KwaZulu-Natal. With his death, the family lost much of its remaining political appeal, though claimants continue to assert their right to the imperial title. A political movement for Corsican independence surfaced in the 1990s which included a Bonapartist restoration in its programme.\nFamily tree.\nFamily tree list.\n\"Note: Bold for common names\"&lt;br&gt;Carlo-Maria (Ajaccio, 1746\u2013Montpellier, 1785) married Maria Letizia Ramolino (Ajaccio, 1750\u2013Rome, 1836) in 1764. He was a minor official in the local courts. They had eight children:\nBonaparte coat of arms.\nThe arms of the Bonaparte family were: \"Gules two bends sinister between two mullets or\". In 1804, Napoleon I changed the arms to \"Azure an imperial eagle or\". The change applied to all members of his family except for his brother Lucien and his nephew, the son from J\u00e9r\u00f4me's first marriage.\nDNA research.\nAccording to studies by G. Lucotte and his coauthors based on DNA research since 2011, Napoleon Bonaparte belonged to Y-DNA (direct male ancestry) haplogroup E1b1b1c1* (E-M34*). This 15000-year-old haplogroup has its highest concentration in Ethiopia and in the Near East (Jordan, Yemen). According to the authors of the study, \"Probably Napol\u00e9on also knew his remote oriental patrilineal origins, because Francesco Buonaparte (the Giovanni son), who was a mercenary under the orders of the Genoa Republic in Ajaccio in 1490, was nicknamed \"The Maure of Sarzane\".\" The latest study identifies the common Bonaparte DNA markers from Carlo (Charles) Bonaparte to 3 living descendants.\nLucotte et al. published in October 2013 the extended Y-STR of Napoleon I based on descendant testing, and the descendants were E-M34, just like the emperor's beard hair tested a year before. The persons tested were the patrilineal descendants of J\u00e9rome Bonaparte, one of Napoleon's brothers, and of Alexandre Colonna-Walewski, Napoleon's illegitimate son with Marie Walewska. These three tests all yielded the same Y-STR haplotype (109 markers) confirming with 100% certainty that the first Emperor of the French belonged to the M34 branch of haplogroup E1b1b.\nSTR strongly suggests that the Bonaparte belong to the Y58897 branch, which means that the ancestor 3000 years ago or a bit more lived in Anatolia, but all relatives in the database with a common ancestor with over 1000 years are found in their own the Massa - La Spezia small area in Italy. There are at the moment no relatives in the database older than that, which means they are very rare in Europe.\nLiving members.\nCharles, Prince Napol\u00e9on (born 1950, great-great-grandson of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte by his second marriage), and his son Jean-Christophe, Prince Napol\u00e9on (born 1986 and appointed heir in the will of his grandfather Louis, Prince Napol\u00e9on) currently dispute the headship of the Bonaparte family. The only other male members of the family are Charles's recently married (2013) brother, Prince J\u00e9r\u00f4me Napol\u00e9on (born 1957) and Jean-Christophe's son, Prince Louis Napol\u00e9on (born 2022). There are no other legitimate descendants in the male line from Napoleon I or from his brothers.\nThere are, however, numerous descendants of Napoleon's illegitimate, unacknowledged son, Count Alexandre Colonna-Walewski (1810\u20131868), born from Napoleon I's union with Marie, Countess Walewski. A descendant of Napoleon's sister Caroline Bonaparte was actor Ren\u00e9 Auberjonois. Recent DNA-matches with living descendants of J\u00e9r\u00f4me and Count Walewski have confirmed the existence of descendants of Lucien Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, namely the Clovis family."}
{"id": "4906", "revid": "6234443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4906", "title": "Beta sheet", "text": "The beta sheet (\u03b2-sheet, also \u03b2-pleated sheet) is a common motif of the regular protein secondary structure. Beta sheets consist of beta strands (\u03b2-strands) connected laterally by at least two or three backbone hydrogen bonds, forming a generally twisted, pleated sheet. A \u03b2-strand is a stretch of polypeptide chain typically 3 to 10 amino acids long with backbone in an extended conformation. The supramolecular association of \u03b2-sheets has been implicated in the formation of the fibrils and protein aggregates observed in amyloidosis, Alzheimer's disease and other proteinopathies.\nHistory.\nThe first \u03b2-sheet structure was proposed by William Astbury in the 1930s. He proposed the idea of hydrogen bonding between the peptide bonds of parallel or antiparallel extended \u03b2-strands. However, Astbury did not have the necessary data on the bond geometry of the amino acids in order to build accurate models, especially since he did not then know that the peptide bond was planar. A refined version was proposed by Linus Pauling and Robert Corey in 1951. Their model incorporated the planarity of the peptide bond which they previously explained as resulting from keto-enol tautomerization.\nStructure and orientation.\nGeometry.\nThe majority of \u03b2-strands are arranged adjacent to other strands and form an extensive hydrogen bond network with their neighbors in which the N\u2212H groups in the backbone of one strand establish hydrogen bonds with the C=O groups in the backbone of the adjacent strands. In the fully extended \u03b2-strand, successive side chains point straight up and straight down in an alternating pattern. Adjacent \u03b2-strands in a \u03b2-sheet are aligned so that their C\u03b1 atoms are adjacent and their side chains point in the same direction. The \"pleated\" appearance of \u03b2-strands arises from tetrahedral chemical bonding at the C\u03b1 atom; for example, if a side chain points straight up, then the bonds to the C\u2032 must point slightly downwards, since its bond angle is approximately 109.5\u00b0. The pleating causes the distance between C and C to be approximately , rather than the expected from two fully extended \"trans\" peptides. The \"sideways\" distance between adjacent C\u03b1 atoms in hydrogen-bonded \u03b2-strands is roughly .\nHowever, \u03b2-strands are rarely perfectly extended; rather, they exhibit a twist. The energetically preferred dihedral angles near (\"\u03c6\",\u00a0\"\u03c8\") = (\u2013135\u00b0,\u00a0135\u00b0) (broadly, the upper left region of the Ramachandran plot) diverge significantly from the fully extended conformation (\"\u03c6\",\u00a0\"\u03c8\") = (\u2013180\u00b0,\u00a0180\u00b0). The twist is often associated with alternating fluctuations in the dihedral angles to prevent the individual \u03b2-strands in a larger sheet from splaying apart. A good example of a strongly twisted \u03b2-hairpin can be seen in the protein BPTI.\nThe side chains point outwards from the folds of the pleats, roughly perpendicularly to the plane of the sheet; successive amino acid residues point outwards on alternating faces of the sheet.\nHydrogen bonding patterns.\nBecause peptide chains have a directionality conferred by their N-terminus and C-terminus, \u03b2-strands too can be said to be directional. They are usually represented in protein topology diagrams by an arrow pointing toward the C-terminus. Adjacent \u03b2-strands can form hydrogen bonds in antiparallel, parallel, or mixed arrangements.\nIn an antiparallel arrangement, the successive \u03b2-strands alternate directions so that the N-terminus of one strand is adjacent to the C-terminus of the next. This is the arrangement that produces the strongest inter-strand stability because it allows the inter-strand hydrogen bonds between carbonyls and amines to be planar, which is their preferred orientation. The peptide backbone dihedral angles (\"\u03c6\",\u00a0\"\u03c8\") are about (\u2013140\u00b0,\u00a0135\u00b0) in antiparallel sheets. In this case, if two atoms C and C are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded \u03b2-strands, then they form two mutual backbone hydrogen bonds to each other's flanking peptide groups; this is known as a close pair of hydrogen bonds.\nIn a parallel arrangement, all of the N-termini of successive strands are oriented in the same direction; this orientation may be slightly less stable because it introduces nonplanarity in the inter-strand hydrogen bonding pattern. The dihedral angles (\"\u03c6\",\u00a0\"\u03c8\") are about (\u2013120\u00b0,\u00a0115\u00b0) in parallel sheets. It is rare to find less than five interacting parallel strands in a motif, suggesting that a smaller number of strands may be unstable, however it is also fundamentally more difficult for parallel \u03b2-sheets to form because strands with N and C termini aligned necessarily must be very distant in sequence . There is also evidence that parallel \u03b2-sheet may be more stable since small amyloidogenic sequences appear to generally aggregate into \u03b2-sheet fibrils composed of primarily parallel \u03b2-sheet strands, where one would expect anti-parallel fibrils if anti-parallel were more stable.\nIn parallel \u03b2-sheet structure, if two atoms C and C are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded \u03b2-strands, then they do \"not\" hydrogen bond to each other; rather, one residue forms hydrogen bonds to the residues that flank the other (but not vice versa). For example, residue \"i\" may form hydrogen bonds to residues \"j\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 and \"j\"\u00a0+\u00a01; this is known as a wide pair of hydrogen bonds. By contrast, residue \"j\" may hydrogen-bond to different residues altogether, or to none at all.\nThe hydrogen bond arrangement in parallel beta sheet resembles that in an amide ring motif with 11 atoms.\nFinally, an individual strand may exhibit a mixed bonding pattern, with a parallel strand on one side and an antiparallel strand on the other. Such arrangements are less common than a random distribution of orientations would suggest, suggesting that this pattern is less stable than the anti-parallel arrangement, however bioinformatic analysis always struggles with extracting structural thermodynamics since there are always numerous other structural features present in whole proteins. Also proteins are inherently constrained by folding kinetics as well as folding thermodynamics, so one must always be careful in concluding stability from bioinformatic analysis.\nThe hydrogen bonding of \u03b2-strands need not be perfect, but can exhibit localized disruptions known as \u03b2-bulges.\nThe hydrogen bonds lie roughly in the plane of the sheet, with the peptide carbonyl groups pointing in alternating directions with successive residues; for comparison, successive carbonyls point in the \"same\" direction in the alpha helix.\nAmino acid propensities.\nLarge aromatic residues (tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan) and \u03b2-branched amino acids (threonine, valine, isoleucine) are favored to be found in \u03b2-strands in the \"middle\" of \u03b2-sheets. Different types of residues (such as proline) are likely to be found in the \"edge\" strands in \u03b2-sheets, presumably to avoid the \"edge-to-edge\" association between proteins that might lead to aggregation and amyloid formation.\nCommon structural motifs.\n\u03b2-hairpin motif.\nA very simple structural motif involving \u03b2-sheets is the \u03b2-hairpin, in which two antiparallel strands are linked by a short loop of two to five residues, of which one is frequently a glycine or a proline, both of which can assume the dihedral-angle conformations required for a tight turn or a \u03b2-bulge loop. Individual strands can also be linked in more elaborate ways with longer loops that may contain \u03b1-helices.\nGreek key motif.\nThe Greek key motif consists of four adjacent antiparallel strands and their linking loops. It consists of three antiparallel strands connected by hairpins, while the fourth is adjacent to the first and linked to the third by a longer loop. This type of structure forms easily during the protein folding process. It was named after a pattern common to Greek ornamental artwork (see meander).\n\u03b2-\u03b1-\u03b2 motif.\nDue to the chirality of their component amino acids, all strands exhibit right-handed twist evident in most higher-order \u03b2-sheet structures. In particular, the linking loop between two parallel strands almost always has a right-handed crossover chirality, which is strongly favored by the inherent twist of the sheet. This linking loop frequently contains a helical region, in which case it is called a \u03b2-\u03b1-\u03b2 motif. A closely related motif called a \u03b2-\u03b1-\u03b2-\u03b1 motif forms the basic component of the most commonly observed protein tertiary structure, the TIM barrel.\n\u03b2-meander motif.\nA simple supersecondary protein topology composed of two or more consecutive antiparallel \u03b2-strands linked together by hairpin loops. This motif is common in \u03b2-sheets and can be found in several structural architectures including \u03b2-barrels and \u03b2-propellers.\nThe vast majority of \u03b2-meander regions in proteins are found packed against other motifs or sections of the polypeptide chain, forming portions of the hydrophobic core that canonically drives formation of the folded structure.\u00a0 However, several notable exceptions include the Outer Surface Protein A (OspA) variants and the Single Layer \u03b2-sheet Proteins (SLBPs) which contain single-layer \u03b2-sheets in the absence of a traditional hydrophobic core.\u00a0 These \u03b2-rich proteins feature an extended single-layer \u03b2-meander \u03b2-sheets that are primarily stabilized via inter-\u03b2-strand interactions and hydrophobic interactions present in the turn regions connecting individual strands.\nPsi-loop motif.\nThe psi-loop (\u03a8-loop) motif consists of two antiparallel strands with one strand in between that is connected to both by hydrogen bonds. There are four possible strand topologies for single \u03a8-loops. This motif is rare as the process resulting in its formation seems unlikely to occur during protein folding. The \u03a8-loop was first identified in the aspartic protease family.\nStructural architectures of proteins with \u03b2-sheets.\n\u03b2-sheets are present in all-\u03b2, \u03b1+\u03b2 and \u03b1/\u03b2 domains, and in many peptides or small proteins with poorly defined overall architecture. All-\u03b2 domains may form \u03b2-barrels, \u03b2-sandwiches, \u03b2-prisms, \u03b2-propellers, and \u03b2-helices.\nStructural topology.\nThe topology of a \u03b2-sheet describes the order of hydrogen-bonded \u03b2-strands along the backbone. For example, the flavodoxin fold has a five-stranded, parallel \u03b2-sheet with topology 21345; thus, the edge strands are \u03b2-strand 2 and \u03b2-strand 5 along the backbone. Spelled out explicitly, \u03b2-strand 2 is H-bonded to \u03b2-strand 1, which is H-bonded to \u03b2-strand 3, which is H-bonded to \u03b2-strand 4, which is H-bonded to \u03b2-strand 5, the other edge strand. In the same system, the Greek key motif described above has a 4123 topology. The secondary structure of a \u03b2-sheet can be described roughly by giving the number of strands, their topology, and whether their hydrogen bonds are parallel or antiparallel.\n\u03b2-sheets can be \"open\", meaning that they have two edge strands (as in the flavodoxin fold or the immunoglobulin fold) or they can be \"closed \u03b2-barrels\" (such as the TIM barrel). \u03b2-Barrels are often described by their \"stagger\" or \"shear\". Some open \u03b2-sheets are very curved and fold over on themselves (as in the SH3 domain) or form horseshoe shapes (as in the ribonuclease inhibitor). Open \u03b2-sheets can assemble face-to-face (such as the \u03b2-propeller domain or immunoglobulin fold) or edge-to-edge, forming one big \u03b2-sheet.\nDynamic features.\n\u03b2-pleated sheet structures are made from extended \u03b2-strand polypeptide chains, with strands linked to their neighbours by hydrogen bonds. Due to this extended backbone conformation, \u03b2-sheets resist stretching. \u03b2-sheets in proteins may carry out low-frequency accordion-like motion as observed by the Raman spectroscopy and analyzed with the quasi-continuum model.\nParallel \u03b2-helices.\nA \u03b2-helix is formed from repeating structural units consisting of two or three short \u03b2-strands linked by short loops. These units \"stack\" atop one another in a helical fashion so that successive repetitions of the same strand hydrogen-bond with each other in a parallel orientation. See the \u03b2-helix article for further information.\nIn lefthanded \u03b2-helices, the strands themselves are quite straight and untwisted; the resulting helical surfaces are nearly flat, forming a regular triangular prism shape, as shown for the 1QRE archaeal carbonic anhydrase at right. Other examples are the lipid A synthesis enzyme LpxA and insect antifreeze proteins with a regular array of Thr sidechains on one face that mimic the structure of ice.\nRighthanded \u03b2-helices, typified by the pectate lyase enzyme shown at left or P22 phage tailspike protein, have a less regular cross-section, longer and indented on one of the sides; of the three linker loops, one is consistently just two residues long and the others are variable, often elaborated to form a binding or active site. &lt;br&gt;\nA two-sided \u03b2-helix (right-handed) is found in some bacterial metalloproteases; its two loops are each six residues long and bind stabilizing calcium ions to maintain the integrity of the structure, using the backbone and the Asp side chain oxygens of a GGXGXD sequence motif. This fold is called a \u03b2-roll in the SCOP classification.\nIn pathology.\nSome proteins that are disordered or helical as monomers, such as amyloid \u03b2 (see amyloid plaque) can form \u03b2-sheet-rich oligomeric structures associated with pathological states. The amyloid \u03b2 protein's oligomeric form is implicated as a cause of Alzheimer's. Its structure has yet to be determined in full, but recent data suggest that it may resemble an unusual two-strand \u03b2-helix.\nThe side chains from the amino acid residues found in a \u03b2-sheet structure may also be arranged such that many of the adjacent sidechains on one side of the sheet are hydrophobic, while many of those adjacent to each other on the alternate side of the sheet are polar or charged (hydrophilic), which can be useful if the sheet is to form a boundary between polar/watery and nonpolar/greasy environments."}
{"id": "4910", "revid": "47722236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4910", "title": "Beryl", "text": "Beryl ( ) is a mineral composed of beryllium aluminium silicate with the chemical formula Be3Al2Si6O18. Well-known varieties of beryl include emerald and aquamarine. Naturally occurring hexagonal crystals of beryl can be up to several meters in size, but terminated crystals are relatively rare. Pure beryl is colorless, but it is frequently tinted by impurities; possible colors are green, blue, yellow, pink, and red (the rarest). It is an ore source of beryllium.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"beryl\" \u2013 \u2013 is borrowed, via and , from Ancient Greek \u03b2\u03ae\u03c1\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \"b\u1e17ryllos\", which referred to a 'precious blue-green color-of-sea-water stone'; from Prakrit \"veru\u1e37iya\", \"ve\u1e37uriya\" 'beryl'\nwhich is ultimately of Dravidian origin, maybe from the name of Belur or \"Velur\", a town in Karnataka, southern India. The term was later adopted for the mineral beryl more exclusively.\nWhen the first eyeglasses were constructed in 13th-century Italy, the lenses were made of beryl (or of rock crystal) as glass could not be made clear enough. Consequently, glasses were named \"Brille\" in German (\"bril\" in Dutch and \"briller\" in Danish).\nDeposits.\nBeryl is a common mineral, and it is widely distributed in nature. It is found most commonly in granitic pegmatites, but also occurs in mica schists, such as those of the Ural Mountains, and in limestone in Colombia. It is less common in ordinary granite and is only infrequently found in nepheline syenite. Beryl is often associated with tin and tungsten ore bodies formed as high-temperature hydrothermal veins. In granitic pegmatites, beryl is found in association with quartz, potassium feldspar, albite, muscovite, biotite, and tourmaline. Beryl is sometimes found in metasomatic contacts of igneous intrusions with gneiss, schist, or carbonate rocks. Common beryl, mined as beryllium ore, is found in small deposits in many countries, but the main producers are Russia, Brazil, and the United States.\nNew England's pegmatites have produced some of the largest beryls found, including one massive crystal from the Bumpus Quarry in Albany, Maine with dimensions with a mass of around ; it is New Hampshire's state mineral. , the world's largest known naturally occurring crystal of any mineral is a crystal of beryl from Malakialina, Madagascar, long and in diameter, and weighing .\nCrystal habit and structure.\nBeryl belongs to the hexagonal crystal system. Normally beryl forms hexagonal columns but can also occur in massive habits. As a cyclosilicate beryl incorporates rings of silicate tetrahedra of that are arranged in columns along the \u00a0axis and as parallel layers perpendicular to the \u00a0axis, forming channels along the \u00a0axis. These channels permit a variety of ions, neutral atoms, and molecules to be incorporated into the crystal thus disrupting the overall charge of the crystal permitting further substitutions in aluminium, silicon, and beryllium sites in the crystal structure. These impurities give rise to the variety of colors of beryl that can be found. Increasing alkali content within the silicate ring channels causes increases to the refractive indices and birefringence.\nHuman health impact.\nBeryl is a beryllium compound that is a known carcinogen with acute toxic effects leading to pneumonitis when inhaled. Care must thus be used when mining, handling, and refining these gems.\nVarieties.\nAquamarine and maxixe.\nAquamarine (from , \"sea water\") is a blue or cyan variety of beryl. It occurs at most localities which yield ordinary beryl. The gem-gravel placer deposits of Sri Lanka contain aquamarine. Green-yellow beryl, such as that occurring in Brazil, is sometimes called \"chrysolite aquamarine\". The deep blue version of aquamarine is called \"maxixe\" (pronounced mah-she-she). Its color results from a radiation-induced color center.\nThe pale blue color of aquamarine is attributed to Fe2+. Fe3+ ions produce golden-yellow color, and when both Fe2+ and Fe3+ are present, the color is a darker blue as in maxixe. Decoloration of maxixe by light or heat thus may be due to the charge transfer between Fe3+ and Fe2+.\nIn the United States, aquamarines can be found at the summit of Mount Antero in the Sawatch Range in central Colorado, and in the New England and North Carolina pegmatites. Aquamarines are also present in the state of Wyoming, aquamarine has been discovered in the Big Horn Mountains, near Powder River Pass. Another location within the United States is the Sawtooth Range near Stanley, Idaho, although the minerals are within a wilderness area which prevents collecting. In Brazil, there are mines in the states of Minas Gerais, Esp\u00edrito Santo, and Bahia, and minorly in Rio Grande do Norte. The mines of Colombia, Skardu Pakistan, Madagascar, Russia, Namibia, Zambia, Malawi, Tanzania, and Kenya also produce aquamarine.\nEmerald.\nEmerald is green beryl, colored by around 2% chromium and sometimes vanadium. Most emeralds are highly included, so their brittleness (resistance to breakage) is classified as generally poor.\nThe modern English word \"emerald\" comes via Middle English \"emeraude\", imported from modern French via Old French \"\u00e9smeraude\" and Medieval Latin , from Latin , from Greek \"smaragdos\" meaning 'green gem'.\nEmeralds in antiquity were mined by the Egyptians and in what is now Austria, as well as Swat in contemporary Pakistan. A rare type of emerald known as a trapiche emerald is occasionally found in the mines of Colombia. A trapiche emerald exhibits a \"star\" pattern; it has raylike spokes of dark carbon impurities that give the emerald a six-pointed radial pattern. It is named for the \"trapiche\", a grinding wheel used to process sugarcane in the region. Colombian emeralds are generally the most prized due to their transparency and fire. Some of the rarest emeralds come from the two main emerald belts in the Eastern Ranges of the Colombian Andes: Muzo and Coscuez west of the Altiplano Cundiboyacense, and Chivor and Somondoco to the east. Fine emeralds are also found in other countries, such as Zambia, Brazil, Zimbabwe, Madagascar, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan and Russia. In the US, emeralds can be found in Hiddenite, North Carolina. In 1998, emeralds were discovered in Yukon.\nEmerald is a rare and valuable gemstone and, as such, it has provided the incentive for developing synthetic emeralds. Both hydrothermal and \"flux-growth\" synthetics have been produced. The first commercially successful emerald synthesis process was that of Carroll Chatham. The other large producer of flux emeralds was Pierre Gilson Sr., which has been on the market since 1964. Gilson's emeralds are usually grown on natural colorless beryl seeds which become coated on both sides. Growth occurs at the rate of per month, a typical seven-month growth run producing emerald crystals of 7\u00a0mm of thickness. The green color of emeralds is widely attributed to presence of Cr3+ ions. Intensely green beryls from Brazil, Zimbabwe and elsewhere in which the color is attributed to vanadium have also been sold and certified as emeralds.\nGolden beryl and heliodor.\n\"Golden beryl\" can range in colors from pale yellow to a brilliant gold. Unlike emerald, golden beryl generally has very few flaws. The term \"golden beryl\" is sometimes synonymous with \"heliodor\" (from Greek \"h\u0113lios \u2013 \u1f25\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2\" \"sun\" + \"d\u014dron \u2013 \u03b4\u1ff6\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd\" \"gift\") but golden beryl refers to pure yellow or golden yellow shades, while heliodor refers to the greenish-yellow shades. The golden yellow color is attributed to Fe3+ ions. Both golden beryl and heliodor are used as gems. Probably the largest cut golden beryl is the flawless stone on display in the Hall of Gems, Washington, D.C., United States.\nGoshenite.\nColorless beryl is called \"goshenite\". The name originates from Goshen, Massachusetts, where it was originally discovered. In the past, goshenite was used for manufacturing eyeglasses and lenses owing to its transparency. Nowadays, it is most commonly used for gemstone purposes.\nThe gem value of goshenite is relatively low. However, goshenite can be colored yellow, green, pink, blue and in intermediate colors by irradiating it with high-energy particles. The resulting color depends on the content of Ca, Sc, Ti, V, Fe, and Co impurities.\nMorganite.\nMorganite, also known as \"pink beryl\", \"rose beryl\", \"pink emerald\" (which is not a legal term according to the new Federal Trade Commission Guidelines and Regulations), and \"cesian (or \"caesian\") beryl\", is a rare light pink to rose-colored gem-quality variety of beryl. Orange/yellow varieties of morganite can also be found, and color banding is common. It can be routinely heat treated to remove patches of yellow and is occasionally treated by irradiation to improve its color. The pink color of morganite is attributed to Mn2+ ions.\nRed beryl.\nRed variety of beryl (the \"bixbite\") was first described in 1904 for an occurrence, its type locality, at Maynard's Claim (Pismire Knolls), Thomas Range, Juab County, Utah. The dark red color is attributed to Mn3+ ions. Old synonym \"bixbite\" is deprecated from the CIBJO because of the possibility of confusion with the mineral bixbyite (both named after mineralogist Maynard Bixby). Red \"bixbite\" beryl formerly was marketed as \"red\" or \"scarlet emerald\", but these terms involving \"Emerald\" terminology are now prohibited in the US.\nRed beryl is very rare and has only been reported from a handful of North American locations: Wah Wah Mountains, Beaver County, Utah; Paramount Canyon, Round Mountain, Juab County, Utah; and Sierra County, New Mexico, although this locality does not often produce gem-grade stones. The bulk of gem-grade red beryl comes from the Ruby-Violet Claim in the Wah Wah Mts. of midwestern Utah, discovered in 1958 by Lamar Hodges, of Fillmore, Utah, while he was prospecting for uranium. Red beryl has been known to be confused with pezzottaite, a caesium analog of beryl, found in Madagascar and, more recently, Afghanistan; cut gems of the two varieties can be distinguished by their difference in refractive index, and the rough crystals easily by their differing crystal systems (pezzottaite trigonal, red beryl hexagonal). Synthetic red beryl is also produced. Like emerald and unlike most other varieties of beryl, the red ones are usually highly included.\nWhile gem beryls are ordinarily found in pegmatites and certain metamorphic stones, red beryl occurs in topaz-bearing rhyolites. It is formed by crystallizing under low pressure and high temperature from a pneumatolytic phase along fractures or within near-surface miarolitic cavities of the rhyolite. Associated minerals include bixbyite, quartz, orthoclase, topaz, spessartine, pseudobrookite and hematite."}
{"id": "4911", "revid": "1272998856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4911", "title": "Basel", "text": "Basel (, ; ), also known as Basle, is a city in northwestern Switzerland on the River Rhine (at the transition from the High to the Upper Rhine). Basel is Switzerland's third-most-populous city (after Zurich and Geneva), with 177,595 inhabitants within the city municipality limits. The official language of Basel is Swiss Standard German and the main spoken language is the local Basel German dialect.\nBasel is commonly considered to be the cultural capital of Switzerland and the city is famous for its many museums, including the Kunstmuseum, which is the first collection of art accessible to the public in the world (1661) and the largest museum of art in Switzerland, the Fondation Beyeler (located in Riehen), the Museum Tinguely and the Museum of Contemporary Art, which is the first public museum of contemporary art in Europe. Forty museums are spread throughout the city-canton, making Basel one of the largest cultural centres in relation to its size and population in Europe. It is the hometown of the Art Basel, world's most prestigious and influential international art fair, showcasing modern and contemporary works from leading galleries and attracting top collectors, artists, and enthusiasts globally.\nThe University of Basel, Switzerland's oldest university (founded in 1460), and the city's centuries-long commitment to humanism, have made Basel a safe haven at times of political unrest in other parts of Europe for such notable people as Erasmus of Rotterdam, the Holbein family, Friedrich Nietzsche, Carl Jung, and in the 20th century also Hermann Hesse and Karl Jaspers.\nBasel was the seat of a Prince-Bishopric starting in the 11th century, and joined the Swiss Confederacy in 1501. The city has been a commercial hub and an important cultural centre since the Renaissance, and has emerged as a centre for the chemical and pharmaceutical industries in the 20th century. In 1897, Basel was chosen by Theodor Herzl as the location for the first World Zionist Congress, and altogether the congress was held there ten times over a time span of 50 years, more than in any other location. The city is also home to the world headquarters of the Bank for International Settlements. The name of the city is internationally known through institutions like the Basel Accords, Art Basel and FC Basel.\nBasel is Switzerland's main centre for the pharmaceutical industry, hosting both Novartis and Roche. In 1938, the world-renowned chemist Albert Hofmann discovered LSD in Basel, where he spent most of his life. Other influential and renowned figures such as Roger Federer, Paracelsus, Matth\u00e4us Merian, Michel von Tell or Stephan Remmler are closely associated with the city or were born there. In 1734, the so-called 'Basel Problem' was solved in the city, which is regarded as one of the most important achievements in mathematics.\nBasel was ranked the tenth most liveable city in the world by Mercer in 2019. Basel is also one of the wealthiest and safest cities in the world. A unique feature of the city is its location in the middle of the tri-border area. It seamlessly transitions into a small German and French town, with the houses directly connected and appearing like integral parts of its own city districts.\nName.\nThe name of Basel is first recorded as \"Basilia\" in the 3rd century (237/8), at the time referring to the Roman castle. This name is mostly interpreted as deriving from the personal name \"Basilius\", from a toponym \"villa Basilia\" (\"estate of Basilius\") or similar.\nAnother suggestion derives it from a name \"Basilia\" attested in northern France as a development of \"basilica\", the term for a public or church building (as in Bazeilles), but all of these names reference early church buildings of the 4th or 5th century and cannot be adduced for the 3rd-century attestation of \"Basilia\".\nBy popular etymology, or simple assonance, the basilisk becomes closely associated with the city, used as heraldic supporter from 1448, represented on coins minted by the city, and frequently found in ornaments.\nThe Middle French form was adopted into English, but this form has fallen gradually out of use although it continues to be used in some sections of British English including the BBC. Currently, the spelling \"Basel\" is most often used, to match the official German spelling. In French was still in use in the 18th century, but was gradually replaced by the modern French spelling . In Icelandic, the city is recorded as in the 12th-century itinerary \"Lei\u00f0arv\u00edsir og borgarskipan\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThere are traces of a settlement at the nearby Rhine knee from the early La T\u00e8ne period (5th century BC). In the 2nd century BC, there was a village of the Raurici at the site of \"Basel-Gasfabrik\" (to the northwest of the Old City, and likely identical with the town of \"Arialbinnum\" that was mentioned on the \"Tabula Peutingeriana\"). The unfortified settlement was abandoned in the 1st century BC in favour of an \"oppidum\" on the site of Basel Minster, probably in reaction to the Roman invasion of Gaul.\nIn Roman Gaul, Augusta Raurica was established some from Basel as the regional administrative centre, while a \"castrum\" (fortified camp) was built on the site of the Celtic \"oppidum\". In AD 83, the area was incorporated into the Roman province of Germania Superior. The Roman Senator Munatius Plancus is known as the traditional founder of Basel since the Renaissance. Roman control over the area deteriorated in the 3rd century, and Basel became an outpost of the \"Provincia Maxima Sequanorum\" formed by Diocletian. \"Basilia\" is first named by the Ammianus Marcellinus in his Res Gestae as part of the Roman military fortifications along the Rhine in the late 4th century.\nThe Germanic confederation of the Alemanni attempted to cross the Rhine several times in the 4th century, but were repelled; one such event was the Battle of Solicinium (368). However, in the great invasion of AD 406, the Alemanni appear to have crossed the Rhine a final time, conquering and then settling what is today Alsace and a large part of the Swiss Plateau.\nThe Duchy of Alemannia fell under Frankish rule in the 6th century. The Alemannic and Frankish settlement of Basel gradually grew around the old Roman castle in the 6th and 7th century. It appears that Basel surpassed the ancient regional capital of Augusta Raurica by the 7th century; based on the evidence of a gold \"tremissis\" (a small gold coin with the value of a third of a \"solidus\") with the inscription \"Basilia fit\", Basel seems to have minted its own coins in the 7th century.\nBasel at this time was part of the Archdiocese of Besan\u00e7on. A separate bishopric of Basel, replacing the ancient bishopric of Augusta Raurica, was established in the 8th century. Under bishop Haito (r. 806\u2013823), the first cathedral was built on the site of the Roman castle (replaced by a Romanesque structure consecrated in 1019).\nAt the partition of the Carolingian Empire through the Treaty of Verdun in 843, Basel was first given to West Francia and became its German exclave. It passed to East Francia with the Treaty of Meerssen of 870. Basel was destroyed by the Magyars in 917. The rebuilt town became part of Upper Burgundy, and as such was incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire in 1032.\nPrince-Bishopric of Basel.\nFrom the donation by Rudolph III of Burgundy of the Moutier-Grandval Abbey and all its possessions to Bishop Adalbero II of Metz in 999 until the Reformation, Basel was ruled by Prince-Bishops.\nIn 1019, the construction of the cathedral of Basel (known locally as the \"M\u00fcnster\") began under Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor.\nIn the 11th to 12th century, Basel gradually acquired the characteristics of a medieval city.\nThe main market place is first mentioned in 1091. The first city walls were constructed around 1100 (with improvements made in the mid-13th and in the late 14th century). A city council of nobles and burghers is recorded for 1185, and the first mayor, Heinrich Steinlin of Murbach, for 1253. The first bridge across the Rhine was built in 1225 under bishop Heinrich von Thun (at the location of the modern Middle Bridge), and from this time the settlement of \"Kleinbasel\" gradually formed around the bridgehead on the far river bank. The bridge was largely funded by Basel's Jewish community who had settled there a century earlier. For many centuries to come Basel possessed the only permanent bridge over the river \"between Lake Constance and the sea\". The first city guild were the furriers, established in 1226. A total of about fifteen guilds were established in the course of the 13th century, reflecting the increasing economic prosperity of the city. The Crusade of 1267 set out from Basel.\nPolitical conflicts between the bishops and the burghers began in the mid-13th century and continued throughout the 14th century. By the late 14th century, the city was for all practical purposes independent although it continued to nominally pledge fealty to the bishops. The House of Habsburg attempted to gain control over the city. This was not successful, but it caused a political split among the burghers of Basel into a pro-Habsburg faction, known as \"Sterner\", and an anti-Habsburg faction, the \"Psitticher\".\nThe Black Death reached Basel in 1348. The Jews were blamed, and an estimated 50 to 70 Jews were executed by burning on 16 January 1349 in what has become known as the Basel massacre. The Basel earthquake of 1356 destroyed much of the city along with a number of castles in the vicinity.\n A riot on 26 February 1376, known as \"B\u00f6se Fasnacht\", led to the killing of a number of men of Leopold III, Duke of Austria. This was seen as a serious breach of the peace, and the city council blamed \"foreign ruffians\" for this and executed twelve alleged perpetrators. Leopold nevertheless had the city placed under imperial ban, and in a treaty of 9 July, Basel was given a heavy fine and was placed under Habsburg control. To free itself from Habsburg hegemony, Basel joined the Swabian League of Cities in 1385, and many knights of the pro-Habsburg faction, along with duke Leopold himself, were killed in the Battle of Sempach the following year. A formal treaty with Habsburg was made in 1393.\nBasel had gained its de facto independence from both the bishop and from the Habsburgs and was free to pursue its own policy of territorial expansion, beginning around 1400.\nThe unique representation of a bishops' crozier as the heraldic charge in the coat of arms of Basel first appears in the form of a gilded wooden staff in the 12th century. It is of unknown origin or significance (beyond its obvious status of bishop's crozier), but it is assumed to have represented a relic, possibly attributed to Saint Germanus of Granfelden. This staff (known as \"Baselstab\") became a symbol representing the Basel diocese, depicted in bishops' seals of the late medieval period. It is represented in a heraldic context in the early 14th century, not yet as a heraldic charge but as a kind of heraldic achievement flanked by the heraldic shields of the bishop. The staff is also represented in the bishops's seals of the period. The use of the \"Baselstab\" in black as the coat of arms of the city was introduced in 1385. From this time, the \"Baselstab\" in red represented the bishop, and the same charge in black represented the city. The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is \"In Silber ein schwarzer Baselstab\" (Argent, a staff of Basel sable). In 1400, Basel was able to purchase the towns of Liestal, Homburg and Waldenburg with its surrounding territory.\nIn 1412 (or earlier), the well-known Gasthof zum Goldenen Sternen was established. Basel became the focal point of western Christendom during the 15th century Council of Basel (1431\u20131449), including the 1439 election of antipope Felix V. In 1459, Pope Pius II endowed the University of Basel, where such notables as Erasmus of Rotterdam and Paracelsus later taught. At the same time the new craft of printing was introduced to Basel by apprentices of Johann Gutenberg. In 1461, the land around Farnsburg became a part of Basel.\nThe Schwabe publishing house was founded in 1488 by Johannes Petri and is the oldest publishing house still in business. Johann Froben also operated his printing house in Basel and was notable for publishing works by Erasmus. In 1495, Basel was incorporated into the Upper Rhenish Imperial Circle; the Bishop of Basel was added to the Bench of the Ecclesiastical Princes of the Imperial Diet. In 1500 the construction of the Basel M\u00fcnster was finished.\nAs a member state in the Swiss Confederacy.\nThe city had remained neutral through the Swabian War of 1499 despite being plundered by soldiers on both sides. The Treaty of Basel ended the war and granted the Swiss confederates exemptions from the emperor Maximillian's taxes and jurisdictions, separating Switzerland \"de facto\" from the Holy Roman Empire.\nOn 9 June 1501, Basel joined the Swiss Confederation as its eleventh canton. It was the only canton that was asked to join, not the other way round. Basel had a strategic location, good relations with Strasbourg and Mulhouse, and control of the corn imports from Alsace, whereas the Swiss lands were becoming overpopulated and had few resources. A provision of the Charter accepting Basel required that in conflicts among the other cantons it was to stay neutral and offer its services for mediation.\nIn 1503, the new bishop Christoph von Utenheim refused to give Basel a new constitution; whereupon, to show its power, the city began to build a new city hall.\nIn 1529, the city became Protestant under Oecolampadius and the bishop's seat was moved to Porrentruy. The bishop's crook was however retained as the city's coat of arms. For centuries to come, a handful of wealthy families collectively referred to as the \"Daig\" played a pivotal role in city affairs as they gradually established themselves as a \"de facto\" city aristocracy.\nThe first edition of \"Christianae religionis institutio\" (\"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" \u2013 John Calvin's great exposition of Calvinist doctrine) was published at Basel in March 1536.\nIn 1544, Johann von Brugge, a rich Dutch Protestant refugee, was given citizenship and lived respectably until his death in 1556, then buried with honors. His body was exhumed and burnt at the stake in 1559 after it was discovered that he was the Anabaptist David Joris.\nIn 1543, \"De humani corporis fabrica\", the first book on human anatomy, was published and printed in Basel by Andreas Vesalius (1514\u20131564).\nThere are indications Joachim Meyer, author of the influential 16th-century martial arts text \"Kunst des Fechten\" (\"The Art of Fencing\"), came from Basel. In 1661 the \"Amerbaschsches Kabinett,\" a vast collection of exotic artifacts, coins, medals and books was purchased by Basel. It was to become to the first public museum of art. Its collection became the core of the later Basel Museum of Art.\nThe Bernoulli family, which included important 17th- and 18th-century mathematicians such as Jakob Bernoulli, Johann Bernoulli and Daniel Bernoulli, were from Basel. The 18th-century mathematician Leonhard Euler was born in Basel and studied under Johann Bernoulli.\nModern history.\nIn 1792, the Republic of Rauracia, a revolutionary French client republic, was created. It lasted until 1793. After three years of political agitation and a short civil war in 1833 the disadvantaged countryside seceded from the Canton of Basel, forming the half canton of Basel-Landschaft. Between 1861 and 1878 the city walls were slighted.\nOn 3 July 1874, Switzerland's first zoo, the Zoo Basel, opened its doors in the south of the city towards Binningen.\nIn 1897 the first World Zionist Congress was held in Basel. Altogether the World Zionist Congress was held in Basel ten times, more than in any other city in the world.\nOn 16 November 1938, the psychedelic drug LSD was first synthesized by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann at Sandoz Laboratories in Basel.\nIn 1967, the population of Basel voted in favor of buying three works of art by painter Pablo Picasso which were at risk of being sold and taken out of the local museum of art, due to a financial crisis on the part of the owner's family. Therefore, Basel became the first city in the world where the population of a political community democratically decided to acquire works of art for a public institution. Pablo Picasso was so moved by the gesture that he subsequently gifted the city with an additional three paintings.\nBasel as a historical, international meeting place.\nBasel has often been the site of peace negotiations and other international meetings. The Treaty of Basel (1499) ended the Swabian War. Two years later Basel joined the Swiss Confederation. The Peace of Basel in 1795 between the French Republic and Prussia and Spain ended the First Coalition against France during the French Revolutionary Wars. In more recent times, the World Zionist Organization held its first congress in Basel from 29 August through 31 August 1897. Because of the Balkan Wars, the (Socialist) Second International held an extraordinary congress at Basel in 1912. In 1989, the Basel Convention was opened for signature with the aim of preventing the export of hazardous waste from wealthy to developing nations for disposal.\nGeography and climate.\nLocation.\nBasel is located in Northwestern Switzerland and is commonly considered to be the capital of that region. It is close to the point where the Swiss, French and German borders meet, and Basel also has suburbs in France and Germany. , the Swiss Basel agglomeration was the third-largest in Switzerland, with a population of 541,000 in 74 municipalities in Switzerland (municipal count as of 2018). The metropolitan area, called the Trinational Eurodistrict of Basel (TEB), consists of 62 suburban communes including municipalities in neighboring countries, and counted 829,000 inhabitants in 2007.\nTopography.\nBasel has an area, , of . Of this area, or 4.0% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 3.7% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 86.4% is settled (buildings or roads), or 6.1% is either rivers or lakes.\nOf the built up area, industrial buildings made up 10.2% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 40.7% and transportation infrastructure made up 24.0%. Power and water infrastructure as well as other special developed areas made up 2.7% of the area while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 8.9%. Out of the forested land, all of the forested land area is covered with heavy forests. Of the agricultural land, 2.5% is used for growing crops and 1.3% is pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen system, Basel features an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"), although with notable continental influences due to its relatively far inland position with cool to cold, overcast winters and warm to hot, humid summers.\nThe city averages 118.2 days of rain or snow annually and on average receives of precipitation. The wettest month is May during which time Basel receives an average of of rain. The month with the most days of precipitation is also May, with an average of 11.7 days. The driest month of the year is February with an average of of precipitation over 8.4 days.\nPolitics.\nThe city of Basel functions as the capital of the Swiss half-canton of Basel-Stadt.\nCanton.\nThe canton Basel-Stadt consists of three municipalities: Riehen, Bettingen, and the city Basel itself. The political structure and agencies of the city and the canton are identical.\nCity.\nQuarters.\nThe city itself has 19 quarters:\nGovernment.\nThe city's and canton's executive, the Executive Council (\"Regierungsrat\"), consists of seven members for a mandate period of 4 years. They are elected by any inhabitant valid to vote on the same day as the parliament, but by means of a system of Majorz, and operates as a collegiate authority. The president () is elected as such by a public election, while the heads of the other departments are appointed by the collegiate. The current president is Beat Jans. The executive body holds its meetings in the red Town Hall () on the central \"Marktplatz\". The building was built in 1504\u201314.\n, Basel's Executive Council is made up of three representatives of the SP (Social Democratic Party) including the president, two LDP (Liberal-Demokratische Partei of Basel), and one member each of Green Liberals (glp), and CVP (Christian Democratic Party). The last election was held on 25 October and 29 November 2020 and four new members have been elected.\nBarbara Sch\u00fcpbach-Guggenb\u00fchlis is State Chronicler (\"Staatsschreiberin\") since 2009, and Marco Greiner is Head of Communication (\"Regierungssprecher\") and Vice State Chronicler (\"Vizestaatsschreiber\") since 2007 for the Executive Council.\nParliament.\nThe city's and canton's parliament, the Grand Council of Basel-Stadt (Grosser Rat), consists of 100 seats, with members (called in German: \"Grossrat/Grossr\u00e4tin\") elected every 4 years. The sessions of the Grand Council are public. Unlike the members of the Executive Council, the members of the Grand Council are not politicians by profession, but they are paid a fee based on their attendance. Any resident of Basel allowed to vote can be elected as a member of the parliament. The delegates are elected by means of a system of Proporz. The legislative body holds its meetings in the red Town Hall (\"Rathaus\").\nThe last election was held on 25 October 2020 for the mandate period (\"Legislatur\") of 2021\u20132025. , the Grand Council consist of 30 (\u22125) members of the Social Democratic Party (SP), 18 (+5) \"Gr\u00fcn-Alternatives B\u00fcndnis (GAB)\" (a collaboration of the Green Party (GPS), its junior party, and Basels starke Alternative (BastA!)), 14 (\u22121) Liberal-Demokratische Partei (LDP), 11 (\u22124) members of the Swiss People's Party (SVP), 8 (+5) Green Liberal Party (glp), 7 (\u22123) The Liberals (FDP), 7 (-) Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP), 3 (+2) Evangelical People's Party (EVP), and one each representative of the \"Aktive Bettingen (AB)\" and \"Volks-Aktion gegen zuviele Ausl\u00e4nder und Asylanten in unserer Heimat\" (VA).\nThe left parties missed an absolute majority by two seats.\nFederal elections.\nNational Council.\nIn the 2019 federal election the most popular party was the Social Democratic Party (SP) which received two seats with 34% (\u22121) of the votes. The next five most popular parties were the Green Party (GPS) (19.4%, +7.3), the LPS (14.5%, +3.6) and the FDP (5.8, \u22123.5), which are chained together at 20.3%, (+0.1), the SVP (11.3%, -5.5), and the Green Liberal Party (GLP) (5%, +0.6), CVP (4.1%, -1.9). In the federal election, a total of 44,628 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 49.4%.\nOn 18 October 2015, in the federal election the most popular party was the Social Democratic Party (SP) which received two seats with 35% of the votes. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (20.2%), the SVP (16.8%), and the Green Party (GPS) (12.2%), each with one seat. In the federal election, a total of 57,304 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 50.4%.\nCouncil of States.\nOn 20 October 2019, in the federal election Eva Herzog, member of the Social Democratic Party (SP), was elected for the first time as a State Councillor () in the first round as single representative of the canton of Basel-Town and successor of Anita Fetz in the national Council of States () with an absolute majority of 37'210 votes.\nOn 18 October 2015, in the federal election State Councillor () Anita Fetz, member of the Social Democratic Party (SP), was re-elected in the first round as single representative of the canton of Basel-Town in the national Council of States () with an absolute majority of 35'842 votes. She has been a member of it since 2003.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns, sister cities and partner regions.\nBasel has two sister cities and a twinning among two states:\nDemographics.\nThe canton of Basel (slightly more than the city itself) has a population () of 201,971, of whom 36.9% are resident foreign nationals.\nOver the 10 years of 1999\u20132009 the population has changed at a rate of \u22120.3%. It has changed at a rate of 3.2% due to migration and at a rate of \u22123% due to births and deaths.\nOf the population in the municipality 58,560 or about 35.2% were born in Basel and lived there in 2000. There were 1,396 or 0.8% who were born in the same canton, while 44,874 or 26.9% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 53,774 or 32.3% were born outside of Switzerland.\nIn there were 898 live births to Swiss citizens and 621 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 1,732 deaths of Swiss citizens and 175 non-Swiss citizen deaths. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 834 while the foreign population increased by 446. There were 207 Swiss men and 271 Swiss women who emigrated from Switzerland. At the same time, there were 1756 non-Swiss men and 1655 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 278 and the non-Swiss population increased by 1138 people. This represents a population growth rate of 0.9%.\n, there were 70,502 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 70,517 married individuals, 12,435 widows or widowers, and 13,104 individuals who are divorced.\n the average number of residents per living room was 0.59 which is about equal to the cantonal average of 0.58 per room. In this case, a room is defined as space of a housing unit of at least as normal bedrooms, dining rooms, living rooms, kitchens and habitable cellars and attics. About 10.5% of the total households were owner occupied, or in other words did not pay rent (though they may have a mortgage or a rent-to-own agreement).\n, there were 86,371 private households in the municipality, and an average of 1.8 persons per household. There were 44,469 households that consist of only one person and 2,842 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 88,646 households that answered this question, 50.2% were households made up of just one person and there were 451 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 20,472 married couples without children, 14,554 married couples with children There were 4,318 single parents with a child or children. There were 2,107 households that were made up of unrelated people and 2,275 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.\n there were 5,747 single family homes (or 30.8% of the total) out of a total of 18,631 inhabited buildings. There were 7,642 multi-family buildings (41.0%), along with 4,093 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (22.0%) and 1,149 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (6.2%). Of the single family homes 1090 were built before 1919, while 65 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single family homes (3,474) were built between 1919 and 1945.\n there were 96,640 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 35,958. There were 11,957 single room apartments and 9,702 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 84,675 apartments (87.6% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 7,916 apartments (8.2%) were seasonally occupied and 4,049 apartments (4.2%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 2.6 new units per 1000 residents.\n the average price to rent an average apartment in Basel was 1118.60 Swiss francs (CHF) per month (US$890, \u00a3500, \u20ac720 approx. exchange rate from 2003). The average rate for a one-room apartment was 602.27 CHF (US$480, \u00a3270, \u20ac390), a two-room apartment was about 846.52 CHF (US$680, \u00a3380, \u20ac540), a three-room apartment was about 1054.14 CHF (US$840, \u00a3470, \u20ac670) and a six or more room apartment cost an average of 2185.24 CHF (US$1750, \u00a3980, \u20ac1400). The average apartment price in Basel was 100.2% of the national average of 1116 CHF. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0.74%.\nLanguage.\nIn 2000, most of the population spoke German (129,592 or 77.8%), with Italian being second most common (9,049 or 5.4%) and French being third (4,280 or 2.6%). There were 202 people who spoke Romansh.\nReligion.\nFrom the , 41,916 or 25.2% were Roman Catholic, while 39,180 or 23.5% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 4,567 members of an Orthodox church (or about 2.74% of the population), 459 individuals (or about 0.28% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church and 3,464 individuals (or about 2.08% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 12,368 individuals (or about 7.43% of the population) who were Muslim, 1,325 individuals (or about 0.80% of the population) who were Jewish, however only members of religious institutions are counted as such by the municipality, which makes the actual number of people of Jewish descent living in Basel considerably higher. There were 746 individuals who were Buddhist, 947 individuals who were Hindu and 485 individuals who belonged to another church. 52,321 (or about 31.41% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 8,780 individuals (or about 5.27% of the population) did not answer the question.\nInfrastructure.\nQuarters.\nBasel is subdivided into 19 quarters (\"Quartiere\"). The municipalities of Riehen and Bettingen, outside the city limits of Basel, are included in the canton of Basel-Stadt as rural quarters (\"Landquartiere\").\nTransport.\nBasel's airport, EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg, is set up for airfreight; heavy goods reach the city and the heart of continental Europe from the North Sea by ship along the Rhine.\nPort.\nBasel has Switzerland's only cargo port, through which goods pass along the navigable stretches of the Rhine and connect to ocean-going ships at the port of Rotterdam.\nAir transport.\nEuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg is operated jointly by two countries, France and Switzerland, although the airport is located completely on French soil. The airport itself is split into two architecturally independent sectors, one half serving the French side and the other half serving the Swiss side; prior to Schengen there was an immigration inspection point at the middle of the airport so that people could \"emigrate\" to the other side of the airport.\nRailways.\nBasel has long held an important place as a rail hub. Three railway stations\u2014those of the German, French and Swiss networks\u2014lie within the city (although the Swiss (Basel SBB) and French (B\u00e2le SNCF) stations are actually in the same complex, separated by Customs and Immigration facilities). Basel Badischer Bahnhof is on the opposite side of the city. Basel's local rail services are supplied by the Basel Regional S-Bahn. The largest goods railway complex of the country is located just outside the city, spanning the municipalities of Muttenz and Pratteln. The new highspeed ICE railway line from Karlsruhe to Basel was completed in 2008 while phase I of the TGV Rhin-Rh\u00f4ne line, opened in December 2011, has reduced travel time from Basel to Paris to about 3 hours.\nRoads.\nBasel is located on the A3 motorway.\nWithin the city limits, five bridges connect Greater and Lesser Basel (downstream):\nFerries.\nA somewhat anachronistic yet still widely used system of reaction ferry boats links the two shores. There are four ferries, each situated approximately midway between two bridges. Each is attached by a cable to a block that rides along another cable spanning the river at a height of . To cross the river, the ferryman orients the boat around 45\u00b0 from the current so that the current pushes the boat across the river. This form of transportation is therefore completely hydraulically driven, requiring no outside energy source.\nHome/Aktuell \u2013 F\u00e4hri Verein Basel\nPublic transport.\nBasel has an extensive public transportation network serving the city and connecting to surrounding suburbs, including a large tram network. Today, Basel has the largest tramway in terms of kilometers of rail tracks in Switzerland. Historically, only Geneva had a larger one at some point.\nThe green-colored local trams and buses are operated by the Basler Verkehrs-Betriebe (BVB). The yellow-colored buses and trams are operated by the Baselland Transport (BLT), and connect areas in the nearby half-canton of Baselland to central Basel. The BVB also shares commuter bus lines in cooperation with transit authorities in the neighboring Alsace region in France and Baden region in Germany. The Basel Regional S-Bahn, the commuter rail network connecting to suburbs surrounding the city, is jointly operated by SBB, SNCF and DB.\nBorder crossings.\nBasel is located at the meeting point of France, Germany, and Switzerland; because it sits on the Swiss national border and is beyond the Jura Mountains, many within the Swiss military reportedly believe that the city is indefensible during wartime. It has numerous road and rail crossings between Switzerland and the other two countries. With Switzerland joining the Schengen Area on 12 December 2008, immigration checks were no longer carried out at the crossings. However, Switzerland did not join the European Union Customs Union (though it did join the EU Single Market) and customs checks are still conducted at or near the crossings.\nFrance-Switzerland (from east to west) \nGermany-Switzerland (clockwise, from north to south)\nAdditionally there are many footpaths and cycle tracks crossing the border between Basel and Germany.\nHealth.\nAs the biggest town in the Northwest of Switzerland numerous public and private health centres are located in Basel. Among others the Universit\u00e4tsspital Basel and the Universit\u00e4tskinderspital Basel. Private health centres include the Bethesda Spital and the Merian Iselin Klinik. Additionally the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute is located in Basel too.\nEnergy.\nBasel is at the forefront of a national vision to more than halve energy use in Switzerland by 2050. To research, develop and commercialise the technologies and techniques required for the country to become a 2000 Watt society, a number of projects have been set up since 2001 in the Basel metropolitan area. These include demonstration buildings constructed to Minergie or \"Passivhaus\" standards, electricity generation from renewable energy sources, and vehicles using natural gas, hydrogen and biogas.\nA building construction law was passed in 2002 also which stated that all new flat roofs must be greened leading to Basel becoming the world's leading green roof city. This was driven by an energy saving programme.\nA hot dry rock geothermal energy project was cancelled in 2009 since it caused induced seismicity in Basel.\nEconomy.\nThe city of Basel, located in the north west of Switzerland, is one of the most dynamic economic regions of Switzerland.\n, Basel had an unemployment rate of 3.7%. , 19.3% of the working population was employed in the secondary sector and 80.6% was employed in the tertiary sector. There were 82,449 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which women made up 46.2% of the workforce.\n the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 130,988. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 13, of which 10 were in agriculture and 4 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 33,171 of which 24,848 or (74.9%) were in manufacturing, 10 were in mining and 7,313 (22.0%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 97,804. In the tertiary sector; 12,880 or 13.2% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 11,959 or 12.2% were in the movement and storage of goods, 6,120 or 6.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, 4,186 or 4.3% were in the information industry, 10,752 or 11.0% were the insurance or financial industry, 13,695 or 14.0% were technical professionals or scientists, 6,983 or 7.1% were in education and 16,060 or 16.4% were in health care.\n, there were 121,842 workers who commuted into the municipality and 19,263 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net importer of workers, with about 6.3 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving. About 23.9% of the workforce coming into Basel are coming from outside Switzerland, while 1.0% of the locals commute out of Switzerland for work. Of the working population, 49.2% used public transportation to get to work, and 18.7% used a private car.\nThe Roche Tower, designed by Herzog &amp; de Meuron, is 41 floors and high, upon its opening in 2015 it has become the tallest building in Switzerland. Basel has also Switzerland's third tallest building (Basler Messeturm, ) and Switzerland's tallest tower (St. Chrischona TV tower, ).\nChemical industry.\nThe Swiss chemical industry operates largely from Basel, and Basel also has a large pharmaceutical industry. Novartis, Syngenta, Ciba Specialty Chemicals, Clariant, Hoffmann-La Roche, Basilea Pharmaceutica, and Actelion are headquartered there. Pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals have become the modern focus of the city's industrial production.\nIn addition, Basel is a major European hub for Biotech and Biopharmaceuticals. There are plenty of small and mid-sized start-ups. The vibrant VC scene also supports this.\nBanking.\nBanking is important to Basel:\nAir.\nSwiss International Air Lines, the national airline of Switzerland, is headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport Basel-Mulhouse-Freiburg in Saint-Louis, Haut-Rhin, France, near Basel. Prior to the formation of Swiss International Air Lines, the regional airline Crossair was headquartered near Basel.\nMedia.\n\"Basler Zeitung\" (\"BaZ\") and \"bz Basel\" are the local newspapers. The local TV station is called \"Telebasel\". The German-speaking Swiss Radio and Television SRF company, part of the Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR, holds offices in Basel as well. The academic publishers Birkh\u00e4user, Karger and MDPI are based in Basel.\nTrade fairs.\nImportant trade shows include Art Basel, the world's most important fair for modern and contemporary art, Baselworld (watches and jewelry, now discontinued), Swissbau (construction and real estate) and Igeho (hotels, catering, take-away, care). The Swiss Sample Fair (\"Schweizer Mustermesse\") was the largest and oldest consumer fair in Switzerland. It was held from 2007 to 2019 and took place in Kleinbasel on the right bank of the Rhine.\nEducation.\nBesides Humanism the city of Basel has also been well known for its achievements in the field of mathematics. Among others, the mathematician Leonhard Euler and the Bernoulli family have done research and been teaching at the local institutions for centuries. In 1910 the Swiss Mathematical Society was founded in the city and in the mid-twentieth century the Russian mathematician Alexander Ostrowski taught at the local university. In 2000 about 57,864 or (34.7%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 27,603 or (16.6%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a ). Of the 27,603 who completed tertiary schooling, 44.4% were Swiss men, 31.1% were Swiss women, 13.9% were non-Swiss men and 10.6% were non-Swiss women.\nIn 2010 11,912 students attended the University of Basel (55% female). 25% were foreign nationals, 16% were from canton of Basel-Stadt. In 2006, 6162 students studied at one of the nine academies of the FHNW (51% female).\n, there were 5,820 students in Basel who came from another municipality, while 1,116 residents attended schools outside the municipality.\nUniversities.\nBasel hosts Switzerland's oldest university, the University of Basel, dating from 1460. Erasmus, Paracelsus, Daniel Bernoulli, Leonhard Euler, Jacob Burckhardt, Friedrich Nietzsche, Tadeusz Reichstein, Karl Jaspers, Carl Gustav Jung, and Karl Barth worked there. The University of Basel is currently counted among the 90 best educational institutions worldwide.\nIn 2007, the ETH Zurich (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Z\u00fcrich) established the Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering (D-BSSE) in Basel. The creation of the D-BSSE was driven by a Swiss-wide research initiative SystemsX, and was jointly supported by funding from the ETH Z\u00fcrich, the Swiss Government, the Swiss University Conference (SUC) and private industry.\nBasel also hosts several academies of the \"Fachhochschule Nordwestschweiz|Fachhochschule NW (FHNW)\": the FHNW Academy of Art and Design, FHNW Academy of Music, and the FHNW School of Business.\nBasel is renowned for various scientific societies, such as the Entomological Society of Basel (Entomologische Gesellschaft Basel, EGB), which celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2005.\nVolksschule.\nIn 2005 16,939 pupils and students attended the \"Volksschule\" (the obligatory school time, including \"Kindergarten\" (127), primary schools (\"Primarschule\", 25), and lower secondary schools (\"Sekundarschule\", 10), of which 94% visited public schools and 39.5% were foreign nationals. In 2010 already 51.1% of all pupils spoke another language than German as their first language. In 2009 3.1% of the pupils visited special classes for pupils with particular needs. The average amount of study in primary school in Basel is 816 teaching hours per year.\nUpper secondary school.\nIn 2010 65% of the youth finished their upper secondary education with a vocational training and education, 18% finished their upper secondary education with a Federal Matura at one of the five gymnasiums, 5% completed a \"Fachmaturit\u00e4t\" at the \"FMS\", 5% completed a \"Berufsmaturit\u00e4t\" synchronously to their vocational training, and 7% other kind of upper secondary maturity. 14.1% of all students at public gymnasiums were foreign nationals. The Maturity quota in 2010 was on a record high at 28.8% (32.8 female, 24.9% male).\nBasel has five public gymnasiums (', ', ', ', \"\"), each with its own profiles (different focus on major subjects, such as visual design, biology and chemistry, Italian, Spanish, or Latin languages, music, physics and applied mathematics, philosophy/education/psychology, and economics and law) that entitles students with a successful Matura graduation to attend universities. And one \"Fachmaturit\u00e4tsschule\", the \"FMS\", with six different major subjects (health/natural sciences, education, social work, design/art, music/theatre/dance, and communication/media) that entitles students with a successful Fachmatura graduation to attend . Four different \"h\u00f6here Fachschulen\" (higher vocational schools such as \"Bildungszentrum Gesundheit Basel-Stadt\" (health), \"Allgemeine Gewerbeschule Basel\" (trade), \"Berufsfachschule Basel\", \"Schule f\u00fcr Gestaltung Basel\" (design)) allows vocational students to improve their knowledge and know-how.\nInternational schools.\nAs a city with a percentage of foreigners of more than thirty-five per cent and as one of the most important centres in the chemical and pharmaceutical field in the world, Basel counts several international schools including: \"Academia International School\", \"\u00c9cole Fran\u00e7aise de B\u00e2le\", \"Freies Gymnasium Basel\" (private), \"Gymnasium am M\u00fcnsterplatz\" (public), \"Schweizerisch-italienische Primarschule Sandro Pertini\", International School Basel, BLIS Baselland International School. and SIS Swiss International School.\nLibraries.\nBasel is home to at least 65 libraries. Some of the largest include; the Universit\u00e4tsbibliothek Basel (main university library), the special libraries of the University of Basel, the \"Allgemein Bibliotheken der Gesellschaft f\u00fcr Gutes und Gemeinn\u00fctziges (GGG) Basel\", the Library of the \"P\u00e4dagogische Hochschule\", the Library of the \"Hochschule f\u00fcr Soziale Arbeit\" and the Library of the \"Hochschule f\u00fcr Wirtschaft\". There was a combined total () of 8,443,643 books or other media in the libraries, and in the same year a total of 1,722,802 items were loaned out.\nCulture.\nMain sights.\nThe red sandstone M\u00fcnster, one of the foremost late-Romanesque/early Gothic buildings in the Upper Rhine, was badly damaged in the great earthquake of 1356, rebuilt in the 14th and 15th century, extensively reconstructed in the mid-19th century and further restored in the late 20th century. A memorial to Erasmus lies inside the M\u00fcnster. The City Hall from the 16th century is located on the Market Square and is decorated with fine murals on the outer walls and on the walls of the inner court.\nBasel is also host to an array of buildings by internationally renowned architects. These include the Beyeler Foundation by Renzo Piano, or the Vitra complex in nearby Weil am Rhein, composed of buildings by architects such as Zaha Hadid (fire station), Frank Gehry (Design Museum), \u00c1lvaro Siza Vieira (factory building), and Tadao Ando (conference centre). Basel also features buildings by Mario Botta (Jean Tinguely Museum and Bank of International settlements) and Herzog &amp; de Meuron (whose architectural practice is in Basel, and who are best known as the architects of Tate Modern in London and the Bird's Nest in Beijing, the Olympia stadium, which was designed for use throughout the 2008 Summer Olympics and Paralympics). The city received the Wakker Prize in 1996.\nHeritage sites.\nBasel features a great number of heritage sites of national significance.\nThese include the entire Old Town of Basel as well as the following buildings and collections: \n\"Badischer Bahnhof\" (German Baden's railway station) with fountain, Bank for International Settlements, \"Blaues Haus (Reichensteinerhof)\" at Rheinsprung 16, \"Bruderholzschule\" (school house) at Fritz-Hauser-Strasse 20, \"Brunschwiler Haus\" at Hebelstrasse 15, \"Bahnhof Basel SBB\" (Swiss railway station), \"B\u00fcrgerspital\" (hospital), \"Caf\u00e9 Spitz (Merianfl\u00fcgel)\", \"Coop Schweiz\" company's central archive, Depot of the \"Arch\u00e4ologischen Bodenforschung des Kanton Basel-Stadt\", former Gallizian Paper Mill and Swiss Museum of Paper, former \"Klingental-Kaserne\" (casern) with \"Klingentaler Kirche\" (church), \"Fasnachtsbrunnen\" (fountain), \"Feuersch\u00fctzenhaus\" (guild house of the riflemen) at Sch\u00fctzenmattstrasse 56, \"Fischmarktbrunnen\" (fountain), \"Geltenzunft\" at Marktplatz 13, \"Gymnasium am Kohlenberg (St Leonhard)\" (school), \"Hauptpost\" (main post office), \"Haus zum Raben\" at Aeschenvorstadt 15, \"Hohenfirstenhof\" at Rittergasse 19, \"Holsteinerhof\" at Hebelstrasse 30, Markgr\u00e4flerhof a former palace of the margraves of Baden-Durlach, \"Mittlere Rhein Br\u00fccke\" (Central Rhine Bridge), \"Stadtcasino\" (music hall) at Steinenberg 14, \"Ramsteinerhof\" at Rittergasse 7 and 9, Rathaus (town hall), \"Rundhof\" building of the \"Schweizerischen Mustermesse\", \"Safranzunft\" at Gerbergasse 11, \"Sandgrube\" at Riehenstrasse 154, \"Schl\u00f6sschen\" (Manor house) Gundeldingen, \"Sch\u00f6nes Haus\" and \"Sch\u00f6ner Hof\" at Nadelberg 6, \"Wasgenring\" school house, \"Seidenhof\" with painting of Rudolf von Habsburg, \"Spalenhof\" at Spalenberg 12, \"Spiesshof\" at Heuberg 7, city walls, Townhouse (former post office) at Stadthausgasse 13 / Toteng\u00e4sslein 6, \"Weisses Haus\" at Martinsgasse 3, \"Wildt'sches Haus\" at Petersplatz 13, \"Haus zum Neuen Singer\" at Speiserstrasse 98, \"Wolfgottesacker\" at M\u00fcnchensteinerstrasse 99, \"Zerkindenhof\" at Nadelberg 10.\nAmong others, there is the Anatomical Museum of the University Basel, Berri-Villen and Museum of Ancient Art Basel and Ludwig Collection, Former Franciscan \"Barefoot\" Order Church and Basel Historical Museum, Company Archive of Novartis, \"Haus zum Kirschgarten\" which is part of the Basel Historical Museum, Historic Archive Roche and Industrial Complex Hoffmann-La Roche, Jewish Museum of Switzerland, Caricature &amp; Cartoon Museum Basel, Karl Barth-Archive, \"Kleines Klingental\" (Lower Klingen Valley) with Museum Klingental, Art Museum of Basel, hosting the world's oldest art collection accessible to the public, Natural History Museum of Basel and the Museum of Cultures Basel, Museum of Modern Art Basel with the E. Hoffmann collection, Museum Jean Tinguely Basel, Music Museum, Pharmacy Historical Museum of the University of Basel, Poster Collection of the School for Design (\"Schule f\u00fcr Gestaltung\"), Swiss Business Archives, Sculpture Hall, Sports Museum of Switzerland, Archives of the Canton of Basel-Stadt, UBS AG Corporate Archives, University Library with manuscripts and music collection, Zoological Garden (\"Zoologischer Garten\").\nTheatre and music.\nBasel is the home of the Schola Cantorum Basiliensis, founded in 1933, a worldwide centre for research on and performance of music from the Medieval through the Baroque eras. Theater Basel, chosen in 1999 as the best stage for German-language performances and in 2009 and 2010 as \"Opera house of the year\" by German opera magazine \"Opernwelt\", presents a busy schedule of plays in addition to being home to the city's opera and ballet companies. Basel is home to the largest orchestra in Switzerland, the Sinfonieorchester Basel. It is also the home of the Basel Sinfonietta and the Kammerorchester Basel, which recorded the complete symphonies of Ludwig van Beethoven for the Sony label, led by its music director Giovanni Antonini. The Schola Cantorum and the Basler Kammerorchester were both founded by the conductor Paul Sacher, who went on to commission works by many leading composers. The Paul Sacher Foundation, opened in 1986, houses a major collection of manuscripts, including the entire Igor Stravinsky archive.\nThe baroque orchestras La Cetra and Capriccio Basel are also based in Basel.\nIn May 2004, the fifth European Festival of Youth Choirs (Europ\u00e4isches Jugendchorfestival, or EJCF) opened; this Basel tradition started in 1992. Host of the festival is the local Basel Boys Choir.\nIn 1997, Basel contended to become the \"European Capital of Culture\", though the honor went to Thessaloniki.\nIn 2025, Basel will host the Eurovision Song Contest at St. Jakobshalle, becoming the third Swiss city to host the competition after Lugano in 1956 and Lausanne in 1989.\nMuseums.\nThe Basel museums cover a broad and diverse spectrum of collections with a marked concentration in the fine arts. They house numerous holdings of international significance. The over three dozen institutions yield an extraordinarily high density of museums compared to other cities of similar size and draw over one million visitors annually.\nConstituting an essential component of Basel culture and cultural policy, the museums are the result of closely interwoven private and public collecting activities and promotion of arts and culture going back to the 16th century. The public museum collection was first created back in 1661 and represents the oldest public collection in continuous existence in Europa. Since the late 1980s, various private collections have been made accessible to the public in new purpose-built structures that have been recognized as acclaimed examples of avant-garde museum architecture.\nEvents.\nThe city of Basel is a centre for numerous fairs and events all year round. One of the most important fairs for contemporary art worldwide is the Art Basel which was founded in 1970 by Ernst Beyeler and takes place in June each year. Baselworld, the watch and jewellery show (\"Uhren- und Schmuckmesse\") one of the biggest fairs of its kind in Europe is held every year as well, and attracts a great number of tourists and dealers to the city. Live marketing company and fair organizer MCH Group has its head office in Basel.\nThe carnival of the city of Basel (\"Basler Fasnacht\") is a major cultural event in the year. The carnival is the biggest in Switzerland and attracts large crowds every year, despite the fact that it starts at exactly four o'clock in the morning (\"Morgestraich\") on a winter Monday. The Fasnacht asserts Basel's Protestant history by commencing the revelry five days after Ash Wednesday and continuing exactly 72 hours. Almost all study and work in the old city cease. Dozens of fife and drum clubs parade in medieval guild tradition with fantastical masks and illuminated lanterns.\nBasel Tattoo, founded in 2006 by the local Top Secret Drum Corps, has grown to be the world's second largest military tattoo in terms of performers and budget after the Edinburgh Military Tattoo. The Basel Tattoo annual parade, with an estimated 125,000 visitors, is considered the largest event in Basel. The event is now sponsored by the Swiss Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport (DDPS), making it the official military tattoo of Switzerland.\nThe city will host the Eurovision Song Contest 2025 at the St. Jakobshalle arena.\nCuisine.\nThere are a number of culinary specialties originating in Basel, including \"Basler L\u00e4ckerli\" cookies and \"M\u00e4ssmogge\" candies. Being located in the meeting place between Switzerland, France and Germany the culinary landscape as a whole is very varied and diverse, making it a city with a great number of restaurants of all sorts.\nZoo.\nZoo Basel is, with over 1.7\u00a0million visitors per year, the most visited tourist attraction in Basel and the second most visited tourist attraction in Switzerland.\nEstablished in 1874, Zoo Basel is the oldest zoo in Switzerland and, by number of animals, the largest. Through its history, Zoo Basel has had several breeding successes, such as the first worldwide Indian rhinoceros birth and Greater flamingo hatch in a zoo. These and other achievements led \"Forbes\" Travel to rank Zoo Basel as one of the fifteen best zoos in the world in 2008.\nDespite its international fame, Basel's population remains attached to Zoo Basel, which is entirely surrounded by the city of Basel. Evidence of this is the millions of donations money each year, as well as Zoo Basel's unofficial name: locals lovingly call \"their\" zoo \"Zolli\" by which is it known throughout Basel and most of Switzerland.\nSport.\nBasel has a reputation in Switzerland as a successful sporting city. The football club FC Basel continues to be successful and in recognition of this the city was one of the Swiss venues for the 2008 European Championships, along with Geneva, Z\u00fcrich and Bern. The championships were jointly hosted by Switzerland and Austria. BSC Old Boys and Concordia Basel are the other football teams in Basel.\nAmong the most popular sports in Switzerland is ice hockey. Basel is home to EHC Basel, who play in the MySports League, the third tier of the Swiss ice hockey league system. They play their home games in the 6,700-seater St. Jakob Arena. The team previously played in the National League and the Swiss League, but had to file for bankruptcy after the 2013\u201314 Swiss League season.\nAmongst its major sports venues, Basel features a large football stadium that has been awarded four stars by UEFA, a modern ice hockey arena, and a sports hall.\nA large indoor tennis event takes place in Basel every October. Some of the best ATP-professionals play every year at the Swiss Indoors, previously including Switzerland's biggest sporting hero Roger Federer, a Basel native who describes the city as \"one of the most beautiful cities in the world\".\nThe annual Basel Rhine Swim draws several thousand visitors to the city to swim in or float on the Rhine.\nWhile football and ice hockey are by far the most popular sports, basketball has a very small but faithful fan base. The top division, called the SBL, is a semi-professional league and has one team from the Basel region, the \"Birstal Starwings\".\nTwo players from Switzerland are currently active in the NBA, Thabo Sefolosha and Clint Capela. As in most European countries, but unlike the U.S., Switzerland has a club-based rather than a school-based competition system. The Starwings Basel are the only first division basketball team in German-speaking Switzerland.\nThe headquarters of the IHF (International Handball Federation) is located in Basel.\nBasel Dragons AFC have been playing Australian Football in the AFL Switzerland league since 2019.\nIn July 2022, the women's water polo players of the WSV Basel secured their 11th national championship title.\nBasel GAA, a Gaelic games club, is also located in Basel.\nNotable people.\nNotable people who were born or grew up in Basel:"}
{"id": "4913", "revid": "31519789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4913", "title": "Black Russian", "text": "The Black Russian is a cocktail of vodka and coffee liqueur. It contains 50\u00a0ml vodka and 20\u00a0ml coffee liqueur, per IBA specified ingredients.\nThe drink is made by pouring the vodka and coffee liqueur over ice cubes or cracked ice in an old-fashioned glass and stirring. The Black Russian is often garnished with a lemon slice and a Luxardo maraschino cherry on a stick.\nHistory.\nThe Black Russian cocktail first appeared in 1949 and is ascribed to Gustave Tops, a Belgian barman, who created it at the Hotel Metropole in Brussels in honor of Perle Mesta, then United States Ambassador to Luxembourg. The cocktail owes its name to the use of vodka, a typical Russian spirit, and the blackness of the coffee liqueur."}
{"id": "4914", "revid": "46511383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4914", "title": "BRP", "text": "BRP can mean:"}
{"id": "4915", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4915", "title": "Bunnies &amp; Burrows", "text": "Bunnies &amp; Burrows (B&amp;B) is a role-playing game (RPG) inspired by the 1972 novel \"Watership Down\". Published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976, the game is centered on intelligent rabbits. It introduced several innovations to role-playing game design, being the first game to encourage players to have non-humanoid roles, and the first to have detailed martial arts and skill systems. Fantasy Games Unlimited published a similar second edition in 1982. Frog God Games published a revised third edition in 2019 from the original authors. The game was also modified and published by Steve Jackson Games as an official \"GURPS\" supplement in 1992.\nAs rabbits, player characters are faced with dangers mirroring those in the real world. The only true \"monsters\" in the game are humans, but there are many predators and natural hazards. The characters' position in the food chain promotes an emphasis on role-playing and problem solving over combat.\nHistory.\nOriginally published by Fantasy Games Unlimited in 1976, only two years after the first role-playing game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was published; this edition is now long out of print. The game was inspired by Richard Adams' fantasy novel \"Watership Down\", and the players were given the opportunity to take on the role of rabbits. As such, the game emphasized role-playing over combat for, according to Steffan O'Sullivan, \"You're playing a rabbit, after all \u2013 how much combat do you want to do?\" David M. Ewalt, in his book \"Of Dice and Men\", commented that \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" \"pushed setting even farther\" than other early RPGs like \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"En Garde!\", as the \"player characters were intelligent rabbits and had to compete for food, avoid predators, and deal with internal warren politics\".\nIt was the first role-playing game to allow for animal characters, and the first to have rules for martial arts.\nBuilding on this first edition, in 1979, B. Dennis Sustare wrote \"Different Worlds Present the World of Druid's Valley: A Bunnies &amp; Burrows Campaign\" in \"Different Worlds\", a magazine published by Chaosium. It detailed how to combine the world of \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" with other fantasy worlds. This was followed by the mini-adventure \"The Jackrabbits' Lair\", written by Daniel J. Maxfield, in \"Pegasus\", a magazine published by Judges Guild.\nA second edition of \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" was printed in 1982 by Fantasy Games Unlimited, although the continuing popularity of the first edition is evidenced by how it was still being actively played in 2008.\nDuring a rise of \"retro\" games in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Steve Jackson Games entered negotiations with Dennis Sustare and Scott Robinson, the current owners of the \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" copyright, to publish an official \"GURPS\" supplement. In 1988, O'Sullivan wrote an unofficial conversion of \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" to \"GURPS\" while the negotiations continued. He indicated that he hoped to one day work on the official supplement. \"GURPS Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" was published in 1992.\nThe setting also had an unofficial conversion in 2004 to be used in \"Risus: The Anything RPG\" by Boyd Mayberry, under their \"Rules for Free Fan-Supplements and Articles\".\nIn 2019, Frog God Games released a 3rd edition of the game after a successful Kickstarter campaign.\nGameplay.\n\"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" was the first role-playing game to allow for non-humanoid play. In addition, it was also the first role-playing game to have detailed martial arts rules (renamed \"Bun Fu\" in GURPS Bunnies &amp; Burrows) and the first attempt at a skill system. For its time, the game was considered by some \"light years\" ahead of the Original \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\".\nPlayers of \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" take the role of rabbits as their player characters. Interaction with many different animal species is part of normal gameplay. Humans, whose thought processes and motivations are completely alien, are the only monster to be encountered.\n\"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" has the advantage of offering players an intuitive grasp of relative dangers and appropriate actions not possible in game worlds that are substantially fictional. For example, a player is told their character is confronted with a fox. There is an immediate intuition on the amount of peril a rabbit is facing. Since player characters are substantially weaker than many of the dangers they face, the game is one of the first to encourage problem solving and outwitting obstacles, rather than out-fighting them.\nThe mechanics of the role-playing game system were created specifically for \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\", common at the time of its original publishing. It features eight abilities and eight classes. The task resolution system is based on rolls of percentile dice. Although newer systems have updated game mechanics significantly, the ideas presented in \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" created the framework for modern role-playing games.\nReception.\nSteve Jackson reviewed \"Bunnies &amp; Burrows\" in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 10. He concluded that \"\"B &amp; B\" is probably worth the retail price [...] at least to a FRP fan. The writing style is intelligent, lucid, and occasionally witty; the rules are workable [...] the art, as I think I pointed out, is so bad it's great; and the whole idea is appealing.\"\nOne commentator asserted that the game had \"incredible role-playing potential\", but the concept of role-playing rabbits can be viewed as bizarre, and as such they believed that most people thought it was stupid when it was first released.\nJames Davis Nicoll in 2020 for \"Black Gate\" said \"In most games, the PCs are functionally apex predators. Not so in B. Dennis Sustare and Scott Robinson's \"Watership Down\"-inspired \"Bunnies and Burrows\", in which you play a rabbit, a tasty, tasty rabbit. Filled with legitimately innovative game mechanics, it provided a combat system the rabbits were very ill-advised to use, as well as a skill system hampered only by the fact the rabbits were, well, as smart as rabbits. Human NPCs fill the Cosmic Horror niche: enigmatic, powerful, and deadly.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"\"B&amp;B\" is the first game to push beyond the fantasy battle boundaries established by \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". This step [helped] the hobby arrive at the sort of indie games that focus on collaborative storytelling and lightweight, intuitive rules.\""}
{"id": "4916", "revid": "1271637558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4916", "title": "Bundaberg Rum", "text": "Bundaberg Rum, colloquially known as Bundy, is a dark rum owned by Diageo. It is produced in Bundaberg East, Queensland, Australia, by the Bundaberg Distilling Company. In 2010, the Bundaberg Distilling Company was inducted into the Queensland Business Leaders Hall of Fame.\nHistory.\nBundaberg Rum originated because the local sugar mills had a problem with what to do with the waste molasses after the sugar was extracted. Molasses was heavy and difficult to transport, and the costs of converting it to stock feed were rarely worth the effort. Sugar men first began to think of the profits that could be made from distilling. The key meeting was held at the Royal Hotel on 1 August 1885. W. M. C. Hickson served as the chairman, and other notables in attendance included all the big sugar mill owners of that time: W. G. Farquhar, F. L. Nott, T. Austin, J. Gale, S. McDougall, T. Penny, S. H. Bravo and A. H. Young. All became the first directors of the company, which started with a capital of \u00a35,000 converted into $9,725.18.\nThe Bundaberg Distilling Company began its operations in 1888, and Bundaberg rum was first produced in 1889. Production ceased from 1907 to 1914, and from 1936 to 1939, after fires, the second of which caused rum from the factory to spill into the nearby Burnett River. Many fish were killed due to the liquor runoff into the river.\nChristsen Pty Ltd operated their own Bundaberg Rum bottling plant in Bourbong Street, Bundaberg, at the rear of their large grocery and hardware business in the centre of town. The spirit was sold at UP and OP strength from their business. \nIn 1961, the company introduced the polar bear as its unusual choice of mascot, to imply that the rum could ward off the coldest chill.\nIn 2000, the Bundaberg Rum company and the distillery were sold to British company Diageo. In 2014, a decision by Diageo to relocate the bottling operations of Bundaberg Rum to the western Sydney suburb of Huntingwood resulted in job losses in Bundaberg. The decision drew criticism from various levels of Queensland politics. The Premier, Campbell Newman, said it was a disappointing move, particularly for a region that had suffered devastating floods in recent years. Bundaberg mayor, Mal Forman, was also disappointed and concerned about the tourism impact.\nA Diageo spokeswoman later clarified the situation, saying some premium products, such as the Master Distillers Collection, would continue to be bottled in Bundaberg. \"This was not a decision we have taken lightly, however it is a necessary one to ensure the longer term sustainability of the distillery. We remain absolutely committed to Bundaberg and the distillery and will continue to invest and focus on our core business of distilling, maturing and blending great quality rum in Bundaberg as we have done for the last 125 years.\"\nDistillery.\nThe Bundaberg Rum distillery is open to visitors for tours of the facility. There is also a museum which offers free samples of Bundaberg Rum products for visitors in a historic Queenslander house. The Big Bundy Bottle is also outside of the bond store. A new $8.5\u00a0million visitor centre opened to the public in August 2016 replacing the smaller historic house next door.\nIn 2009 as part of the Q150 celebrations, the Bundaberg Rum Distillery was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for its role as a \"location\". The State Library of Queensland holds correspondence and financial records from the Bundaberg Distilling Co. Ltd. Records for years 1907 to 1946.\nSponsorship.\nBundaberg Rum is a major sponsor of the Australian Wallabies rugby union team and also sponsors the Bundaberg Rum Rugby Series. Bundaberg is also a sponsor of the NSW Waratahs. Bundaberg Rum sponsored the rugby league ANZAC Test till 2009. Bundaberg Rum signed a 5-year deal with the NRL to be the official dark rum of the NRL. They are also the naming-rights sponsor of NRL Friday Night Football.\nFrom 2009 until 2011, Bundaberg Rum sponsored V8 Supercar team Walkinshaw Racing.\nRecognition.\nBundaberg Rum has been distinguished with numerous awards. In 2011, Bundaberg Rum's Master Distillers' Collective rum was launched, with the first three releases, the 10 Year Old, Port Barrel and Golden Reserve, winning awards in the global stage.\nAdvertising.\nBundaberg Rum has also been criticised for targeting its advertising towards young people and boys, through television commercials during NRL broadcasts, and other promotions. A series of advertisements featuring the Bundaberg Rum bear, a polar bear known as Bundy R. Bear, were produced by advertising agency Leo Burnett to align the product 'with a larrikin approach to Australian mateship'. The Bundaberg Rum bear first appeared in 1961. It was designed to soften rum's aggressive image and broaden its appeal from the traditional older male drinker to a more sociable audience. The advertisements have been cited as a favourite among Australia's youth."}
{"id": "4917", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4917", "title": "Ben Nevis", "text": "Ben Nevis ( ; , ) is the highest mountain in Scotland, the United Kingdom, and the British Isles. Ben Nevis stands at the western end of the Grampian Mountains in the Highland region of Lochaber, close to the town of Fort William. The mountain's name can translate to either \"cloudy mountain\" or \"venomous mountain\".\nThe mountain is a popular destination, attracting an estimated 150,000 visitors a year, around three-quarters of which use the Mountain Track from Glen Nevis. The mountain has hosted a foot race since 1898. The cliffs of the north face are among the highest in Scotland, providing classic scrambles and rock climbs of all difficulties for climbers and mountaineers. They are also the principal locations in Scotland for ice climbing. The cliffs of the north face can be viewed from the Charles Inglis Clark Memorial Hut, a private alpine hut.\nThe summit is above sea level and is the highest land in any direction for . The summit is a stony plateau (a felsenmeer). It features a number of monuments and the ruins of an observatory which was continuously staffed between 1883 and 1904. The meteorological data collected during this period is still important for understanding Scottish mountain weather. C. T. R. Wilson was inspired to invent the cloud chamber after a period spent working at the observatory. \nBen Nevis is the namesake for a distillery at its base, a packet ship, a mountain in Svalbard, a mountain in Hong Kong, and a cartoon character.\nEtymology.\n\"Ben Nevis\" is the Anglicisation of the Scottish Gaelic name . Whilst is the common Scottish Gaelic word for 'mountain' the origin of is unclear. may preserve an earlier Pictish form, or , involving the Celtic root , meaning 'clouds' (compare: Welsh \u2009)., thus 'Cloudy Mountain'. may also have an origin with the words meaning 'heaven' (which is related to the modern Scottish Gaelic word meaning 'bright, shining') and meaning 'the top of a man's head'. Thus, could derive from , \"the mountain with its head in the clouds\", or 'mountain of heaven'.\nThe Scottish Gaelic word can be translated as 'malice', 'poison' or 'venom', yielding 'venomous mountain'.\nAs is common for many Scottish mountains, it is known both to locals and visitors as simply \"the Ben\".\nGeography.\nBen Nevis forms a massif with its neighbours to the northeast, , to which it is linked by the Ar\u00eate, and . All four are Munros.\nThe western and southern flanks of Ben Nevis rise in about above the River Nevis flowing down Glen Nevis\u00a0\u2013 the longest and steepest hill slope in Britain\u00a0\u2013 with the result that the mountain presents an aspect of massive bulk on this side. To the north, by contrast, cliffs drop some to ().\nIn addition to the main summit, Ben Nevis has two subsidiary \"tops\" listed in Munro's Tables, both of which are called (\"red hill\"). The higher of these, at , is to the northwest, and is often mistaken for Ben Nevis itself in views from the Fort William area. The other () juts out into Glen Nevis on the mountain's southwestern side. A lower hill, (), is further west, forming a saddle with Ben Nevis which contains a small loch, . The tourist path from Glen Nevis skirts the side of this hill before ascending Ben Nevis's broad western flank.\nSummit.\nThe summit of Ben Nevis comprises a large stony plateau of about . The summit is an example of a felsenmeer, a surface covered by rocks that are not exposed by mass wasting. The highest point is marked with a large, solidly built cairn atop which sits an Ordnance Survey trig point. The summit is the highest ground in any direction for before the Scandinavian Mountains in western Norway are reached.\nThe Peace Memorial, on the summit, is a cairn which was erected on V J Day, 15 August 1945, by the Young Men's Class of Vicar Street Methodist Church, Dudley, led by Bert Bissell, \"to the glory of God and in memory of the fallen of all races\". They carried the materials, including a 2cwt memorial stone, to the summit. The inscription declares it to be \"Britain's highest war memorial\". A second plaque was added in 1965, brought by helicopter: \"A tribute to the fallen of all nations from the youth associated with the World Federation of United Nations Associations and the International Student Movement of the United Nations.\" It is variously known as the Ben Nevis War Memorial, Ben Nevis Peace Memorial, or The Fort William-Dudley Memorial and Peace Cairn A 2006 proposal to move the cairn to the foot of the Ben, was opposed by people in both Fort William and Dudley.\nThe view from the UK's highest point is extensive. Under ideal conditions, it can extend to over , including such mountains as the Torridon Hills, Morven in Caithness, Lochnagar, Ben Lomond, Barra Head and to Knocklayd in County Antrim, Northern Ireland.\nIn 2016, the height of Ben Nevis was officially remeasured to be 1344.527m by Ordnance Survey. The height of Ben Nevis will therefore be shown on new Ordnance Survey maps as instead of the now obsolete value of .\nClimate.\nBen Nevis has a highland tundra climate (\"ET\" in the K\u00f6ppen classification). Ben Nevis's elevation, maritime location and topography frequently lead to cool and cloudy weather conditions, which can pose a danger to ill-equipped walkers. According to the observations carried out at the summit observatory from 1883 to 1904, fog was present on the summit for almost 80% of the time between November and January, and 55% of the time in May and June. The average winter temperature was around , and the mean monthly temperature for the year was . In an average year the summit sees 261\u00a0gales, and receives of rainfall, compared to only in nearby Fort William, in Inverness and in London. Rainfall on Ben Nevis is about twice as high in the winter as it is in the spring and summer. Snow can be found on the mountain for approximately 7 months out of the year.\nGeology.\nBen Nevis is all that remains of a Devonian volcano that met a cataclysmic end in the Carboniferous period around 350 million years ago. Evidence near the summit shows light-coloured granite (which had cooled in subterranean chambers several kilometres beneath the surface) lies among dark basaltic lavas (that form only on the surface). The two lying side by side is evidence the huge volcano collapsed in on itself creating an explosion comparable to Thera (2nd millennium BC) or Krakatoa (1883).\nThe mountain is now all that remains of the imploded inner dome of the volcano.\nIts form has been extensively shaped by glaciation.\nResearch has shown igneous rock from the Devonian period (around 400 million years ago) intrudes into the surrounding metamorphic schists; the intrusions take the form of a series of concentric ring dikes. The innermost of these, known as the Inner Granite, constitutes the southern bulk of the mountain above , and also the neighbouring ridge of ; forms part of the Outer Granite, which is redder in colour. The summit dome itself, together with the steep northern cliffs, is composed of andesite and basaltic lavas.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded ascent of Ben Nevis was made on 17 August 1771 by James Robertson, an Edinburgh botanist, who was in the region to collect botanical specimens. Another early ascent was in 1774 by John Williams, who provided the first account of the mountain's geological structure. John Keats climbed the mountain in 1818, comparing the ascent to \"mounting ten St. Pauls without the convenience of a staircase\". The following year William MacGillivray, who was later to become a distinguished naturalist, reached the summit only to find \"fragments of earthen and glass ware, chicken bones, corks, and bits of paper\". It was not until 1847 that Ben Nevis was confirmed by the Ordnance Survey as the highest mountain in Britain and Ireland, ahead of its rival Ben Macdui.\nA meteorological observatory on the summit was first proposed by the Scottish Meteorological Society (SMS) in the late-1870s, at a time when similar observatories were being built around the world to study the weather at high altitude. In the summer of 1881, Clement Lindley Wragge climbed the mountain daily to make observations (earning him the nickname \"Inclement Rag\"), leading to the opening on 17 October 1883 of a permanent observatory run by the SMS. The building was staffed full-time until 1904, when it was closed due to inadequate funding. The twenty years worth of readings still provide the most comprehensive set of data on mountain weather in Great Britain.\nIn September 1894, C. T. R. Wilson was employed at the observatory for a couple of weeks as temporary relief for one of the permanent staff. During this period, he witnessed a Brocken spectre and glory, caused by the sun casting a shadow on a cloud below the observer. He subsequently tried to reproduce these phenomena in the laboratory, resulting in his invention of the cloud chamber, used to detect ionising radiation.\nThe ruins of the observatory can still be seen on the summit. An emergency shelter has been built on top of the observatory tower for the benefit of those caught out by bad weather.\nThe first path to the summit was built at the same time as the observatory and was designed to allow ponies to carry up supplies, with a maximum gradient of one in five. The opening of the path and the observatory made the ascent of the mountain increasingly popular, all the more so after the arrival of the West Highland Railway in Fort William in 1894. Around this time the first of several proposals was made for a rack railway to the summit, none of which came to fruition.\nIn 1911, an enterprising Ford dealer named Henry Alexander ascended the mountain in a Model T as a publicity stunt. The ascent was captured on film and can be seen in the archives of the British Film Institute. A statue of Alexander and the car was unveiled in Fort William in 2018.\nIn 2000, the Ben Nevis Estate, comprising all of the south side of the mountain including the summit, was bought by the Scottish conservation charity the John Muir Trust.\nOn 17 May 2006, a piano that had been buried under one of the cairns on the peak was uncovered by the John Muir Trust, which owns much of the mountain. The piano is believed to have been carried up for charity by removal men from Dundee over 20\u00a0years earlier.\nOutdoor recreation.\nHiking and climbing.\nBen Nevis is a popular hiking destination, with 150,000 people a year visiting the peak.\nThe 1883 Pony Track to the summit (also known as the \"Ben Path\", the \"Mountain Path\" or the \"Tourist Route\") remains the simplest and most popular route of ascent. It begins at Achintee on the east side of Glen Nevis about from Fort William town centre, at around above sea level. Bridges from the Visitor Centre and the youth hostel now allow access from the west side of Glen Nevis. The path climbs steeply to the saddle by Lochan Meall an t-Suidhe (colloquially known as the 'Halfway Lochan') at 570\u00a0m, then ascends the remaining up the stony west flank of Ben Nevis in a series of zig-zags.\nA route popular with experienced hillwalkers starts at Torlundy, a few miles north-east of Fort William on the A82 road, and follows the path alongside the . It can also be reached from Glen Nevis by following the Pony Track as far as , then descending slightly to the Charles Inglis Clark Memorial Hut (known as the CIC Hut), a private mountain hut above sea level, owned by the Scottish Mountaineering Club The route then ascends and continues along the Ar\u00eate (\"CMD Ar\u00eate\") before climbing steeply to the summit of Ben Nevis. This route involves a total of of ascent and requires modest scrambling ability and a head for heights. In common with other approaches on this side of the mountain, it has the advantage of giving an extensive view of the cliffs of the north face, which are hidden from the Pony Track.\nThe north face of Ben Nevis is riven with buttresses, ridges, towers and pinnacles, and contains many classic scrambles and rock climbs. It is of major importance for British winter climbing, with many of its routes holding snow often until late April. It was one of the first places in Scotland to receive the attention of serious mountaineers; a partial ascent and, the following day, a complete descent of Tower Ridge in early September 1892 is the earliest documented climbing expedition on Ben Nevis. (It was not climbed from bottom to top in entirety for another two years). The Scottish Mountaineering Club's Charles Inglis Clark hut was built below the north face in Coire Leis in 1929. Because of its remote location, it is said to be the only genuine alpine hut in Britain.\nTower Ridge is the longest of the north face's four main ridges, with around of ascent. It is not technically demanding (its grade is Difficult), and most pitches can be tackled unroped by competent climbers, but it is committing and very exposed. Castle Ridge (Moderate), the northernmost of the main ridges, is an easier scramble, while Observatory Ridge (Very Difficult), the closest ridge to the summit, is \"technically the hardest of the Nevis ridges in summer and winter\". Between the Tower and Observatory Ridges are the Tower and Gardyloo Gullies; the latter takes its name from the cry of (French for \"watch out for the water\") formerly used in Scottish cities as a warning when householders threw their waste out of a tenement window into the street. The gully's top wall was the refuse pit for the summit observatory. \nThe north face contains dozens of graded rock climbs along its entire length, with particular concentrations on the Buttress (below the Munro top of NW) and around the North-east Buttress and Observatory Ridge. Classic rock routes include \"Rubicon Wall\" on Observatory Buttress (Severe)\u00a0\u2013 whose second ascent in 1937, when it was considered the hardest route on the mountain, is described by W. H. Murray in \"Mountaineering in Scotland\"\u00a0\u2013 and, on , \"Centurion\" and \"The Bullroar\" (both HVS), \"Torro\" (E2), and \"Titan's Wall\" (E3), these four described in the SMC's guide as among \"the best climbs of their class in Scotland\".\nMany seminal lines were recorded before the First World War by pioneering Scottish climbers like J. N. Collie, Willie Naismith, Harold Raeburn, and William and Jane Inglis Clark. Other classic routes were put up by G. Graham Macphee, Dr James H. B. Bell and others between the Wars; these include Bell's \"Long Climb\", at reputedly the longest sustained climb on the British mainland. In summer 1943 conscientious objector Brian Kellett made a phenomenal seventy-four repeat climbs and seventeen first ascents including fourteen solos, returning in 1944 to add fifteen more new lines, eleven solo, including his eponymous HVS on Gardyloo buttress. Much more recently, an extreme and as yet ungraded climb on Echo Wall was completed by Dave MacLeod in 2008 after two years of preparation.\nThe north face is also one of Scotland's foremost venues for winter mountaineering and ice climbing and holds snow until quite late in the year; in a good year, routes may remain in winter condition until mid-spring. Most of the possible rock routes are also suitable as winter climbs, including the four main ridges; Tower Ridge, for example, is grade IV on the Scottish winter grade, having been upgraded in 2009 by the Scottish Mountaineering Club after requests by the local Mountain Rescue Team, there being numerous benightments and incidents every winter season. \nIn February 1960 James R. Marshall and Robin Clark Smith recorded six major new ice routes in only eight days including Orion Direct (V,5 400m); this winter version of Bell's Long Climb was \"the climax of a magnificent week's climbing by Smith and Marshall, and the highpoint of the step-cutting era\".\nHill running.\nThe history of hill running on Ben Nevis dates back to 1895. William Swan, a barber from Fort William, made the first recorded timed ascent up the mountain on or around 27 September of that year, when he ran from the old post office in Fort William to the summit and back in 2 hours 41 minutes.\nThe following years saw several improvements on Swan's record, but the first competitive race was held on 3 June 1898 under Scottish Amateur Athletic Association rules. Ten competitors ran the course, which started at the Lochiel Arms Hotel in Banavie and was thus longer than the route from Fort William; the winner was 21-year-old Hugh Kennedy, a gamekeeper at Tor Castle, who finished (coincidentally with Swan's original run) in 2\u00a0hours 41\u00a0minutes.\nRegular races were organised until 1903, when two events were held; these were the last for 24\u00a0years, perhaps due to the closure of the summit observatory the following year. The first was from Achintee, at the foot of the Pony Track, and finished at the summit; It was won in just over an hour by Ewen MacKenzie, the observatory roadman. The second race ran from new Fort William post office, and MacKenzie lowered the record to 2\u00a0hours 10\u00a0minutes, a record he held for 34\u00a0years.\nThe Ben Nevis Race has been run in its current form since 1937. It now takes place on the first Saturday in September every year, with a maximum of 500\u00a0competitors taking part. It starts and finishes at the Claggan Park football ground on the outskirts of Fort William, and is long with of ascent. Due to the seriousness of the mountain environment, entry is restricted to those who have completed three hill races, and runners must carry waterproofs, a hat, gloves and a whistle; anyone who has not reached the summit after two hours is turned back. As of 2018, the record for the men's race has stood unbroken since 1984, when Kenny Stuart of Keswick Athletic Club won with a time of 1:25:34. The record for the women's race of 1:43:01 was set in 2018 by Victoria Wilkinson.\nExtreme sports.\nBen Nevis is becoming popular with ski mountaineers and boarders. The Red Burn () just to the North of the tourist path gives the easiest descent, but most if not all of the easier gullies on the North Face have been skied, as has the slope once adorned by the abseil poles into . No 4 gully is probably the most skied. Although Tower scoop makes it a no-fall zone, Tower Gully is becoming popular, especially in May and June when there is spring snow.\nIn 2018 J\u00f6ttnar pro team member Tim Howell BASE jumped off Ben Nevis which was covered by BBC Scotland.\nOn 6 May 2019, a team of highliners completed a crossing above the Gardyloo Gully, a new altitude record for the UK. Also in May 2019, a team of 12, led by Dundee artist Douglas Roulston carried a tall statue of the DC Thomson character Oor Wullie to the top of the mountain. The statue, which had been painted by Roulston with a 360-degree scene of the view from the summit was later sold at the Oor Wullie Big Bucket Trail charity auction to raise money for a number of Scottish children's charities.\nBen Nevis is one of the three mountains climbed in the National Three Peaks Challenge, where participants aim to climb Ben Nevis, Scafell Pike and Snowdon, often within 24 hours and using motor transport between them. The total height climbed is and the distance walked , with about of driving. It has been estimated that some 30,000 people attempt the challenge each year, often as part of organised groups, and the impact on the local areas has been criticised. Various records have been set for the challenge, including James Forrest's fastest self-supported completion in 16 days, 13 hours, 59 mins in 2021 and Imogen Boddy's fastest female completion on foot, with support, in 6 days 5 hours 43 mins, in 2024. In 2022 the Nevis Landscape Trust introduced a registration system for charity events on Ben Nevis.\nSafety.\nBen Nevis's popularity, climate and complex topography contribute to a high number of mountain rescue incidents. In 1999 there were 41 rescues and four fatalities on the mountain. It has also been estimated that there are several deaths annually on Ben Nevis.\nNavigation.\nSome incidents arise over difficulties in navigating to or from the summit, especially in poor visibility. The problem stems from the fact that the summit plateau is roughly kidney-shaped and surrounded by cliffs on three sides; the danger is particularly accentuated when the main path is obscured by snow. Two precise compass bearings taken in succession are necessary to navigate from the summit cairn to the west flank, from where a descent can be made on the Pony Track in relative safety.\nIn the late 1990s, Lochaber Mountain Rescue Team erected two posts on the summit plateau to assist walkers attempting the descent in foggy conditions. These posts were subsequently cut down by climbers, sparking controversy in mountaineering circles on the ethics of such additions. Critics argued that cairns and posts are an unnecessary man-made intrusion into the natural landscape, which create a false sense of security and could lessen mountaineers' sense of responsibility for their own safety.\nIn 2009, the Nevis Partnership moved and erected a number of -tall cairns on the summit plateau to aid navigation. Subsequently, the John Muir Trust cleared a number of smaller informal cairns in 2016 which had been erected by visitors, which were seen as dangerous as they could confuse walkers using them for navigation.\nAvalanches.\nTwo avalanches occurred on Ben Nevis in 2009 and 2016, causing the deaths of two people on each occasion. In another two avalanches that occurred in 1970 and 2019, three people died on each occasion. A climber died in an avalanche on the north face of the mountain in 2022.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Ben Nevis Distillery is a single malt whisky distillery at the foot of the mountain, near Victoria Bridge to the north of Fort William. Founded in 1825 by John McDonald (known as \"Long John\"), it is one of the oldest licensed distilleries in Scotland, and is a popular visitor attraction in Fort William. The water used to make the whisky comes from the , the stream that flows from Ben Nevis's northern corrie. \"Ben Nevis\" 80/\u2012 organic ale is, by contrast, brewed in Bridge of Allan near Stirling.\n\"Ben Nevis\" was the name of a White Star Line packet ship which in 1854 carried the group of immigrants who were to become the Wends of Texas. At least another eight vessels have carried the name since then.\nA mountain in Svalbard is also named Ben Nevis, after the Scottish peak. It is high and is south of the head of Raudfjorden, Albert I Land, in the northwestern part of the island of Spitsbergen. Hung Fa Chai, a hill in Northeast New Territories of Hong Kong was given the name Ben Nevis by British surveyors in 1901.\nWee Ben Nevis was a character appearing in \"The Beano\" comic for a few years from 1974, drawn by Vic Neill, in a feature described by Auberon Waugh as having \"strong undertones of Scottish Nationalism by its untrue suggestion that Scotsmen have superhuman strength despite their diminutive stature\"."}
{"id": "4918", "revid": "1272129068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4918", "title": "Bipolar I disorder", "text": " Bipolar I disorder (BD-I; pronounced \"type one bipolar disorder\") is a type of bipolar spectrum disorder characterized by the occurrence of at least one manic episode, with or without mixed or psychotic features. Most people also, at other times, have one or more depressive episodes. Typically, these manic episodes can last at least 7 days for most of each day to the extent that the individual may need medical attention, while the depressive episodes last at least 2 weeks.\nIt is a type of bipolar disorder and conforms to the classic concept of manic-depressive illness, which can include psychosis during mood episodes.\nDiagnosis.\nThe essential feature of bipolar I disorder is a clinical course characterized by the occurrence of one or more manic episodes or mixed episodes. Often, individuals have had one or more major depressive episodes. One episode of mania is sufficient to make the diagnosis of bipolar disorder; the person may or may not have a history of major depressive disorder. Episodes of substance-induced mood disorder due to the direct effects of a medication, or other somatic treatments for depression, substance use disorder, or toxin exposure, or of mood disorder due to a general medical condition need to be excluded before a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder can be made. Bipolar I disorder requires confirmation of only 1 full manic episode for diagnosis, but may be associated with hypomanic and depressive episodes as well. Diagnosis for bipolar II disorder does not include a full manic episode; instead, it requires the occurrence of both a hypomanic episode and a major depressive episode. Serious aggression has been reported to occur in one out of every ten major, first-episode, BD-I patients with psychotic features, the prevalence in this group being particularly high in association with a recent suicide attempt, alcohol use disorder, learning disability, or manic polarity in the first episode.\nBipolar I disorder often coexists with other disorders including PTSD, substance use disorders, and a variety of mood disorders. Studies suggest that psychiatric comorbidities correlate with further impairment of day-to-day life. Up to 40% of people with bipolar disorder also present with PTSD, with higher rates occurring in women and individuals with bipolar I disorder. A diagnosis of bipolar 1 disorder is only given if bipolar episodes are not better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder or superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or a psychotic disorder not otherwise specified.\nMedical assessment.\nRegular medical assessments are performed to rule-out secondary causes of mania and depression. These tests include complete blood count, glucose, serum chemistry/electrolyte panel, thyroid function test, liver function test, renal function test, urinalysis, vitamin B12 and folate levels, HIV screening, syphilis screening, and pregnancy test, and when clinically indicated, an electrocardiogram (ECG), an electroencephalogram (EEG), a computed tomography (CT scan), and/or a magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) may be ordered. Drug screening includes recreational drugs, particularly synthetic cannabinoids, and exposure to toxins.\nDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5).\nIn May 2013, American Psychiatric Association released the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). There are several proposed revisions to occur in the diagnostic criteria of Bipolar I Disorder and its subtypes. For Bipolar I Disorder 296.40 (most recent episode hypomanic) and 296.4x (most recent episode manic), the proposed revision includes the following specifiers: with psychotic features, with mixed features, with catatonic features, with rapid cycling, with anxiety (mild to severe), with suicide risk severity, with seasonal pattern, and with postpartum onset. Bipolar I Disorder 296.5x (most recent episode depressed) will include all of the above specifiers plus the following: with melancholic features and with atypical features. The categories for specifiers will be removed in DSM-5 and criterion A will add or there are at least 3 symptoms of major depression of which one of the symptoms is depressed mood or anhedonia. For Bipolar I Disorder 296.7 (most recent episode unspecified), the listed specifiers will be removed.\"\"\nThe criteria for manic and hypomanic episodes in criteria A &amp; B will be edited. Criterion A will include \"and present most of the day, nearly every day\", and criterion B will include \"and represent a noticeable change from usual behavior\". These criteria as defined in the DSM-IV-TR have created confusion for clinicians and need to be more clearly defined.\nThere have also been proposed revisions to criterion B of the diagnostic criteria for a Hypomanic Episode, which is used to diagnose For Bipolar I Disorder 296.40, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic. Criterion B lists \"inflated self-esteem, flight of ideas, distractibility, and decreased need for sleep\" as symptoms of a Hypomanic Episode. This has been confusing in the field of child psychiatry because these symptoms closely overlap with symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).\nTreatment.\nMedication.\nMood stabilizers are often used as part of the treatment process.\nAntidepressant-induced mania occurs in 20\u201340% of people with bipolar disorder. Mood stabilizers, especially lithium, may protect against this effect, but some research contradicts this.\nA frequent problem in these individuals is non-adherence to pharmacological treatment; long-acting injectable antipsychotics may contribute to solving this issue in some patients.\nA review of validated treatment guidelines for bipolar disorder by international bodies was published in 2020.\nPrognosis.\nBipolar I usually has a poor prognosis, which is associated with substance abuse, psychotic features, depressive symptoms, and inter-episode depression. A manic episode can be so severe that it requires hospitalization. An estimated 63% of all BP-I related mania results in hospitalization. The natural course of BP-I, if left untreated, leads to episodes becoming more frequent or severe over time. But with proper treatment, individuals with BP-I can lead a healthy lifestyle.\nEducation.\nPsychosocial interventions can be used for managing acute depressive episodes and for maintenance treatment to aid in relapse prevention. This includes psychoeducation, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), family-focused therapy (FFT), interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT), and peer support.\nInformation on the condition, importance of regular sleep patterns, routines and eating habits and the importance of compliance with medication as prescribed. Behavior modification through counseling can have positive influence to help reduce the effects of risky behavior during the manic phase. Additionally, the lifetime prevalence for bipolar I disorder is estimated to be 1%."}
{"id": "4919", "revid": "448065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4919", "title": "Bipolar II", "text": ""}
{"id": "4920", "revid": "689041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4920", "title": "Bolshevik Revolution", "text": ""}
{"id": "4921", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4921", "title": "Bacardi", "text": "Bacardi Limited ( , , ) is the largest privately held, family-owned spirits company in the world. Originally known for its Bacard\u00ed brand of white rum, it now has a portfolio of more than 200 brands and labels. Founded in Cuba in 1862 by the Spanish businessmen Facundo Bacard\u00ed Mass\u00f3, Bacardi Limited has been family-owned for seven generations, and employs more than 8,000 people with sales in approximately 170 countries. Bacardi Limited is the group of companies as a whole and includes Bacardi International Limited.\nBacardi Limited is headquartered in Hamilton, Bermuda, and has a board of directors led by the original founder's great-great-grandson, Facundo L. Bacard\u00ed, the board's chairman.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nFacundo Bacard\u00ed Mass\u00f3, a Spanish wine merchant, was born in Sitges, Catalonia, Spain, on October 16, 1814, and immigrated to Santiago, Cuba, in 1830. At the time, rum was cheaply made and not considered a refined drink, and rarely sold in upmarket taverns or purchased by the growing emerging middle class on the island. Facundo began attempting to \"tame\" rum by isolating a proprietary strain of yeast harvested from local sugar cane still used in Bacard\u00ed production today. This yeast gives Bacard\u00ed rum its flavour profile. After experimenting with several techniques for close to ten years, Facundo pioneered charcoal rum filtration, which removed impurities from his rum. Facundo then created two separate distillates that he could blend together, balancing a variety of flavors: Aguardiente (a robust, flavorful distillate) and Redestillado (a refined, delicate distillate). Once Facundo achieved the perfect balance of flavors by marrying the two distillates together, he purposefully aged the rum in white oak barrels to develop subtle flavors and characteristics while mellowing out those that were unwanted. The final product was the first clear, light-bodied, and mixable \"white\" rum in the world.\nMoving from the experimental stage to a more commercial endeavour as local sales began to grow, Facundo and his brother Jos\u00e9 purchased a Santiago de Cuba distillery on October 16, 1862, which housed a still made of copper and cast iron. In the rafters of this building lived fruit bats\u00a0\u2013 the inspiration for the Bacardi bat logo. It was the idea of Do\u00f1a Amalia, Facundo's wife, to adopt the bat to the rum bottle when she recognized its symbolism of family unity, good health, and good fortune to her husband's homeland of Spain. This logo was pragmatic considering the high illiteracy rate in the 19th century, enabling customers to easily identify the product.\nThe 1880s and 1890s were turbulent times for Cuba and the company. Emilio Bacard\u00ed, Don Facundo's eldest son, known for his forward thinking in both his professional and personal life and a passionate advocate for Cuban Independence was imprisoned twice for having fought in the rebel army against Spain in the Cuban War of Independence.\nEmilio's brothers, Facundo and Jos\u00e9, and their brother-in-law Enrique 'Henri' Schueg, remained in Cuba with the difficult task of sustaining the company during a period of war. With Don Facundo's passing in 1886, Do\u00f1a Amalia sought refuge by exile in Kingston, Jamaica. At the end of the Cuban War of Independence during the US occupation of Cuba, \"The Original Cuba Libre\" and the Daiquiri cocktails were both created, with the then Cuban based Bacard\u00ed rum. In 1899, Emilio Bacard\u00ed became the first democratically elected mayor of Santiago, appointed US General Leonard Wood.\nDuring his time in public office, Emilio established schools and hospitals, completed municipal projects such as the famous Padre Pico Street and the Bacardi Dam, financed the creation of parks, and decorated the city of Santiago with monuments and sculptures. In 1912, Emilio and his wife travelled to Egypt, where he purchased a mummy (still on display) for the future Emilio Bacardi Moreau Municipal Museum in Santiago de Cuba. In Santiago, his brother Facundo M. Bacard\u00ed continued to manage the company along with Schueg, who began the company's international expansion by opening bottling plants in Barcelona (1910) and New York City (1916). The New York plant was soon shut down due to Prohibition, yet during this time Cuba became a hotspot for US tourists, kicking off a period of rapid growth for the Bacardi company and the onset of cocktail culture in America.\nIn 1922, the family completed the expansion and renovation of the original distillery in Santiago, increasing the site's rum production capacity. In 1930 Schueg oversaw the construction and opening of Edificio Bacard\u00ed in Havana, regarded as one of the finest Art Deco buildings in Latin America, as the third generation of the Bacard\u00ed family entered the business. In 1927, Bacardi ventured outside the realm of spirits for the first time, with the introduction of an authentic Cuban Malt beer: Hatuey beer.\nBacardi's success in transitioning into an international brand and company was due mostly to Schueg, who branded Cuba as \"The home of rum\", and Bacard\u00ed as \"The king of rums and the rum of Kings\". Expansion began overseas, first to Mexico in 1931, where architects Ludwig Mies Van Der Rohe and Felix Candela designed office buildings and a bottling plant in Mexico City during the 1950s. The building complex was added to the tentative list of UNESCO's World Heritage Site list on 20 November 2001. In 1936, Bacardi began producing rum on U.S. territory in Puerto Rico after Prohibition which enabled the company to sell rum tariff-free in the United States. The company later expanded to the United States in 1944 with the opening of Bacardi Imports, Inc. in Manhattan, New York City.\nDuring World War II, the company was led by Schueg's son-in-law, Jos\u00e9 \"Pepin\" Bosch. Pepin founded Bacardi Imports in New York City and became Cuba's Minister of the Treasury in 1949.\nCuban Revolution.\nDuring the Cuban Revolution in 1959, the Bacard\u00ed family (and hence the company) supported and aided the rebels. However, after the triumph of the revolutionaries, and turn to communism, the family maintained a fierce opposition to Fidel Castro's policies in Cuba in the 1960s. In his book, \"Bacardi and the Long Fight for Cuba\", Tom Gjelten describes how the Bacard\u00ed family and the company left Cuba in exile after the Cuban\u00a0government confiscated the company's Cuban assets without compensation on 14 October 1960, particularly nationalizing and banning all private property on the island as well as all bank accounts. However, due to concerns over the previous Cuban leader, Fulgencio Batista, the company had started foreign branches a few years before the revolution; the company moved the ownership of its trademarks, assets and proprietary formulas out of the country to the Bahamas prior to the revolution and already produced Bacard\u00ed rum at other distillery sites\u00a0in Puerto Rico and Mexico. This helped the company survive after the Cuban government confiscated all Bacard\u00ed assets without compensation.\nIn 1965, over 100 years after the company was established in Cuba, Bacardi established new roots and found a new home with global headquarters in Hamilton, Bermuda. In February 2019, Bacardi's CEO, Mahesh Madhavan, stated that Bacard\u00ed's global headquarters would remain in Bermuda for the next \"500 years\" and that \"Bermuda is our home now.\"\nIn 1999, Otto Reich, a lobbyist in Washington on behalf of Bacard\u00ed, drafted section 211 of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Appropriations Act, FY1999, a bill that became known as the Bacardi Act. Section 211 denied trademark protection to products of Cuban businesses expropriated after the Cuban revolution, a provision sought by Bacard\u00ed. The act was aimed primarily at the Havana Club brand in the US. The brand was created by the Jos\u00e9 Arechabala S.A. and nationalised without compensation in the Cuban revolution, the Arechabala family left Cuba and stopped producing rum. They, therefore, allowed the US trademark registration for \"Havana Club\" to lapse in 1973. Taking advantage of the lapse, the Cuban government registered the mark in the US in 1976. This new law was drafted to invalidate the trademark registration. Section 211 has been challenged unsuccessfully by the Cuban government and the European Union in US courts. It was ruled illegal by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001 and 2002. The US Congress has yet to re-examine the matter. The Cuban government assigned the brand to Pernod Ricard in 1993.\nBacardi rekindled the story of the Arechabala family and Havana Club in the United States when it launched the AMPARO Experience in 2018, an immersive play experience based in Miami, the city with the highest population of Cuban exiles. AMPARO \"is the story of the family's entire history being erased and their heritage 'stolen'\" according to playwright Vanessa Garcia.\nBacardi in the United States.\nIn 1964, Bacardi opened new US offices in Miami, Florida. Exiled Cuban architect Enrique Gutierrez created a hurricane-proof building using a system of steel cables and pulleys that allowed the building to move slightly in the event of a strong shock. The steel cables are anchored into the bedrock and extend through marble-covered shafts up to the top floor, where they are led over large pulleys. Outside, on both sides of the eight-story building, more than 28,000 tiles painted and fired by Brazilian artist Francisco Brennand, depicting abstract blue flowers, were placed on the walls according to the artist's exact specifications.\nIn 1973, the company commissioned the square building in the plaza. Architect Ignacio Carrera-Justiz used cantilevered construction, a style invented by Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright observed how well trees with taproots withstood hurricane-force winds. The building, raised off the ground around a central core, features four massive walls made of sections of inch-thick hammered glass mural tapestries designed and manufactured in France. The striking design of the annex, affectionately known as the 'Jewel Box' building, came from a painting by German artist Johannes M. Dietz.\nIn 2006, Bacardi USA leased a 15-story headquarters complex in Coral Gables, Florida. At the time, Bacardi had employees in seven buildings across Miami-Dade County.\nBacardi vacated its former headquarters buildings on Biscayne Boulevard in Midtown Miami. The building currently serves as the headquarters of the National YoungArts Foundation. Miami citizens began a campaign to label the buildings as \"historic\". The Bacardi Buildings Complex has been a locally protected historic resource since Oct. 6, 2009, when it was designated by unanimous decision by the Historic and Environmental Preservation Board.\nIn 2007 Chad Oppenheim, the head of Oppenheim Architecture + Design, described the Bacardi buildings as \"elegant, with a Modernist [look combined with] a local flavour\". In April 2009, University of Miami professor of architecture Allan Schulman said \"Miami's brand is its identity as a tropical city. The Bacardi buildings are exactly the sort that resonate with our consciousness of what Miami is about.\"\nThe American headquarters is in Coral Gables, Florida.\nBacardi and Cuba today.\nBacardi drinks are not easily found in Cuba today. The main brand of rum in Cuba is Havana Club, produced by a company that was confiscated and nationalized by the government following the revolution. Bacardi later bought the brand from the original owners, the Arechabala family. In partnership with the French company Pernod Ricard, the Cuban government sells its Havana Club products internationally, except in the United States and its territories. Bacardi created the Real Havana Club rum based on the original recipe from the Arechabala family, manufactures it in Puerto Rico, and sells it in the United States. Bacardi continues to fight in the courts, attempting to legalize their Havana Club trademark outside the United States.\nAcquisitions.\nBacardi Limited has made numerous acquisitions to diversify away from the eponymous Bacard\u00ed rum brand.\nIn 1993, Bacardi merged with Martini &amp; Rossi, the Italian producer of Martini vermouth and sparkling wines, creating the Bacardi-Martini group. Other associated brands include the Real Havana Club, Drambuie Scotch whisky liqueur, DiSaronno Amaretto, Eristoff vodka, Cazadores Tequila, B&amp;B and B\u00e9n\u00e9dictine liqueurs.\nIn 1998, Bacardi company acquired John Dewar &amp; Sons, Ltd and Bombay Sapphire from Diageo for $2 billion.\nIn 2004, Bacardi purchased Grey Goose, a French-made vodka, from Sidney Frank for $2 billion.\nIn 2006 Bacardi purchased New Zealand vodka brand 42 Below.\nIn 2018, Bacardi purchased tequila manufacturer Patr\u00f3n Spirits Company for $5.1 billion.\nIn 2023, Bacardi acquired the super-premium mezcal brand, Ilegal Mezcal.\nIn December 2023, Bacardi took majority control of Irish whiskey producer Teeling.\nBrands.\nBacardi beverage brands include:\nBeer: Hatuey\nCacha\u00e7a: Leblon\nCognac: Baron Otard, D'uss\u00e9\nGin: Bombay Sapphire, Bosford Rose, Oxley\nLiqueur: B\u00e9n\u00e9dictine, Cedlila, Get, Martini Spirito, Patr\u00f3n Citr\u00f3nge, St-Germain\nMezcal: Illegal\nRum: Bacard\u00ed, Banks, Castillo, Facundo, Havana Club (USA only), Pyrat, Santa Teresa, Single Cane Estate\nSparkling wine: Martini Alta Langa, Martini Asti, Martini Grandi Augur, Martini Magici Istanti, Martini Prosecco, Martini Riserva di Montellera. Martini Ros\u00e9\nTequila: Camino Real, Cazadores, Corzo, Patr\u00f3n\nVermouth: Martini, Noilly Prat\nVodka: Eristoff, Grey Goose, Russian Prince, Ultimat Vodka, 42 Below\nAmerican whiskey: Angel's Envy, Stillhouse\nIrish whiskey: Teeling\nScotch whisky:\nSingle malt Scotch whisky: Aberfeldy, Aultmore, Craigellachie, Deveron, Royal Brackla\nBlended Scotch whisky: Dewar's, William Lawson's\nAwards.\nBacard\u00ed rums have been entered for a number of international spirit ratings awards. Several Bacard\u00ed spirits have performed notably well. In 2020, Bacard\u00ed Superior, Bacard\u00ed Gold, Bacard\u00ed Black, Bacard\u00ed A\u00f1ejo Cuatro were each awarded a gold medal by the International Quality Institute Monde Selection. In addition, both Bacard\u00ed Reserva Ocho and Bacard\u00ed Gran Reserva Diez were awarded the top honor of Grand Gold quality award.\nHemingway connection.\nErnest Hemingway lived in Cuba from 1939 until shortly after the Cuban Revolution. He lived at Finca Vig\u00eda, in the small town of San Francisco de Paula, located very close to Bacardi's Modelo Brewery for Hatuey Beer in Cotorro, Havana.\nIn 1954, Compa\u00f1\u00eda Ron Bacardi S.A. threw Hemingway a party when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature \u2013 soon after the publication of his novel \"The Old Man and the Sea\" (1952) \u2013 in which he honored the company by mentioning its Hatuey beer. Hemingway also mentioned Bacard\u00ed and Hatuey in his novels \"To Have and Have Not\" (1937) and \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" (1940). Guillermo Cabrera Infante wrote an account of the festivities for the periodical \"Cicl\u00f3n\", titled \"El Viejo y la Marca\" (\"The Old Man and the Brand\", a play on \"El Viejo y el Mar\", the book's Spanish title). In his account he described how \"on one side there was a wooden stage with two streamers\u00a0\u2013 Hatuey beer and Bacardi rum\u00a0\u2013 on each end and a Cuban flag in the middle. Next to the stage was a bar, at which people crowded, ordering daiquiris and beer, all free.\" A sign at the event read \"Bacardi rum welcomes the author of \"The Old Man and the Sea\"\".\nIn his article \"The Old Man and the Daiquiri\", Wayne Curtis writes about how Hemingway's \"home bar also held a bottle of Bacard\u00ed rum\". Hemingway wrote in \"Islands in the Stream\", \"...this frozen daiquir\u00ed, so well beaten as it is, looks like the sea where the wave falls away from the bow of a ship when she is doing thirty knots.\"\nMishaps.\nDeath of Day Davis.\nOn August 16, 2012 temporary worker Lawrence Daquan \"Day\" Davis was crushed to death when a faulty palletizer he was cleaning was activated. It was his first day on the job at the Jacksonville, Florida Bacardi Bottling facility. No lockout/tagout procedures had been implemented. An Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) investigation found 12 safety violations, and Bacardi was fined $192,000, but reached an agreement where it paid $110,000.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nIn March 2022, after Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Bacardi announced that it would halt all exports to Russia and freeze investment and advertising programs. From June 2022 through June 2023, the company imported $169 million worth of products and tripled its profits, and through the summer of 2023 it increased its business in Russia and sought new employees for its Russian branch. When this gained international media attention, the pledge disappeared from their company website. On August 10, 2023, Ukrainian authorities added Bacardi to their list of International Sponsors of War."}
{"id": "4922", "revid": "4534361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4922", "title": "Black and Tans", "text": "The Black and Tans () were constables recruited into the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) as reinforcements during the Irish War of Independence. Recruitment began in Great Britain in January 1920, and about 10,000 men enlisted during the conflict. The majority were unemployed former British soldiers from England, Scotland and Wales who had fought in the First World War. Some sources count Irish recruits to the RIC from 1920 as \"Black and Tans.\"\nThe Black and Tans had a reputation for brutality; they committed murder, arson and looting and became notorious for reprisal attacks on civilians and civilian property. Their actions further swayed Irish public opinion against British rule and drew condemnation in Britain. The Black and Tans were sometimes confused with the Auxiliary Division, a counterinsurgency unit of the RIC, also recruited during the conflict and made up of former British officers. At the time, \"Black and Tans\" was sometimes used for both groups. Another force, the Ulster Special Constabulary (commonly called the \"B-Specials\"), was founded in 1920 to reinforce the RIC in Northern Ireland.\nThe British administration in Ireland promoted the idea of bolstering the RIC with British recruits. They were to help the overstretched RIC maintain control and suppress the Irish Republican Army (IRA), although they were less well trained in ordinary police methods. The nickname \"Black and Tans\" arose from the colours of the improvised uniforms they initially wore, a mixture of dark green RIC (which appeared black) and khaki British Army. They served in all parts of Ireland, but most were sent to southern and western regions where fighting was heaviest. By 1921, for example the Black and Tans made up almost half of the RIC in County Tipperary.\nName.\nThe nickname \"Black and Tans\" arose from the improvised uniforms they initially wore. Due to a shortage of RIC uniforms, the new recruits were issued with a mixture of dark RIC tunics and caps, and khaki army trousers. Christopher O'Sullivan wrote in the \"Limerick Echo\" on 25 March 1920 that, meeting a group of recruits on a train at Limerick Junction, the attire of one reminded him of the Scarteen Hunt, whose \"Black and Tans\" nickname derived from the colours of its Kerry Beagles. Ennis comedian Mike Nono elaborated the joke in Limerick's Theatre Royal, and the nickname soon took hold, persisting even after the men received full RIC uniforms.\nSome modern sources refer to the Black and Tans as the \"RIC Special Reserve\", such as the Irish police researcher Jim Herlihy. However, historians agree that they were not a separate reserve force but \"recruits to the regular RIC\" and \"enlisted as regular constabulary\". Canadian historian D. M. Leeson and Irish historian Se\u00e1n William Gannon have not found the name in any historical documents. Leeson partly blames Wikipedia for promoting this misnomer.\nDefinition.\nAs \"Black and Tans\" was not the official name of any RIC formation, there is some disagreement over which RIC men it should apply to. Some historians, such as David Leeson, Tom Toomey and Jim Herlihy, define \"Black and Tans\" as only those RIC recruits from Britain during the War of Independence. Leeson argues that British-recruited police received less training, which took place at Gormanston Camp rather than the RIC depot in Phoenix Park. Herlihy says the British-recruited personnel were recruited differently and trained for a shorter time and considers them to have formed a \"Special Reserve\". Others, such as William Lowe and Se\u00e1n William Gannon, also include those recruited in Ireland during the conflict. Gannon argues that records do not show a large difference in training time between British and Irish-recruited personnel, that both wore the black-and-tan uniform, and that they performed identical duties.\nAuxiliary Division.\nDuring the war, the British government founded the Auxiliary Division of the RIC, which is sometimes conflated with the \"Black and Tans\". Some British politicians also occasionally conflated them at the time, such as Churchill, Henry Wilson and Herbert Samuel. However, while the \"Black and Tans\" were regular constables, the Auxiliary Division was a paramilitary counterinsurgency force which was operationally independent and composed of former British military \"officers\". Thus, academic sources generally distinguish the Auxiliaries from the \"Black and Tans\". At least some of the crimes attributed to the Black and Tans were actually the work of the Auxiliaries.\nFoundation.\nThe early 20th century in Ireland was dominated by Irish nationalists' pursuit of Home Rule from the United Kingdom. The issue of Home Rule was shelved with the outbreak of World War I, and in 1916 Irish republicans staged the Easter Rising against British rule in an attempt to establish an independent republic. Growing support amongst the Irish populace for the republican Sinn F\u00e9in party saw it win a majority of Irish seats in the 1918 general election. On 21 January 1919, Sinn F\u00e9in followed through on its manifesto and founded an independent Irish parliament (D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann), which then declared an independent Irish Republic. The D\u00e1il called on the public to boycott the RIC, while the Irish Republican Army (IRA) began attacking police barracks and ambushing police patrols. In September 1919 David Lloyd George, the British Prime Minister, outlawed the D\u00e1il and augmented the British Army presence in Ireland.\nAfter the First World War, there were many unemployed ex-servicemen in Britain. British Unionist leader Walter Long had suggested recruiting these men into the RIC in a May 1919 letter to John French, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The idea was promoted by French as well as by Frederick Shaw, Commander of the British Army in Ireland. The RIC's Inspector General, Joseph Byrne, was against it. He resisted the militarisation of the police and believed ex-soldiers could not be controlled by police discipline. In December 1919, Byrne was replaced by his deputy T. J. Smith, an Orangeman. On 27 December, Smith issued an order authorising recruitment in Britain. The advertisements appeared in major cities calling for men willing to \"face a rough and dangerous task\". The first British recruits joined the RIC six days later, on 2 January 1920. By June 1920 the RIC was considered to be under strength while being increasingly threatened. Many RIC members were older men who were forced into living in a state of constant vigilance. The newly appointed 'Police Adviser' to the Dublin Castle administration in Ireland Lieutenant-General Hugh Tudor called for the adding of 4,000 men to the RIC.\nRecruits.\nAbout 10,000 were recruited between January 1920 and the end of the conflict. About 100 were recruited each month from January to June 1920. The recruitment rate rose from July, when the RIC was given a large pay raise. The RIC began losing men at a high rate in the summer of 1920, due to the IRA campaign. On an average week, about 100 men resigned or retired while only 76 recruits enlisted to replace them. More police were needed, but enough replacements could not be found in Ireland; on average, the RIC recruited only seven Irishmen per week. The intake of British recruits steadily rose and then surged from late September, following the widely publicised Sack of Balbriggan.\nThis sudden influx of men led to a shortage of RIC uniforms, and the new recruits were issued with a mixture of dark RIC tunics and caps, and khaki army trousers. These uniforms differentiated them from both the regular RIC and the British Army, and gave rise to their nickname: \"Black and Tans\".\nThe new recruits were trained at Gormanstown Camp near Dublin, most spending two or three weeks there before being sent to RIC barracks around the country. In general, the recruits were poorly trained for police duties and received much less training than the existing Irish RIC constables.\nThe vast majority of Black and Tans were unemployed First World War veterans in their twenties, most of whom joined for economic reasons. The RIC offered men good wages, a chance for promotion, and the prospect of a pension. According to historian David Leeson, \"The typical Black and Tan was in his early twenties and relatively short in stature. He was an unmarried Protestant from London or the Home Counties who had fought in the British Army [...] He was a working-class man with few skills\". The popular Irish claim made at the time that most Black and Tans had criminal records and had been recruited straight from British prisons is incorrect, as a criminal record would disqualify one from working as a policeman.\nAccording to Jim Herlihy, author of \"The Royal Irish Constabulary \u2013 A Short History and Genealogical Guide\", 10,936 Black and Tans were recruited; the vast majority were born in Britain, while 883 (8%) were \"Irish-born\". Based on RIC recruitment data stored in the British Public Record Office at Kew, William Lowe, extrapolating from a sample of 2745 (about one quarter), estimates that 20% of Black and Tans were Irish, with just over half of these giving their religion as Catholic.\nDeployment and violence.\nBlack and Tans served in all parts of Ireland, but most were sent to southern and western regions where the IRA was most active and fighting was heaviest. By 1921, Black and Tans made up nearly half of all RIC constables in County Tipperary, for example. Few were sent to what became Northern Ireland, however. The authorities there raised their own reserve force, the Ulster Special Constabulary. For the most part, the Black and Tans were \"treated as ordinary constables, despite their strange uniforms, and they lived and worked in barracks alongside the Irish police\". They spent most of their time manning police posts or on patrol\u2014\"walking, cycling, or riding on Crossley Tenders\". They also undertook guard, escort and crowd control duties. While some Irish constables got along well with the Black and Tans, \"it seems that many Irish police did not like their new British colleagues\" and saw them as \"rough\". Differing discipline, dialect and ignorance of \"local knowledge\" contributed to an estrangement between the Black and Tans and the greater police force which at times rose to violent infighting.\nAlexander Will, from Forfar in Scotland, was the first Black and Tan to die in the conflict. He was killed during an IRA attack on the RIC barracks in Rathmore, County Kerry, on 11 July 1920.\nThe Black and Tans soon gained a reputation for brutality. In the summer of 1920, Black and Tans began responding to IRA attacks by carrying out arbitrary reprisals against civilians, especially republicans. This usually involved the burning of homes, businesses, meeting halls and farms. Some buildings were also attacked with gunfire and grenades, and businesses were looted. Reprisals on property \"were often accompanied by beatings and killings\". Many villages suffered mass reprisals, including the Sack of Balbriggan (20 September), Kilkee (26 September), Trim (27 September), Tubbercurry (30 September) and Granard (31 October). Following the Rineen ambush (22 September) in which six RIC men were killed, police burned many houses in the surrounding villages of Milltown Malbay, Lahinch and Ennistymon, and killed five civilians. In early November, Black and Tans \"besieged\" Tralee in revenge for the IRA abduction and killing of two local RIC men. They closed all the businesses in the town, let no food in for a week and shot dead three local civilians. On 14 November, Black and Tans were suspected of abducting and murdering a Roman Catholic priest, Father Michael Griffin, in Galway. His body was found in a bog in Barna a week later. From October 1920 to July 1921, the Galway region was \"remarkable in many ways\", most notably the level of police brutality towards suspected IRA members, which was far above the norm in the rest of Ireland. The villages of Clifden and Knockcroghery suffered mass reprisals in March and June 1921.\nMembers of the British government, the British administration in Ireland, and senior officers in the RIC tacitly supported reprisals as a way of encouraging the police and scaring the population into rejecting the IRA. In December 1920, the government officially approved certain reprisals against property. There were an estimated 150 official reprisals over the next six months. Taken together with an increased emphasis on discipline in the RIC, this helped to curb the atrocities the Black and Tans committed for the remainder of the war, if only because reprisals were now directed from above rather than being the result of a spontaneous desire for revenge.\nMany of the activities popularly attributed to the Black and Tans may have been committed by the Auxiliary Division or 'old' RIC constables. For instance, Tom\u00e1s Mac Curtain, the Mayor of Cork, was killed in his home on the night of 19 March 1920, when few Black and Tans were stationed in the city. The coroner's inquest found that Mac Curtain had been murdered by unknown members of the RIC, and named District Inspector Oswald Swanzy as the responsible officer. The RIC transferred Swanzy from Cork to Lisburn, County Antrim for his own safety, but he was killed by the IRA on 22 August 1920. The Burning of Cork city on 11 December 1920 was carried out by K Company of the Auxiliary Division, in reprisal for an IRA ambush at Dillon's Cross. The shooting dead by Crown forces of 13 civilians at Croke Park on Bloody Sunday, in retaliation for the killing of British intelligence officers was carried out by a mixed force of military, Auxiliaries and RIC, though it is not clear who initiated the shooting. In the aftermath, \"The army blamed the Auxiliaries and the Auxiliaries blamed the regular police\".\nReaction.\nThe actions of the Black and Tans alienated public opinion in both Ireland and Great Britain. Their violent tactics encouraged the Irish public to increase their covert support of the IRA, while the British public pressed for a move towards a peaceful resolution.\nIn January 1921, the British Labour Commission produced a report on the situation in Ireland which was highly critical of the government's security policy. It said the government, in forming the Black and Tans, had \"liberated forces which it is not at present able to dominate\". Edward Wood MP, better known as the future Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax, rejected force and urged the British government to make an offer to the Irish \"conceived on the most generous lines\". Sir John Simon MP, another future Foreign Secretary, was also horrified at the tactics being used. Lionel Curtis, writing in the imperialist journal \"The Round Table\", wrote: \"If the British Commonwealth can only be preserved by such means, it would become a negation of the principle for which it has stood\". The King, senior Anglican bishops, MPs from the Liberal and Labour parties, Oswald Mosley, Jan Smuts, the Trades Union Congress and parts of the press were increasingly critical of the actions of the Black and Tans. Mahatma Gandhi said of the British peace offer: \"It is not fear of losing more lives that has compelled a reluctant offer from England but it is the shame of any further imposition of agony upon a people that loves liberty above everything else\".\nDisbandment.\nMore than a third left the service before they were disbanded along with the rest of the RIC in 1922, an extremely high wastage rate, and well over half received government pensions. Over 500 members of the RIC died in the conflict and more than 600 were wounded. Some sources have stated that 525 police were killed in the conflict, including 152 Black and Tans and 44 Auxiliaries. This figure of total police killed would also include 72 members of the Ulster Special Constabulary killed between 1920 and 1922 and 12 members of the Dublin Metropolitan Police.\nMany Black and Tans were left unemployed after the RIC was disbanded and about 3,000 were in need of financial assistance after their employment in Ireland was terminated. About 250 Black and Tans and Auxiliaries, among over 1,300 former RIC personnel, joined the Royal Ulster Constabulary. Another 700 joined the Palestine Police Force which was led by former British Chief of Police in Ireland, Henry Hugh Tudor. Others were resettled in Canada or elsewhere by the RIC Resettlement branch. Those who returned to civilian life sometimes had problems re-integrating. At least two former Black and Tans were hanged for murder in Britain and another (Scott Cullen) wanted for murder committed suicide before the police could arrest him.\nLegacy.\nDue to the enduring historical memory of the Black and Tans' violence, historian David Leeson describes them as \"the most notorious police in the history of the British Isles\". One of the best known Irish Republican songs is Dominic Behan's \"Come Out, Ye Black and Tans\". The Irish War of Independence is sometimes referred to as the \"Tan War\" or \"Black-and-Tan War\". This term was preferred by those who fought on the anti-Treaty side in the Irish Civil War and is still used by Republicans today. The \"Cogadh na Saoirse\" (\"War of Independence\") medal, awarded since 1941 by the Irish government to IRA veterans of the War of Independence, bears a ribbon with two vertical stripes in black and tan.\nIn 2020, Justice Minister Charlie Flanagan proposed a commemoration ceremony for those who had served in the Royal Irish Constabulary. This resulted in widespread criticism due to the Black and Tans being members of the RIC; many officials announced that they would not appear and refused to participate. Flanagan decided to cancel the ceremony due to the controversy."}
{"id": "4923", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4923", "title": "Boomeroid", "text": ""}
{"id": "4924", "revid": "31322263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4924", "title": "Bunsen burner", "text": "A Bunsen burner, named after Robert Bunsen, is a kind of ambient air gas burner used as laboratory equipment; it produces a single open gas flame, and is used for heating, sterilization, and combustion.\nThe gas can be natural gas (which is mainly methane) or a liquefied petroleum gas, such as propane, butane, or a mixture. Combustion temperature achieved depends in part on the adiabatic flame temperature of the chosen fuel mixture.\nHistory.\nIn 1852, the University of Heidelberg hired Bunsen and promised him a new laboratory building. The city of Heidelberg had begun to install coal-gas street lighting, and the university laid gas lines to the new laboratory.\nThe designers of the building intended to use the gas not just for lighting, but also as fuel for burners for laboratory operations. For any burner lamp, it was desirable to maximize the temperature of its flame, and minimize its luminosity (which represented lost heating energy). Bunsen sought to improve existing laboratory burner lamps as regards economy, simplicity, and flame temperature, and adapt them to coal-gas fuel.\nWhile the building was under construction in late 1854, Bunsen suggested certain design principles to the university's mechanic, Peter Desaga, and asked him to construct a prototype. Similar principles had been used in an earlier burner design by Michael Faraday, and in a device patented in 1856 by gas engineer R. W. Elsner. The Bunsen/Desaga design generated a hot, sootless, non-luminous flame by mixing the gas with air in a controlled fashion before combustion. Desaga created adjustable slits for air at the bottom of the cylindrical burner, with the flame issuing at the top. When the building opened early in 1855, Desaga had made 50 burners for Bunsen's students. Two years later Bunsen published a description, and many of his colleagues soon adopted the design. Bunsen burners are now used in laboratories around the world.\nOperation.\nThe device in use today safely burns a continuous stream of a flammable gas such as natural gas (which is principally methane) or a liquefied petroleum gas such as propane, butane, or a mixture of both.\nThe hose barb is connected to a gas nozzle on the laboratory bench with rubber tubing. Most laboratory benches are equipped with multiple gas nozzles connected to a central gas source, as well as vacuum, nitrogen, and steam nozzles. The gas then flows up through the base through a small hole at the bottom of the barrel and is directed upward. There are open slots in the side of the tube bottom to admit air into the stream using the Venturi effect, and the gas burns at the top of the tube once ignited by a flame or spark. The most common methods of lighting the burner are using a match or a spark lighter.\nThe amount of air mixed with the gas stream affects the completeness of the combustion reaction. Less air yields an incomplete and thus cooler reaction, while a gas stream well mixed with air provides oxygen in a stoichiometric amount and thus a complete and hotter reaction. The air flow can be controlled by opening or closing the slot openings at the base of the barrel, similar in function to the choke in a carburettor.\nIf the collar at the bottom of the tube is adjusted so more air can mix with the gas before combustion, the flame will burn hotter, appearing blue as a result. If the holes are closed, the gas will only mix with ambient air at the point of combustion, that is, only after it has exited the tube at the top. This reduced mixing produces an incomplete reaction, producing a cooler but brighter yellow, which is often called the \"safety flame\" or \"luminous flame\". The yellow flame is luminous due to small soot particles in the flame, which are heated to incandescence. The yellow flame is considered \"dirty\" because it leaves a layer of carbon on whatever it is heating. When the burner is regulated to produce a hot, blue flame, it can be nearly invisible against some backgrounds. The hottest part of the flame is the tip of the inner flame, while the coolest is the whole inner flame. Increasing the amount of fuel gas flow through the tube by opening the needle valve will increase the size of the flame. However, unless the airflow is adjusted as well, the flame temperature will decrease because an increased amount of gas is now mixed with the same amount of air, starving the flame of oxygen.\nGenerally, the burner is placed underneath a laboratory tripod, which supports a beaker or other container. The burner will often be placed on a suitable heatproof mat to protect the laboratory bench surface.\nA Bunsen burner is also used in microbiology laboratories to sterilise pieces of equipment and to produce an updraft that forces airborne contaminants away from the working area.\nVariants.\nOther burners based on the same principle exist. The most important alternatives to the Bunsen burner are:"}
{"id": "4925", "revid": "48534318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4925", "title": "Blue whale", "text": "The blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus) is a marine mammal and a baleen whale. Reaching a maximum confirmed length of and weighing up to , it is the largest animal known ever to have existed. The blue whale's long and slender body can be of various shades of greyish-blue on its upper surface and somewhat lighter underneath. Four subspecies are recognized: \"B. m. musculus\" in the North Atlantic and North Pacific, \"B. m. intermedia\" in the Southern Ocean, \"B. m. brevicauda\" (the pygmy blue whale) in the Indian Ocean and South Pacific Ocean, and \"B. m. indica\" in the Northern Indian Ocean. There is a population in the waters off Chile that may constitute a fifth subspecies.\nIn general, blue whale populations migrate between their summer feeding areas near the poles and their winter breeding grounds near the tropics. There is also evidence of year-round residencies, and partial or age/sex-based migration. Blue whales are filter feeders; their diet consists almost exclusively of krill. They are generally solitary or gather in small groups, and have no well-defined social structure other than mother\u2013calf bonds. Blue whales vocalize, with a fundamental frequency ranging from 8 to 25\u00a0Hz; their vocalizations may vary by region, season, behavior, and time of day. Orcas are their only natural predators.\nThe blue whale was abundant in nearly all the Earth's oceans until the end of the 19th\u00a0century. It was hunted almost to the point of extinction by whalers until the International Whaling Commission banned all blue whale hunting in 1966. The International Union for Conservation of Nature has listed blue whales as Endangered as of 2018. It continues to face numerous man-made threats such as ship strikes, pollution, ocean noise, and climate change. Scientists found evidence of this through morphological or epidemiological analysis. These analyses are accompanied by chemical profiles that use fecal and tissue which continue to prove the impact of man-made threats.\nTaxonomy.\nNomenclature.\nThe genus name, \"Balaenoptera\", means \"winged whale,\" while the species name, \"musculus\", could mean \"muscle\" or a diminutive form of \"mouse\", possibly a pun by Carl Linnaeus when he named the species in \"Systema Naturae\". One of the first published descriptions of a blue whale comes from Robert Sibbald's \"Phalainologia Nova\", after Sibbald found a stranded whale in the estuary of the Firth of Forth, Scotland, in 1692. The name \"blue whale\" was derived from the Norwegian \"bl\u00e5hval\", coined by Svend Foyn shortly after he had perfected the harpoon gun. The Norwegian scientist G. O. Sars adopted it as the common name in 1874.\nBlue whales were referred to as \"Sibbald's rorqual\", after Robert Sibbald, who first described the species. Whalers sometimes referred to them as \"sulphur bottom\" whales, as the bellies of some individuals are tinged with yellow. This tinge is due to a coating of huge numbers of diatoms. (Herman Melville briefly refers to \"sulphur bottom\" whales in his novel \"Moby-Dick\".)\nEvolution.\nBlue whales are rorquals in the family Balaenopteridae. A 2018 analysis estimates that the Balaenopteridae family diverged from other families in between 10.48 and 4.98\u00a0million years ago during the late Miocene. The earliest discovered anatomically modern blue whale is a partial skull fossil from southern Italy identified as \"B.\" cf. \"musculus\", dating to the Early Pleistocene, roughly 1.5\u20131.25\u00a0million years ago. The Australian pygmy blue whale diverged during the Last Glacial Maximum. Their more recent divergence has resulted in the subspecies having a relatively low genetic diversity, and New Zealand blue whales have an even lower genetic diversity.\nWhole genome sequencing suggests that blue whales are most closely related to sei whales with gray whales as a sister group. This study also found significant gene flow between minke whales and the ancestors of the blue and sei whale. Blue whales also displayed high genetic diversity.\nHybridization.\nBlue whales are known to interbreed with fin whales. The earliest description of a possible hybrid between a blue whale and a fin whale was a anomalous female whale with the features of both the blue and the fin whales taken in the North Pacific. A whale captured off northwestern Spain in 1984, was found to have been the product of a blue whale mother and a fin whale father.\nTwo live blue-fin whale hybrids have since been documented in the Gulf of St. Lawrence (Canada), and in the Azores (Portugal). DNA tests done in Iceland on a blue whale killed in July 2018 by the Icelandic whaling company Hvalur hf, found that the whale was the offspring of a male fin whale and female blue whale; however, the results are pending independent testing and verification of the samples. Because the International Whaling Commission classified blue whales as a \"Protection Stock\", trading their meat is illegal, and the kill is an infraction that must be reported. Blue-fin hybrids have been detected from genetic analysis of whale meat samples taken from Japanese markets. Blue-fin whale hybrids are capable of being fertile. Molecular tests on a pregnant female whale caught off Iceland in 1986 found that it had a blue whale mother and a fin whale father, while its fetus was sired by a blue whale.\nIn 2024, a genome analysis of North Atlantic blue whales found evidence that approximately 3.5% of the blue whales' genome was derived from hybridization with fin whales. Gene flow was found to be unidirectional from fin whales to blue whales. Comparison with Antarctic blue whales showed that this hybridization began after the separation of the northern and southern populations. Despite their smaller size, fin whales have similar cruising and sprinting speeds to blue whales, which would allow fin males to complete courtship chases with blue females.\nThere is a reference to a humpback\u2013blue whale hybrid in the South Pacific, attributed to marine biologist Michael Poole.\nSubspecies and stocks.\nAt least four subspecies of blue whale are traditionally recognized, some of which are divided into population stocks or \"management units\". They have a worldwide distribution, but are mostly absent from the Arctic Ocean and the Mediterranean, Okhotsk, and Bering Sea.\nBlue whales off the Chilean coast might be a separate subspecies based on their geographic separation, genetics, and unique song types. Chilean blue whales might overlap in the Eastern Tropical Pacific with Antarctica blue whales and Eastern North Pacific blue whales. Chilean blue whales are genetically differentiated from Antarctica blue whales such that interbreeding is unlikely. However, the genetic distinction is less between them and the Eastern North Pacific blue whale, hence there might be gene flow between the Southern and Northern Hemispheres. A 2019 study by Luis Pastene, Jorge Acevedo and Trevor Branch provided new morphometric data from a survey of 60 Chilean blue whales, hoping to address the debate about the possible distinction of this population from others in the Southern Hemisphere. Data from this study, based on whales collected in the 1965/1966 whaling season, shows that both the maximum and mean body length of Chilean blue whales lies between these values in pygmy and Antarctic blue whales. Data also indicates a potential difference in snout-eye measurements between the three, and a significant difference in fluke-anus length between the Chilean population and pygmy blue whales. This further confirms Chilean blue whales as a separate population, and implies that they do not fall under the same subspecies as the pygmy blue whale (\"B. m. brevicauda\").\nA 2024 genomic study of the global blue whale population found support for the subspecific status of Antarctic and Indo-western Pacific blue whales but not eastern Pacific blue whales. The study found \"...divergence between the eastern North and eastern South Pacific, and among the eastern Indian Ocean, the western South Pacific and the northern Indian Ocean.\" and \"no divergence within the Antarctic\".\nDescription.\nThe blue whale is a slender-bodied cetacean with a broad U-shaped head; thin, elongated flippers; a small sickle-shaped dorsal fin located close to the tail, and a large tail stock at the root of the wide and thin flukes. The upper jaw is lined with 70\u2013395 black baleen plates. The throat region has 60\u201388 grooves which allows the skin to expand during feeding. It has two blowholes that can squirt up in the air. The skin has a mottled grayish-blue coloration, appearing blue underwater. The mottling patterns near the dorsal fin vary between individuals. The underbelly has lighter pigmentation and can appear yellowish due to diatoms in the water, which historically earned them the nickname \"sulphur bottom\". The male blue whale has the largest penis in the animal kingdom, at around long and wide.\nSize.\nThe blue whale is the largest animal known ever to have existed. Some studies have estimated that certain shastasaurid ichthyosaurs and the ancient whale \"Perucetus\" could have rivalled the blue whale in size, with \"Perucetus\" also being heavier than the blue whale with a mean weight of . These estimates are based on fragmentary remains, and the proposed size for the latter has been disputed in 2024. Other studies estimate that on land, large sauropods like \"Bruhathkayosaurus\" (mean weight: 110\u2013170 tons) and \"Maraapunisaurus\" (mean weight: 80\u2013120 tons) would have easily rivalled the blue whale, with the former even exceeding the blue whale based on its most liberal estimations (240 tons), although these estimates are based on even more fragmentary specimens that had disintegrated by the time those estimates were made.\nThe International Whaling Commission (IWC) whaling database reports 88 individuals longer than , including one of . The Discovery Committee reported lengths up to . The longest scientifically measured individual blue whale was from rostrum tip to tail notch. Female blue whales are larger than males. Hydrodynamic models suggest a blue whale could not exceed because of metabolic and energy constraints.\nThe average length of sexually mature female blue whales is for Eastern North Pacific blue whales, for central and western North Pacific blue whales, for North Atlantic blue whales, for Antarctic blue whales, for Chilean blue whales, and for pygmy blue whales.\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, males weigh an average and females . Eastern North Pacific blue whale males average and females . Antarctic males average and females . Pygmy blue whale males average to . The weight of the heart of a stranded North Atlantic blue whale was , the largest known in any animal. The record-holder blue whale was recorded at , with estimates of up to .\nIn 2024, Motani and Pyenson calculated the body mass of blue whales at different lengths, compiling records of their sizes from previous academic literatures and using regression analyses and volumetric analyses. A long individual was estimated to weigh approximately , while a long individual was estimated to weigh approximately . Considering that the largest blue whale was indeed long, they estimated that a blue whale of such length would have weighed approximately .\nDuring the harvest of a female blue whale, Messrs. Irvin and Johnson collected a fetus that is now 70% preserved and used for educational purposes. The fetus was collected in 1922, so some shrinkage may have occurred, making visualization of some features fairly difficult. However, due to this collection researchers now know that the external anatomy of a blue whale fetus is approximately 133\u00a0mm. Along with during the developmental phases, the fetus is located where the embryonic and fetal phases converge. This fetus is the youngest gestational age of the specimen recorded.\nLife span.\nBlue whales live around 80\u201390 years or more. Scientists look at a blue whale's earwax or ear plug to estimate its age. Each year, a light and dark layer of wax is laid corresponding with fasting during migration and feeding time. Each set is thus an indicator of age. The oldest blue whale found was determined, using this method, to be 110 years old. The maximum age of a pygmy blue whale determined this way is 73 years. In addition, female blue whales develop scars or corpora albicantia on their ovaries every time they ovulate. In a female pygmy blue whale, one corpus albicans is formed on average every 2.6 years.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nThe blue whale is usually solitary, but can be found in pairs. When productivity is high enough, blue whales can be seen in gatherings of more than 50 individuals. Populations may go on long migrations, traveling to their summer feeding grounds towards the poles and then heading to their winter breeding grounds in more equatorial waters. The animals appear to use memory to locate the best feeding areas. There is evidence of alternative strategies, such as year-round residency, and partial (where only some individuals migrate) or age/sex-based migration. Some whales have been recorded feeding in breeding grounds. The traveling speed for blue whales ranges . Their massive size limits their ability to breach.\nThe greatest dive depth reported from tagged blue whales was . Their theoretical aerobic dive limit was estimated at 31.2 minutes, however, the longest dive measured was 15.2 minutes. The deepest confirmed dive from a pygmy blue whale was . A blue whale's heart rate can drop to 2 beats per minute (bpm) at deep depths, but upon surfacing, can rise to 37 bpm, which is close to its peak heart rate.\nDiet and feeding.\nThe blue whale's diet consists almost exclusively of krill. Blue whales capture krill through lunge feeding; they swim towards them at high speeds as they open their mouths up to 80\u00b0. They may engulf of water at one time. They squeeze the water out through their baleen plates with pressure from the throat pouch and tongue, and swallow the remaining krill. Blue whales have been recorded making 180\u00b0 rolls during lunge-feeding, possibly allowing them to search the prey field and find the densest patches.\nWhile pursuing krill patches, blue whales maximize their calorie intake by increasing the number of lunges while selecting the thickest patches. This provides them enough energy for everyday activities while storing additional energy necessary for migration and reproduction. Due to their size, blue whales have larger energetic demands than most animals resulting in their need for this specific feeding habit. Blue whales have to engulf densities greater than 100 krill/m3 to maintain the cost of lunge feeding. They can consume from one mouthful of krill, which can provide up to 240 times more energy than used in a single lunge. It is estimated that an average-sized blue whale must consume of krill a day.\nIn the southern ocean, blue whales feed on Antarctic krill (\"Euphausia superba\"). In the South Australia, pygmy blue whales (\"B. m. brevicauda\") feeds on \"Nyctiphanes australis\". In California, they feed mostly on \"Thysanoessa spinifera,\" but also less commonly on North pacific krill (\"Euphausia pacifica\"). Research of the Eastern North Pacific population shows that when diving to feed on krill, the whales reach an average depth of 201 meters, with dives lasting 9.8 minutes on average.\nWhile most blue whales feed almost exclusively on krill, the Northern Indian Ocean subspecies (\"B. m. indica\") instead feeds predominantly on sergestid shrimp. To do so, they dive deeper and for longer periods of time than blue whales in other regions of the world, with dives of 10.7 minutes on average, and a hypothesized dive depth of about 300 meters. Fecal analysis also found the presence of fish, krill, amphipods, cephalopods, and scyphozoan jellyfish in their diet.\nBlue whales appear to avoid directly competing with other baleen whales. Different whale species select different feeding spaces and times as well as different prey species. In the Southern Ocean, baleen whales appear to feed on Antarctic krill of different sizes, which may lessen competition between them.\nBlue whale feeding habits may differ due to situational disturbances, like environmental shifts or human interference. This can cause a change in diet due to stress response. Due to these changing situations, there was a study performed on Blue whales measuring Cortisol levels and comparing them with the levels of stressed individuals, it gave a closer look to the reasoning behind their diet and behavioral changes.\nReproduction and birth.\nThe age of sexual maturity for blue whales is thought to be 5\u201315 years. In the Northern Hemisphere, the length at which they reach maturity is for females and for males. In the Southern Hemisphere, the length of maturity is and for females and males respectively. Male pygmy blue whales average at sexual maturity. Female pygmy blue whales are in length and roughly 10 years old at the age of sexual maturity. Little is known about mating behavior, or breeding and birthing areas. Blue whales appear to be polygynous, with males competing for females. A male blue whale typically trails a female and will fight off potential rivals. The species mates from fall to winter.\nPregnant females eat roughly four percent of their body weight daily, amounting to 60% of their overall body weight throughout summer foraging periods. Gestation may last 10\u201312 months with calves being long and weighing at birth. Estimates suggest that because calves require milk per kg of mass gain, blue whales likely produce of milk per day (ranging from of milk per day). The first video of a calf thought to be nursing was filmed in New Zealand in 2016. Calves may be weaned when they reach 6\u20138 months old at a length of . They gain roughly during the weaning period. Interbirth periods last two to three years; they average 2.6 years in pygmy blue whales.\nVocalizations.\nBlue whales produce some of the loudest and lowest frequency vocalizations in the animal kingdom, and their inner ears appear well adapted for detecting low-frequency sounds. The fundamental frequency for blue whale vocalizations ranges from 8 to 25\u00a0Hz. Blue whale songs vary between populations.\nVocalizations produced by the Eastern North Pacific population have been well studied. This population produces pulsed calls (\"A\") and tonal calls (\"B\"), upswept tones that precede type B calls (\"C\") and separate downswept tones (\"D\"). A and B calls are often produced in repeated co-occurring sequences and sung only by males, suggesting a reproductive function. D calls may have multiple functions. They are produced by both sexes during social interactions while feeding. and by males when competing for mates.\nBlue whale calls recorded off Sri Lanka have a three-unit phrase. The first unit is a 19.8 to 43.5\u00a0Hz pulsive call, and is normally 17.9 \u00b1 5.2 seconds long. The second unit is a 55.9 to 72.4\u00a0Hz FM upsweep that is 13.8 \u00b1 1.1 seconds long. The final unit is 28.5 \u00b1 1.6 seconds long with a tone of 108 to 104.7\u00a0Hz. A blue whale call recorded off Madagascar, a two-unit phrase, consists of 5\u20137 pulses with a center frequency of 35.1 \u00b1 0.7\u00a0Hz lasting 4.4 \u00b1 0.5 seconds proceeding a 35 \u00b1 0\u00a0Hz tone that is 10.9 \u00b1 1.1 seconds long. In the Southern Ocean, blue whales produce 18-second vocals which start with a 9-second-long, 27\u00a0Hz tone, and then a 1-second downsweep to 19\u00a0Hz, followed by a downsweep further to 18\u00a0Hz. Other vocalizations include 1\u20134 second long, frequency-modulated calls with a frequency of 80 and 38\u00a0Hz.\nThere is evidence that some blue whale songs have temporally declined in tonal frequency. The vocalization of blue whales in the Eastern North Pacific decreased in tonal frequency by 31% from the early 1960s to the early 21st century. The frequency of pygmy blue whales in the Antarctic has decreased by a few tenths of a hertz every year starting in 2002. It is possible that as blue whale populations recover from whaling, there is increasing sexual selection pressure (i.e., a lower frequency indicates a larger body size).\nPredators and parasites.\nThe only known natural predator to blue whales is the orca, although the rate of fatal attacks by orcas is unknown. Photograph-identification studies of blue whales have estimated that a high proportion of the individuals in the Gulf of California have rake-like scars, indicative of encounters with orcas. Off southeastern Australia, 3.7% of blue whales photographed had rake marks and 42.1% of photographed pygmy blue whales off Western Australia had rake marks. Documented predation by orcas has been rare. A blue whale mother and calf were first observed being chased at high speeds by orcas off southeastern Australia. The first documented attack occurred in 1977 off southwestern Baja California, Mexico, but the injured whale escaped after five hours. Four more blue whales were documented as being chased by a group of orcas between 1982 and 2003. The first documented predation event by orcas occurred in September 2003, when a group of orcas in the Eastern Tropical Pacific was encountered feeding on a recently killed blue whale calf. In March 2014, a commercial whale watch boat operator recorded an incident involving a group of orcas harassing a blue whale in Monterey Bay. The blue whale defended itself by slapping its tail. A similar incident was recorded by a drone in Monterey Bay in May 2017. The first direct observations of orca predation occurred off the south coast of Western Australia, two in 2019 and one more in 2021. The first victim was estimated to be .\nIn Antarctic waters, blue whales accumulate diatoms of the species \"Cocconeis ceticola\" and the genera \"Navicola\", which are normally removed when the whales enter warmer waters. Other external parasites include barnacles such as \"Coronula diadema\", \"Coronula reginae\", and \"Cryptolepas rhachianecti\", which latch on their skin deep enough to leave behind a pit if removed. Whale lice species make their home in cracks of the skin and are relatively harmless. The copepod species \"Pennella balaenopterae\" digs in and attaches itself to the blubber to feed on. Intestinal parasites include the trematode genera \"Ogmogaster\" and \"Lecithodesmus\"; the tapeworm genera \"Priapocephalus\", \"Phyllobotrium\", \"Tetrabothrius\", \"Diphyllobotrium\", and \"Diplogonoporus\"; and the thorny-headed worm genus \"Bolbosoma\". In the North Atlantic, blue whales also contain the protozoans \"Entamoeba\", \"Giardia\" and \"Balantidium\".\nConservation.\nThe global blue whale population is estimated to be 5,000\u201315,000 mature individuals and 10,000\u201325,000 total as of 2018. By comparison, there were at least 140,000 mature whales in 1926. There are an estimated total of 1,000\u20133,000 whales in the North Atlantic, 3,000\u20135,000 in the North Pacific, and 5,000\u20138,000 in the Antarctic. There are possibly 1,000\u20133,000 whales in the eastern South Pacific while the pygmy blue whale may number 2,000\u20135,000 individuals. Blue whales have been protected in areas of the Southern Hemisphere since 1939. In 1955, they were given complete protection in the North Atlantic under the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling; this protection was extended to the Antarctic in 1965 and the North Pacific in 1966. The protected status of North Atlantic blue whales was not recognized by Iceland until 1960. In the United States, the species is protected under the Endangered Species Act.\nBlue whales are formally classified as endangered under both the U.S. Endangered Species Act and the IUCN Red List. They are also listed on Appendix\u00a0I under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals. Although, for some populations, there is not enough information on current abundance trends (e.g., pygmy blue whales), others are critically endangered (e.g., Antarctic blue whales).\nThreats.\nBlue whales were initially difficult to hunt because of their size and speed. This began to change in the mid-19th century with the development of harpoons that can be shot as projectiles. Blue whale whaling peaked between 1930 and 1931 with 30,000 animals taken. Harvesting of the species was particularly high in the Antarctic, with 350,000\u2013360,000 whales taken in the first half of the 20th century. In addition, 11,000 North Atlantic whales (mostly around Iceland) and 9,500 North Pacific whales were killed during the same period. The International Whaling Commission banned all hunting of blue whales in 1966 and gave them worldwide protection. However, the Soviet Union continued to illegally hunt blue whales and other species up until the 1970s.\nShip strikes are a significant mortality factor for blue whales, especially off the U.S. West Coast. A total of 17 blue whales were killed or suspected to have been killed by ships between 1998 and 2019 off the U.S. West Coast. Five deaths in 2007 off California were considered an unusual mortality event, as defined under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. Lethal ship strikes are also a problem in Sri Lankan waters, where their habitat intersects with one of the world's most active shipping routes. Here, strikes caused the deaths of eleven blue whales in 2010 and 2012, and at least two in 2014. Ship-strike mortality claimed the lives of two blue whales off southern Chile in the 2010s. Possible measures for reducing future ship strikes include better predictive models of whale distribution, changes in shipping lanes, vessel speed reductions, and seasonal and dynamic management of shipping lanes. Few cases of blue whale entanglement in commercial fishing gear have been documented. The first report in the U.S. occurred off California in 2015, reportedly some type of deep-water trap/pot fishery. Three more entanglement cases were reported in 2016. In Sri Lanka, a blue whale was documented with a net wrapped through its mouth, along the sides of its body, and wound around its tail.\nIncreasing man-made underwater noise impacts blue whales. They may be exposed to noise from commercial shipping and seismic surveys as a part of oil and gas exploration. Blue whales in the Southern California Bight decreased calling in the presence of mid-frequency active (MFA) sonar. Exposure to simulated MFA sonar was found to interrupt blue whale deep-dive feeding but no changes in behavior were observed in individuals feeding at shallower depths. The responses also depended on the animal's behavioral state, its (horizontal) distance from the sound source and the availability of prey.\nThe potential impacts of pollutants on blue whales is unknown. However, because blue whales feed low on the food chain, there is a lesser chance for bioaccumulation of organic chemical contaminants. Analysis of the earwax of a male blue whale killed by a collision with a ship off the coast of California showed contaminants like pesticides, flame retardants, and mercury. Reconstructed persistent organic pollutant (POP) profiles suggested that a substantial maternal transfer occurred during gestation and/or lactation. Male blue whales in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Canada, were found to have higher concentrations of PCBs, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), metabolites, and several other organochlorine compounds relative to females, reflecting maternal transfer of these persistent contaminants from females into young."}
{"id": "4927", "revid": "36510957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4927", "title": "Bolsheviks", "text": "The Bolsheviks (, ; from \u0431\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0448\u0438\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0432\u043e, , 'majority'), led by Vladimir Lenin, were a radical faction of the Marxist Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) which split with the Mensheviks at the Second Party Congress in 1903. The Bolshevik party, formally established in 1912, seized power in Russia in the October Revolution of 1917, and was later renamed the Russian Communist Party, All-Union Communist Party, and ultimately the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Its ideology, based on Leninist and later Marxist\u2013Leninist principles, became known as Bolshevism.\nThe origin of the RSDLP split was Lenin's support for a smaller party of professional revolutionaries, as opposed to the Menshevik desire for a broad party membership. The influence of the factions fluctuated in the years up to 1912, when the RSDLP formally split in two. The political philosophy of the Bolsheviks was based on the Leninist principles of vanguardism and democratic centralism. Lenin was also more willing to use illegal means such as robbery to fund the party's activities. Influenced by the experience of World War I, by 1917 he had concluded that the chain of world capitalism could \"break at its weakest link\" in Russia before it had reached the level of the advanced countries, contrary to theorists such as Georgi Plekhanov. Lenin had also come to view poorer peasants as potential allies of the relatively small Russian proletariat. \nAfter the February Revolution of 1917, Lenin returned to Russia and issued his April Theses, which called for \"no support for the Provisional Government\" and \"all power to the soviets\". During the summer of 1917, which saw events including the July Days and Kornilov affair, large numbers of radicalized workers joined the Bolsheviks, which planned the October Revolution that overthrew the government. The Bolsheviks initially governed in coalition with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, but increasingly centralized power and suppressed opposition during the Russian Civil War, and after 1921 became the sole legal party in Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union. Under Joseph Stalin's leadership, Bolshevism became linked to his policies of \"socialism in one country\", rapid industrialization, collectivized agriculture, and centralized state control.\nHistory of the split.\nVladimir Lenin's ideology in \"What Is to Be Done?\".\nLenin's political pamphlet \"What Is to Be Done?\", written in 1901, helped to precipitate the Bolsheviks' split from the Mensheviks. In Germany, the book was published in 1902, but in Russia, strict censorship outlawed its publication and distribution. One of the main points of Lenin's writing was that a revolution can only be achieved by a strong, professional leadership with deep dedication to Marxist theoretical principles and an organization that spanned through the whole of Russia, abandoning what Lenin called \"artisanal work\" towards a more organized revolutionary work. After the proposed revolution had successfully overthrown the Russian autocracy, this strong leadership would relinquish power and allow a Socialist party to fully develop within the principles of democratic centralism. Lenin said that if professional revolutionaries did not maintain influence over the fight of the workers, then that fight would steer away from the party's objective and carry on under the influence of opposing beliefs or even away from revolution entirely.\nThe pamphlet also showed that Lenin's view of a socialist intelligentsia was in line with Marxist theory. For example, Lenin agreed with the Marxist ideal of social classes ceasing to be and for the eventual \"withering away of the state\". Most party members considered unequal treatment of workers immoral and were loyal to the idea of a completely classless society. This pamphlet also showed that Lenin opposed another group of reformers, known as \"Economists\", who were for economic reform while leaving the government relatively unchanged and who, in Lenin's view, failed to recognize the importance of uniting the working population behind the party's cause.\nSecond Party Congress.\nAt the 2nd Congress of the RSDLP, which was held in Brussels and then London during August 1903, Lenin and Julius Martov disagreed over the party membership rules. Lenin, who was supported by Georgy Plekhanov, wanted to limit membership to those who supported the party full-time and worked in complete obedience to the elected party leadership. Martov wanted to extend membership to anyone \"who recognises the Party Programme and supports it by material means and by regular personal assistance under the direction of one of the party's organisations.\" Lenin believed his plan would develop a core group of professional revolutionaries who would devote their full time and energy towards developing the party into an organization capable of leading a successful proletarian revolution against the Tsarist autocracy.\nThe base of active and experienced members would be the recruiting ground for this professional core. Sympathizers would be left outside and the party would be organised based on the concept of democratic centralism. Martov, until then a close friend of Lenin, agreed with him that the core of the party should consist of professional revolutionaries, but he argued that party membership should be open to sympathizers, revolutionary workers, and other fellow travellers. The two had disagreed on the issue as early as March\u2013May 1903, but it was not until the Congress that their differences became irreconcilable and split the party. At first, the disagreement appeared to be minor and inspired by personal conflicts. For example, Lenin's insistence on dropping less active editorial board members from \"Iskra\" or Martov's support for the Organizing Committee of the Congress which Lenin opposed. The differences grew and the split became irreparable.\nInternal unrest also arose over the political structure that was best suited for Soviet power. As discussed in \"What Is To Be Done?\", Lenin firmly believed that a rigid political structure was needed to effectively initiate a formal revolution. This idea was met with opposition from once close allies, including Martov, Plekhanov, Vera Zasulich, Leon Trotsky, and Pavel Axelrod. Plekhanov and Lenin's major dispute arose addressing the topic of nationalizing land or leaving it for private use. Lenin wanted to nationalize to aid in collectivization, whereas Plekhanov thought worker motivation would remain higher if individuals were able to maintain their own property. Those who opposed Lenin and wanted to continue on the socialist mode of production path towards complete socialism and disagreed with his strict party membership guidelines became known as \"softs\" while Lenin supporters became known as \"hards\".\nSome of the factionalism could be attributed to Lenin's steadfast belief in his own opinion and what was described by Plekhanov as Lenin's inability to \"bear opinions which were contrary to his own\" and loyalty to his own self-envisioned utopia. Lenin was seen even by fellow party members as being so narrow-minded and unable to accept criticism that he believed that anyone who did not follow him was his enemy. Trotsky, one of Lenin's fellow revolutionaries, compared Lenin in 1904 to the French revolutionary Maximilien Robespierre.\nEtymology of \"Bolshevik\" and \"Menshevik\".\nThe two factions of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) were originally known as \"hard\" (Lenin supporters) and \"soft\" (Martov supporters). In the 2nd Congress vote, Lenin's faction won votes on the majority of important issues, and soon came to be known as \"Bolsheviks\", from the Russian \"bolshinstvo\", 'majority'. Likewise, Martov's group came to be known as \"Mensheviks\", from \"menshinstvo\", 'minority'. However, Martov's supporters won the vote concerning the question of party membership, and neither Lenin nor Martov had a firm majority throughout the Congress as delegates left or switched sides. In the end, the Congress was evenly split between the two factions.\nStarting in 1907, English-language articles sometimes used the term \"Maximalist\" for \"Bolshevik\" and \"Minimalist\" for \"Menshevik\", which proved to be confusing as there was also a \"Maximalist\" faction within the Russian Socialist Revolutionary Party in 1904\u20131906 (which, after 1906, formed a separate Union of Socialists-Revolutionaries Maximalists) and then again after 1917.\nThe Bolsheviks ultimately became the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Bolsheviks, or \"Reds\", came to power in Russia during the October Revolution phase of the 1917 Russian Revolution, and founded the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR). With the Reds defeating the Whites and others during the Russian Civil War of 1917\u20131922, the RSFSR became the chief constituent of the Soviet Union (USSR) in December 1922.\nDemographics of the two factions.\nThe average party member was very young: in 1907, 22% of Bolsheviks were under 20 years of age; 37% were 20\u201324 years of age; and 16% were 25\u201329 years of age. By 1905, 62% of the members were industrial workers (3% of the population in 1897). Twenty-two percent of Bolsheviks were gentry (1.7% of the total population) and 38% were uprooted peasants; compared with 19% and 26% for the Mensheviks. In 1907, 78% of the Bolsheviks were Russian and 10% were Jewish; compared to 34% and 20% for the Mensheviks. Total Bolshevik membership was 8,400 in 1905, 13,000 in 1906, and 46,100 by 1907; compared to 8,400, 18,000 and 38,200 for the Mensheviks. By 1910, both factions together had fewer than 100,000 members.\nBeginning of the 1905 Revolution (1903\u201305).\nBetween 1903 and 1904, the two factions were in a state of flux, with many members changing sides. Plekhanov, the founder of Russian Marxism, who at first allied himself with Lenin and the Bolsheviks, had parted ways with them by 1904. Trotsky at first supported the Mensheviks, but left them in September 1904 over their insistence on an alliance with Russian liberals and their opposition to a reconciliation with Lenin and the Bolsheviks. He remained a self-described \"non-factional social democrat\" until August 1917, when he joined Lenin and the Bolsheviks, as their positions resembled his and he came to believe that Lenin was correct on the issue of the party.\nAll but one member of the RSDLP Central Committee were arrested in Moscow in early 1905. The remaining member, with the power of appointing a new committee, was won over by the Bolsheviks. The lines between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks hardened in April 1905 when the Bolsheviks held a Bolsheviks-only meeting in London, which they called the 3rd Party Congress. The Mensheviks organised a rival conference and the split was thus finalized.\nThe Bolsheviks played a relatively minor role in the 1905 Revolution and were a minority in the Saint Petersburg Soviet of Workers' Deputies led by Trotsky. However, the less significant Moscow Soviet was dominated by the Bolsheviks. These Soviets became the model for those formed in 1917.\nMensheviks (1906\u201307).\nAs the Russian Revolution of 1905 progressed, Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and smaller non-Russian social democratic parties operating within the Russian Empire attempted to reunify at the 4th Congress of the RSDLP held in April 1906 at Folkets hus, Norra Bantorget, in Stockholm. When the Mensheviks made an alliance with the Jewish Bund, the Bolsheviks found themselves in a minority.\nHowever, all factions retained their respective factional structure and the Bolsheviks formed the Bolshevik Centre, the \"de facto\" governing body of the Bolshevik faction within the RSDLP. At the 5th Congress held in London in May 1907, the Bolsheviks were in the majority, but the two factions continued functioning mostly independently of each other.\nSplit between Lenin and Bogdanov (1908\u201310).\nTensions had existed between Lenin and Alexander Bogdanov from as early as 1904. Lenin had fallen out with Nikolai Valentinov after Valentinov had introduced him to Ernst Mach's Empiriocriticism, a viewpoint that Bogdanov had been exploring and developing as Empiriomonism. Having worked as co-editor with Plekhanov, on \"Zarya\", Lenin had come to agree with the Valentinov's rejection of Bogdanov's Empiriomonism.\nWith the defeat of the revolution in mid-1907 and the adoption of a new, highly restrictive election law, the Bolsheviks began debating whether to boycott the new parliament known as the Third Duma. Lenin, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, and others argued for participating in the Duma while Bogdanov, Anatoly Lunacharsky, Mikhail Pokrovsky, and others argued that the social democratic faction in the Duma should be recalled. The latter became known as \"recallists\" (Russian: \"otzovists\"). A smaller group within the Bolshevik faction demanded that the RSDLP Central Committee should give its sometimes unruly Duma faction an ultimatum, demanding complete subordination to all party decisions. This group became known as \"ultimatists\" and was generally allied with the recallists.\nWith most Bolshevik leaders either supporting Bogdanov or undecided by mid-1908 when the differences became irreconcilable, Lenin concentrated on undermining Bogdanov's reputation as a philosopher. In 1909, he published a scathing book of criticism entitled \"Materialism and Empirio-criticism\" (1909), assaulting Bogdanov's position and accusing him of philosophical idealism. In June 1909, Bogdanov proposed the formation of Party Schools as Proletarian Universities at a Bolshevik mini-conference in Paris organised by the editorial board of the Bolshevik magazine \"Proletary\". However, this proposal was not adopted and Lenin tried to expel Bogdanov from the Bolshevik faction. Bogdanov was then involved with setting up Vpered, which ran the Capri Party School from August to December 1909.\nFinal attempt at party unity (1910).\nWith both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks weakened by splits within their ranks and by Tsarist repression, the two factions were tempted to try to reunite the party. In January 1910, Leninists, recallists, and various Menshevik factions held a meeting of the party's Central Committee in Paris. Kamenev and Zinoviev were dubious about the idea; but under pressure from conciliatory Bolsheviks like Victor Nogin, they were willing to give it a try.\nOne of the underlying reasons that prevented any reunification of the party was the Russian police. The police were able to infiltrate both parties' inner circles by sending in spies who then reported on the opposing party's intentions and hostilities. This allowed the tensions to remain high between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks and helped prevent their uniting.\nLenin was firmly opposed to any reunification but was outvoted within the Bolshevik leadership. The meeting reached a tentative agreement, and one of its provisions was to make Trotsky's Vienna-based \"Pravda\", a party-financed central organ. Kamenev, Trotsky's brother-in-law who was with the Bolsheviks, was added to the editorial board; but the unification attempts failed in August 1910 when Kamenev resigned from the board amid mutual recriminations.\nForming a separate party (1912).\nThe factions permanently broke relations in January 1912 after the Bolsheviks organised a Bolsheviks-only Prague Party Conference and formally expelled Mensheviks and recallists from the party. As a result, they ceased to be a faction in the RSDLP and instead declared themselves an independent party, called Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) \u2013 or RSDLP(b). Unofficially, the party has been referred to as the Bolshevik Party. Throughout the 20th century, the party adopted a number of different names. In 1918, RSDLP(b) became All-Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and remained so until 1925. From 1925 to 1952, the name was All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and from 1952 to 1991, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.\nAs the party split became permanent, further divisions became evident. One of the most notable differences was how each faction decided to fund its revolution. The Mensheviks decided to fund their revolution through membership dues while Lenin often resorted to more drastic measures since he required a higher budget. One of the common methods the Bolsheviks used was committing bank robberies, one of which, in 1907, resulted in the party getting over 250,000 roubles, which is the equivalent of about $125,000. Bolsheviks were in constant need of money because Lenin practised his beliefs, expressed in his writings, that revolutions must be led by individuals who devote their entire lives to the cause. As compensation, he rewarded them with salaries for their sacrifice and dedication. This measure was taken to help ensure that the revolutionaries stayed focused on their duties and motivated them to perform their jobs. Lenin also used the party money to print and copy pamphlets which were distributed in cities and at political rallies in an attempt to expand their operations. Both factions received funds through donations from wealthy supporters.\nFurther differences in party agendas became evident as the beginning of World War I loomed near. Joseph Stalin was especially eager for the start of the war, hoping that it would turn into a war between classes or essentially a Russian Civil War. This desire for war was fuelled by Lenin's vision that the workers and peasants would resist joining the war effort and therefore be more compelled to join the socialist movement. Through the increase in support, Russia would then be forced to withdraw from the Allied powers in order to resolve her internal conflict. Unfortunately for the Bolsheviks, Lenin's assumptions were incorrect. Despite his and the party's attempts to push for a civil war through involvement in two conferences in 1915 and 1916 in Switzerland, the Bolsheviks were in the minority in calling for a ceasefire by the Imperial Russian Army in World War I.\nAlthough the Bolshevik leadership had decided to form a separate party, convincing pro-Bolshevik workers within Russia to follow suit proved difficult. When the first meeting of the Fourth Duma was convened in late 1912, only one out of six Bolshevik deputies, Matvei Muranov (another one, Roman Malinovsky, was later exposed as an Okhrana agent), voted on 15 December 1912 to break from the Menshevik faction within the Duma. The Bolshevik leadership eventually prevailed, and the Bolsheviks formed their own Duma faction in September 1913.\nOne final difference between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks was how ferocious and tenacious the Bolshevik party was in order to achieve its goals, although Lenin was open minded to retreating from political ideals if he saw the guarantee of long-term gains benefiting the party. This practice was seen in the party's trying to recruit peasants and uneducated workers by promising them how glorious life would be after the revolution and granting them temporary concessions.\nBolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky, Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky considered that Lenin's influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky's, not to Lenin's plan.\nIn 1918, the party renamed itself the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) at Lenin's suggestion. In 1925, this was changed to All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks). At the 19th Party Congress in 1952 the Party was renamed the Communist Party of the Soviet Union at Stalin's suggestion.\nDerogatory usage of \"Bolshevik\".\nBolo was a derogatory expression for Bolsheviks used by British service personnel in the North Russian Expeditionary Force which intervened against the Red Army during the Russian Civil War. Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels, and other Nazi leaders used it in reference to the worldwide political movement coordinated by the Comintern.\nDuring the Cold War in the United Kingdom, trade union leaders and other leftists were sometimes derisively described as Bolshies. The usage is roughly equivalent to the term \"commie\", \"Red\", or \"pinko\" in the United States during the same period. The term \"Bolshie\" later became a slang term for anyone who was rebellious, aggressive, or truculent.\nExternal links.\n by Bertrand Russell, November 1920."}
{"id": "4928", "revid": "47865387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4928", "title": "Battle of \u015awiecino", "text": "The Battle of \u015awiecino (named for the village of \u015awiecino, near \u017barnowiec Lake, northern Poland) also called the Battle of \u017barnowiec or in German Die Schlacht bei Schwetz, took place on September 17, 1462, during the Thirteen Years' War. The Polish forces, commanded by Piotr Dunin and consisting of some 2,000 mercenaries and Poles, decisively defeated the 2,700-man army of the Teutonic Knights, commanded by Fritz Raweneck and Commander of the Order Kaspar Nostitz (\"Nostyc\"). Auxiliary forces sent by Duke Eric II of Pomerania, temporary ally of the Teutonic Knights, did not enter the battle.\nPolish forces.\nThe Polish forces consisted mostly of the mercenaries hired by the Polish king, Casimir IV the Jagiellon and the city of Danzig (Gda\u0144sk). This army included 1,000 cavalry, of which 112 were heavy cavalry, and another 1,000 of infantry. 1,000 cavalry and 400 infantry were mercenaries hired by the Polish king, while the rest were units from Danzig (Gda\u0144sk).\nTeutonic forces.\nMost of the Teutonic army, under the command of Fritz Raweneck and Kaspar Nostitz, were troops gathered from the nearby castles Mewe (Gniew), Stargard (Starogard Gda\u0144ski), Nowe, Skarszewy, and Stara Kiszewa. This army totalled 1,000 cavalry and 400 infantry. Raweneck also had the supply chain (tabors), cannons, and up to 1,300 auxiliary infantry of Pomeranian peasants, used mainly for fortification works.\nBattle.\nThe battle started in the evening. Adopting a relatively new tactic, Polish units built a fortified camp on the Hussite model consisting of wagons linked by a chain surrounded by a deep ditch (tabor). The units of Raveneck and his subordinate, Kaspar Nostyc (commander from Conitz (Chojnice)) also created a tabor. Piotr Dunin decided not to wait for the enemy and attacked first, setting infantry with crossbows on the left, defended by cavalry between the tabor and the coast of the nearby lake of Rogo\u017anica. Raveneck placed cavalry in front of his tabor, and infantry behind it, without any strategic plan. The first phase of the battle was started by a charge of Polish heavy cavalry under Pawe\u0142 Jasie\u0144ski. Fierce fighting continued for three hours and ended without a clear winner. After a short pause at midday, Teutonic units were able to push the Poles back; however, they found themselves under very heavy fire from crossbows of the Polish infantry, which caused huge losses and a withdrawal. During this fight Raveneck was wounded. He stopped his soldiers and tried to attack again, but this charge ended with a total defeatRaveneck died and the rest of the cavalry surrendered or escaped. The Teutonic infantry tried to defend themselves at the tabor but its resistance was broken by a quick attack of Polish cavalry.\nAt the end of the battle, reinforcements of Eric II of Pomerania appeared, however, seeing the defeat of the Teutonic Knights, the Pomeranian prince did not attack, while the Poles attacked, forcing his troops to flee.\nCasualties.\nThe Teutonic Order's army lost around 1,000 soldiers, including some 300 cavalrymen. Fifty soldiers were captured. The Teutonic commander was also killed in battle and was buried in the \u017barnowiec chapter church.\nThe Poles lost just 100 soldiers, although 150 later died from their wounds. Among the dead on the Polish side was Maciej Hagen from Gda\u0144sk. Piotr Dunin was wounded twice.\nAftermath.\nThe direct result of the battle of \u015awiecino was that the city of Danzig and Pomerania were freed from the danger of an attack by the Teutonic Order. As a result, the royal and municipal armed forces could be used elsewhere in the war, mainly to protect the Vistula waterway and to capture the Teutonic held strongholds. This way that Teutonic forces in Prussia on the right bank of Vistula were cut off from supplies from Western Europe.\nThe psychological significance of the battle was that this was the first open field battle won by the royal forces, so it increased the morale of the Polish forces and lowered the morale of the Teutonic Knights. Many military historians say that the battle of \u015awiecino was the turning point of the Thirteen Years' War, leading to the final Polish victory in 1466."}
{"id": "4930", "revid": "28832845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4930", "title": "Barney Bubbles", "text": "Barney Bubbles (born Colin Fulcher; 30 July 1942 \u2013 14 November 1983) was an English graphic artist whose work encompassed graphic design and music video direction. Bubbles, who also sketched and painted privately, is best known for his distinctive contribution to the design practices associated with the British independent music scene of the 1970s and 1980s. His record sleeves, laden with symbols and riddles, were his most recognisable output.\nEarly life.\nFulcher was born in Tranmere Road, Whitton, Middlesex (now Greater London), in July 1942. He attended Isleworth Grammar School. In 1958 he embarked on a retail display course for a National Diploma in Design (NDD) at the art school of Twickenham College of Technology. During his five years at the college Fulcher received a multi-disciplinary education that included training in cardboard design, display and packaging, skills that would be utilised later in his record sleeve work.\nCareer.\nMichael Tucker + Associates.\nAfter leaving college in 1963, Fulcher worked as an assistant at the design company Michael Tucker + Associates in London. Its clients included Pirelli. In a rare interview in November 1981 in \"The Face\", Bubbles described Tucker's discipline as \"very Swiss; very hard; unjustified, very grey; and he taught me \"everything\" about typography.\" Tucker's studio produced the posters for Hugh Hudson's Pirelli-sponsored film \"The Tortoise &amp; The Hare\" (1967), for which Fulcher designed the poster lettering on a freelance basis.\nThe Conran Group.\nIn May 1965, Fulcher was recruited by The Conran Group as senior graphic designer alongside Stafford Cliff, Virginia Clive-Smith and John Muggeridge. He produced a variety of commercial commissions for Conran, including the Norman-style archer logo for Strongbow cider and items for Conran's new homewares chain Habitat. Fulcher also established an association with Justin de Blank, a director at Conran, which blossomed when de Blank left to launch his own upmarket provisions company and restaurant business in 1968.\nA1 Good Guyz and other early activities.\nBetween 1965 and 1966, Fulcher organised happenings, parties and other events under the name \"A1 Good Guyz\" with two graduates of Twickenham Art College, David Wills and Roy Burge.\nIn 1967, Fulcher became known as Barney Bubbles, although he did not change his name by deed poll for several more years. The name came about when Fulcher was operating a light show that created a bubble effect by mixing oils and water on projection slides. These lightshows were for groups including the Gun and Quintessence at underground venues including the Roundhouse, Jim Haynes's Drury Lane Arts Lab, the Electric Cinema and Middle Earth.\nWith Wills, Bubbles undertook freelance design commissions, including a redesign of \"Motor Racing\" magazine and a recipe book for the English Egg Marketing Board. With a team of contributors Bubbles and Wills art-directed \"Oz\" magazine issue 12, dubbed \"The Tax Dodge Special\" and published in May 1968.\nTeenburger Designs.\nEarly in 1969, Bubbles took the lease on a three-storey building at 307 Portobello Road in Notting Hill Gate, West London. He converted the ground-floor space into a graphic art studio, which he named Teenburger Designs. With a business association established with two entrepreneurs, Edward Molton and Stephen Warwick, and with John Muggeridge from Conran serving briefly as an assistant, he set about working primarily for the music industry. His first record sleeve design was for Quintessence's LP \"In Blissful Company\" (1969). The gatefold sleeve design uses illustrations by Gopala on the front and back, and contains a monochrome glued-in booklet inside.\nTeenburger also provided record sleeve designs for the bands Brinsley Schwarz and Red Dirt, as well as Vertigo artists such as Cressida, Gracious! and Dr Z, whose LP \"Three Parts to My Soul\" is particularly noted for its complex and colourful fold-out sleeve.\nFollowing the closure of Teenburger in 1970 as a result of the disappearance of Molton and Warwick, Bubbles worked as the designer of the underground newspaper \"Friends\" (later renamed \"Frendz\").\nBubbles' son, Aten Skinner, who is also an artists and graphic designer, was born in 1972.\nHawkwind (and other 1970s rock).\nWhile he was working at \"Friends\", Bubbles formed an association with Hawkwind and became responsible for a run of their album sleeves, including \"In Search of Space\", \"Doremi Fasol Latido\" and \"Space Ritual\". Bubbles engaged in many aspects of the group's visual identity, titling releases and designing posters, adverts, stage decoration and performance plans, some of which were adorned with mystical and mock-Teutonic insignia. In 1972 Bubbles produced the triple LP package \"Glastonbury Fayre\". This comprised a six-panel fold-out card sleeve, two poster inserts, a booklet and a cut-out and build miniature pyramid, housed in a clear vinyl bag (with two sleeve variations and three label variations).\nFrom 1973 onwards, Bubbles increasingly avoided credits for his artwork, typically working anonymously or occasionally adopting alternative pseudonyms. During this period he designed album sleeves and additional material for such acts as the Sutherland Brothers, Kevin Coyne, Edgar Broughton Band, Chilli Willi and the Red Hot Peppers, Quiver, the Kursaal Flyers and Michael Moorcock and the Deep Fix.\nIn 1976, his design relationship with Hawkwind came to an end. It was rekindled once, in 1978, for the Hawklords spin-off, but otherwise continued only with design commissions for projects involving the band's saxophonist Nik Turner.\nStiff, Radar and F Beat (and other punk and new wave).\nBarney Bubbles joined Stiff Records as designer and art director early in 1977. With the label's co-founder Jake Riviera he generated a body of creative work that helped to secure Stiff's reputation as an exciting new independent label. Bubbles created sleeves for bands including the Damned, Elvis Costello, Ian Dury and Wreckless Eric. Often these were accompanied by quirky logos such as the face logo for Blockhead, advertisements and promotional items. The marketing of Elvis Costello's \"My Aim Is True\" included advertisements in three UK music papers from which a poster of Costello could be constructed, and the first 1,000 pressings contained an insert headed \"Help Us Hype Elvis\", which, if completed and returned to Stiff, ensured that a friend would receive a free copy.\nWhen Riviera left Stiff in late 1977, Bubbles joined him at his new label Radar Records and later at Riviera's F-Beat Records. At these labels, Bubbles created more designs for Elvis Costello, as well as other artists such as Nick Lowe, Carlene Carter, Blanket of Secrecy and Clive Langer &amp; The Boxes.\nBubbles also maintained his freelance output, producing designs for Peter Jenner (Ian Dury and Billy Bragg's manager), and others. He created a prodigious output by working for such bands, musicians and performers as Peter Hammill, Vivian Stanshall, Generation X, Big Star, Johnny Moped, Whirlwind, Billy Bragg, Clover, the Sinceros, Roger Chapman, Phillip Goodhand-Tait, Dr. Feelgood, Inner City Unit and the Psychedelic Furs. As a result, his work appeared on releases by labels such as Aura, Chiswick, Utility, Go! Discs, Epic, Charisma, CBS, Line Records, United Artists and Riddle Records. His signature style emerged as one that was colourful, playful, loaded with geometry, art-history and music-history references, jokes, cryptograms and symbols. The overriding appetite was for going against the grain of accepted design standards. His work is simultaneously complex in meaning and simple in its delivery. Examples include:\nMusic promo videos.\nBarney Bubbles directed several videos, including the Specials' \"Ghost Town\", Squeeze's \"Is That Love\" and \"Tempted\", Elvis Costello's \"Clubland\" and \"New Lace Sleeves\", and Fun Boy Three's \"The Lunatics (Have Taken Over the Asylum)\". Two promos for the punk act Johnny Moped, \"Incendiary Device\" and \"Darling Let's Have Another Baby\", were never commercially released to broadcasters.\n\"A good video can sell a record which might not do so well,\" Bubbles told \"Smash Hits\" magazine in 1982. \"The record companies know that. I think Chrysalis would agree that The Specials' 'Ghost Town' video helped sales a good deal. This year I intend to make videos which are really inexpensive but really inventive. It can be done, you know.\"\n\"NME\".\nIn 1979, riding on the reputation of his work for Stiff, Bubbles was engaged by the UK music newspaper \"New Musical Express\" to spearhead an overhaul of its decades-old brand. Bubbles' redesign incorporated elements of Pop art and 1920s Soviet poster art into a \"sleek, forward-looking\" graphic format. His restyling included a fresh logo with \"clean, stencilled, military-style lettering\", which heralded the title's change from \"New Musical Express\" to \"NME\".\nOther work.\nIn 1979, Derek Boshier curated an exhibition entitled Lives at the Hayward Gallery, London, and he commissioned Bubbles to design the catalogue and poster. Together with the photographer Chris Gabrin, Bubbles also exhibited a video and mixed-media installation in the exhibition.\nIn the early 1980s, Bubbles created furniture designs, some of which were featured in \"The Face\", November 1981.\nIn 1982, Bubbles conceived the album \"Ersatz\", working primarily with Nik Turner and other musicians from Inner City Unit. The LP was released under the name of The Imperial Pompadours.\nBubbles painted privately, increasingly in the early 1980s.\nDeath.\nFulcher, who suffered from manic depression, committed suicide in London on 14 November 1983 by gassing himself, trapping the fumes in a plastic bag he placed over his head, at the age of 41. He had considerable personal and financial worries, and had fallen out of fashion in the early 1980s. His designs for record sleeves were being rejected by musicians and record companies, and he was being investigated by the Inland Revenue for unpaid taxes dating back several years. He was also displaying increasingly erratic behaviour, alarming close friends by lacerating his face with razor blades and making threats to kill himself.\nMonograph/biography.\n\"Reasons To Be Cheerful: The Life &amp; Work of Barney Bubbles\", a hybrid monograph-biography by Paul Gorman containing 400-plus images of artworks by Bubbles and contributions from British designers Peter Saville and Malcolm Garrett along with Billy Bragg was published in November 2008 by independent British imprint Adelita. The book was welcomed as a long-overdue recognition of Bubbles' achievements and selected by British music magazine \"Mojo\" as its Book Of The Year.\nA revised and updated second edition of \"Reasons To Be Cheerful\", with an additional contribution by US graphic artist Art Chantry, was published by Adelita in October 2010.\nThe third edition of the monograph, retitled \"The Wild World of Barney Bubbles: Graphic Design and the Art of Music\", with a new cover and updated sections including previously unpublished designs and an essay by American graphic designer Clarita Hinojosa, was published by Thames &amp; Hudson in June 2022 in the UK and in July 2022 in the US.\nA companion limited edition box-set, \"A Box of Bubbles\", containing the monograph with a different jacket and reproductions of the designer's artworks for Ian Dury, Hawkwind and the Glastonbury Fayre triple-LP package, was published by specialist imprint Volume in September 2022.\nInfluence and legacy.\nBarney Bubbles is widely acknowledged as a pioneer and exemplar of design for music. 'To say that Bubbles' work was influential would be an understatement. He took the world by storm with his momentous contribution,' wrote Creative Boom's Aya Angelos in 2022. According to Peter Saville, 'The work of Barney Bubbles expresses post-modern principles: that there is the past, the present and the possible; that culture and the history of culture are a fluid palette of semiotic expression and everything is available to articulate a point of view.'\nThe first exhibition dedicated to Bubbles' work was held at London gallery Artomatic in 2001, curated by the art-design team Rebecca And Mike.\nPaul Gorman and Caz Facey curated an exhibition about Bubbles' practice entitled \"Process: The Working Practices of Barney Bubbles\" at London gallery Chelsea Space in October 2010.\nIn January 2012, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a documentary, \"In Search of Barney Bubbles\", written, produced and presented by Mark Hodkinson.\nIn summer 2012 Gorman curated The Past The Present &amp; The Possible, which presented 250 examples of Bubbles' finished artworks as part of the exhibition White Noise at the 23rd International Poster &amp; Graphic Design Festival in Chaumont, France.\nUnder the heading G\u00e9n\u00e9ration Bubbles!, the cover and a 10-page feature in the July 2012 issue of French design magazine \"\u00c9tapes\" were dedicated to the exhibition and Bubbles' influence over contemporary design practice.\nIn 2017 Gorman curated \"Optics &amp; Semantics\", an exhibition which included furniture designed by Bubbles, at central London's Rob Tufnell Gallery as well as a show featuring finished artworks including record sleeves, posters and ephemera at casualwear brand Fred Perry's outlet in Covent Garden.\nIn 2020 an archive of Bubbles work was acquired for public collections under the UK's cultural gifts and acceptance in lieu (AiL) schemes and allocated to Liverpool John Moores University.\nGeneral and group exhibitions.\nDesigns by Barney Bubbles have been prominently featured in many exhibitions, including \"Destroy: Punk Graphic Design in Britain\", held at London's Southbank Centre in 1998, \"Communicate: British Independent Graphic Design since the Sixties\", staged at the Barbican Centre in 2004, \"Too Fast To Live, Too Young To Die: Punk Graphics 1976 - 1986\" at Cranbrook Art Museum in Michigan in 2017 and the Museum of Art &amp; Design in New York in 2019 and \"Torn Apart: Punk New Wave and the Graphic Aftermath 1976-86\" at the Pacific Design Center in Los Angeles in 2022.\nBubbles works are in the permanent collections of The Museum of Modern Art in New York and London's Victoria and Albert Museum, which gave prominence to a selection in its 2011 show \"Postmodernism: Style &amp; Subversion 1970\u20131990\" and the following year's \"British Design 1948\u20132012\".\nBarney Bubbles Estate.\nRepresenting family members, the Barney Bubbles Estate controls the intellectual copyrights in hundreds of original designs by Bubbles and has worked with others to ensure that the designer's legacy is protected.\nProjects include a capsule collection of shirts bearing Bubbles designs with Fred Perry in 2017, Elvis Costello and Universal Music's 2020 box-set reissue of Costello's 1979 album \"Armed Forces\", the 12-inch vinyl rerelease of \"Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick\" for Record Store Day 2021 with the Ian Dury Estate and music group BMG and a collaboration of four T-shirts with New York streetwear label Noah in 2022.\nExamples of rare and hitherto unseen work from Bubbles' vast archive is posted regularly on the Estate's Instagram account, and the Estate also has an online shop marketing original designs on apparel and other media."}
{"id": "4932", "revid": "408908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4932", "title": "Basal body temperature method", "text": ""}
{"id": "4933", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4933", "title": "Blackridge, Pennsylvania", "text": "Blackridge is a community in eastern Allegheny County and is a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States. This community consists of approximately 650 private homes built from 1920 to 1949. Blackridge Estates was and remains one of the area's largest residential communities.\nBlackridge lies in the municipalities of Wilkinsburg, Penn Hills and Churchill. It maintains a Civic Association and a private park and swim club for residents.\nBlackridge is defined as the territory bounded on the West by Graham Boulevard, on the South by William Penn Highway, on the East by Beulah Road and the Churchill Country Club property, from the Churchill Country Club property along Orlando Place to Atkinson Place, Atkinson Place to Pine Way, and Pine Way to Graham Boulevard, and includes the properties fronting on both sides of said portions of Country Club Drive, Orlando Place, Atkinson Place and Pine Way.\nThe Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation Historic Landmark \"1939 House\" (\"Good Housekeeping\" house) is located in Blackridge at 2363 Sebring Place in the Wilkinsburg section of the neighborhood."}
{"id": "4934", "revid": "1249837184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4934", "title": "Basic English", "text": "Basic English (a backronym for British American Scientific International and Commercial English) is a controlled language based on standard English, but with a greatly simplified vocabulary and grammar. It was created by the linguist and philosopher Charles Kay Ogden as an international auxiliary language, and as an aid for teaching English as a second language. It was presented in Ogden's 1930 book \"Basic English: A General Introduction with Rules and Grammar\". \nThe first work on Basic English was written by two Englishmen, Ivor Richards of Harvard University and Charles Kay Ogden of the University of Cambridge in England. The design of Basic English drew heavily on the semiotic theory put forward by Ogden and Richards in their 1923 book \"The Meaning of Meaning\".\nOgden's Basic, and the concept of a simplified English, gained its greatest publicity just after the Allied victory in World War II as a means for world peace. He was convinced that the world needed to gradually eradicate minority languages and use as much as possible only one: English, in either a simple or complete form. \nAlthough Basic English was not built into a program, similar simplifications have been devised for various international uses. Richards promoted its use in schools in China. It has influenced the creation of Voice of America's Learning English for news broadcasting, and Simplified Technical English, another English-based controlled language designed to write technical manuals.\nWhat survives of Ogden's Basic English is the basic 850-word list used as the beginner's vocabulary of the English language taught worldwide, especially in Asia.\nDesign principles.\nOgden tried to simplify English while keeping it normal for native speakers, by specifying grammar restrictions and a controlled small vocabulary which makes an extensive use of paraphrasing. Most notably, Ogden allowed only 18 verbs, which he called \"operators\". His \"General Introduction\" says, \"There are no 'verbs' in Basic English\", with the underlying assumption that, as noun use in English is very straightforward but verb use/conjugation is not, the elimination of verbs would be a welcome simplification.\nWord lists.\nOgden's word lists include only word roots, which in practice are extended with the defined set of affixes and the full set of forms allowed for any available word (noun, pronoun, or the limited set of verbs). The 850 core words of Basic English are found in Wiktionary's Basic English word list. This core is theoretically enough for everyday life. However, Ogden prescribed that any student should learn an additional 150-word list for everyday work in some particular field, by adding a list of 100 words particularly useful in a general field (e.g., science, verse, business), along with a 50-word list from a more specialised subset of that general field, to make a basic 1000-word vocabulary for everyday work and life.\nMoreover, Ogden assumed that any student should already be familiar with (and thus may only review) a core subset of around 200 \"international\" words. Therefore, a first-level student should graduate with a core vocabulary of around 1200 words. A realistic general core vocabulary could contain around 2000 words (the core 850 words, plus 200 international words, and 1000 words for the general fields of trade, economics, and science). It is enough for a \"standard\" English level. This 2000 word vocabulary represents \"what any learner should know\". At this level students could start to move on their own.\nOgden's and Voice of America's serve as dictionaries for the Simple English Wikipedia.\nRules.\nBasic English includes a simple grammar for modifying or combining its 850 words to talk about additional meanings (morphological derivation or inflection). The grammar is based on English, but simplified.\nCriticism.\nLike all international auxiliary languages (or IALs), Basic English may be criticised as inevitably based on personal preferences, and is thus, paradoxically, inherently divisive. Moreover, like all natural-language-based IALs, Basic is subject to criticism as unfairly biased towards the native speaker community.\nAs a teaching aid for English as a second language, Basic English has been criticised for the choice of the core vocabulary and for its grammatical constraints.\nIn 1944, readability expert Rudolf Flesch published an article in \"Harper's Magazine\", \"How Basic is Basic English?\" in which he said, \"It's not basic, and it's not English.\" The essence of his complaint is that the vocabulary is too restricted, and, as a result, the text ends up being awkward and more difficult than necessary. He also argues that the words in the Basic vocabulary were arbitrarily selected, and notes that there had been no empirical studies showing that it made language simpler.\nIn his 1948 paper \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", Claude Shannon contrasted the limited vocabulary of Basic English with James Joyce's \"Finnegans Wake\", a work noted for a wide vocabulary. Shannon notes that the lack of vocabulary in Basic English leads to a very high level of redundancy, whereas Joyce's large vocabulary \"is alleged to achieve a compression of semantic content\".\nLiterary references.\nIn the novel \"The Shape of Things to Come\", published in 1933, H. G. Wells depicted Basic English as the lingua franca of a new elite that after a prolonged struggle succeeds in uniting the world and establishing a totalitarian world government. In the future world of Wells' vision, virtually all members of humanity know this language.\nFrom 1942 to 1944 George Orwell was a proponent of Basic English, but in 1945 he became critical of universal languages. Basic English later inspired his use of Newspeak in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\nEvelyn Waugh criticized his own 1945 novel \"Brideshead Revisited\", which he had previously called his magnum opus, in the preface of the 1959 reprint: \"It [World War II] was a bleak period of present privation and threatening disaster\u2014the period of soya beans and Basic English\u2014and in consequence the book is infused with a kind of gluttony, for food and wine, for the splendours of the recent past, and for rhetorical and ornamental language that now, with a full stomach, I find distasteful.\"\nIn his story \"Gulf\", science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein used a constructed language called Speedtalk, in which every Basic English word is replaced with a single phoneme, as an appropriate means of communication for a race of genius supermen.\nSamples.\nThe Lord's Prayer has been often used for an impressionistic language comparison:"}
{"id": "4937", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4937", "title": "BND", "text": "BND may refer to:"}
{"id": "4938", "revid": "15903185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4938", "title": "Branch prediction", "text": ""}
{"id": "4939", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4939", "title": "Betting", "text": ""}
{"id": "4940", "revid": "1271295985", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4940", "title": "Brass instrument", "text": "A brass instrument is a musical instrument that produces sound by sympathetic vibration of air in a tubular resonator in sympathy with the vibration of the player's lips. The term labrosone, from Latin elements meaning \"lip\" and \"sound\", is also used for the group, since instruments employing this \"lip reed\" method of sound production can be made from other materials like wood or animal horn, particularly early or traditional instruments such as the cornett, alphorn or shofar.\nThere are several factors involved in producing different pitches on a brass instrument. Slides, valves, crooks (though they are rarely used today), or keys are used to change vibratory length of tubing, thus changing the available harmonic series, while the player's embouchure, lip tension and air flow serve to select the specific harmonic produced from the available series.\nThe view of most scholars (see organology) is that the term \"brass instrument\" should be defined by the way the sound is made, as above, and not by whether the instrument is actually made of brass. Thus one finds brass instruments made of wood, like the alphorn, the cornett, the serpent and the didgeridoo, while some woodwind instruments are made of brass, like the saxophone.\nFamilies.\nModern brass instruments generally come in one of two families:\nThere are two other families that have, in general, become functionally obsolete for practical purposes. Instruments of both types, however, are sometimes used for period-instrument performances of Baroque or Classical pieces. In more modern compositions, they are occasionally used for their intonation or tone color.\nBore taper and diameter.\nBrass instruments may also be characterised by two generalizations about geometry of the bore, that is, the tubing between the mouthpiece and the flaring of the tubing into the bell. Those two generalizations are with regard to\nCylindrical vs. conical bore.\nWhile all modern valved and slide brass instruments consist in part of conical and in part of cylindrical tubing, they are divided as follows:\nWhole-tube vs. half-tube.\nThe resonances of a brass instrument resemble a harmonic series, with the exception of the lowest resonance, which is significantly lower than the fundamental frequency of the series that the other resonances are overtones of. Depending on the instrument and the skill of the player, the missing fundamental of the series can still be played as a pedal tone, which relies mainly on vibration at the overtone frequencies to produce the fundamental pitch. The bore diameter in relation to length determines whether the fundamental tone or the first overtone is the lowest partial practically available to the player in terms of playability and musicality, dividing brass instruments into whole-tube and half-tube instruments. These terms stem from a comparison to organ pipes, which produce the same pitch as the fundamental pedal tone of a brass instrument of equal length.\nOther brass instruments.\nThe instruments in this list fall for various reasons outside the scope of much of the discussion above regarding families of brass instruments.\nValves.\nValves are used to change the length of tubing of a brass instrument allowing the player to reach the notes of various harmonic series. Each valve pressed diverts the air stream through additional tubing, individually or in conjunction with other valves. This lengthens the vibrating air column thus lowering the fundamental tone and associated harmonic series produced by the instrument. Designs exist, although rare, in which this behaviour is reversed, i.e., pressing a valve removes a length of tubing rather than adding one. One modern example of such an ascending valve is the Yamaha YSL-350C trombone, in which the extra valve tubing is normally engaged to pitch the instrument in B, and pressing the thumb lever removes a whole step to pitch the instrument in C. Valves require regular lubrication.\nA core standard valve layout based on the action of three valves had become almost universal by (at latest) 1864 as witnessed by Arban's method published in that year. The effect of a particular combination of valves may be seen in the table below. This table is correct for the core three-valve layout on almost any modern valved brass instrument. The most common four-valve layout is a superset of the well-established three-valve layout and is noted in the table, despite the exposition of four-valve and also five-valve systems (the latter used on the tuba) being incomplete in this article.\nTuning.\nSince valves \"lower\" the pitch, a valve that makes a pitch too low (flat) creates an interval wider than desired, while a valve that plays sharp creates an interval narrower than desired. Intonation deficiencies of brass instruments that are independent of the tuning or temperament system are inherent in the physics of the most popular valve design, which uses a small number of valves in combination to avoid redundant and heavy lengths of tubing (this is entirely separate from the slight deficiencies between Western music's dominant equal (even) temperament system and the just (not equal) temperament of the harmonic series itself). Since each lengthening of the tubing has an inversely proportional effect on pitch (Pitch of brass instruments), while pitch perception is logarithmic, there is no way for a simple, uncompensated addition of length to be correct in every combination when compared with the pitches of the open tubing and the other valves.\nAbsolute tube length.\nFor example, given a length of tubing equaling 100 units of length when open, one may obtain the following tuning discrepancies:\nPlaying notes using valves (notably 1st + 3rd and 1st + 2nd + 3rd) requires compensation to adjust the tuning appropriately, either by the player's lip-and-breath control, via mechanical assistance of some sort, or, in the case of horns, by the position of the stopping hand in the bell. 'T' stands for trigger on a trombone.\nRelative tube length.\nTraditionally the valves lower the pitch of the instrument by adding extra lengths of tubing based on a just tuning:\nCombining the valves and the harmonics of the instrument leads to the following ratios and comparisons to 12-tone equal tuning and to a common five-limit tuning in C:\nTuning compensation.\nThe additional tubing for each valve usually features a short tuning slide of its own for fine adjustment of the valve's tuning, except when it is too short to make this practicable. For the first and third valves this is often designed to be adjusted as the instrument is played, to account for the deficiencies in the valve system.\nIn most trumpets and cornets, the compensation must be provided by extending the third valve slide with the third or fourth finger, and the first valve slide with the left hand thumb (see Trigger or throw below). This is used to lower the pitch of the 1\u20133 and 1\u20132\u20133 valve combinations. On the trumpet and cornet, these valve combinations correspond to low D, low C, low G, and low F, so chromatically, to stay in tune, one must use this method.\nIn instruments with a fourth valve, such as tubas, euphoniums, piccolo trumpets, etc. that valve lowers the pitch by a perfect fourth; this is used to compensate for the sharpness of the valve combinations 1\u20133 and 1\u20132\u20133 (4 replaces 1\u20133, 2\u20134 replaces 1\u20132\u20133). All three normal valves may be used in addition to the fourth to increase the instrument's range downwards by a perfect fourth, although with increasingly severe intonation problems.\nWhen four-valved models without any kind of compensation play in the corresponding register, the sharpness becomes so severe that players must finger the note a half-step below the one they are trying to play. This eliminates the note a half-step above their open fundamental.\nManufacturers of low brass instruments may choose one or a combination of four basic approaches to compensate for the tuning difficulties, whose respective merits are subject to debate:\nCompensation system.\nIn the Compensation system, each of the first two (or three) valves has an additional set of tubing extending from the back of the valve. When the third (or fourth) valve is depressed in combination with another one, the air is routed through both the usual set of tubing plus the extra one, so that the pitch is lowered by an appropriate amount. This allows compensating instruments to play with accurate intonation in the octave below their open second partial, which is critical for tubas and euphoniums in much of their repertoire.\nThe compensating system was applied to horns to serve a different purpose. It was used to allow a double horn in F and B to ease playing difficulties in the high register. In contrast to the system in use in tubas and euphoniums, the default 'side' of the horn is the longer F horn, with secondary lengths of tubing coming into play when the first, second or third valves are pressed; pressing the thumb valve takes these secondary valve slides and the extra length of main tubing out of play to produce a shorter B horn. A later \"full double\" design has completely separate valve section tubing for the two sides, and is considered superior, although rather heavier in weight.\nAdditional valves.\nInitially, compensated instruments tended to sound stuffy and blow less freely due to the air being doubled back through the main valves. In early designs, this led to sharp bends in the tubing and other obstructions of the air-flow. Some manufacturers therefore preferred adding more 'straight' valves instead, which for example could be pitched a little lower than the 2nd and 1st valves and were intended to be used instead of these in the respective valve combinations. While no longer featured in euphoniums for decades, many professional tubas are still built like this, with five valves being common on CC- and BB-tubas and five or six valves on F-tubas.\nCompensating double horns can also suffer from the stuffiness resulting from the air being passed through the valve section twice, but as this really only affects the longer F side, a compensating double can be very useful for a 1st or 3rd horn player, who uses the F side less.\nAdditional sets of slides on each valve.\nAnother approach was the addition of two sets of slides for different parts of the range. Some euphoniums and tubas were built like this, but today, this approach has become highly exotic for all instruments except horns, where it is the norm, usually in a double, sometimes even triple configuration.\nTrigger or throw.\nSome valved brass instruments provide triggers or throws that manually lengthen (or, less commonly, shorten) the main tuning slide, a valve slide, or the main tubing. These mechanisms alter the pitch of notes that are naturally sharp in a specific register of the instrument, or shift the instrument to another playing range. Triggers and throws permit speedy adjustment while playing.\nTrigger is used in two senses:\nA throw is a simple metal grip for the player's finger or thumb, attached to a valve slide. The general term \"throw\" can describe a u-hook, a saddle (u-shaped grips), or a ring (ring-shape grip) in which a player's finger or thumb rests. A player extends a finger or thumb to lengthen a slide, and retracts the finger to return the slide to its original position.\nExamples of instruments that use triggers or throws.\nTrumpet or cornet.\nTriggers or throws are sometimes found on the first valve slide. They are operated by the player's thumb and are used to adjust a large range of notes using the first valve, most notably the player's written top line F, the A above directly above that, and the B above that. Other notes that require the first valve slide, but are not as problematic without it include the first line E, the F above that, the A above that, and the third line B.\nTriggers or throws are often found on the third valve slide. They are operated by the player's fourth finger, and are used to adjust the lower D and C. Trumpets typically use throws, whilst cornets may have a throw or trigger.\nTrombone.\nTrombone triggers are primarily but not exclusively installed on the F-trigger, bass, and contrabass trombones to alter the length of tubing, thus making certain ranges and pitches more accessible.\nEuphoniums.\nA euphonium occasionally has a trigger on valves other than 2 (especially 3), although many professional quality euphoniums, and indeed other brass band instruments, have a trigger for the main tuning slide.\nMechanism.\nThe two major types of valve mechanisms are \"rotary valves\" and \"piston valves\". The first piston valve instruments were developed just after the start of the 19th century. The \"St\u00f6lzel valve\" (invented by Heinrich St\u00f6lzel in 1814) was an early variety. In the mid 19th century the \"Vienna valve\" was an improved design. However many professional musicians preferred rotary valves for quicker, more reliable action, until better designs of piston valves were mass manufactured towards the end of the 19th century. Since the early decades of the 20th century, piston valves have been the most common on brass instruments except for the orchestral horn and the tuba. See also the article Brass Instrument Valves.\nSound production in brass instruments.\nBecause the player of a brass instrument has direct control of the prime vibrator (the lips), brass instruments exploit the player's ability to select the harmonic at which the instrument's column of air vibrates. By making the instrument about twice as long as the equivalent woodwind instrument and starting with the second harmonic, players can get a good range of notes simply by varying the tension of their lips (see embouchure).\nMost brass instruments are fitted with a removable mouthpiece. Different shapes, sizes and styles of mouthpiece may be used to suit different embouchures, or to more easily produce certain tonal characteristics. Trumpets, trombones, and tubas are characteristically fitted with a cupped mouthpiece, while horns are fitted with a conical mouthpiece.\nOne interesting difference between a woodwind instrument and a brass instrument is that woodwind instruments are non-directional. This means that the sound produced propagates in all directions with approximately equal volume. Brass instruments, on the other hand, are highly directional, with most of the sound produced traveling straight outward from the bell. This difference makes it significantly more difficult to record a brass instrument accurately. It also plays a major role in some performance situations, such as in marching bands.\nManufacture.\nMetal.\nTraditionally the instruments are normally made of brass, polished and then lacquered to prevent corrosion. Some higher quality and higher cost instruments use gold or silver plating to prevent corrosion.\nAlternatives to brass include other alloys containing significant amounts of copper or silver. These alloys are biostatic due to the oligodynamic effect, and thus suppress growth of molds, fungi or bacteria. Brass instruments constructed from stainless steel or aluminium have good sound quality but are rapidly colonized by microorganisms and become unpleasant to play.\nMost higher quality instruments are designed to prevent or reduce galvanic corrosion between any steel in the valves and springs, and the brass of the tubing. This may take the form of desiccant design, to keep the valves dry, sacrificial zincs, replaceable valve cores and springs, plastic insulating washers, or nonconductive or noble materials for the valve cores and springs. Some instruments use several such features.\nThe process of making the large open end (bell) of a brass instrument is called \"metal beating\". In making the bell of, for example, a trumpet, a person lays out a pattern and shapes sheet metal into a bell-shape using templates, machine tools, handtools, and blueprints. The maker cuts out the bell blank, using hand or power shears. He hammers the blank over a bell-shaped mandrel, and butts the seam, using a notching tool. The seam is brazed, using a torch and smoothed using a hammer or file. A draw bench or arbor press equipped with expandable lead plug is used to shape and smooth the bell and bell neck over a mandrel. A lathe is used to spin the bell head and to form a bead at the edge of bell head. Previously shaped bell necks are annealed, using a hand torch to soften the metal for further bending. Scratches are removed from the bell using abrasive-coated cloth.\nOther materials.\nA few specialty instruments are made from wood.\nInstruments made mostly from plastic emerged in the 2010s as a cheaper and more robust alternative to brass. Plastic instruments could come in almost any colour. The sound plastic instruments produce is different from the one of brass, lacquer, gold or silver. This is because plastic is much less dense, or rather has less matter in a given space as compared to the aforementioned which causes vibrations to occur differently. While originally seen as a gimmick, these plastic models have found increasing popularity during the last decade and are now viewed as practice tools that make for more convenient travel as well as a cheaper option for beginning players.\nEnsembles.\nBrass instruments are one of the major classical instrument families and are played across a range of musical ensembles.\nOrchestras include a varying number of brass instruments depending on music style and era, typically:\nConcert bands generally have a larger brass section than an orchestra, typically:\nBritish brass bands are made up entirely of brass, mostly conical bore instruments. Typical membership is:\nQuintets are common small brass ensembles; a quintet typically contains:\nBig bands and other jazz bands commonly contain cylindrical bore brass instruments.\nMexican bandas have:\nSingle brass instruments are also often used to accompany other instruments or ensembles such as an organ or a choir."}
{"id": "4941", "revid": "230475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4941", "title": "Blood libel", "text": "Blood libel or ritual murder libel (also blood accusation) is an antisemitic canard which falsely accuses Jews of murdering Christians in order to use their blood in the performance of religious rituals. Echoing very old myths of secret cultic practices in many prehistoric societies, the claim, as it is leveled against Jews, was rarely attested to in antiquity. According to Tertullian, it originally emerged in late antiquity as an accusation made against members of the early Christian community of the Roman Empire. Once this accusation had been dismissed, it was revived a millennium later as a Christian slander against Jews in the medieval period. The first examples of medieval blood libel emerged in England in the mid 1100s before spreading into other parts of Europe, especially France and Germany. This libel, alongside those of well poisoning and host desecration, became a major theme of the persecution of Jews in Europe from that period down to modern times.\nBlood libels often claim that Jews require human blood for the baking of matzos, an unleavened flatbread which is eaten during Passover. Earlier versions of the blood libel accused Jews of ritually re-enacting the crucifixion. The accusations often assert that the blood of Christian children is especially coveted, and historically, blood libel claims have been made in order to account for the otherwise unexplained deaths of children. In some cases, the alleged victims of human sacrifice have become venerated as Christian martyrs. Many of these most prominently William of Norwich (1144), Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln (1255), and Simon of Trent (1475) became objects of local cults and veneration; the cult of Hugh of Lincoln gained the support of Henry III and his son Edward I, giving it official credibility and helping it to be particularly well remembered. Although he was never canonized, the veneration of Simon was added to the General Roman Calendar. One child who was allegedly murdered by Jews, Gabriel of Bia\u0142ystok, was canonized by the Russian Orthodox Church.\nIn Jewish lore, blood libels served as the impetus for the creation of the Golem of Prague by Rabbi Judah Loew ben Bezalel in the 16th century. The term 'blood libel' has also been used in reference to any unpleasant or damaging false accusation, and as a result, it has acquired a broader metaphoric meaning. However, this wider usage of the term remains controversial.\nHistory.\nThe earliest versions of the accusations involving Jews supposedly crucifying Christian children on Easter/Passover is said to be because of a prophecy. There is no reference to the use of blood in unleavened matzo bread at this time yet, which develops later as a major motivation for the crime.\nPossible precursors.\nThe earliest known antecedent is tenth century, from Damocritus (not Democritus the philosopher) mentioned in the Suda, who alleged that \"every seven years the Jews captured a stranger, brought him to the temple in Jerusalem, and sacrificed him, cutting his flesh into bits.\" The Greco-Egyptian author Apion claimed that the Jews sacrificed Greek victims in their temple. Here, the writer states that when Antiochus Epiphanes entered the temple in Jerusalem, he discovered a Greek captive, who told him that he was being fattened for sacrifice. Every year, Apion claimed, the Jews would sacrifice a Greek and consume his flesh, at the same time swearing eternal hatred towards the Greeks. Apion's claim likely reflects already circulating attitudes towards Jews as similar claims are made by Posidonius and Apollonius Molon in the 1st century BCE. This idea is exampled later in history, when Socrates Scholasticus ( 5th century) reported that in a drunken frolic, a group of Jews bound a Christian child to a cross in mockery of the death of Christ and scourged him until he died.\nMedieval context.\nThe blood libels emerged at a time when the church and particularly the Crusades were driving increasingly anti-Judaic discourses. These were later reinforced through the Church council Lateran IV which mandated the segregation of Christian and Jewish society, and built an apparatus of enforcement across Europe. At a local context, many of the English examples may have included an element of church competition for saintly cults, with the income that veneration produced.\nIsrael Yuval proposed that the blood libel may have originated in the 12th century due to Christian views on Jewish behavior during the First Crusade. Some Jews committed suicide and killed their own children rather than exposing them to forced conversion to Christianity. Yuval wrote that Christians may have argued that if Jews could kill their own children, they could also kill Christian children.\nOrigins in England.\nIn England, in 1144, the Jews of Norwich were falsely accused of ritual murder after a boy, William of Norwich, was found dead in the woods with stab wounds. William's hagiographer, Thomas of Monmouth, falsely claimed that every year there is an international council of Jews at which they choose the country in which a child will be killed during Easter, because of a Jewish prophecy that states that the killing of a Christian child each year will ensure that the Jews will be restored to the Holy Land. According to Monmouth, England was chosen in 1144, and the leaders of the Jewish community delegated the Jews of Norwich to perform the killing, after which they abducted and crucified William. The legend was turned into a cult, with William acquiring the status of a martyr and pilgrims bringing offerings to the local church.\nThis was followed by similar accusations in Gloucester (1168), Bury St Edmunds (1181) and Bristol (1183). In 1189, the Jewish deputation attending the coronation of Richard the Lionheart was attacked by the crowd. Massacres of Jews at London and York soon followed. In 1190, on 16 March, 150 Jews were attacked in York and then massacred when they took refuge in the royal castle, where Clifford's Tower now stands, with some committing suicide rather than being taken by the mob. The remains of 17 bodies thrown in a well in Norwich between the 12th and 13th century (five that were shown by DNA testing to likely be members of a single Jewish family) were very possibly killed as part of one of these pogroms.\nAfter the death of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln, there were trials and executions of Jews. The case was described by Matthew Paris and later by Chaucer, and formed the basis of the \"Sir Hugh\" ballads which have circulated to the present day. Its notoriety sprang from the intervention of the Crown, the first time an accusation of ritual killing had been given royal credibility.\nThe eight-year-old Hugh disappeared at Lincoln on 31 July 1255. His body was probably discovered on 29 August, in a well. A Jew named Copin or Koppin confessed to involvement. He confessed to John of Lexington, a servant of the crown, and relative of the Bishop of Lincoln. He confessed that the boy had been crucified by the Jews, who had assembled at Lincoln for that purpose. King Henry III, who had reached Lincoln at the beginning of October, had Copin executed and 91 of the Jews of Lincoln seized and sent up to London, where 18 of them were executed. The rest were pardoned at the intercession of the Franciscans or Dominicans.\nWithin a few decades, Jews would be expelled from all of England in 1290 and not allowed to return until 1657, although it is likely that some Jews lived there during this period and kept their religion secret. After the expulsion, Edward I renovated \"Little Saint Hugh's\" shrine and decorated it with his Royal insignia, as part of his efforts to justify his actions. As Stacey notes: \"A more explicit identification of the crown with the ritual crucifixion charge can hardly be imagined.\"\nContinental Europe.\nMuch like the blood libel of England, the history of blood libel in continental Europe consists of unsubstantiated claims made about the corpses of Christian children. There were frequently associated supernatural events speculated about these discoveries and corpses, events which were often attributed by contemporaries to miracles. Also, just as in England, these accusations in continental Europe typically resulted in the execution of numerous Jews \u2013 sometimes even all, or close to all, the Jews in one town. These accusations and their effects also, in some cases, led to royal interference on behalf of the Jews.\nThomas of Monmouth's story of the annual Jewish meeting to decide which local community would kill a Christian child also quickly spread to the continent. An early version appears in \"Bonum Universale de Apibus\" ii. 29, \u00a7 23, by Thomas of Cantimpr\u00e9 (a monastery near Cambray). Thomas wrote, in around 1260, \"It is quite certain that the Jews of every province annually decide by lot which congregation or city is to send Christian blood to the other congregations.\" Thomas of Cantimpr\u00e9 also believed that since the time when the Jews called out to Pontius Pilate, \"His blood be on us, and on our children\" (), they have been afflicted with hemorrhages, a condition equated with male menstruation:\nA very learned Jew, who in our day has been converted to the (Christian) faith, informs us that one enjoying the reputation of a prophet among them, toward the close of his life, made the following prediction: 'Be assured that relief from this secret ailment, to which you are exposed, can only be obtained through Christian blood (\"\"solo sanguine Christiano\").' This suggestion was followed by the ever-blind and impious Jews, who instituted the custom of annually shedding Christian blood in every province, in order that they might recover from their malady.\nThomas added that the Jews had misunderstood the words of their prophet, who by his expression \"solo sanguine Christiano\"\" had meant not the blood of any Christian, but that of Jesus the only true remedy for all physical and spiritual suffering. Thomas did not mention the name of the \"very learned\" proselyte, but it may have been Nicholas Donin of La Rochelle, who, in 1240, had a disputation on the Talmud with Yechiel of Paris, and who in 1242 caused the burning of numerous Talmudic manuscripts in Paris. It is known that Thomas was personally acquainted with Nicholas. Nicholas Donin and another Jewish convert, Theobald of Cambridge, are greatly credited with the adoption and the belief of the blood libel myth in Europe.\nThe first known case outside England was in Blois, France, in 1171. This was the site of a blood libel accusation against the town's entire Jewish community that led to around 31\u201333 Jews (with 17 women making up this total) being burned to death on 29 May of that year, or the 20th of Sivan of 4931. The blood libel revolved around R. Isaac, a Jew whom a Christian servant reported had deposited a murdered Christian in the Loire. The child's body was never found. The count had about 40 adult Blois Jews arrested and they were eventually to be burned. The surviving members of the Blois Jewish community, as well as surviving holy texts, were ransomed. As a result of this case, the Jews garnered new promises from the king. The burned bodies of the sentenced Jews were supposedly maintained unblemished through the burning, a claim which is a well-known miracle, martyr myth for both Jews and Christians. There is significant primary source material from this case including a letter revealing moves for Jewish protection with King Louis VII. Responding to the mass execution, the Twentieth of Sivan was declared a fast day by Rabbenu Tam. In this case in Blois, there was not yet the myth proclaimed that Jews needed the blood of Christians.\nIn 1235, after the dead bodies of five boys were found on Christmas day in Fulda, the inhabitants of the town claimed the Jews had killed them to consume their blood, and burned 34 Jews to death with the help of Crusaders assembled at the time. Even though emperor Frederick II cleared the Jews of any wrongdoing after an investigation, blood libel accusations persisted in Germany. At Pforzheim, Baden, in 1267, a woman supposedly sold a girl to Jews who, according to the myth, then cut her open and dumped her in the Enz River, where boatmen found her; the girl cried for vengeance, and then died. The body was said to have bled as the Jews were brought to it. The woman and the Jews allegedly confessed and were subsequently killed. That a judicial execution was summarily committed in consequence of the accusation is evident from the manner in which the Nuremberg \"Memorbuch\" and the synagogal poems refer to the incident.\nIn 1270, at Weissenburg, of Alsace, a supposed miracle alone decided the charge against the Jews. A child's body had shown up in the Lauter River; it was claimed that Jews had cut into the child to acquire his blood, and that the child continued bleeding for five days.\nAt Oberwesel, near Easter of 1287, alleged miracles again constituted the only evidence against the Jews. In this case, it was claimed that the corpse of the 16-year-old Werner of Oberwesel (also referred to as \"Good Werner\") landed at Bacharach and the body performed miracles, particularly medicinal miracles. Light was also said to have been emitted by the body. Reportedly, the child was hung upside down, forced to throw up the host and was cut open. In consequence, the Jews of Oberwesel and many other adjacent localities were severely persecuted during the years 1286\u201389. The Jews of Oberwesel were particularly targeted because there were no Jews remaining in Bacharach following a 1283 pogrom. Additionally, there were pogroms following this case as well at and around Oberwesel. Rudolph of Habsburg, to whom the Jews had appealed for protection, in order to manage the miracle story, had the archbishop of Mainz declare great wrong had been done to the Jew. This apparent declaration was very limited in effectiveness.\nA statement was made, in the \"Chronicle\" of Konrad Justinger of 1423, that at Bern in 1293 or 1294 the Jews tortured and murdered a boy called Rudolph (sometimes also referred to as Ruff, or Ruof). The body was reportedly found by the house of J\u00f6ly, a Jew. The Jewish community was then implicated. The penalties imposed upon the Jews included torture, execution, expulsion, and steep financial fines. Justinger argued Jews were out to harm Christianity. The historical impossibility of this widely credited story was demonstrated by Jakob Stammler, pastor of Bern, in 1888.\nThere have been several explanations put forth as to why these blood libel accusations were made and perpetuated. For example, it has been argued Thomas of Monmouth's account and other similar false accusations, as well as their perpetuation, largely had to do with the economic and political interests of leaders perpetuating these myths. The use of blood and other human products for medicinal or magical purposes was an established concept in medieval Europe. As such illegal ways of accessing these item were ascribed (in 1507) by Franciscans to Dominicans, by others to sorcerers and devil worshippers as well as Jews.\n19th century.\nOne of the child-saints in the Russian Orthodox Church is the six-year-old boy Gavriil Belostoksky from the village Zverki. According to the legend supported by the church, the boy was kidnapped from his home during the holiday of Passover while his parents were away. Shutko, who was a Jew from Bia\u0142ystok, was accused of bringing the boy to Bia\u0142ystok, piercing him with sharp objects and draining his blood for nine days, then bringing the body back to Zverki and dumping it at a local field. A cult developed, and the boy was canonized in 1820. His relics are still the object of pilgrimage. On All Saints Day, 27 July 1997, the Belarusian state TV showed a film alleging the story is true. The revival of the cult in Belarus was cited as a dangerous expression of antisemitism in international reports on human rights and religious freedoms which were passed to the UNHCR.\nViews of the Catholic Church.\nThe attitude of the Catholic Church towards these accusations and the cults venerating children supposedly killed by Jews has varied over time. The Papacy generally opposed them, although it had problems in enforcing its opposition.\nIn 1911, the \"Dictionnaire apolog\u00e9tique de la foi catholique\", an important French Catholic encyclopedia, published an analysis of the blood libel accusations. This may be taken as being broadly representative of educated Catholic opinion in continental Europe at that time. The article noted that the popes had generally refrained from endorsing the blood libel, and it concluded that the accusations were unproven in a general sense, but it left open the possibility that some Jews had committed ritual murders of Christians. Other contemporary Catholic sources (notably the Jesuit periodical \"La Civilt\u00e0 Cattolica\") promoted the blood libel as truth.\nToday, the accusations are rarer in Catholic circles. While Simon of Trent's local status as a saint was removed in 1965, several towns in Spain still commemorate the blood libel.\nBlood libels in Muslim lands.\nIn late 1553 or 1554, Suleiman the Magnificent, the reigning sultan of the Ottoman Empire, issued a firman (royal decree) which formally denounced blood libels against the Jews.\nIn 1840, following the Western outrage arising from the Damascus affair, British politician and leader of the British Jewish community, Sir Moses Montefiore, backed by other influential westerners including Britain's Lord Palmerston and Damascus consul Charles Henry Churchill, the French lawyer Adolphe Cr\u00e9mieux, Austrian consul Giovanni Gasparo Merlato, Danish missionary John Nicolayson, and Solomon Munk, persuaded Sultan Abdulmejid I in Constantinople, to issue a firman on 6 November 1840 intended to halt the spread of blood libel accusations in the Ottoman Empire. The edict declared that blood libel accusations were a slander against Jews and they would be prohibited throughout the Ottoman Empire, and read in part:\n... and for the love we bear to our subjects, we cannot permit the Jewish nation, whose innocence for the crime alleged against them is evident, to be worried and tormented as a consequence of accusations which have not the least foundation in truth...\nIn the remainder of the 19th century and into the 20th century, there were many instances of the blood libel in Ottoman lands, such as the 1881 Fornaraki affair. However the libel almost always came from the Christian community, sometimes with the connivance of Greek or French diplomats. The Jews could usually count on the goodwill of the Ottoman authorities and increasingly on the support of British, Prussian and Austrian representatives.\nIn the 1910 Shiraz blood libel, the Jews of Shiraz, Iran, were falsely accused of murdering a Muslim girl. The entire Jewish quarter was pillaged, with the pogrom leaving 12 Jews dead and about 50 injured.\nIn 1983, Mustafa Tlass, the Syrian Minister of Defense, wrote and published \"The Matzah of Zion\", which is a treatment of the Damascus affair of 1840 that repeats the ancient \"blood libel\", that Jews use the blood of murdered non-Jews in religious rituals such as baking Matza bread. In this book, he argues that the true religious beliefs of Jews are \"black hatred against all humans and religions\", and no Arab country should ever sign a peace treaty with Israel. Tlass re-printed the book several times. Following the book's publication, Tlass told \"Der Spiegel\", that this accusation against Jews was valid and he also claimed that his book is \"an historical study ... based on documents from France, Vienna and the American University in Beirut.\"\nIn 2003, the Egyptian newspaper \"Al-Ahram\" published a series of articles by Osama El-Baz, a senior advisor to the then Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Among other things, Osama El-Baz explained the origins of the blood libel against the Jews. He said that Arabs and Muslims have never been antisemitic, as a group, but he accepted the fact that a few Arab writers and media figures attack Jews \"on the basis of the racist fallacies and myths that originated in Europe\". He urged people not to succumb to \"myths\" such as the blood libel.\nNevertheless, on many occasions in modern times, blood libel stories have appeared in the state-sponsored media of a number of Arab and Muslim nations, as well as on their television shows and websites, and books which allege instances of Jewish blood libels are not uncommon there.\nThe blood libel was featured in a scene in the Syrian TV series \"Ash-Shatat\", shown in 2003.\nIn 2007, Lebanese poet Marwan Chamoun, in an interview aired on T\u00e9l\u00e9 Liban, referred to the \"... slaughter of the priest Tomaso de Camangiano ... in 1840... in the presence of two rabbis in the heart of Damascus, in the home of a close friend of this priest, Daud Al-Harari, the head of the Jewish community of Damascus. After he was slaughtered, his blood was collected, and the two rabbis took it.\" A novel, \"Death of a Monk\", based on the Damascus affair, was published in 2004.\nReferences.\nNotes"}
{"id": "4942", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4942", "title": "Bagpuss", "text": "Bagpuss is a British animated children's television series which was made by Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate through their company Smallfilms. The series of thirteen episodes was first broadcast from 12 February to 7 May 1974. The title character was \"a saggy, old cloth cat, baggy, and a bit loose at the seams\". Although only thirteen episodes were produced and broadcast, the programme remains fondly remembered, and was frequently repeated in the UK until 1986. In early 1999, \"Bagpuss\" topped a BBC poll for the UK's favourite children's television programme.\nCharacters.\nBagpuss himself is a stuffed cloth cat, referred to in the intro as \"The Most Important, The Most Beautiful, The Most Magical, Saggy Old Cloth Cat in the Whole, Wide World\".\nThe six mice carved on the side of the \"mouse organ\" (a small mechanical pipe organ that played rolls of music) wake up and scurry around, singing in high-pitched voices. The names of the six mice are: Charlie Mouse, Jenny Mouse, Janey Mouse, Lizzy Mouse, Eddie Mouse and Willy Mouse, although only three of the mice are ever referred to by their name; the remaining three are named only in the books which accompany the series.\nA rag doll made of scraps, called Madeleine, sits in a wicker chair. Gabriel the toad, unlike most Smallfilms characters, could move by a special device beneath his can without the use of stop-motion animation.\nThe wooden woodpecker bookend became the drily academic Professor Yaffle (based on the philosopher Bertrand Russell, whom Postgate had once met).\nVoices and music.\nSandra Kerr and John Faulkner provided the voices of Madeleine and Gabriel respectively and put together and performed all the folk songs. All the other characters' voices, including that of the narrator, were performed by writer Oliver Postgate.\nFormat.\nThe scene is set at the turn of the 20th century, with Emily Firmin (Peter Firmin's daughter) playing the part of the Victorian child Emily. The first antique village vignette is a cropped image of Horrabridge taken in 1898, though nothing is known of the other photo of the children with the pram. The shop window was at the Firmin family home in Blean.\nEach programme begins in the same way: through a series of sepia photographs, the viewer is told of a little girl named Emily who owns a shop. She never sells any merchandise, but instead finds lost or broken objects and later displays them in the front window after they have been mended so their owners might come in and claim them.\nEmily leaves an object in front of her favourite stuffed toy, the large, saggy, pink and white striped cat named Bagpuss, and recites the following verse:\nAfter Emily departs, Bagpuss wakes up. The programme shifts from sepia to colour stop motion film and various toys in the shop come to life.\nAfter being introduced by the narrator, the toys discuss what the new object is; one of them tells a story related to the object (sometimes shown in an animated thought bubble over Bagpuss's head), often with a song, accompanied by Gabriel on the banjo (which often sounded a lot more like a guitar) and then the mice, singing in high-pitched squeaky harmony to the tune of \"Sumer Is Icumen In\" as they work, mending the broken object. There is much banter between the characters, with the pompous Yaffle constantly finding fault with the playful mice: his complaint, 'Those mice are never serious!' becomes his main catchphrase. However, peace is always restored by the end of the episode, usually thanks to the timely intervention of Bagpuss, Gabriel or Madeleine. The newly mended object is then placed in the shop window, so that its owner might see it as they pass and come in to collect it. Bagpuss yawns and goes to sleep, and the colour fades to sepia and the other toys freeze in place as the narrator says the following:\nBroadcasting.\nThe series was originally broadcast in the United Kingdom, at 1:45 pm, on BBC1. The BBC sold the series to the Dutch broadcaster Nederlandse Christelijke Radio-Vereniging and the series was transmitted in the Netherlands from October 1976. The series was also transmitted in Italy from February 1977.\nEpisodes.\nThe titles of the episodes each refer in some way to the object Emily found.\nProduction.\nThe programmes were made using stop-frame animation. Bagpuss is an actual cloth cat, but was not intended to be such an electric pink. In Firmin's words: \"It should have been a ginger marmalade cat but the company in Folkestone dyeing the material made a mistake and it turned out pink and cream. It was the best thing that ever happened\".\nMadeleine the rag doll was made by Firmin's wife, Joan, with an extra long dress to hold their children's nightdresses, but Postgate asked Joan to make a new version as one of the characters.\nGabriel the Toad was the only character in the series who could move freely without the use of stop-frame animation. Scenes featuring him playing the banjo and singing would have taken quite a bit of time if filmed with the stop-frame method, so Peter Firmin created a mechanism that helped him control Gabriel through a hole in his can. The character was based on a real toad that lived in the basement area of the flat that Peter and Joan rented in Twickenham beside the River Thames. Gabriel (named after Walter Gabriel in \"The Archers\", a long-running British radio soap opera) was originally made for Firmin's live ITV programme \"The Musical Box\". Postgate chose him to be one of the characters in \"Bagpuss\" and he was made into a new, slightly larger version.\nProfessor Yaffle was created as the book-end who had access to \"facts\". The BBC did not like the original character, a man in top hat made from black Irish bog oak, called \"Professor Bogwood\". They thought he was too frightening and asked for a non-human instead.\nMost of the stories and songs used in the series are based on folk songs and fairy tales from around the world.\nLegacy.\nIn 1987, the University of Kent at Canterbury awarded honorary degrees to Postgate and Firmin. In his speech, Postgate stated that the degree was really intended for Bagpuss, who was subsequently displayed in academic dress.\nIn 1999, \"Bagpuss\" came first in a BBC poll selecting the nation's favourite children's programme made and broadcast by that corporation. It also came fourth in the Channel 4 poll, \"The 100 Greatest Kids' TV Shows\", broadcast in 2001.\nIn 2002 and 2005, a stage show of \"Bagpuss\" songs toured the UK folk festivals and theatres with original singers Sandra Kerr and John Faulkner, along with Kerr's daughter Nancy Kerr and her husband, James Fagan.\nIn June 2002, the charity Hospices of Hope opened the Bagpuss Children's Wing in its hospice in Bra\u0219ov, Romania. The wing was funded entirely by Postgate from royalties received from the BBC. In April 2012, Marc Jenner from Tunbridge Wells in Kent ran in the Virgin London Marathon dressed in a Bagpuss costume to raise money for the charity, supported by Emily Firmin (seen in the programme's opening titles) and Postgate's family.\nThom Yorke of the band Radiohead has claimed to be a fan of the series, watching it with his son. It was an influence for 2003 album \"Hail to the Thief\". Gabriel's song in Episode 2 was the acknowledged inspiration for the album track (and first single) \"There There\" (originally titled \"The Bony King of Nowhere\").\nIn 2009 Coolabi revealed that it had signed an \u201cexclusive new option to develop and produce new content\u201d based on Bagpuss, as they held the merchandising and distribution rights. Daniel Postgate, the son of co-creator Oliver Postgate, said he did not want a \u201clightweight\u201d remake using CGI animation. He said CGI had \u201ca slightly lurid quality, even at the best of times\u201d.\nBagpuss appeared in The Official BBC Children in Need Medley in 2009, along with many other British children's characters.\nBagpuss appeared on one of the twelve postage stamps issued by Royal Mail in January 2014 to celebrate classic children's programmes.\nBagpuss was displayed with Rupert Bear in the Rupert Bear Museum in Canterbury, part of the Canterbury Heritage Museum. After its closure at the end of 2017, he and Rupert Bear moved to the Beaney House of Art and Knowledge in Canterbury.\nIn 2014, Emily Firmin and Dan Postgate, surviving children of the series creators, created the account to share archive footage not widely available, such as several short stories narrated by Oliver Postgate.\nThe first episode of the BBC show \"Man Like Mobeen\" was called Bagpuss.\nIn the fourth season of \"The Crown\", Bagpuss made a cameo appearance on the episodes \"Fairytale\" and \"Favourites\", in which the fictionalised version of Princess Diana (played by Emma Corrin) watched the show in two aforementioned episodes.\nHome media.\nDVD and Blu-ray.\nThe full series was released on DVD, in April 2005 and in 2007. It was re-released in April 2015. The full series was re-released in 2023 on Blu-ray and DVD to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Bagpuss. This release included \u201cPeter Firmin \u2013 At Home with Bagpuss\u201d and \u201cThe Story of Smallfilms\u201d as extra features.\nBBC iPlayer.\nThe entire series was released onto the BBC iPlayer for the first time in May 2021 for 30 days.\nMusic.\nA CD of the original songs was released in 1999. The CD was re-released as well as a vinyl LP, again of the original songs from the series, in 2018.\nBooks.\nSeveral books have been released over the years to accompany the series."}
{"id": "4944", "revid": "44248157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4944", "title": "Naive set theory", "text": "Naive set theory is any of several theories of sets used in the discussion of the foundations of mathematics.\nUnlike axiomatic set theories, which are defined using formal logic, naive set theory is defined informally, in natural language. It describes the aspects of mathematical sets familiar in discrete mathematics (for example Venn diagrams and symbolic reasoning about their Boolean algebra), and suffices for the everyday use of set theory concepts in contemporary mathematics.\nSets are of great importance in mathematics; in modern formal treatments, most mathematical objects (numbers, relations, functions, etc.) are defined in terms of sets. Naive set theory suffices for many purposes, while also serving as a stepping stone towards more formal treatments.\nMethod.\nA \"naive theory\" in the sense of \"naive set theory\" is a non-formalized theory, that is, a theory that uses natural language to describe sets and operations on sets. Such theory treats sets as platonic absolute objects. The words \"and\", \"or\", \"if ... then\", \"not\", \"for some\", \"for every\" are treated as in ordinary mathematics. As a matter of convenience, use of naive set theory and its formalism prevails even in higher mathematics \u2013 including in more formal settings of set theory itself.\nThe first development of set theory was a naive set theory. It was created at the end of the 19th\u00a0century by Georg Cantor as part of his study of infinite sets and developed by Gottlob Frege in his \"Grundgesetze der Arithmetik\".\nNaive set theory may refer to several very distinct notions. It may refer to\nParadoxes.\nThe assumption that any property may be used to form a set, without restriction, leads to paradoxes. One common example is Russell's paradox: there is no set consisting of \"all sets that do not contain themselves\". Thus consistent systems of naive set theory must include some limitations on the principles which can be used to form sets.\nCantor's theory.\nSome believe that Georg Cantor's set theory was not actually implicated in the set-theoretic paradoxes (see Fr\u00e1polli 1991). One difficulty in determining this with certainty is that Cantor did not provide an axiomatization of his system. By 1899, Cantor was aware of some of the paradoxes following from unrestricted interpretation of his theory, for instance Cantor's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox, and did not believe that they discredited his theory. Cantor's paradox can actually be derived from the above (false) assumption\u2014that any property may be used to form a set\u2014using for \" is a cardinal number\". Frege explicitly axiomatized a theory in which a formalized version of naive set theory can be interpreted, and it is \"this\" formal theory which Bertrand Russell actually addressed when he presented his paradox, not necessarily a theory Cantorwho, as mentioned, was aware of several paradoxespresumably had in mind.\nAxiomatic theories.\nAxiomatic set theory was developed in response to these early attempts to understand sets, with the goal of determining precisely what operations were allowed and when.\nConsistency.\nA naive set theory is not \"necessarily\" inconsistent, if it correctly specifies the sets allowed to be considered. This can be done by the means of definitions, which are implicit axioms. It is possible to state all the axioms explicitly, as in the case of Halmos' \"Naive Set Theory\", which is actually an informal presentation of the usual axiomatic Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. It is \"naive\" in that the language and notations are those of ordinary informal mathematics, and in that it does not deal with consistency or completeness of the axiom system.\nLikewise, an axiomatic set theory is not necessarily consistent: not necessarily free of paradoxes. It follows from G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems that a sufficiently complicated first order logic system (which includes most common axiomatic set theories) cannot be proved consistent from within the theory itself \u2013 even if it actually is consistent. However, the common axiomatic systems are generally believed to be consistent; by their axioms they do exclude \"some\" paradoxes, like Russell's paradox. Based on G\u00f6del's theorem, it is just not known \u2013 and never can be \u2013 if there are \"no\" paradoxes at all in these theories or in any first-order set theory.\nThe term \"naive set theory\" is still today also used in some literature to refer to the set theories studied by Frege and Cantor, rather than to the informal counterparts of modern axiomatic set theory.\nUtility.\nThe choice between an axiomatic approach and other approaches is largely a matter of convenience. In everyday mathematics the best choice may be informal use of axiomatic set theory. References to particular axioms typically then occur only when demanded by tradition, e.g. the axiom of choice is often mentioned when used. Likewise, formal proofs occur only when warranted by exceptional circumstances. This informal usage of axiomatic set theory can have (depending on notation) precisely the \"appearance\" of naive set theory as outlined below. It is considerably easier to read and write (in the formulation of most statements, proofs, and lines of discussion) and is less error-prone than a strictly formal approach.\nSets, membership and equality.\nIn naive set theory, a set is described as a well-defined collection of objects. These objects are called the elements or members of the set. Objects can be anything: numbers, people, other sets, etc. For instance, 4 is a member of the set of all even integers. Clearly, the set of even numbers is infinitely large; there is no requirement that a set be finite.\nThe definition of sets goes back to Georg Cantor. He wrote in his 1915 article \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Begr\u00fcndung der transfiniten Mengenlehre\":\nNote on consistency.\nIt does \"not\" follow from this definition \"how\" sets can be formed, and what operations on sets again will produce a set. The term \"well-defined\" in \"well-defined collection of objects\" cannot, by itself, guarantee the consistency and unambiguity of what exactly constitutes and what does not constitute a set. Attempting to achieve this would be the realm of axiomatic set theory or of axiomatic class theory.\nThe problem, in this context, with informally formulated set theories, not derived from (and implying) any particular axiomatic theory, is that there may be several widely differing formalized versions, that have both different sets and different rules for how new sets may be formed, that all conform to the original informal definition. For example, Cantor's verbatim definition allows for considerable freedom in what constitutes a set. On the other hand, it is unlikely that Cantor was particularly interested in sets containing cats and dogs, but rather only in sets containing purely mathematical objects. An example of such a class of sets could be the von Neumann universe. But even when fixing the class of sets under consideration, it is not always clear which rules for set formation are allowed without introducing paradoxes.\nFor the purpose of fixing the discussion below, the term \"well-defined\" should instead be interpreted as an \"intention\", with either implicit or explicit rules (axioms or definitions), to rule out inconsistencies. The purpose is to keep the often deep and difficult issues of consistency away from the, usually simpler, context at hand. An explicit ruling out of \"all\" conceivable inconsistencies (paradoxes) cannot be achieved for an axiomatic set theory anyway, due to G\u00f6del's second incompleteness theorem, so this does not at all hamper the utility of naive set theory as compared to axiomatic set theory in the simple contexts considered below. It merely simplifies the discussion. Consistency is henceforth taken for granted unless explicitly mentioned.\nMembership.\nIf \"x\" is a member of a set \"A\", then it is also said that \"x\" belongs to \"A\", or that \"x\" is in \"A\". This is denoted by \"x\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0\"A\". The symbol \u2208 is a derivation from the lowercase Greek letter epsilon, \"\u03b5\", introduced by Giuseppe Peano in 1889 and is the first letter of the word \u1f10\u03c3\u03c4\u03af (means \"is\"). The symbol \u2209 is often used to write \"x\"\u00a0\u2209\u00a0\"A\", meaning \"x is not in A\".\nEquality.\nTwo sets \"A\" and \"B\" are defined to be equal when they have precisely the same elements, that is, if every element of \"A\" is an element of \"B\" and every element of \"B\" is an element of \"A\". (See axiom of extensionality.) Thus a set is completely determined by its elements; the description is immaterial. For example, the set with elements 2, 3, and 5 is equal to the set of all prime numbers less than 6.\nIf the sets \"A\" and \"B\" are equal, this is denoted symbolically as \"A\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"B\" (as usual).\nEmpty set.\nThe empty set, denoted as formula_1 and sometimes formula_2, is a set with no members at all. Because a set is determined completely by its elements, there can be only one empty set. (See axiom of empty set.) Although the empty set has no members, it can be a member of other sets. Thus formula_3, because the former has no members and the latter has one member.\nSpecifying sets.\nThe simplest way to describe a set is to list its elements between curly braces (known as defining a set \"extensionally\"). Thus denotes the set whose only elements are and .\nNote the following points:\nThis notation can be informally abused by saying something like to indicate the set of all dogs, but this example would usually be read by mathematicians as \"the set containing the single element \"dogs\"\".\nAn extreme (but correct) example of this notation is , which denotes the empty set.\nThe notation , or sometimes , is used to denote the set containing all objects for which the condition holds (known as defining a set \"intensionally\").\nFor example, denotes the set of real numbers, denotes the set of everything with blonde hair.\nThis notation is called set-builder notation (or \"set comprehension\", particularly in the context of Functional programming).\nSome variants of set builder notation are:\nSubsets.\nGiven two sets \"A\" and \"B\", \"A\" is a subset of \"B\" if every element of \"A\" is also an element of \"B\".\nIn particular, each set \"B\" is a subset of itself; a subset of \"B\" that is not equal to \"B\" is called a proper subset.\nIf \"A\" is a subset of \"B\", then one can also say that \"B\" is a superset of \"A\", that \"A\" is contained in \"B\", or that \"B\" contains \"A\". In symbols, means that \"A\" is a subset of \"B\", and means that \"B\" is a superset of \"A\".\nSome authors use the symbols \u2282 and \u2283 for subsets, and others use these symbols only for \"proper\" subsets. For clarity, one can explicitly use the symbols \u228a and \u228b to indicate non-equality.\nAs an illustration, let R be the set of real numbers, let Z be the set of integers, let \"O\" be the set of odd integers, and let \"P\" be the set of current or former U.S. Presidents.\nThen \"O\" is a subset of Z, Z is a subset of R, and (hence) \"O\" is a subset of R, where in all cases \"subset\" may even be read as \"proper subset\".\nNot all sets are comparable in this way. For example, it is not the case either that R is a subset of \"P\" nor that \"P\" is a subset of R.\nIt follows immediately from the definition of equality of sets above that, given two sets \"A\" and \"B\", if and only if and . In fact this is often given as the definition of equality. Usually when trying to prove that two sets are equal, one aims to show these two inclusions. The empty set is a subset of every set (the statement that all elements of the empty set are also members of any set \"A\" is vacuously true).\nThe set of all subsets of a given set \"A\" is called the power set of \"A\" and is denoted by formula_4 or formula_5; the \"\" is sometimes in a script font: . If the set \"A\" has \"n\" elements, then formula_5 will have formula_7 elements.\nUniversal sets and absolute complements.\nIn certain contexts, one may consider all sets under consideration as being subsets of some given universal set.\nFor instance, when investigating properties of the real numbers R (and subsets of R), R may be taken as the universal set. A true universal set is not included in standard set theory (see Paradoxes below), but is included in some non-standard set theories.\nGiven a universal set U and a subset \"A\" of U, the complement of \"A\" (in U) is defined as\nIn other words, \"A\"C (\"\"A-complement\"; sometimes simply \"A, \"A-prime\"\" ) is the set of all members of U\"' which are not members of \"A\".\nThus with R, Z and \"O\" defined as in the section on subsets, if Z is the universal set, then \"OC\" is the set of even integers, while if R is the universal set, then \"OC\" is the set of all real numbers that are either even integers or not integers at all.\nUnions, intersections, and relative complements.\nGiven two sets \"A\" and \"B\", their union is the set consisting of all objects which are elements of \"A\" or of \"B\" or of both (see axiom of union). It is denoted by .\nThe intersection of \"A\" and \"B\" is the set of all objects which are both in \"A\" and in \"B\". It is denoted by .\nFinally, the relative complement of \"B\" relative to \"A\", also known as the set theoretic difference of \"A\" and \"B\", is the set of all objects that belong to \"A\" but \"not\" to \"B\". It is written as or .\nSymbolically, these are respectively\nThe set \"B\" doesn't have to be a subset of \"A\" for to make sense; this is the difference between the relative complement and the absolute complement () from the previous section.\nTo illustrate these ideas, let \"A\" be the set of left-handed people, and let \"B\" be the set of people with blond hair. Then is the set of all left-handed blond-haired people, while is the set of all people who are left-handed or blond-haired or both. , on the other hand, is the set of all people that are left-handed but not blond-haired, while is the set of all people who have blond hair but aren't left-handed.\nNow let \"E\" be the set of all human beings, and let \"F\" be the set of all living things over 1000 years old. What is in this case? No living human being is over 1000 years old, so must be the empty set {}.\nFor any set \"A\", the power set formula_5 is a Boolean algebra under the operations of union and intersection.\nOrdered pairs and Cartesian products.\nIntuitively, an ordered pair is simply a collection of two objects such that one can be distinguished as the \"first element\" and the other as the \"second element\", and having the fundamental property that, two ordered pairs are equal if and only if their \"first elements\" are equal and their \"second elements\" are equal.\nFormally, an ordered pair with first coordinate \"a\", and second coordinate \"b\", usually denoted by (\"a\", \"b\"), can be defined as the set formula_9\nIt follows that, two ordered pairs (\"a\",\"b\") and (\"c\",\"d\") are equal if and only if and .\nAlternatively, an ordered pair can be formally thought of as a set {a,b} with a total order.\n(The notation (\"a\", \"b\") is also used to denote an open interval on the real number line, but the context should make it clear which meaning is intended. Otherwise, the notation ]\"a\", \"b\"[ may be used to denote the open interval whereas (\"a\", \"b\") is used for the ordered pair).\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are sets, then the Cartesian product (or simply product) is defined to be:\nThat is, is the set of all ordered pairs whose first coordinate is an element of \"A\" and whose second coordinate is an element of \"B\".\nThis definition may be extended to a set of ordered triples, and more generally to sets of ordered n-tuples for any positive integer \"n\".\nIt is even possible to define infinite Cartesian products, but this requires a more recondite definition of the product.\nCartesian products were first developed by Ren\u00e9 Descartes in the context of analytic geometry. If R denotes the set of all real numbers, then represents the Euclidean plane and represents three-dimensional Euclidean space.\nSome important sets.\nThere are some ubiquitous sets for which the notation is almost universal. Some of these are listed below. In the list, \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" refer to natural numbers, and \"r\" and \"s\" are real numbers.\nParadoxes in early set theory.\nThe unrestricted formation principle of sets referred to as the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension,\nis the source of several early appearing paradoxes:\nIf the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension is weakened to the axiom schema of specification or axiom schema of separation,\nthen all the above paradoxes disappear. There is a corollary. With the axiom schema of separation as an axiom of the theory, it follows, as a theorem of the theory:\nOr, more spectacularly (Halmos' phrasing): There is no universe. \"Proof\": Suppose that it exists and call it . Now apply the axiom schema of separation with and for use . This leads to Russell's paradox again. Hence cannot exist in this theory.\nRelated to the above constructions is formation of the set\nwhere the statement following the implication certainly is false. It follows, from the definition of , using the usual inference rules (and some afterthought when reading the proof in the linked article below) both that and holds, hence . This is Curry's paradox.\nIt is (perhaps surprisingly) not the possibility of that is problematic. It is again the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension allowing for . With the axiom schema of specification instead of unrestricted comprehension, the conclusion does not hold and hence is not a logical consequence.\nNonetheless, the possibility of is often removed explicitly or, e.g. in ZFC, implicitly, by demanding the axiom of regularity to hold. One consequence of it is\nor, in other words, no set is an element of itself.\nThe axiom schema of separation is simply too weak (while unrestricted comprehension is a very strong axiom\u2014too strong for set theory) to develop set theory with its usual operations and constructions outlined above. The axiom of regularity is of a restrictive nature as well. Therefore, one is led to the formulation of other axioms to guarantee the existence of enough sets to form a set theory. Some of these have been described informally above and many others are possible. Not all conceivable axioms can be combined freely into consistent theories. For example, the axiom of choice of ZFC is incompatible with the conceivable \"every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable\". The former implies the latter is false."}
{"id": "4946", "revid": "1262480417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4946", "title": "Breathy voice", "text": "Breathy voice (also called murmured voice, whispery voice, soughing and susurration) is a phonation in which the vocal folds vibrate, as they do in normal (modal) voicing, but are adjusted to let more air escape which produces a sighing-like sound. A simple breathy phonation, (not actually a fricative consonant, as a literal reading of the IPA chart would suggest), can sometimes be heard as an allophone of English between vowels, such as in the word \"behind\", for some speakers.\nIn the context of the Indo-Aryan languages like Sanskrit and Hindi and comparative Indo-European studies, breathy consonants are often called \"voiced aspirated\", as in the Hindi and Sanskrit stops normally denoted \"bh, dh, \u1e0dh, jh,\" and \"gh\" and the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European phonemes \"b\u02b0,d\u02b0,\u01f5\u02b0,g\u02b0,g\u02b7\u02b0\". , as breathy voice is a different type of phonation from aspiration. However, breathy and aspirated stops are acoustically similar in that in both cases there is a delay in the onset of full voicing. In the history of several languages, like Greek and some varieties of Chinese, breathy stops have developed into aspirated stops.\nClassification and terminology.\nThere is some confusion as to the nature of murmured phonation. The International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and authors such as Peter Ladefoged equate phonemically contrastive murmur with \"breathy voice\" in which the vocal folds are held with lower tension (and farther apart) than in modal voice, with a concomitant increase in airflow and slower vibration of the glottis. In that model, murmur is a point in a continuum of glottal aperture between modal voice and breath phonation (voicelessness).\nOthers, such as Laver, Catford, Trask and the authors of the Voice Quality Symbols (VoQS), equate murmur with \"whispery voice\" in which the vocal folds or, at least, the anterior part of the vocal folds vibrates, as in modal voice, but the arytenoid cartilages are held apart to allow a large turbulent airflow between them. In that model, murmur is a compound phonation of approximately modal voice plus whisper.\nIt is possible that the realization of murmur varies among individuals or languages. The IPA uses the term \"breathy voice\", but VoQS uses the term \"whispery voice\". Both accept the term \"murmur\", popularised by Ladefoged.\nTranscription.\nA stop with breathy release or a breathy nasal is transcribed in the IPA as etc. or as etc. Breathy vowels are most often written etc. Indication of breathy voice by using subscript diaeresis was approved in or before June 1976 by members of the council of International Phonetic Association.\nIn VoQS, the notation } is used for whispery voice (or murmur), and } is used for breathy voice. Some authors, such as Laver, suggest the alternative transcription (rather than IPA ) as the correct analysis of Gujarati , but it could be confused with the replacement of modal voicing in voiced segments with whispered phonation, conventionally transcribed with the diacritic .\nMethods of production.\nThere are several ways to produce breathy sounds such as . One is to hold the vocal folds apart, so that they are lax as they are for , but to increase the volume of airflow so that they vibrate loosely. A second is to bring the vocal folds closer together along their entire length than in voiceless , but not as close as in modally voiced sounds such as vowels. This results in an airflow intermediate between and vowels, and is the case with English intervocalic /h/. A third is to constrict the glottis, but separate the arytenoid cartilages that control one end. This results in the vocal folds being drawn together for voicing in the back, but separated to allow the passage of large volumes of air in the front. This is the situation with Hindi.\nThe distinction between the latter two of these realizations, vocal folds somewhat separated along their length (\"breathy voice\") and vocal folds together with the arytenoids making an opening (\"whispery voice\"), is phonetically relevant in White Hmong (\"Hmong Daw\").\nPhonological property.\nA number of languages use breathy voicing in a phonologically contrastive way. Many Indo-Aryan languages, such as Hindi, typically have a four-way contrast among plosives and affricates (voiced, breathy, tenuis, aspirated) and a two-way contrast among nasals (voiced, breathy). The Nguni languages within the southern branch of the Bantu languages, including Phuthi, Xhosa, Zulu, Southern Ndebele and Swazi, also have contrastive breathy voice. In the case of Xhosa, there is a four-way contrast analogous to Indic in oral clicks, and similarly a two-way contrast among nasal clicks, but a three-way contrast among plosives and affricates (breathy, aspirated, and ejective), and two-way contrasts among fricatives (voiceless and breathy) and nasals (voiced and breathy).\nIn some Bantu languages, historically breathy stops have been phonetically devoiced, but the four-way contrast in the system has been retained. In all five of the southeastern Bantu languages named, the breathy stops (even if they are realised phonetically as devoiced aspirates) have a marked tone-lowering (or tone-depressing) effect on the following tautosyllabic vowels. For this reason, such stop consonants are frequently referred to in the local linguistic literature as 'depressor' stops.\nSwazi, and to a greater extent Phuthi, display good evidence that breathy voicing can be used as a morphological property independent of any consonant voicing value. For example, in both languages, the standard morphological mechanism for achieving the morphosyntactic copula is to simply execute the noun prefix syllable as breathy (or 'depressed').\nIn Portuguese, vowels after the stressed syllable can be pronounced with breathy voice.\nGujarati is unusual in contrasting breathy vowels and consonants: 'twelve', 'outside', 'burden'.\nTsumkwe Ju\u01c0\u02bchoan makes the following rare distinctions : fall, land (of a bird etc.); walk; herb species; and /n|\u02b1oa\u1d51/ greedy person; /n|oa\u02b1\u1d51/ cat.\nBreathy stops in Punjabi lost their phonation, merging with voiceless and voiced stops in various positions, and a system of high and low tones developed in syllables that formerly had these sounds.\nBreathy voice can also be observed in place of debuccalized coda in some dialects of colloquial Spanish, e.g. for \" \"."}
{"id": "4947", "revid": "7918938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4947", "title": "B\u00e9zout's identity", "text": "In mathematics, B\u00e9zout's identity (also called B\u00e9zout's lemma), named after \u00c9tienne B\u00e9zout who proved it for polynomials, is the following theorem:\nHere the greatest common divisor of and is taken to be . The integers and are called B\u00e9zout coefficients for ; they are not unique. A pair of B\u00e9zout coefficients can be computed by the extended Euclidean algorithm, and this pair is, in the case of integers one of the two pairs such that and ; equality occurs only if one of and is a multiple of the other.\nAs an example, the greatest common divisor of 15 and 69 is 3, and 3 can be written as a combination of 15 and 69 as , with B\u00e9zout coefficients \u22129 and 2.\nMany other theorems in elementary number theory, such as Euclid's lemma or the Chinese remainder theorem, result from B\u00e9zout's identity.\nA B\u00e9zout domain is an integral domain in which B\u00e9zout's identity holds. In particular, B\u00e9zout's identity holds in principal ideal domains. Every theorem that results from B\u00e9zout's identity is thus true in all principal ideal domains.\nStructure of solutions.\nIf and are not both zero and one pair of B\u00e9zout coefficients has been computed (for example, using the extended Euclidean algorithm), all pairs can be represented in the form\nformula_1\nwhere is an arbitrary integer, is the greatest common divisor of and , and the fractions simplify to integers.\nIf and are both nonzero and none of them divides the other, then exactly two of the pairs of B\u00e9zout coefficients satisfy \nformula_2 If and are both positive, one has formula_3 and formula_4 for one of these pairs, and formula_5 and formula_6 for the other. If is a divisor of (including the case formula_7), then one pair of B\u00e9zout coefficients is .\nThis relies on a property of Euclidean division: given two non-zero integers and , if does not divide , there is exactly one pair such that and , and another one such that and .\nThe two pairs of small B\u00e9zout's coefficients are obtained from the given one by choosing for in the above formula either of the two integers next to .\nThe extended Euclidean algorithm always produces one of these two minimal pairs.\nExample.\nLet and , then . Then the following B\u00e9zout's identities are had, with the B\u00e9zout coefficients written in red for the minimal pairs and in blue for the other ones.\nformula_8\nIf is the original pair of B\u00e9zout coefficients, then yields the minimal pairs via , respectively ; that is, , and .\nExistence proof.\nGiven any nonzero integers and , let . The set is nonempty since it contains either or (with and ). Since is a nonempty set of positive integers, it has a minimum element , by the well-ordering principle. To prove that is the greatest common divisor of and , it must be proven that is a common divisor of and , and that for any other common divisor , one has .\nThe Euclidean division of by may be written as\nformula_9\nThe remainder is in , because\nformula_10\nThus is of the form , and hence . However, , and is the smallest positive integer in : the remainder can therefore not be in , making necessarily 0. This implies that is a divisor of . Similarly is also a divisor of , and therefore is a common divisor of and .\nNow, let be any common divisor of and ; that is, there exist and such that and . One has thus\nformula_11\nThat is, is a divisor of . Since , this implies .\nGeneralizations.\nFor three or more integers.\nB\u00e9zout's identity can be extended to more than two integers: if \nformula_12\nthen there are integers formula_13 such that\nformula_14\nhas the following properties:\nFor polynomials.\nB\u00e9zout's identity does not always hold for polynomials. For example, when working in the polynomial ring of integers: the greatest common divisor of and is \"x\", but there does not exist any integer-coefficient polynomials and satisfying .\nHowever, B\u00e9zout's identity works for univariate polynomials over a field exactly in the same ways as for integers. In particular the B\u00e9zout's coefficients and the greatest common divisor may be computed with the extended Euclidean algorithm.\nAs the common roots of two polynomials are the roots of their greatest common divisor, B\u00e9zout's identity and fundamental theorem of algebra imply the following result: \nThe generalization of this result to any number of polynomials and indeterminates is Hilbert's Nullstellensatz.\nFor principal ideal domains.\nAs noted in the introduction, B\u00e9zout's identity works not only in the ring of integers, but also in any other principal ideal domain (PID).\nThat is, if is a PID, and and are elements of , and is a greatest common divisor of and ,\nthen there are elements and in such that . The reason is that the ideal is principal and equal to .\nAn integral domain in which B\u00e9zout's identity holds is called a B\u00e9zout domain.\nHistory and attribution.\nThe French mathematician \u00c9tienne B\u00e9zout (1730\u20131783) proved this identity for polynomials. The statement for integers can be found already in the work of an earlier French mathematician, Claude Gaspard Bachet de M\u00e9ziriac (1581\u20131638).\nAndrew Granville traced the association of B\u00e9zout's name with the identity to Bourbaki, arguing that it is a misattribution since the identity is implicit in Euclid's \"Elements\"."}
{"id": "4948", "revid": "1271276718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4948", "title": "Banacek", "text": "Banacek is an American detective television series starring George Peppard that aired on NBC from 1972 to 1974. The series was part of the rotating \"NBC Wednesday Mystery Movie\" anthology. It alternated in its time slot with several other shows, but was the only one of them to last beyond its first season.\nPremise.\nPeppard played Thomas Banacek, a Polish-American freelance, Boston-based private investigator who solves seemingly impossible thefts. He collects from the insurance companies 10% of the insured value of the recovered property. One of Banacek's verbal signatures is the quotation of strangely worded yet curiously cogent \"Polish proverbs\" such as:\nPart of the joke is that Ralph Manza, as Banacek's chauffeur Jay Drury, will often ask \"What does it mean, Boss?\" Banacek also has a running agreement with his chauffeur for a 10% share of Banacek's 10% if he solved the crime. Mr. Drury is never at a loss for a potential solution that Banacek always manages to shoot down with his very next line. Another recurring gag is for other characters\u2014particularly his rivals\u2014 to mispronounce his name deliberately. The name \"Banaczek\" (as pronounced in the show) is actually quite rare in Poland.\nMurray Matheson plays seller of rare books and information source Felix Mulholland, a character always ready with a droll remark and who exhibits a passion for chess and jigsaw puzzles. He is also the series' only character to ever call Banacek by his first name.\nRecurring characters include insurance company executive Cavanaugh (George Murdock), \nBanacek's rival and some-time love interest Carlie Kirkland (Christine Belford), and another insurance investigator/rival Fennyman/Henry DeWitt (Linden Chiles).\nBanacek lives on historic Beacon Hill in Boston.\nWhile he has a limousine and driver, he also owns and sometimes drives an antique 1941 Packard convertible. Both vehicles are equipped with mobile radio telephones at a time when such devices are uncommon and expensive. Banacek is intelligent, well-educated, cultured, and suave. An unapologetic ladies' man who enjoys the company of beautiful women, he is also street-smart and can engage in hand-to-hand combat when the need arises; in one episode he mentions having learned combat judo in the Marine Corps, which is probably a reference to George Peppard's two-year enlistment in the Marine Corps, being discharged at the rank of Corporal. He grew up in Scollay Square and a childhood acquaintance described him as the neighborhood jock who excelled in all sports. For recreation he jogs, plays squash, engages in weekend touch football and sculling on the Charles River.\nProduction.\nIn general, the series was shot on the Universal Studios backlot, though location scenes were filmed around Los Angeles in areas that could pass for Boston, or rural areas near there. The episode titled \"If Max Is So Smart, Why Doesn't He Tell Us Where He Is?\" was shot on location at the California Institute of the Arts around the time the school first opened. \"Ten Thousand Dollars a Page\" was filmed at the Pasadena Art Museum, later known as the Pasadena Museum of Modern Art and now the Norton Simon Museum of Art. \"Horse of a Slightly Different Color\" was filmed at Hollywood Park Racetrack, now the site of SoFi Stadium.\nA customized 1969 American Motors AMX was built by George Barris for the second regular-season episode. The car became known as the AMX-400 and it is now owned by an automobile collector. Other continuing cars in the series were a 1941 maroon Packard 180 with a Victoria body designed by Howard \"Dutch\" Darrin (license plate number 178344), a 1973 Corvette (driven by Ms. Kirkland) and a 1973 Cadillac Fleetwood limousine (mobile telephone number KL 17811). In keeping with both the exotic car theme and the humor between Banacek and his driver Jay Drury, he was even chauffeured around in a Willys MB, Jeep CJ2A, and a CJ6, as well as a brand new Ford/De Tomaso Pantera. Two Packards were used in filming, a 1941 used for principal photography and a modified 1942 model used for some shots in Los Angeles. The main 1941 picture car was auctioned in 2019 by RM Sotheby's for $373,500.\nIn preparation for the pilot and then the first and second seasons, the cast went to Boston and filmed a variety of background scenes. These scenes were then used through the series and are especially shown in the opening scenes, including Banacek rowing on the Charles River and walking through Government Center. In the pilot, Banacek's car pulls into his Beacon Hill home, the historic Second Harrison Gray Otis House located at 85 Mount Vernon Street. In other episodes, views are shown of the Public Garden, the entry to Felix's bookstore at 50 Beacon Street, and the Esplanade. The Boston-filmed pieces were done by a second unit and directed by Peppard himself.\nReception.\nAlthough the show had a mixture of humor and rather intricate plots, it never generated strong ratings. Despite this, the show was well received by critics. In addition, the Polish American Congress gave the series an award for portraying Polish Americans in a good manner. It also helped revive Peppard's career.\nCancellation.\n\"Banacek\" was well received by television critics, and, as a result, was picked up for a third season. However, before the third season could start, Peppard quit the show to prevent his ex-wife Elizabeth Ashley from receiving a larger percentage of his earnings as part of their divorce settlement. The complication ended any chance of reviving \"Banacek\" during Peppard's lifetime. A&amp;E continued rebroadcasts of \"Banacek\" in syndication.\nIn popular culture.\nThe mentalist Steven Shaw adopted his stage name \"Banachek\" after the television program.\nThe show was referenced by the band Fun Lovin' Criminals in the lyrics of its 1998 single \"Love Unlimited\".\nThe character Banacek was also referenced in \"The Simpsons\" \"Treehouse of Horror III\" segment \"Dial Z for Zombies\" when Bart tries to cast a spell to rid Springfield of the zombies he unleashed by intoning the magic words \"Kojak, Mannix, Banacek, Danno...\" (All names of 1970s TV detectives.) \nIn 2018, \"Banacek\" was the subject of an episode-length parody in \"The Simpsons\" (\"Homer Is Where the Art Isn't\"), with Bill Hader voicing the Peppard character, named \"Manacek\". The episode is patterned closely after a typical Banacek outing, referencing items from the series' storytelling format to its establishing shots. The opening and closing credits mimicked \"Banacek\"'s style, even including Goldenberg's theme music. In the \"Akron Beacon Journal\", Rich Heldenfels called the episode \"a dead-on parody of \"Banacek\".\"\nBanacek has a clear resemblance to the title character of the Steve McQueen movie \"The Thomas Crown Affair\", particularly in his attitude towards women and authority. The house used for exterior shots of Thomas Crown's home in Boston, the Harrison Gray Otis House, was used for Banacek's home in the series. Both the film and the show revolve around insurance investigations, but in the series Banacek is solving crimes, not committing them.\nHome media.\nArts Alliance America has released the entire series on DVD in Region 1. Season one was released on May 15, 2007, without the series pilot. Season two was released on January 22, 2008, and included the pilot episode. On September 30, 2008, Arts Alliance released \"Banacek: The Complete Series\", a five-disc box set featuring all 17 episodes.\nIn Region 2, Fabulous Films released both seasons on DVD in the UK on February 10, 2014.\nIn Region 4, Madman Entertainment has released both seasons on DVD in Australia."}
{"id": "4949", "revid": "45131783", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4949", "title": "Blue Angels", "text": "The Blue Angels, formally named the U.S. Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron, are a flight demonstration squadron of the United States Navy. Formed in 1946, the unit is the second oldest formal aerobatic team in the world, following the which formed in 1931. The team has six Navy and one Marine Corps demonstration pilots. They fly the Boeing F/A-18 Super Hornet and the Lockheed Martin C-130J Super Hercules.\nThe Blue Angels typically perform aerial displays in at least 60 shows annually at 30 locations throughout the United States and two shows at one location in Canada. The \"Blues\" still employ many of the same practices and techniques used in the inaugural 1946 season. An estimated 11 million spectators view the squadron during air shows from March through November each year. Members of the Blue Angels team also visit more than 50,000 people in schools, hospitals, and community functions at air show cities. Since 1946, the Blue Angels have flown for more than 505 million spectators. In 2011, the Blue Angels received $37 million from the annual Department of Defense budget.\nMission.\nThe mission of the Blue Angels is to showcase the pride and professionalism of the United States Navy and Marine Corps by inspiring a culture of excellence and service to the country through flight demonstrations and community outreach.\nAir shows.\nThe Blue Angels perform at both military and non-military airfields, and often at major U.S. cities and capitals; also locations in Canada are often included in the air show schedule.\nDuring their aerobatic demonstration, the six-member team flies F/A-18 Hornets, split into the Diamond formation (Blue Angels 1through 4) and the Lead and Opposing Solos (Blue Angels 5and 6). Most of the show alternates between maneuvers performed by the Diamond formation and those performed by the Solos. The Diamond, in tight formation and usually at lower speeds (400\u00a0mph), performs maneuvers such as formation loops, rolls, and transitions from one formation to another. The Solos showcase the high performance capabilities of their individual aircraft through the execution of high-speed passes, slow passes, fast rolls, slow rolls, and very tight turns. The highest speed flown during an air show is 700\u00a0mph (just under Mach 1) and the lowest speed, is 126\u00a0mph (110 knots) during Section High Alpha with the new Super Hornet (about 115 knots with the old \"Legacy\" Hornet). Some of the maneuvers include both solo aircraft performing at once, such as opposing passes (toward each other in what appears to be a collision course) and mirror formations (back-to-back, belly-to-belly, or wingtip-to-wingtip, with one jet flying inverted). The Solos join the diamond formation near the end of the show for a number of maneuvers in delta formation.\nThe parameters of each show must be tailored in accordance with local weather conditions at showtime: in clear weather the \"high\" show is performed; in overcast conditions a \"low\" show is performed, and in limited visibility (weather permitting) the \"flat\" show is presented. The \"high\" show requires at least an ceiling and visibility of at least from the show's center point. The minimum ceilings allowed for low and flat shows are 4,500\u00a0feet, and 1,500 feet respectively.\nAircraft.\nCurrent.\nThe team flew the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet for 34 years from 1986 through 2020. The team currently flies the Boeing F/A-18 Super Hornet.\nIn August 2018, Boeing was awarded a contract to convert nine single-seat F/A-18E Super Hornets and two F/A-18F two-seaters for Blue Angels use. Modifications to each F/A-18E/F include removal of the weapons and replacement with a tank that contains smoke-oil used in demonstrations and outfitting the control stick with a spring system for more precise aircraft control input. Control sticks are tensioned with of force to allow the pilot minimal room for non-commanded movement of the aircraft. Each modified F/A-18 remains in the fleet and can be returned to combat duty aboard an aircraft carrier within 72 hours. As converted aircraft were delivered, they were used for testing maneuvers starting in mid 2020. The team's Super Hornets became operational by the beginning of 2021, their 75th anniversary year.\nThe show's narrator flies Blue Angels No. 7, a two-seat F/A-18F Hornet, to show sites. The Blues use these jets for backups, and to give demonstration rides to VIP (civilians). Usually, two back seats rides are available at each air show; one goes to a member of the press, and the other to the \"Key Influencer\". The No. 4 slot pilot often flies the No. 7 aircraft in Friday's \"practice\" so that pilots from the fleet and future team members can experience the show.\nIn 2020, the United States Marine Corps Blue Angels purchased a surplus Royal Air Force Lockheed C-130J Super Hercules (RAF registration ZH885, US registration 170000) as the new \"Fat Albert\", for their logistics, carrying spare parts, equipment, and to carry support personnel between shows.\nHistorical.\nF6F-5 Hellcat.\nThe \"Hellcat\" was the first aircraft flown, and the pilots were advanced flight instructors who flew the aircraft at war. The F6F-5s were painted in a dark navy blue with gold lettering and made first flight demonstration on May 10, 1946.\nF8F-1 Bearcat.\nThe \"'Bearcat\" began flying towards the end of the first season for the team. It was the last propeller-driven aircraft flown by the Blue Angels and the first to fly the diamond formation. The Bearcats first appeared when performing in Denver in August of 1946.\nF9F-2 Panther.\nThe \"Panther\" was the first jet used by the Blue Angels. After a temporary disbandment for the Korean War, with the unit serving with VMF-191, when reactivated on Oct. 25, 1951 the F9F-5 Panther was again used.\nF9F-8 Cougar.\nIn the winter of 1954/55 the \"Cougar\" started being flown by the Blue Angels, serving until the middle of 1957.\nF11F-1 Tiger.\nIn mid 1957 \"Tiger\" began flying with the Blue Angels. The F11F-1 was the first supersonic jet and the last Grumman planes serving the flight team. It was used until 1969, even though it had been withdrawn from frontline service years ago. It proved one of the most popular aircraft with the public shows, because of its afterburner and sleek lines.\nF/A-18 Hornet.\nIn 1986 the Blue Angels transitioned to the F/A-18 Hornet. The F/A-18A model served from 1986 to 2010, and F/A-18C model from 2010 to 2020.\nF-4J Phantom II.\nIn 1969 the F-4J became the demo plane, serving until December 1974. The F-4 was operated concurrently by the Blue Angels and Thunderbirds demonstration teams.\nA-4F Skyhawk II.\nSome accidents and the price of fuel lead to adopt the more economical \"Skyhawk\". The Blue Angels flew the A-4 in their 80 shows during the Bicentennial celebrations of 1976. The Blue Angels also made 30 years on 1976 and performed their 2,000th show flying the A-4F . The \"Skyhawk\" served from December 1974 to November 1986.\nTeam members.\n, there have been 272 demonstration pilots in the Blue Angels since their inception.\nAll team members, both officer and enlisted, pilots and staff officers, come from the ranks of regular Navy and United States Marine Corps units. The demonstration pilots and narrator are made up of Navy and USMC Naval Aviators. Pilots serve two to three years, and position assignments are made according to team needs, pilot experience levels, and career considerations for members. Other officers in the squadron include a naval flight officer who serves as the events coordinator, three USMC C-130 pilots, an executive officer, a maintenance officer, a supply officer, a public affairs officer, an administrative officer, and a flight surgeon. Enlisted members range from E-4 to E-9 and perform all maintenance, administrative, and support functions. They serve three to four years in the squadron. After serving with the squadron, members return to fleet assignments.\nThe officer selection process requires pilots and support officers (flight surgeon, events coordinator, maintenance officer, supply officer, and public affairs officer) wishing to become Blue Angels to apply formally via their chain-of-command, with a personal statement, letters of recommendation, and flight records. Navy and Marine Corps F/A-18 demonstration pilots and naval flight officers are required to have a minimum of 1,250 tactical jet hours and be carrier-qualified. Marine Corps C-130 demonstration pilots are required to have 1,200 flight hours and be an aircraft commander.\nApplicants \"rush\" the team at one or more airshows, paid out of their own finances, and sit in on team briefs, post-show activities, and social events. It is critical that new officers fit the existing culture and team dynamics. The application and evaluation process runs from March through early July, culminating with extensive finalist interviews and team deliberations. Team members vote in secret on the next year's officers. Selections must be unanimous.\nThe Flight Leader (No. 1) is the commanding officer and always holds the rank of commander, and may be promoted to captain mid-tour if approved by the selection board.\nCommander Adam L. Bryan assumed command of the Blue Angles in November 2024. He relieved Captain Alexander P. Armatas, a native of Skaneateles, New York. Armatas graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 2002 with a Bachelor of Science in aerospace engineering. Armatas joined the Blue Angels in August 2022. He has accumulated more than 4,100 flight hours and 911 carrier-arrested landings. His decorations include the Meritorious Service Medal, four Strike/Flight Air Medals, five Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medals, one Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, and various personal, unit and service awards.\nPilots numbered 2\u20137 are Navy lieutenant commanders or lieutenants, or Marine Corps majors or captains. The No.7 pilot narrates for a year, and then typically flies Opposing and then Lead Solo the following two years, respectively. The No.3 pilot moves to the No.4 (slot) position for their second year. Blue Angel No.4 serves as the demonstration safety officer, due largely to the perspective they are afforded from the slot position within the formation, as well as their status as a second-year demonstration pilot. No.8 serves as Events Coordinator for two years.\nSince 2008, six female flight officers have been selected. LCDR. Amanda Lee became the first woman to be named as a F/A-18 demonstration pilot. She served from 2022-2024. LCDR Lilly Montana is serving as Events Coordinator for the 2025 season. CDR. Amy Tomlinson, MAJ. Corrie Mays USMC, and LCDR. Katlin Forster have previously served as Events Coordinators. MAJ. Katie Higgins Cook USMC served as a C-130 pilot.\nSeveral minority flight officers have served including CAPT. Donnie Cochran the first African American to command the Blue Angels. Lt. Andre Webb and LCDR. Julius Bratton have served as demonstration pilots.\nFlight surgeons serve a two-year term. The flight surgeon provides team medical services, evaluates demonstration maneuvers from the ground, and participates in each post-flight debrief. The first female Blue Angel flight surgeon was Lt. Tamara Schnurr, who was a member of the 2001 team.\nTraining and weekly routine.\nAnnual winter training takes place at NAF El Centro, California, where new and returning pilots hone skills learned in the fleet. During winter training, the pilots fly two practice sessions per day, six days a week, to fly the 120 training missions needed to perform the demonstration safely. The separation between the formation of aircraft and their maneuver altitude is gradually reduced over the course of about two months in January and February. The team then returns to their home base in Pensacola, Florida, in March, and continues to practice throughout the show season. A typical week during the season has practices at NAS Pensacola on Tuesday and Wednesday mornings. The team then flies to its show venue for the upcoming weekend on Thursday, conducting \"circle and arrival\" orientation maneuvers upon arrival. The team flies a \"practice\" airshow at the show site on Friday. This show is attended by invited guests but is often open to the general public. The main airshows are conducted on Saturdays and Sundays, with the team returning home to NAS Pensacola on Sunday evenings after the show. Monday is an off day for the Blues' demonstration pilots and road crew. Extensive aircraft maintenance is performed on Sunday evening and Monday by maintenance team members.\nPilots maneuver the flight stick with their right hand and operate the throttle with their left. They do not wear G-suits because the air bladders inside repeatedly deflate and inflate, increasing the risk of unintentional movement. To compensate for the lack of G-suits, Blue Angel pilots have developed a method for tensing their muscles to prevent blood from pooling in their lower extremities, possibly rendering them unconscious.\nHistory.\nOverview.\nThe Blue Angels were originally formed in April 1946 as the Navy Flight Exhibition Team. They changed their name to the Blue Angels after seeing an advertisement for the New York nightclub The Blue Angel, also known as The Blue Angel Supper Club, in the New Yorker Magazine. The team was first introduced as the Blue Angels during an air show in July 1946.\nThe first Blue Angels demonstration aircraft wore navy blue (nearly black) with gold lettering. The current shades of blue and yellow were adopted when the first demonstration aircraft were transitioned from the Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat to the Grumman F8F-1 Bearcat in August 1946; the aircraft wore an all-yellow scheme with blue markings during the 1949 show season.\nThe original Blue Angels insignia or crest was designed in 1949, by Lt. Commander Raleigh \"Dusty\" Rhodes, their third Flight Leader and first jet fighter leader. The aircraft silhouettes change as the team changes aircraft.\nThe Blue Angels transitioned from propeller-driven aircraft to blue and gold jet aircraft (Grumman F9F-2B Panther) in August 1949.\nThe Blue Angels demonstration teams began wearing leather jackets and special colored flight suits with the Blue Angels insignia, in 1952. In 1953, they began wearing gold colored flight suits for the first show of the season and or to commemorate milestones for the flight demonstration squadron.\nThe Navy Flight Exhibition Team was reorganized and commissioned the \"United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron\" on 10 December 1973.\n1946\u20131949.\nThe Blue Angels were established as a Navy flight exhibition team on 24 April 1946 by order of Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Chester Nimitz to generate greater public support of naval aviation. To boost Navy morale, demonstrate naval air power, and maintain public interest in naval aviation, an underlying mission was to help the Navy generate public and political support for a larger allocation of the shrinking defense budget. Rear Admiral Ralph Davison personally selected Lieutenant Commander Roy Marlin \"Butch\" Voris, a World War II fighter ace, to assemble and train a flight demonstration team, naming him Officer-in-Charge and Flight Leader. Voris selected three fellow instructors to join him (Lt. Maurice \"Wick\" Wickendoll, Lt. Mel Cassidy, and Lt. Cmdr. Lloyd Barnard, veterans of the War in the Pacific), and they spent countless hours developing the show. The group perfected its initial maneuvers in secret over the Florida Everglades so that, in Voris' words, \"if anything happened, just the alligators would know\". The first four pilots and those after them were some of the best and most experienced aviators in the Navy.\nThe team's first demonstration with Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat aircraft took place before Navy officials on 10 May 1946 and was met with enthusiastic approval. The United States Navy's Blue Angels performed their first air show at what is now JaxEx (formerly Craig Municipal Airport, one of 6 airports in the Jacksonville, FL area developed for military training), on June 15, 1946. The exhibition team flew three Gruman F6F Hellcat Fighter planes (a fourth F6F-5 was held in reserve). On 15 June, Voris led the three Hellcats (numbered 1\u20133), specially modified to reduce weight and painted sea blue with gold leaf trim, through their inaugural 15-minute-long performance. The team employed a North American SNJ Texan, painted and configured to simulate a Japanese Zero, to simulate aerial combat. This aircraft was later painted yellow and dubbed the \"Beetle Bomb\". This aircraft is said to have been inspired by one of the Spike Jones' \"Murdering the Classics\" series of musical satires, set to the tune (in part) of the \"William Tell\" Overture as a thoroughbred horse race scene, with \"Beetle Bomb\" being the \"trailing horse\" in the lyrics.\nThe team thrilled spectators with low-flying maneuvers performed in tight formations, and (according to Voris) by \"keeping something in front of the crowds at all times. My objective was to beat the Army Air Corps. If we did that, we'd get all the other side issues. I felt that if we weren't the best, it would be my naval career.\" The Blue Angels' first public demonstration also netted the team its first trophy, which sits on display at the team's current home at NAS Pensacola. During an air show at Omaha, Nebraska on 19\u201321 July 1946, the Navy Flight Exhibition Team was introduced as the \"Blue Angels\". The name had originated through a suggestion by Right Wing Pilot Lt. Maurice \"Wick\" Wickendoll, after he had read about the Blue Angel nightclub in \"The New Yorker\" magazine. After ten appearances with the Hellcats, the Hellcats were replaced by the lighter, faster, and more powerful F8F-1 Bearcats on 25 August. By the end of the year the team consisted of four Bearcats numbered 1\u20134 on the tail sections.\nIn May 1947, flight leader Lt. Cmdr. Bob Clarke replaced Butch Voris as the leader of the team. The team with an additional fifth pilot, relocated to Naval Air Station (NAS) Corpus Christi, Texas. On 7 June at Birmingham, Alabama, four F8F-1 Bearcats (numbered 1\u20134) flew in diamond formation for the first time which is now considered the Blue Angels' trademark. A fifth Bearcat was also added that year. A SNJ was used as a Japanese Zero for dogfights with the Bearcats in air shows.\nIn January 1948, Lt. Cmdr. Raleigh \"Dusty\" Rhodes took command of the Blue Angels team which was flying four Bearcats and a yellow painted SNJ with USN markings dubbed \"Beetle Bomb\"; the SNJ represented a Japanese Zero for the air show dogfights with the Bearcats. The name \"Blue Angels\" also was painted on the Bearcats.\nIn 1949, the team acquired a Douglas R4D Skytrain for logistics to and from show sites. The team's SNJ was also replaced by another Bearcat, painted yellow for the air combat routine, inheriting the \"Beetle Bomb\" nickname. In May, the team went to the west coast on temporary duty so the pilots and the rest of the team could become familiar with jet aircraft. On 13 July, the team acquired, and began flying the straight-wing Grumman F9F-2B Panther between demonstration shows. On 20 August, the team debuted the panther jets under Team Leader Lt. Commander Raleigh \"Dusty\" Rhodes during an air show at Beaumont, Texas and added a sixth pilot. The F8F-1 \"Beetle Bomb\" was relegated to solo aerobatics before the main show, until it crashed on takeoff at a training show in Pensacola on 24 April 1950, killing \"Blues\" pilot Lt. Robert Longworth. Team headquarters shifted from NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, to NAAS Whiting Field, Florida, on 10 September 1949, announced 14 July 1949.\n1950\u20131959.\nThe Blue Angels pilots continued to perform nationwide in 1950. On 25 June, the Korean War started, and all Blue Angels pilots volunteered for combat duty. The squadron (due to a shortage of pilots, and no available planes) and its members were ordered to \"combat-ready status\" after an exhibition at Naval Air Station, Dallas, Texas on 30 July. The Blue Angels were disbanded, and its pilots were reassigned to a carrier. Once aboard the aircraft carrier on 9 November, the group formed the core of Fighter Squadron 191 (VF-19), \"Satan's Kittens\", under the command of World War II fighter ace and 1950 Blue Angels Commander/Flight Leader, Lt. Commander John Magda; he was killed in action on 8 March 1951.\nOn 25 October 1951, the Blues were ordered to re-activate as a flight demonstration team, and reported to NAS Corpus Christi, Texas. Lt. Cdr. Voris was again tasked with assembling the team (he was the first of only two commanding officers to lead them twice). In May 1952, the Blue Angels began performing again with F9F-5 Panthers at an airshow in Memphis, Tennessee. In 1953, the team traded its Sky Train for a Curtiss R5C Commando. In August, \"Blues\" leader LCDR Ray Hawkins became the first naval aviator to survive an ejection at supersonic speeds when a new F9F-6 he was piloting became uncontrollable on a cross-country flight. After summer, the team began demonstrating with F9F-6 Cougar.\nIn 1954, the first Marine Corps pilot, Captain Chuck Hiett, joined the Navy flight demonstration team. The Blue Angels also received special colored flight suits. In May, the Blue Angels performed at Bolling Air Force Base in Washington, D.C., with the Air Force Thunderbirds (activated 25 May 1953). The Blue Angels began relocating to their current home at Naval Air Station (NAS) Pensacola, Florida that winter, and it was here they progressed to the swept-wing Grumman F9F-8 Cougar. In December, the team left its home base for its first winter training facility at Naval Air Facility El Centro, California\nIn September 1956, the team added a sixth aircraft to the flight demonstration in the Opposing Solo position, and gave its first performance outside the United States at the International Air Exposition in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. It also upgraded its logistics aircraft to the Douglas R5D Skymaster.\nIn 1957, the Blue Angels transitioned from the F9F-8 Cougar to the supersonic Grumman F11F-1 Tiger. The first demonstration was flying the short-nosed version on 23 March, at Barin Field, Pensacola, and then the long-nosed versions. The demonstration team (with added Angel 6) wore gold flight suits during the first air show that season.\nIn 1958, the first Six-Plane Delta Maneuvers were added that season.\n1960\u20131969.\nIn July 1964, the Blue Angels participated in the Aeronaves de Mexico Anniversary Air Show over Mexico City, Mexico, before an estimated crowd of 1.5\u00a0million people.\nIn 1965, the Blue Angels conducted a Caribbean island tour, flying at five sites. Later that year, they embarked on a European tour to a dozen sites, including the Paris Air Show, where they were the only team to receive a standing ovation.\nIn 1967, the Blues toured Europe again, at six sites.\nIn 1968, the C-54 Skymaster transport aircraft was replaced with a Lockheed VC-121J Constellation. The Blues transitioned to the two-seat McDonnell Douglas F-4J Phantom II in 1969, nearly always keeping the back seat empty for flight demonstrations. The Phantom was the only plane to be flown by both the \"Blues\" and the United States Air Force Thunderbirds (the \"Birds\"). That year they also upgraded to the Lockheed C-121 Super Constellation for logistics.\n1970\u20131979.\nIn 1970, the Blues received their first U.S. Marine Corps Lockheed KC-130F Hercules, manned by an all-Marine crew. That year, they went on their first South American tour.\nIn 1971, the team which wore the gold flight suits for the first show, conducted its first Far East Tour, performing at a dozen locations in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Guam, and the Philippines.\nIn 1972, the Blue Angels were awarded the Navy's Meritorious Unit Commendation for the two-year period from 1 March 1970 to 31 December 1971. Another European tour followed in 1973, including air shows in Iran, England, France, Spain, Turkey, Greece, and Italy.\nOn 10 December 1973, the Navy Flight Exhibition Team was reorganized and commissioned the \"United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron\". The Blues mission was more on Navy recruiting.\nIn 1974, the Blue Angels transitioned to the new Douglas A-4F Skyhawk II. Navy Commander Anthony Less became the squadron's first \"commanding officer\" and \"flight leader\". A permanent flight surgeon position and administration officer was added to the team. The squadron's mission was redefined by Less to further improve the recruiting effort.\nBeginning in 1975, \"Bert\" was used for Jet Assisted Take Off (JATO) and short aerial demonstrations just prior to the main event at selected venues, but the JATO demonstration ended in 2009 due to dwindling supplies of rockets. \"Fat Albert Airlines\" flies with an all-Marine crew of three officers and five enlisted personnel.\n1980\u20131989.\nIn 1986, LCDR Donnie Cochran, joined the Blue Angels as the first African-American Naval Aviator to be selected. He served for two more years with the squadron flying the left wing-man position in the No.3 A-4F fighter, and returned to command the Blue Angels in 1995 and 1996.\nOn 8 November 1986, the Blue Angels completed their 40th anniversary year during ceremonies unveiling what would be their aircraft through their 75th anniversary year, the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet. The power and aerodynamics of the Hornet allows them to perform a slow, high angle of attack \"tail sitting\" maneuver, and to fly a \"dirty\" (landing gear down) formation loop.\n1990\u20131999.\nIn 1992, the Blue Angels deployed for a month-long European tour, their first in 19 years, conducting shows in Sweden, Finland, Russia (first foreign flight demonstration team to perform there), Romania, Bulgaria, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Spain.\nIn 1998, CDR Patrick Driscoll made the first \"Blue Jet\" landing on a \"haze gray and underway\" aircraft carrier, USS \"Harry S. Truman\" (CVN-75).\nOn 8 October 1999, the Blue Angels lost two pilots. LCDR Kieron O'Connor and LT Kevin Colling were returning from a practice flight before an air show when their F/A-18B crashed in a wooded area of south Georgia.\n2000\u20132009.\nIn 2000, the Navy was conducting investigations in regard and connected to the loss of two Blue Angels pilots in October 1999. The pilots of the F/A-18 Hornet were not required to wear and do not wear g-suits.\nIn 2006, the Blue Angels marked their 60th year of performing. On 30 October 2008, a spokesman for the team announced that the team would complete its last three performances of the year with five jets instead of six. The change was because one pilot and another officer in the organization had been removed from duty for engaging in an \"inappropriate relationship\". The Navy said one of the individuals was a man and the other a woman, one a Marine and the other from the Navy, and that Rear Admiral Mark Guadagnini, chief of Naval air training, was reviewing the situation. At the next performance at Lackland Air Force Base following the announcement the No.4 or slot pilot, was absent from the formation. A spokesman for the team would not confirm the identity of the pilot removed from the team. On 6 November 2008, both officers were found guilty at an admiral's mast on unspecified charges but the resulting punishment was not disclosed.\nOn 21 April 2007, pilot Kevin \"Kojak\" Davis was killed and eight people on the ground were injured when Davis lost control of the No.6 jet and crashed during an air show at the Marine Corps Air Station Beaufort in Beaufort, South Carolina.\nThe Fat Albert performed its final JATO demonstration at the 2009 Pensacola Homecoming show, expending their eight remaining JATO bottles. This demonstration not only was the last JATO performance of the squadron, but also the final JATO use of the U.S. Marine Corps.\nIn 2009, the Blue Angels were inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\n2010\u20132019.\nOn 22 May 2011, the Blue Angels were performing at the Lynchburg Regional Airshow in Lynchburg, Virginia, when the Diamond formation flew the Barrel Roll Break maneuver at an altitude lower than the required minimum. The maneuver was aborted, the remainder of the demonstration canceled and all aircraft landed safely. The next day, the Blue Angels announced that they were initiating a safety stand-down, canceling their upcoming Naval Academy Airshow and returning to their home base in Pensacola, Florida, for additional training and airshow practice. On 26 May, the Blue Angels announced they would not be flying their traditional fly-over of the Naval Academy Graduation Ceremony and that they were canceling their 28\u201329 May 2011 performances at the Millville Wings and Wheels Airshow in Millville, New Jersey.\nOn 27 May 2011, the Blue Angels announced that Commander Dave Koss, the squadron's commanding officer, would be stepping down. He was replaced by Captain Greg McWherter, the team's previous commanding officer. The squadron canceled performances at the Rockford, Illinois Airfest 4\u20135 June and the Evansville, Indiana Freedom Festival Air Show 11\u201312 June to allow additional practice and demonstration training under McWherter's leadership.\nOn 29 July 2011, a new Blue Angels Mustang GT was auctioned off for $400,000 at the Experimental Aircraft Association AirVenture Oshkosh (Oshkosh Air Show) annual summer gathering of aviation enthusiasts from 25 to 31 July in Oshkosh, Wisconsin which had an attendance of 541,000 persons and 2,522 show planes.\nBetween 2 and 4 September 2011 on Labor Day weekend, the Blue Angels flew for the first time with a fifty-fifty blend of conventional JP-5 jet fuel and a camelina-based biofuel at Naval Air Station Patuxent River, Maryland. McWherter flew an F/A-18 test flight on 17 August and stated there were no noticeable differences in performance from inside the cockpit.\nOn 1 March 2013, the U.S. Navy announced that it was cancelling remaining 2013 performances after 1 April 2013 due to sequestration budget constraints. In October 2013, Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, stating that \"community and public outreach is a crucial Departmental activity\", announced that the Blue Angels (along with the U.S. Air Force's Thunderbirds) would resume appearing at air shows starting in 2014, although the number of flyovers will continue to be severely reduced.\nOn 15 March 2014, the demonstration pilots numbered 1\u20137 wore gold flight suits to celebrate the team's \"return to the skies\" during their first air show of the season; there were only three air shows in 2013.\nIn July 2014, Marine Corps C-130 pilot Capt. Katie Higgins, 27, became the first female pilot to join the Blue Angels, flying the support aircraft Fat Albert for the 2015 and 2016 show seasons.\nIn July 2015, Cmdr. Bob Flynn became the Blue Angels' first executive officer.\nOn 2 June 2016, Capt. Jeff Kuss, an Opposing Solo, died just after takeoff while performing the Split-S maneuver in his Hornet during a practice run for The Great Tennessee Air Show in Smyrna, Tennessee. The Navy's investigation found that Capt. Kuss had performed the maneuver too low while failing to retard the throttle out of afterburner, causing him to fall too fast and recover too low above the ground. Capt. Kuss ejected, but his parachute was immediately engulfed in flames, causing him to fall to his death. Kuss' body was recovered just yards away from the crash site. The cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head. The investigation also cited weather and pilot fatigue as additional causes of the crash. In a strange twist, Captain Kuss' fatal crash happened hours after the Blue Angels' fellow pilots in the United States Air Force Thunderbirds suffered a crash of their own, following the United States Air Force Academy graduation ceremony earlier that day. Capt. Jeff Kuss was replaced by Cmdr. Frank Weisser to finish out the 2016 and 2017 seasons.\nIn July 2016, Boeing was awarded a $12 million contract to begin an engineering proposal for converting the Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet for Blue Angels use, with the proposal to be completed by September 2017.\nThe Fat Albert (BUNO 164763) was retired from service in May 2019 with 30,000 flight hours. The Blue Angels replaced it with a C-130J Super Hercules acquired from the Royal Air Force (BUNO 170000).\n2020\u2013present.\nIn response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, the Blue Angels flew over multiple US cities as a tribute to healthcare and front line workers.\nThe Blues officially transitioned to Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornets on 4 November 2020.\nIn July 2022, Lt. Amanda Lee was announced as the first woman to serve as a demonstration pilot in the Blue Angels.\nAircraft timeline.\nThe \"Blues\" have flown ten different demonstration aircraft and six support aircraft models:\nCommanding officers.\nNotable Commanding Officers include;\nNotable members.\nBelow are some of the more notable members of the Blue Angels squadron:\nTeam accidents and deaths.\nA total of 20 Blue Angels pilots and one crew member have died while assigned to the flight team. Four other pilots died in combat action after their service with the Blue Angels.\nCombat casualties.\nFour former Blue Angels pilots have been killed in action or died after being captured, all having been downed by anti-aircraft fire."}
{"id": "4950", "revid": "1269447965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4950", "title": "Born again", "text": "To be born again, or to experience the new birth, is a phrase, particularly in evangelical Christianity, that refers to a \"spiritual rebirth\", or a regeneration of the human spirit. In contrast to one's physical birth, being \"born again\" is distinctly and separately caused by the operation of the Holy Spirit, and it occurs when one surrenders one's life to Christ (John 3:5, Titus 3:5). While all Christians are familiar with the concept from the Bible, it is a core doctrine of the denominations of the Anabaptist, Moravian, Methodist, Baptist, Plymouth Brethren and Pentecostal churches along with evangelical Christian denominations. These Churches stress Jesus's words in the Gospels: \"Do not be astonished that I said to you, \u2018You must be born from above.\u2019\" (John 3:7). (In some English translations, the phrase \"born again\" is rendered as \"born from above\".) Their doctrines also hold that to be \"born again\" and thus \"saved\", one must have a personal and intimate relationship with Jesus Christ.\nThe term \"born again\" has its origin in the New Testament. In the First Epistle of Peter, the author describes the new birth as taking place from the seed which is the Word of God. In the Gospel of Luke, Jesus himself refers to the Word of God as the seed.\nIn contemporary Christian usage and apart from evangelicalism, the term is distinct from similar terms which are sometimes used in Christianity in reference to a person who is, or is becoming, a Christian. This usage of the term is usually linked to baptism with water and the related doctrine of baptismal regeneration. Individuals who profess to be \"born again\" (meaning born in the \"Holy Spirit\") often state that they have a \"personal relationship with Jesus Christ\".\nOrigin.\nThe term is derived from an event in the Gospel of John in which the words of Jesus were not understood by a Jewish Pharisee, Nicodemus:\nThe Gospel of John was written in Koine Greek, and the original text is ambiguous which results in a double entendre that Nicodemus misunderstands. The word translated as 'again' is (), which could mean either 'again', or 'from above'. The double entendre is a figure of speech that the gospel writer uses to create bewilderment or misunderstanding in the hearer; the misunderstanding is then clarified by either Jesus or the narrator. Nicodemus takes only the literal meaning from Jesus's statement, while Jesus clarifies that he means more of a spiritual rebirth from above. English translations have to pick one sense of the phrase or another; the NIV, King James Version, and Revised Version use \"born again\", while the New Revised Standard Version and the New English Translation prefer the \"born from above\" translation. Most versions will note the alternative sense of the phrase in a footnote.\nEdwyn Hoskyns argues that \"born from above\" is to be preferred as the fundamental meaning and he drew attention to phrases such as \"birth of the Spirit\", \"birth from God\", but maintains that this necessarily carries with it an emphasis upon the newness of the life as given by God himself.\nThe final use of the phrase occurs in the First Epistle of Peter, rendered in the King James Version as:\nHere, the Greek word translated as 'born again' is ().\nInterpretations.\nThe traditional Jewish understanding of the promise of salvation is interpreted as being rooted in \"the seed of Abraham\"; that is, physical lineage from Abraham. Jesus explained to Nicodemus that this doctrine was in errorthat every person must have two birthsnatural birth of the physical body and another of the water and the spirit. This discourse with Nicodemus established the Christian belief that all human beingswhether Jew or Gentilemust be \"born again\" of the spiritual seed of Christ. This understanding is further reinforced in 1 Peter 1:23. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states that \"[a] controversy existed in the primitive church over the interpretation of the expression \"the seed of Abraham\". It is [the First Epistle of Peter's] teaching in one instance that all who are Christ's by faith are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. He is concerned, however, with the fact that the promise is not being fulfilled to the seed of Abraham (referring to the Jews).\"\nCharles Hodge writes that \"The subjective change wrought in the soul by the grace of God, is variously designated in Scripture\" with terms such as \"new birth\", \"resurrection\", \"new life\", \"new creation\", \"renewing of the mind\", \"dying to sin and living to righteousness\", and \"translation from darkness to light\".\nJesus used the \"birth\" analogy in tracing spiritual newness of life to a divine beginning. Contemporary Christian theologians have provided explanations for \"born from above\" being a more accurate translation of the original Greek word transliterated . Theologian Frank Stagg cites two reasons why the newer translation is significant:\nAn early example of the term in its more modern use appears in the sermons of John Wesley. In the sermon entitled \"A New Birth\" he writes, \"none can be holy unless he be born again\", and \"except he be born again, none can be happy even in this world. For[...] a man should not be happy who is not holy.\" Also, \"I say, [a man] may be born again and so become an heir of salvation.\" Wesley also states infants who are baptized are born again, but for adults it is different:\nA Unitarian work called \"The Gospel Anchor\" noted in the 1830s that the phrase was not mentioned in any of the Gospels, nor by any Epistles except in that of 1 Peter. \"It was not regarded by any of the Evangelists but John of sufficient importance to record.\" It adds that without John, \"we should hardly have known that it was necessary for one to be born again.\" This suggests that \"the text and context was meant to apply to Nicodemus particularly, and not to the world.\"\nHistoricity.\nScholars of the historical Jesus, who attempt to ascertain how closely the stories of Jesus match the historical events they are based on, generally treat Jesus's conversation with Nicodemus in John 3 with skepticism. It details what is presumably a private conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus, with none of the disciples seemingly attending, making it unclear how a record of this conversation was acquired. In addition, the conversation is recorded in no other ancient Christian source other than John and works based on John. According to Bart Ehrman, the larger issue is that the same problem English translations of the Bible have with the Greek () is a problem in the Aramaic language as well: there is no single word in Aramaic that means both 'again' and 'from above', yet the conversation rests on Nicodemus making this misunderstanding. As the conversation was between two Jews in Jerusalem, where Aramaic was the native language, there is no reason to think that they would have spoken in Greek. This implies that even if based on a real conversation, the author of John heavily modified it to include Greek wordplay and idiom.\nDenominational positions.\nAnabaptism.\nAnabaptist denominations, such as the Mennonites, teach that \"True faith entails a new birth, a spiritual regeneration by God's grace and power; 'believers' are those who have become the spiritual children of God.\" In Anabaptist theology, the pathway to salvation, is \"marked not by a forensic understanding of salvation by 'faith alone', but by the entire process of repentance, self-denial, faith rebirth and obedience.\" Those who wish to tarry this path receive baptism after the new birth.\nAnglicanism.\nThe phrase \"born again\" is mentioned in the 39 Articles of the Anglican Church in article XV, entitled \"Of Christ alone without Sin\". In part, it reads: \"sin, as S. John saith, was not in Him. But all we the rest, although baptized and born again in Christ, yet offend in many things: and if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.\"\nAlthough the phrase \"baptized and born again in Christ\" occurs in Article XV, the reference is clearly to the scripture passage in John 3:3.\nThe Baptism Office of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer directly connects Baptism and new birth affirming a Baptismal Regeneration view of the meaning of the phrase \"Born Again\", not a conversion experience.\nBefore the Baptism the prayers include;\n\"None can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be regenerate and born anew of Water and of the Holy Ghost; I beseech you to call upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous goodness he will grant to these persons that which by nature they cannot have; that they may be baptized with Water and the Holy Ghost, and received into Christ's holy Church, and be made lively members of the same.\"\nAnd; \"Beloved, ye hear in this Gospel the express words of our Saviour Christ, that except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Whereby ye may perceive the great necessity of this Sacrament, where it may be had.\"\nAnd after Baptism; \"yield thee humble thanks, O heavenly Father, that thou hast vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace, and faith in thee; Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore. Give thy Holy Spirit to these persons; that, being now born again, and made heirs of everlasting salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, they may continue thy servants, and attain thy promises; through the same Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who liveth and reigneth with thee, in the unity of the same Holy Spirit, everlastingly. Amen.\"\nBaptists.\nBaptists teach that people are born again when they believe that Jesus died for their sin, and was buried, and rose again, and that by believing/trusting in Jesus' death, burial and resurrection, eternal life shall be granted as a gift by God. Those who have been born again, according to Baptist teaching, know that they are \"[children] of God because the Holy Spirit witnesses to them that they are\" (cf. assurance).\nCatholicism.\nHistorically, the classic text from John 3 was consistently interpreted by early Church Fathers as a reference to baptism. Modern Catholic interpreters have noted that the phrase 'born from above' or 'born again' is clarified as 'being born of water and Spirit'.\nCatholic commentator John F. McHugh notes, \"Rebirth, and the commencement of this new life, are said to come about , of water and spirit. This phrase (without the article) refers to a rebirth which the early Church regarded as taking place through baptism.\"\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" (CCC) notes that the essential elements of Christian initiation are: \"proclamation of the Word, acceptance of the Gospel entailing conversion, profession of faith, Baptism itself, and the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, and admission to Eucharistic communion.\" Baptism gives the person the grace of forgiveness for all prior sins; it makes the newly baptized person a new creature and an adopted child of God; it incorporates them into the Body of Christ and creates a sacramental bond of unity leaving an indelible mark on the person's soul. \"Incorporated into Christ by Baptism, the person baptized is configured to Christ. Baptism seals the Christian with the indelible spiritual mark (character) of his belonging to Christ. No sin can erase this mark, even if sin prevents Baptism from bearing the fruits of salvation. Given once for all, Baptism cannot be repeated.\" The Holy Spirit is involved with each aspect of the movement of grace. \"The first work of the grace of the Holy Spirit is conversion. [...] Moved by grace, man turns toward God and away from sin, thus accepting forgiveness and righteousness from on high.\"\nThe Catholic Church also teaches that under special circumstances, the need for water baptism can be superseded by the Holy Spirit in a 'Baptism of desire', such as when catechumens die or are martyred prior to Baptism.\nPope John Paul II wrote in about \"the problem of children baptized in infancy [who] come for catechesis in the parish without receiving any other initiation into the faith and still without any explicit personal attachment to Jesus Christ.\" He noted that \"being a Christian means saying 'yes' to Jesus Christ, but let us remember that this 'yes' has two levels: It consists of surrendering to the word of God and relying on it, but it also means, at a later stage, endeavoring to know better\u2014and better the profound meaning of this word.\"\nThe modern expression being \"born again\" is really about the concept of \"conversion\".\nThe National Directory of Catechesis (published by the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, USCCB) defines conversion as, \"the acceptance of a personal relationship with Christ, a sincere adherence to him, and a willingness to conform one's life to his.\" To put it more simply, \"Conversion to Christ involves making a genuine commitment to him and a personal decision to follow him as his disciple.\"\nEchoing the writings of Pope John Paul II, the \"National Directory of Catechesis\" describes a new intervention required by the modern world called the \"New Evangelization\". This is directed to the Church, to the baptized who were never effectively evangelized before, to those who have never made a personal commitment to Christ and the Gospel, to those formed by the values of secular culture, to those who have lost a sense of faith, and to those who are alienated.\nDeclan O'Sullivan, co-founder of the Catholic Men's Fellowship and knight of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, wrote that the \"New Evangelization emphasizes the personal encounter with Jesus Christ as a pre-condition for spreading the gospel. The born-again experience is not just an emotional, mystical high; the really important matter is what happened in the convert's life after the moment or period of radical change.\"\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that individuals do not have the power to choose to be born again, but that God calls and selects his followers \"from above\". Only those belonging to the \"144,000\" are considered to be born again.\nLutheranism.\nThe Lutheran Church holds that \"we are cleansed of our sins and born again and renewed in Holy Baptism by the Holy Ghost. But some Lutherans also teach that whoever is baptized must, through daily contrition and repentance, drown The Old Adam so that daily a new man come forth and arise who walks before God in righteousness and purity forever. Conservative Lutherans teach that whoever lives in sins after his baptism has again lost the grace of baptism.\"\nMoravianism.\nWith regard to the new birth, the Moravian Church holds that a personal conversion to Christianity is a joyful experience, in which the individual \"accepts Christ as Lord\" after which faith \"daily grows inside the person.\" For Moravians, \"Christ lived as a man because he wanted to provide a blueprint for future generations\" and \"a converted person could attempt to live in his image and daily become more like Jesus.\" As such, \"heart religion\" characterizes Moravian Christianity. The Moravian Church has historically emphasized evangelism, especially missionary work, to spread the faith.\nMethodism.\nIn Methodism, the \"new birth is necessary for salvation because it marks the move toward holiness. That comes with faith.\" John Wesley held that the New Birth \"is that great change which God works in the soul when he brings it into life, when he raises it from the death of sin to the life of righteousness.\" In the life of a Christian, the new birth is considered the first work of grace. In keeping with Wesleyan-Arminian covenant theology, the \"Articles of Religion\", in Article XVII \u2013 Of Baptism, state that baptism is a \"sign of regeneration or the new birth.\" \"The Methodist Visitor\" in describing this doctrine, admonishes individuals: \"'Ye must be born again.' Yield to God that He may perform this work in and for you. Admit Him to your heart. 'Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.'\" Methodist theology teaches that the new birth contains two phases that occur together, justification and regeneration:\nAt the moment a person experiences the New Birth, he/she is \"adopted into the family of God\".\nPlymouth Brethren.\nThe Plymouth Brethren teach that the new birth effects salvation and those who testify that they have been born again, repented, and have faith in the Scriptures are given the right hand of fellowship, after which they can partake of the Lord's Supper.\nPentecostalism.\nHoliness Pentecostals historically teach the new birth (first work of grace), entire sanctification (second work of grace) and baptism with the Holy Spirit, as evidenced by glossolalia, as the third work of grace. The new birth, according to Pentecostal teaching, imparts \"spiritual life\".\nQuakerism.\nThe majority of the world's Quakers are evangelical in churchmanship and teach a born-again experience (cf. Evangelical Friends Church International).\nThe Central Yearly Meeting of Friends, a Holiness Quaker denomination, teaches that regeneration is the \"divine work of initial salvation (Tit. 3:5), or conversion, which involves the accompanying works of justification (Rom. 5:18) and adoption (Rom. 8:15, 16).\" In regeneration, which occurs in the new birth, there is a \"transformation in the heart of the believer wherein he finds himself a new creation in Christ (II Cor. 5:17; Col. 1:27).\"\nFollowing the new birth, George Fox taught the possibility of \"holiness of heart and life through the instantaneous baptism with the Holy Spirit subsequent to the new birth\" (cf. Christian perfection).\nReformed.\nIn Reformed theology, Holy Baptism is the sign and the seal of one's regeneration, which is of comfort to the believer. The time of one's regeneration, however, is a mystery to oneself according to the Canons of Dort.\nAccording to the Reformed churches being born again refers to \"the inward working of the Spirit which induces the sinner to respond to the effectual call\". According to the Westminster Shorter Catechism, Q 88, \"the outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicateth to us the benefits of redemption are, his ordinances, especially the word, sacraments, and prayer; all of which are made effectual to the elect for salvation.\" Effectual calling is \"the work of God's Spirit, whereby, convincing us of our sin and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing our wills, he doth persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely offered to us in the gospel.\"\nIn Reformed theology, \"regeneration precedes faith.\" Samuel Storms writes that, \"Calvinists insist that the sole cause of regeneration or being born again is the will of God. God first sovereignly and efficaciously regenerates, and only in consequence of that do we act. Therefore, the individual is passive in regeneration, neither preparing himself nor making himself receptive to what God will do. Regeneration is a change wrought in us by God, not an autonomous act performed by us for ourselves.\"\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe \"Book of Mormon\" emphasizes the need for everyone to be reborn of God.\nLatter Day Saints believe that to be born again is referring to a true repentance. In otherwords, rejecting the carnal sinful nature of men and making a covenant with God to live a righteous, Christ like life. This covenant is done initially as baptism by immersion at the age of 8, or age of accountability, or when someone newly converts. It is then renewed weekly through partaking of sacrament during church meetings.\nIt is a common misconception that the Church of Jesus Christ teaches that these ordinances are required works to be \"saved\". It is actually taught that Christ has already saved all mankind from physical death and will save from spiritual death through repentance and obeying God's commandments at judgement day, after death and resurrection. Baptism and Sacrament are done as according to the faith of a person as an outward expression of an inward commitment to serve God and live a righteous life.\nDisagreements between denominations.\nThe term \"born again\" is used by several Christian denominations, but there are disagreements on what the term means, and whether members of other denominations are justified in claiming to be born-again Christians.\nCatholic Answers says:\nOn the other hand, an Evangelical site argues:\nThe Reformed view of regeneration may be set apart from other outlooks in at least two ways. \nHistory and usage.\nHistorically, Christianity has used various metaphors to describe its rite of initiation, that is, spiritual regeneration via the sacrament of baptism by the power of the water and the spirit. This remains the common understanding in most of Christendom, held, for example, in Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, Lutheranism, Anglicanism, and in other historic branches of Protestantism. However, sometime after the Reformation, Evangelicalism attributed a different significance to the expression \"born again\" as an experience of religious conversion, only symbolized by water baptism, and rather brought about by a commitment to one's own personal faith in Jesus Christ for salvation. This same belief is, historically, also an integral part of Methodist doctrine, and is connected with the doctrine of Justification.\nAccording to \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\":\nAccording to J. Gordon Melton:\nAccording to Andrew Purves and Charles Partee:\nThe term \"born again\" has become widely associated with the evangelical Christian renewal since the late 1960s, first in the United States and then around the world. Associated perhaps initially with Jesus People and the Christian counterculture, \"born again\" came to refer to a conversion experience, accepting Jesus Christ as lord and savior in order to be saved from hell and given eternal life with God in heaven, and was increasingly used as a term to identify devout believers. By the mid-1970s, \"born again\" Christians were increasingly referred to in the mainstream media as part of the born again movement.\nIn 1976, Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson's book \"Born Again\" gained international notice. \"Time\" magazine named him \"One of the 25 most influential Evangelicals in America.\" The term was sufficiently prevalent so that during the year's presidential campaign, Democratic party nominee Jimmy Carter described himself as \"born again\" in the first \"Playboy\" magazine interview of an American presidential candidate.\nColson describes his path to faith in conjunction with his criminal imprisonment and played a significant role in solidifying the \"born again\" identity as a cultural construct in the US. He writes that his spiritual experience followed considerable struggle and hesitancy to have a \"personal encounter with God.\" He recalls:\nJimmy Carter was the first President of the United States to publicly declare that he was born-again, in 1976. By the 1980 campaign, all three major candidates stated that they had been born again.\nSider and Knippers state that \"Ronald Reagan's election that fall [was] aided by the votes of 61% of 'born-again' white Protestants.\"\nThe Gallup Organization reported that \"In 2003, 42% of U.S. adults said they were born-again or evangelical; the 2004 percentage is 41%\" and that, \"Black Americans are far more likely to identify themselves as born-again or evangelical, with 63% of blacks saying they are born-again, compared with 39% of white Americans. Republicans are far more likely to say they are born-again (52%) than Democrats (36%) or independents (32%).\"\n\"The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics\", referring to several studies, reports \"that 'born-again' identification is associated with lower support for government anti-poverty programs.\" It also notes that \"self-reported born-again\" Christianity, \"strongly shapes attitudes towards economic policy.\"\nNames which have been inspired by the term.\nThe idea of \"rebirth in Christ\" has inspired some common European forenames: French Ren\u00e9/Ren\u00e9e, Dutch Renaat/Renate, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Croatian Renato/Renata, Latin Renatus/Renata, all of which mean \"reborn\", \"born again\".\nThe command language and shell program Bash, short for \"Bourne-Again SHell\", is a pun on \"born again\", being a mix with the name of the previous Bourne shell.\nStatistics.\n\"The Oxford Handbook of Religion and American Politics\" notes: \"The GSS ... has asked a born-again question on three occasions ... 'Would you say you have been 'born again' or have had a 'born-again' experience?\" The Handbook says that \"Evangelical, black, and Latino Protestants tend to respond similarly, with about two-thirds of each group answering in the affirmative. In contrast, only about one third of mainline Protestants and one sixth of Catholics (Anglo and Latino) claim a born-again experience.\" However, the handbook suggests that \"born-again questions are poor measures even for capturing evangelical respondents. ... it is likely that people who report a born-again experience also claim it as an identity.\""}
{"id": "4952", "revid": "1216158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4952", "title": "Rockwell B-1 Lancer", "text": "The Rockwell B-1 Lancer is a supersonic variable-sweep wing, heavy bomber used by the United States Air Force. It has been nicknamed the \"Bone\" (from \"B-One\"). , it is one of the United States Air Force's three strategic bombers, along with the B-2 Spirit and the B-52 Stratofortress. Its 75,000-pound (34,000\u00a0kg) payload is the heaviest of any U.S. bomber.\nThe B-1 was first envisioned in the 1960s as a bomber that would combine the Mach 2 speed of the B-58 Hustler with the range and payload of the B-52, ultimately replacing both. After a long series of studies, North American Rockwell (subsequently renamed Rockwell International, B-1 division later acquired by Boeing) won the design contest for what emerged as the B-1A. Prototypes of this version could fly Mach 2.2 at high altitude and long distances at Mach 0.85 at very low altitudes. The program was canceled in 1977 due to its high cost, the introduction of the AGM-86 cruise missile that flew the same basic speed and distance, and early work on the B-2 stealth bomber.\nThe program was restarted in 1981, largely as an interim measure due to delays in the B-2 stealth bomber program. The B-1A design was altered, reducing top speed to Mach 1.25 at high altitude, increasing low-altitude speed to Mach 0.96, extensively improving electronic components, and upgrading the airframe to carry more fuel and weapons. Dubbed the B-1B, deliveries of the new variant began in 1985; the plane formally entered service with Strategic Air Command (SAC) as a nuclear bomber the following year. By 1988, all 100 aircraft had been delivered.\nWith the disestablishment of SAC and its reassignment to the Air Combat Command in 1992, the B-1B's nuclear capabilities were disabled and it was outfitted for conventional bombing. It first served in combat during Operation Desert Fox in 1998 and again during the NATO action in Kosovo the following year. The B-1B has supported U.S. and NATO military forces in Afghanistan and Iraq. As of 2021 the Air Force has 45 B-1Bs. The Northrop Grumman B-21 Raider is to begin replacing the B-1B after 2025; all B-1s are planned to be retired by 2036.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nIn 1955, the USAF issued requirements for a new bomber combining the payload and range of the Boeing B-52 Stratofortress with the Mach\u00a02 maximum speed of the Convair B-58 Hustler. In December 1957, the USAF selected North American Aviation's B-70 Valkyrie for this role, a six-engine bomber that could cruise at Mach\u00a03 at high altitude (). Soviet Union interceptor aircraft, the only effective anti-bomber weapon in the 1950s, were already unable to intercept the high-flying Lockheed U-2; the Valkyrie would fly at similar altitudes, but much higher speeds, and was expected to fly right by the fighters.\nBy the late 1950s, however, anti-aircraft surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) could threaten high-altitude aircraft, as demonstrated by the 1960 downing of Gary Powers' U-2. The USAF Strategic Air Command (SAC) was aware of these developments and had begun moving its bombers to low-level penetration even before the U-2 incident. This tactic greatly reduces radar detection distances through the use of terrain masking; using features of the terrain like hills and valleys, the line-of-sight from the radar to the bomber can be broken, rendering the radar (and human observers) incapable of seeing it. Additionally, radars of the era were subject to \"clutter\" from stray returns from the ground and other objects, which meant a minimum angle existed above the horizon where they could detect a target. Bombers flying at low altitudes could remain under these angles simply by keeping their distance from the radar sites. This combination of effects made SAMs of the era ineffective against low-flying aircraft. The same effects also meant that low-flying aircraft were difficult to detect by higher-flying interceptors, since their radar systems could not readily pick out aircraft against the clutter from ground reflections (lack of look-down/shoot-down capability).\nThe switch from high-altitude to low-altitude flight profiles severely affected the B-70, the design of which was tuned for high-altitude performance. Higher aerodynamic drag at low level limited the B-70 to subsonic speed while dramatically decreasing its range. The result would be an aircraft with somewhat higher subsonic speed than the B-52, but less range. Because of this, and a growing shift to the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) force, the B-70 bomber program was cancelled in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy, and the two XB-70 prototypes were used in a supersonic research program.\nAlthough never intended for the low-level role, the B-52's flexibility allowed it to outlast its intended successor as the nature of the air war environment changed. The B-52's huge fuel load allowed it to operate at lower altitudes for longer times, and the large airframe allowed the addition of improved radar jamming and deception suites to deal with radars. During the Vietnam War, the concept that all future wars would be nuclear was turned on its head, and the \"big belly\" modifications increased the B-52's total bomb load to , turning it into a powerful tactical aircraft which could be used against ground troops along with strategic targets from high altitudes. The much smaller bomb bay of the B-70 would have made it much less useful in this role.\nDesign studies and delays.\nAlthough effective, the B-52 was not ideal for the low-level role. This led to a number of aircraft designs known as penetrators, which were tuned specifically for long-range low-altitude flight. The first of these designs to see operation was the supersonic F-111 fighter-bomber, which used variable-sweep wings for tactical missions. A number of studies on a strategic-range counterpart followed.\nThe first post-B-70 strategic penetrator study was known as the Subsonic Low-Altitude Bomber (SLAB), which was completed in 1961. This produced a design that looked more like an airliner than a bomber, with a large swept wing, T-tail, and large high-bypass engines. This was followed by the similar Extended Range Strike Aircraft (ERSA), which added a variable-sweep wing, then en vogue in the aviation industry. ERSA envisioned a relatively small aircraft with a payload and a range of including flown at low altitudes. In August 1963, the similar Low-Altitude Manned Penetrator design was completed, which called for an aircraft with a bomb load and somewhat shorter range of .\nThese all culminated in the October 1963 Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (AMPSS), which led to industry studies at Boeing, General Dynamics, and North American (later North American Rockwell). In mid-1964, the USAF had revised its requirements and retitled the project as Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (AMSA), which differed from AMPSS primarily in that it also demanded a high-speed high-altitude capability, similar to that of the existing Mach\u00a02-class F-111. Given the lengthy series of design studies, North American Rockwell engineers joked that the new name actually stood for \"America's Most Studied Aircraft\".\nThe arguments that led to the cancellation of the B-70 program had led some to question the need for a new strategic bomber of any sort. The USAF was adamant about retaining bombers as part of the nuclear triad concept that included bombers, ICBMs, and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) in a combined package that complicated any potential defense. They argued that the bomber was needed to attack hardened military targets and to provide a safe counterforce option because the bombers could be quickly launched into safe loitering areas where they could not be attacked. However, the introduction of the SLBM made moot the mobility and survivability argument, and a newer generation of ICBMs, such as the Minuteman III, had the accuracy and speed needed to attack point targets. During this time, ICBMs were seen as a less costly option based on their lower unit cost, but development costs were much higher. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara preferred ICBMs over bombers for the Air Force portion of the deterrent force and felt a new expensive bomber was not needed. McNamara limited the AMSA program to studies and component development beginning in 1964.\nProgram studies continued; IBM and Autonetics were awarded AMSA advanced avionics study contracts in 1968. McNamara remained opposed to the program in favor of upgrading the existing B-52 fleet and adding nearly 300 FB-111s for shorter range roles then being filled by the B-58. He again vetoed funding for AMSA aircraft development in 1968.\nB-1A program.\nPresident Richard Nixon reestablished the AMSA program after taking office, keeping with his administration's flexible response strategy that required a broad range of options short of general nuclear war. Nixon's Secretary of Defense, Melvin Laird, reviewed the programs and decided to lower the numbers of FB-111s, since they lacked the desired range, and recommended that the AMSA design studies be accelerated. In April 1969, the program officially became the \"B-1A\". This was the first entry in the new bomber designation series, created in 1962. The Air Force issued a request for proposals in November 1969.\nProposals were submitted by Boeing, General Dynamics and North American Rockwell in January 1970. In June 1970, North American Rockwell was awarded the development contract. The original program called for two test airframes, five flyable aircraft, and 40 engines. This was cut in 1971 to one ground and three flight test aircraft. The company changed its name to Rockwell International and named its aircraft division North American Aircraft Operations in 1973. A fourth prototype, built to production standards, was ordered in the fiscal year 1976 budget. Plans called for 240 B-1As to be built, with initial operational capability set for 1979.\nRockwell's design had features common to the F-111 and XB-70. It used a crew escape capsule, that ejected as a unit to improve crew survivability if the crew had to abandon the aircraft at high speed. Additionally, the design featured large variable-sweep wings in order to provide both more lift during takeoff and landing, and lower drag during a high-speed dash phase. With the wings set to their widest position the aircraft had a much better airfield performance than the B-52, allowing it to operate from a wider variety of bases. Penetration of the Soviet Union's defenses would take place at supersonic speed, crossing them as quickly as possible before entering the more sparsely defended interior of the country where speeds could be reduced again. The large size and fuel capacity of the design would allow the \"dash\" portion of the flight to be relatively long.\nIn order to achieve the required Mach\u00a02 performance at high altitudes, the exhaust nozzles and air intake ramps were variable. Initially, it had been expected that a Mach\u00a01.2 performance could be achieved at low altitude, which required that titanium be used in critical areas in the fuselage and wing structure. The low altitude performance requirement was later lowered to Mach\u00a00.85, reducing the amount of titanium and therefore cost. A pair of small vanes mounted near the nose are part of an active vibration damping system that smooths out the otherwise bumpy low-altitude ride. The first three B-1As featured the escape capsule that ejected the cockpit with all four crew members inside. The fourth B-1A was equipped with a conventional ejection seat for each crew member.\nThe B-1A mockup review occurred in late October 1971; this resulted in 297 requests for alteration to the design due to failures to meet specifications and desired improvements for ease of maintenance and operation. The first B-1A prototype (Air Force serial no. 74\u20130158) flew on 23 December 1974. As the program continued the per-unit cost continued to rise in part because of high inflation during that period. In 1970, the estimated unit cost was $40 million, and by 1975, this figure had climbed to $70 million.\nNew problems and cancellation.\nIn 1976, Soviet pilot Viktor Belenko defected to Japan with his MiG-25 \"Foxbat\". During debriefing he described a new \"super-Foxbat\" (almost certainly referring to the MiG-31) that had look-down/shoot-down radar in order to attack cruise missiles. This would also make any low-level penetration aircraft \"visible\" and easy to attack. Given that the B-1's armament suite was similar to the B-52, and it then appeared no more likely to survive Soviet airspace than the B-52, the program was increasingly questioned. In particular, Senator William Proxmire continually derided the B-1 in public, arguing it was an outlandishly expensive dinosaur. During the 1976 federal election campaign, Jimmy Carter made it one of the Democratic Party's platforms, saying \"The B-1 bomber is an example of a proposed system which should not be funded and would be wasteful of taxpayers' dollars.\"\nWhen Carter took office in 1977 he ordered a review of the entire program. By this point the projected cost of the program had risen to over $100 million per aircraft, although this was lifetime cost over 20 years. He was informed of the relatively new work on stealth aircraft that had started in 1975, and he decided that this was a better approach than the B-1. Pentagon officials also stated that the AGM-86 Air-Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM) launched from the existing B-52 fleet would give the USAF equal capability of penetrating Soviet airspace. With a range of , the ALCM could be launched well outside the range of any Soviet defenses and penetrate at low altitude like a bomber (with a much lower radar cross-section (RCS) due to smaller size), and in much greater numbers at a lower cost. A small number of B-52s could launch hundreds of ALCMs, saturating the defense. A program to improve the B-52 and develop and deploy the ALCM would cost at least 20% less than the planned 244 B-1As.\nOn 30 June 1977, Carter announced that the B-1A would be canceled in favor of ICBMs, SLBMs, and a fleet of modernized B-52s armed with ALCMs. Carter called it \"one of the most difficult decisions that I've made since I've been in office.\" No mention of the stealth work was made public with the program being top secret, but it is now known that in early 1978 he authorized the Advanced Technology Bomber (ATB) project, which eventually led to the B-2 Spirit.\nDomestically, the reaction to the cancellation was split along partisan lines. The Department of Defense was surprised by the announcement; it expected that the number of B-1s ordered would be reduced to around 150. Congressman Robert Dornan (R-CA) claimed, \"They're breaking out the vodka and caviar in Moscow.\" However, it appears the Soviets were more concerned by large numbers of ALCMs representing a much greater threat than a smaller number of B-1s. Soviet news agency TASS commented that \"the implementation of these militaristic plans has seriously complicated efforts for the limitation of the strategic arms race.\" Western military leaders were generally happy with the decision. NATO commander Alexander Haig described the ALCM as an \"attractive alternative\" to the B-1. French General Georges Buis stated \"The B-1 is a formidable weapon, but not terribly useful. For the price of one bomber, you can have 200 cruise missiles.\"\nFlight tests of the four B-1A prototypes for the B-1A program continued through April 1981. The program included 70 flights totaling 378 hours. A top speed of Mach\u00a02.22 was reached by the second B-1A. Engine testing also continued during this time with the YF101 engines totaling almost 7,600 hours.\nShifting priorities.\nIt was during this period that the Soviets started to assert themselves in several new theaters of action, in particular through Cuban proxies during the Angolan Civil War starting in 1975 and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. U.S. strategy to this point had been focused on containing Communism and preparation for war in Europe. The new Soviet actions revealed that the military lacked capability outside these narrow confines.\nThe U.S. Department of Defense responded by accelerating its Rapid Deployment Forces concept but suffered from major problems with airlift and sealift capability. In order to slow an enemy invasion of other countries, air power was critical; however the key Iran-Afghanistan border was outside the range of the United States Navy's carrier-based attack aircraft, leaving this role to the U.S. Air Force.\nDuring the 1980 presidential campaign, Ronald Reagan campaigned heavily on the platform that Carter was weak on defense, citing the cancellation of the B-1 program as an example, a theme he continued using into the 1980s. During this time Carter's defense secretary, Harold Brown, announced the stealth bomber project, apparently implying that this was the reason for the B-1 cancellation.\nB-1B program.\nOn taking office, Reagan was faced with the same decision as Carter before: whether to continue with the B-1 for the short term, or to wait for the development of the ATB, a much more advanced aircraft. Studies suggested that the existing B-52 fleet with ALCM would remain a credible threat until 1985. It was predicted that 75% of the B-52 force would survive to attack its targets. After 1985, the introduction of the SA-10 missile, the MiG-31 interceptor and the first effective Soviet Airborne Early Warning and Control (AWACS) systems would make the B-52 increasingly vulnerable. During 1981, funds were allocated to a new study for a bomber for the 1990s time-frame which led to developing the \"Long-Range Combat Aircraft\" (LRCA) project. The LRCA evaluated the B-1, F-111, and ATB as possible solutions; an emphasis was placed on multi-role capabilities, as opposed to purely strategic operations.\nIn 1981, it was believed the B-1 could be in operation before the ATB, covering the transitional period between the B-52's increasing vulnerability and the ATB's introduction. Reagan decided the best solution was to procure both the B-1 and ATB, and on 2 October 1981 he announced that 100 B-1s were to be ordered to fill the LRCA role.\nIn January 1982, the U.S. Air Force awarded two contracts to Rockwell worth a combined $2.2 billion for the development and production of 100 new B-1 bombers. Numerous changes were made to the design to make it better suited to the now expected missions, resulting in the \"B-1B\". These changes included a reduction in maximum speed, which allowed the variable-aspect intake ramps to be replaced by simpler fixed geometry intake ramps. This reduced the B-1B's radar cross-section which was seen as a good trade off for the speed decrease. High subsonic speeds at low altitude became a focus area for the revised design, and low-level speeds were increased from about Mach\u00a00.85 to 0.92. The B-1B has a maximum speed of Mach\u00a01.25 at higher altitudes.\nThe B-1B's maximum takeoff weight was increased to from the B-1A's . The weight increase was to allow for takeoff with a full internal fuel load and for external weapons to be carried. Rockwell engineers were able to reinforce critical areas and lighten non-critical areas of the airframe, so the increase in empty weight was minimal. To deal with the introduction of the MiG-31 equipped with the new Zaslon radar system, and other aircraft with look-down capability, the B-1B's electronic warfare suite was significantly upgraded.\nOpposition to the plan was widespread within Congress. Critics pointed out that many of the original problems remained in both areas of performance and expense. In particular it seemed the B-52 fitted with electronics similar to the B-1B would be equally able to avoid interception, as the speed advantage of the B-1 was now minimal. It also appeared that the \"interim\" time frame served by the B-1B would be less than a decade, being rendered obsolete shortly after the introduction of a much more capable ATB design. The primary argument in favor of the B-1 was its large conventional weapon payload, and that its takeoff performance allowed it to operate with a credible bomb load from a much wider variety of airfields. Production subcontracts were spread across many congressional districts, making the aircraft more popular on Capitol Hill.\nB-1A No. 1 was disassembled and used for radar testing at the Rome Air Development Center in the former Griffiss Air Force Base, New York. B-1As No. 2 and No. 4 were then modified to include B-1B systems. The first B-1B was completed and began flight testing in March 1983. The first production B-1B was rolled out on 4 September 1984 and first flew on 18 October 1984. The 100th and final B-1B was delivered on 2 May 1988; before the last B-1B was delivered, the USAF had determined that the aircraft was vulnerable to Soviet air defenses.\nIn 1996, Rockwell International sold most of its space and defense operations to Boeing, which continues as the primary contractor for the B1 as of 2024.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe B-1 has a blended wing body configuration, with variable-sweep wing, four turbofan engines, triangular ride-control fins and cruciform tail. The wings can sweep from 15 degrees to 67.5 degrees (full forward to full sweep). Forward-swept wing settings are used for takeoff, landings and high-altitude economical cruise. Aft-swept wing settings are used in high subsonic and supersonic flight. The B-1's variable-sweep wings and thrust-to-weight ratio provide it with improved takeoff performance, allowing it to use shorter runways than previous bombers. The length of the aircraft presented a flexing problem due to air turbulence at low altitude. To alleviate this, Rockwell included small triangular fin control surfaces or vanes near the nose on the B-1. The B-1's Structural Mode Control System moves the vanes, and lower rudder, to counteract the effects of turbulence and smooth out the ride.\nUnlike the B-1A, the B-1B cannot reach Mach\u00a02+ speeds; its maximum speed is Mach\u00a01.25 (about 950\u00a0mph or 1,530\u00a0km/h at altitude), but its low-level speed increased to Mach\u00a00.92 (700\u00a0mph, 1,130\u00a0km/h). The speed of the current version of the aircraft is limited by the need to avoid damage to its structure and air intakes. To help lower its radar cross-section, the B-1B uses serpentine air intake ducts (see S-duct) and fixed intake ramps, which limit its speed compared to the B-1A. Vanes in the intake ducts serve to deflect and shield radar returns from the highly reflective engine compressor blades.\nThe B-1A's engine was modified slightly to produce the GE F101-102 for the B-1B, with an emphasis on durability, and increased efficiency. The core from this engine was subsequently used in several other engines, including the GE F110 used in the F-14 Tomcat, F-15K/SG variants and later versions of the General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon. It is also the basis for the non-afterburning GE F118 used in the B-2 Spirit and the U-2S. The F101 engine core is also used in the CFM56 civil engine.\nThe nose-gear door is the location for ground-crew control of the auxiliary power unit (APU) which can be used during a scramble for quick-starting the APU.\nAvionics.\nThe B-1's main computer is the IBM AP-101, which was also used on the Space Shuttle orbiter and the B-52 bomber. The computer is programmed with the JOVIAL programming language. The Lancer's offensive avionics include the Westinghouse (now Northrop Grumman) AN/APQ-164 forward-looking offensive passive electronically scanned array radar set with electronic beam steering (and a fixed antenna pointed downward for reduced radar observability), synthetic aperture radar, ground moving target indication (GMTI), and terrain-following radar modes, Doppler navigation, radar altimeter, and an inertial navigation suite. The B-1B Block D upgrade added a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver beginning in 1995.\nThe B-1's defensive electronics include the Eaton AN/ALQ-161A radar warning and defensive jamming equipment, which has three sets of antennas; one at the front base of each wing and the third rear-facing in the tail radome. Also in the tail radome is the AN/ALQ-153 missile approach warning system (pulse-Doppler radar). The ALQ-161 is linked to a total of eight AN/ALE-49 flare dispensers located on top behind the canopy, which are handled by the AN/ASQ-184 avionics management system. Each AN/ALE-49 dispenser has a capacity of 12 MJU-23A/B flares. The MJU-23A/B flare is one of the world's largest infrared countermeasure flares at a weight of over . The B-1 has also been equipped to carry the ALE-50 towed decoy system.\nAlso aiding the B-1's survivability is its relatively low RCS. Although not technically a stealth aircraft, thanks to the aircraft's structure, serpentine intake paths and use of radar-absorbent material its RCS is about 1/50th that of the similar sized B-52. This is approximately 26\u00a0ft2 or 2.4\u00a0m2, comparable to that of a small fighter aircraft.\nThe B-1 holds 61 FAI world records for speed, payload, distance, and time-to-climb in different aircraft weight classes. In November 1993, three B-1Bs set a long-distance record for the aircraft, which demonstrated its ability to conduct extended mission lengths to strike anywhere in the world and return to base without any stops. The National Aeronautic Association recognized the B-1B for completing one of the 10 most memorable record flights for 1994.\nUpgrades.\nThe B-1 has been upgraded since production, beginning with the \"Conventional Mission Upgrade Program\" (CMUP), which added a new MIL-STD-1760 smart-weapons interface to enable the use of precision-guided conventional weapons. CMUP was delivered through a series of upgrades:\nIn 2007, the Sniper XR targeting pod was integrated on the B-1 fleet. The pod is mounted on an external hardpoint at the aircraft's chin near the forward bomb bay. Following accelerated testing, the Sniper pod was fielded in summer 2008. Future precision munitions include the Small Diameter Bomb.\nThe USAF commenced the Integrated Battle Station (IBS) modification in 2012 as a combination of three separate upgrades when it realised the benefits of completing them concurrently; the Fully Integrated Data Link (FIDL), Vertical Situational Display Unit (VSDU) and Central Integrated Test System (CITS). FIDL enables electronic data sharing, eliminating the need to enter information between systems by hand. VSDU replaces existing flight instruments with multifunction color displays, a second display aids with threat evasion and targeting, and acts as a back-up display. CITS saw a new diagnostic system installed that allows crew to monitor over 9,000 parameters on the aircraft. Other additions are to replace the two spinning mass gyroscopic inertial navigation system with ring laser gyroscopic systems and a GPS antenna, replacement of the APQ-164 radar with the Scalable Agile Beam Radar \u2013 Global Strike (SABR-GS) active electronically scanned array, and a new attitude indicator. The IBS upgrades were completed in 2020.\nIn August 2019, the Air Force unveiled a modification to the B-1B to allow it to carry more weapons internally and externally. Using the moveable forward bulkhead, space in the intermediate bay was increased from 180 to 269\u00a0in (457 to 683\u00a0cm). Expanding the internal bay to make use of the Common Strategic Rotary Launcher (CSRL), as well as utilizing six of the eight external hardpoints that had been previously out of use to keep in line with the New START Treaty, would increase the B-1B's weapon load from 24 to 40. The configuration also enables it to carry heavier weapons in the 5,000\u00a0lb (2,300\u00a0kg) range, such as hypersonic missiles; the AGM-183 ARRW is planned for integration onto the bomber. In the future the HAWC could be used by the bomber which, combining both internal and external weapon carriage, could conceivably bring the total number of hypersonic weapons to 31.\nOperational history.\nStrategic Air Command.\nThe second B-1B, \"The Star of Abilene\", was the first B-1B delivered to SAC in June 1985. Initial operational capability was reached on 1 October 1986 and the B-1B was placed on nuclear alert status. The B-1 received the official name \"Lancer\" on 15 March 1990. However, the bomber has been commonly called the \"Bone\"; a nickname that appears to stem from an early newspaper article on the aircraft wherein its name was phonetically spelled out as \"B-ONE\" with the hyphen inadvertently omitted.\nIn late 1990, engine fires in two Lancers led to a grounding of the fleet. The cause was traced back to problems in the first-stage fan, and the aircraft were placed on \"limited alert\"; in other words, they were grounded unless a nuclear war broke out. Following inspections and repairs they were returned to duty beginning on 6 February 1991. By 1991, the B-1 had a fledgling conventional capability, forty of them able to drop the Mk-82 General Purpose (GP) bomb, although mostly from low altitude. Despite being cleared for this role, the problems with the engines prevented their use in Operation Desert Storm during the Gulf War. B-1s were primarily reserved for strategic nuclear strike missions at this time, providing the role of airborne nuclear deterrent against the Soviet Union. The B-52 was more suited to the role of conventional warfare and it was used by coalition forces instead.\nOriginally designed strictly for nuclear war, the B-1's development as an effective conventional bomber was delayed. The collapse of the Soviet Union had brought the B-1's nuclear role into question, leading to President George H. W. Bush ordering a $3 billion conventional refit.\nOn 26 April 1991, ten B-1Bs narrowly avoided being hit by the 1991 Andover tornado while located at McConnell AFB, which took a direct hit. Two of the bombers were equipped with nuclear warheads.\nAfter the inactivation of SAC and the establishment of the Air Combat Command (ACC) in 1992, the B-1 developed a greater conventional weapons capability. Part of this development was the start-up of the U.S. Air Force Weapons School B-1 Division. In 1994, two additional B-1 bomb wings were also created in the Air National Guard, with former fighter wings in the Kansas Air National Guard and the Georgia Air National Guard converting to the aircraft. By the mid-1990s, the B-1 could employ GP weapons as well as various CBUs. By the end of the 1990s, with the advent of the \"Block D\" upgrade, the B-1 boasted a full array of guided and unguided munitions.\nThe B-1B no longer carries nuclear weapons; its nuclear capability was disabled by 1995 with the removal of nuclear arming and fuzing hardware. Under provisions of the New START treaty with Russia, further conversions were performed. These included modification of aircraft hardpoints to prevent nuclear weapon pylons from being attached, removal of weapons bay wiring bundles for arming nuclear weapons, and destruction of nuclear weapon pylons. The conversion process was completed in 2011, and Russian officials inspect the aircraft every year to verify compliance.\nAir Combat Command.\nThe B-1 was first used in combat in support of operations in Iraq during Operation Desert Fox in December 1998, employing unguided GP weapons. B-1s have been subsequently used in Operation Allied Force (Kosovo) and, most notably, in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The B-1 has deployed an array of conventional weapons in war zones, most notably the GBU-31, JDAM. In the first six months of Operation Enduring Freedom, eight B-1s dropped almost 40 percent of aerial ordnance, including some 3,900 JDAMs. JDAM munitions were heavily used by the B-1 over Iraq, notably on 7 April 2003 in an unsuccessful attempt to kill Saddam Hussein and his two sons. During Operation Enduring Freedom, the B-1 was able to raise its mission capable rate to 79%.\nOf the 100 B-1Bs built, 93 remained in 2000 after losses in accidents. In June 2001, the Pentagon sought to place one-third of its then fleet into storage; this proposal resulted in several U.S. Air National Guard officers and members of Congress lobbying against the proposal, including the drafting of an amendment to prevent such cuts. The 2001 proposal was intended to allow money to be diverted to further upgrades to the remaining B-1Bs, such as computer modernization. In 2003, accompanied by the removal of B-1Bs from the two bomb wings in the Air National Guard, the USAF decided to retire 33 aircraft to concentrate its budget on maintaining availability of remaining B-1Bs. In 2004, a new appropriation bill called for some retired aircraft to return to service, and the USAF returned seven mothballed bombers to service to increase the fleet to 67 aircraft.\nOn 14 July 2007, the Associated Press reported on the growing USAF presence in Iraq, including reintroduction of B-1Bs as a close-at-hand platform to support Coalition ground forces. Beginning in 2008, B-1s were used in Iraq and Afghanistan in an \"armed overwatch\" role, loitering for surveillance purposes while ready to deliver guided bombs in support of ground troops as required.\nThe B-1B underwent a series of flight tests using a 50/50 mix of synthetic and petroleum fuel; on 19 March 2008, a B-1B from Dyess Air Force Base, Texas, became the first USAF aircraft to fly at supersonic speed using a synthetic fuel during a flight over Texas and New Mexico. This was conducted as part of an USAF testing and certification program to reduce reliance on traditional oil sources. On 4 August 2008, a B-1B flew the first Sniper Advanced Targeting Pod equipped combat sortie where the crew successfully targeted enemy ground forces and dropped a GBU-38 guided bomb in Afghanistan.\nIn March 2011, B-1Bs from Ellsworth Air Force Base attacked undisclosed targets in Libya as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn.\nWith upgrades to keep the B-1 viable, the USAF may keep it in service until approximately 2038. Despite upgrades, a single flight hour needs 48.4 hours of repair. The fuel, repairs, and other needs for a 12-hour mission cost $720,000 (~$ in ) as of 2010. The $63,000 cost per flight hour is, however, less than the $72,000 for the B-52 and the $135,000 of the B-2. In June 2010, senior USAF officials met to consider retiring the entire fleet to meet budget cuts. The Pentagon plans to begin replacing the aircraft with the B-21 Raider after 2025. In the meantime, its \"capabilities are particularly well-suited to the vast distances and unique challenges of the Pacific region, and we'll continue to invest in, and rely on, the B-1 in support of the focus on the Pacific\" as part of President Obama's \"Pivot to East Asia\".\nIn August 2012, the 9th Expeditionary Bomb Squadron returned from a six-month tour in Afghanistan. Its 9 B-1Bs flew 770 sorties, the most of any B-1B squadron on a single deployment. The squadron spent 9,500 hours airborne, keeping one of its bombers in the air at all times. They accounted for a quarter of all combat aircraft sorties over the country during that time and fulfilled an average of two to three air support requests per day. On 4 September 2013, a B-1B participated in a maritime evaluation exercise, deploying munitions such as laser-guided 500\u00a0lb GBU-54 bombs, 500\u00a0lb and 2,000\u00a0lb JDAM, and Long Range Anti-Ship Missiles (LRASM). The aim was to detect and engage several small craft using existing weapons and tactics developed from conventional warfare against ground targets; the B-1 is seen as a useful asset for maritime duties such as patrolling shipping lanes.\nBeginning in 2014, the B-1 was used against the Islamic State (IS) in the Syrian Civil War. From August 2014 to January 2015, the B-1 accounted for eight percent of USAF sorties during Operation Inherent Resolve. The 9th Bomb Squadron was deployed to Qatar in July 2014 to support missions in Afghanistan, but when the air campaign against IS began on 8 August, the aircraft were employed in Iraq. During the Battle of Kobane in Syria, the squadron's B-1s dropped 660 bombs over 5 months in support of Kurdish forces defending the city. This amounted to one-third of all bombs used during OIR during the period, and they killed some 1,000 ISIL fighters. The 9th Bomb Squadron's B-1s went \"Winchester\"\u2013dropping all weapons on board\u201331 times during their deployment. They dropped over 2,000 JDAMs during the six-month rotation. B-1s from the 28th Bomb Wing flew 490 sorties where they dropped 3,800 munitions on 3,700 targets during a six-month deployment. In February 2016, the B-1s were sent back to the U.S. for cockpit upgrades.\nAir Force Global Strike Command.\nAs part of a USAF reorganization announced in April 2015, all B-1s were reassigned from Air Combat Command to Global Strike Command (GSC) in October 2015.\nOn 8 July 2017, the USAF flew two B-1s near the North Korean border in a show of force amid increasing tensions, particularly in response to North Korea's 4 July test of an ICBM capable of reaching Alaska.\nOn 14 April 2018, B-1s launched 19 JASSM missiles as part of the 2018 bombing of Damascus and Homs in Syria. In August 2019, six B-1Bs met full mission capability; 15 were undergoing depot maintenance and 39 under repair and inspection.\nIn February 2021, the USAF announced it will retire 17 B-1s, leaving 45 aircraft in service. Four of these will be stored in a condition that will allow their return to service if required.\nIn March 2021, B-1s deployed to Norway's \u00d8rland Main Air Station for the first time. During the deployment, they conducted bombing training with Norwegian and Swedish ground force Joint terminal attack controllers. One B-1 also conducted a \"warm-pit refuel\" at Bod\u00f8 Main Air Station, marking the first landing inside Norway's Arctic Circle, and integrated with four Swedish Air Force JAS 39 Gripen fighters.\nOn 2 February 2024, the U.S. deployed two B-1Bs to strike 85 terrorist targets in seven locations in Iraq and Syria as part of a multi-tiered response to the killing of three U.S. troops in a drone attack in Jordan.\nOperators.\nThe USAF had 45 B-1Bs in service as of July 2024.\nAccidents and incidents.\nThe Aviation Safety Network lists 15 accidents from 1984 to 2024 in which 11 B-1s were lost and a total of 12 crew members were killed. An April 2022 maintenance fire damaged another. Among the incidents:"}
{"id": "4953", "revid": "16614872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4953", "title": "Book of Common Prayer", "text": "The Book of Common Prayer (BCP) is the name given to a number of related prayer books used in the Anglican Communion and by other Christian churches historically related to Anglicanism. The first prayer book, published in 1549 in the reign of King Edward VI of England, was a product of the English Reformation following the break with Rome. The 1549 work was the first prayer book to include the complete forms of service for daily and Sunday worship in English. It contains Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer, the Litany, Holy Communion, and occasional services in full: the orders for Baptism, Confirmation, Marriage, \"prayers to be said with the sick\", and a funeral service. It also sets out in full the \"propers\" (the parts of the service that vary weekly or daily throughout the Church's Year): the introits, collects, and epistle and gospel readings for the Sunday service of Holy Communion. Old Testament and New Testament readings for daily prayer are specified in tabular format, as are the Psalms and canticles, mostly biblical, to be said or sung between the readings.\nThe 1549 book was soon succeeded by a 1552 revision that was more Reformed but from the same editorial hand, that of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. It was used only for a few months, as after Edward VI's death in 1553, his half-sister Mary I restored Roman Catholic worship. Mary died in 1558 and, in 1559, Elizabeth I's first Parliament authorised the 1559 prayer book, which effectively reintroduced the 1552 book with modifications to make it acceptable to more traditionally minded worshippers and clergy.\nIn 1604, James I ordered some further changes, the most significant being the addition to the Catechism of a section on the Sacraments; this resulted in the 1604 \"Book of Common Prayer\". Following the tumultuous events surrounding the English Civil War, when the Prayer Book was again abolished, another revision was published as the 1662 prayer book. That edition remains the official prayer book of the Church of England, although throughout the later 20th century, alternative forms that were technically supplements largely displaced the \"Book of Common Prayer\" for the main Sunday worship of most English parish churches.\nVarious permutations of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" with local variations are used in churches within and exterior to the Anglican Communion in over 50 countries and over 150 different languages. In many of these churches, the 1662 prayer book remains authoritative even if other books or patterns have replaced it in regular worship.\nTraditional English-language Lutheran, Methodist, and Presbyterian prayer books have borrowed from the \"Book of Common Prayer,\" and the marriage and burial rites have found their way into those of other denominations and into the English language. Like the King James Version of the Bible and the works of Shakespeare, many words and phrases from the \"Book of Common Prayer\" have entered common parlance.\nFull name.\nThe full name of the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" is \"The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, Together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be Sung or said in churches: And the Form and Manner of Making, ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons\".\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe forms of parish worship in the late mediaeval church in England, which followed the Latin Roman Rite, varied according to local practice. By far the most common form, or \"use\", found in Southern England was that of Sarum (Salisbury). There was no single book; the services provided by the \"Book of Common Prayer\" were found in the Missal (the Eucharist), the Breviary (daily offices), Manual (the occasional services of baptism, marriage, burial etc.), and Pontifical (services appropriate to a bishop\u2014confirmation, ordination). The chant (plainsong, plainchant) for worship was contained in the \"Roman Gradual\" for the Mass, the \"Antiphonale\" for the offices, and the \"Processionale\" for the litanies. The \"Book of Common Prayer\" has never contained prescribed music or chant, but in 1550 John Merbecke produced his \"Booke of Common Praier noted\", which sets much of Mattins, Evensong, Holy Communion and the Burial Office in the Prayer Book to simple plainchant, generally inspired by Sarum Use.\nThe work of producing a liturgy in English was largely done by Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, starting cautiously in the reign of Henry VIII (1509\u20131547) and then more radically under his son Edward VI (1547\u20131553). In his early days, Cranmer was a conservative humanist and an admirer of Erasmus. After 1531, Cranmer's contacts with reformers from continental Europe helped change his outlook. The Exhortation and Litany, the earliest English-language service of the Church of England, was the first overt manifestation of his changing views. It was no mere translation from the Latin, instead making its Protestant character clear by the drastic reduction of the place of saints, compressing what had been the major part into three petitions. Published in 1544, the Exhortation and Litany borrowed greatly from Martin Luther's Litany and Myles Coverdale's New Testament and was the only service that might be considered Protestant to have been finished within Henry VIII's lifetime.\n1549 prayer book.\nOnly after Henry VIII's death and the accession of Edward VI in 1547 could revision of prayer books proceed faster. Despite conservative opposition, Parliament passed the Act of Uniformity on 21 January 1549, and the newly authorised \"Book of Common Prayer\" (BCP) was required to be in use by Whitsunday (Pentecost), 9 June. Cranmer is \"credited [with] the overall job of editorship and the overarching structure of the book,\" though he borrowed and adapted material from other sources.\nThe prayer book had provisions for the daily offices (Morning and Evening Prayer), scripture readings for Sundays and holy days, and services for Communion, public baptism, confirmation, matrimony, visitation of the sick, burial, purification of women upon childbirth, and Ash Wednesday. An ordinal for ordination services of bishops, priests, and deacons was added in 1550. There was also a calendar and lectionary, which meant a Bible and a Psalter were the only other books a priest required.\nThe BCP represented a \"major theological shift\" in England towards Protestantism. Cranmer's doctrinal concerns can be seen in the systematic amendment of source material to remove any idea that merit contributes to salvation. The doctrines of justification by faith and predestination are central to Cranmer's theology. These doctrines are implicit throughout the prayer book and had important implications for his understanding of the sacraments. Cranmer believed that someone who was not one of God's elect received only the outward form of the sacrament (washing in baptism or eating bread in Communion), not actual grace, with only the elect receiving the sacramental sign and the grace. Cranmer held the position that faith, a gift given only to the elect, united the outward sign of sacrament and its inward grace, with only the unity of the two making the sacrament effective. This position was in agreement with the Reformed churches but in opposition to Roman Catholic and Lutheran views.\nAs a compromise with conservatives, the word \"Mass\" was kept, with the service titled \"The Supper of the Lord and the Holy Communion, commonly called the Mass\". The service also preserved much of the Mass's mediaeval structure\u2014stone altars remained, the clergy wore traditional vestments, much of the service was sung, and the priest was instructed to put the communion wafer into communicants' mouths instead of in their hands. Nevertheless, the first BCP was a \"radical\" departure from traditional worship in that it \"eliminated almost everything that had till then been central to lay Eucharistic piety\".\nA priority for Protestants was to replace the Roman Catholic teaching that the Mass was a sacrifice to God (\"the very same sacrifice as that of the cross\") with the Protestant teaching that it was a service of thanksgiving and spiritual communion with Christ. Cranmer's intention was to suppress Catholic notions of sacrifice and transubstantiation in the Mass. To stress this, there was no elevation of the consecrated bread and wine, and eucharistic adoration was prohibited. The elevation had been the central moment of the mediaeval Mass, attached as it was to the idea of real presence. Cranmer's eucharistic theology was close to the Calvinist spiritual presence view, and can be described as Receptionism and Virtualism: the real presence of Jesus by the power of the Holy Spirit. The words of administration in the 1549 rite are deliberately ambiguous; they can be understood as identifying the bread with the body of Christ or (following Cranmer's theology) as a prayer that the communicant might spiritually receive the body of Christ by faith.\nMany of the other services were little changed. Cranmer based his baptism service on Martin Luther's service, a simplification of the long and complex mediaeval rite. Like communion, the baptism service maintained a traditional form. The confirmation and marriage services followed the Sarum rite. There are also remnants of prayer for the dead and the Requiem Mass, such as the provision for celebrating holy communion at a funeral. Cranmer's work of simplification and revision was also applied to the Daily Offices, which were reduced to Morning and Evening Prayer. Cranmer hoped these would also serve as a daily form of prayer to be used by the laity, thus replacing both the late mediaeval lay observation of the Latin Hours of the Virgin and its English-language equivalent primers.\n1552 prayer book.\nFrom the outset, the 1549 book was intended only as a temporary expedient, as German reformer Bucer was assured on meeting Cranmer for the first time in April 1549: \"concessions \u2026 made both as a respect for antiquity and to the infirmity of the present age\", as he wrote. According to historian Christopher Haigh, the 1552 prayer book \"broke decisively with the past\". The services for baptism, confirmation, communion and burial are rewritten, and ceremonies hated by Protestants were removed. Unlike the 1549 version, the 1552 prayer book removed many traditional sacramentals and observances that reflected belief in the blessing and exorcism of people and objects. In the baptism service, infants no longer receive minor exorcism. Anointing is no longer included in the services for baptism, ordination and visitation of the sick. These ceremonies are altered to emphasise the importance of faith, rather than trusting in rituals or objects.\nMany of the traditional elements of the communion service were removed in the 1552 version. The name of the service was changed to \"The Order for the Administration of the Lord's Supper or Holy Communion\", removing the word \"Mass\". Stone altars were replaced with communion tables positioned in the chancel or nave, with the priest standing on the north side. The priest is to wear the surplice instead of traditional Mass vestments. The service appears to promote a spiritual presence view of the Eucharist, meaning that Christ is spiritually but not corporally present.\nThere was controversy over how people should receive communion: kneeling or seated. John Knox protested against kneeling. Ultimately, it was decided that communicants should continue to kneel, but the Privy Council ordered that the Black Rubric be added to the prayer book to clarify the purpose of kneeling. The rubric denied \"any real and essential presence \u2026 of Christ's natural flesh and blood\" in the Eucharist and was the clearest statement of eucharistic theology in the prayer book. The 1552 service removed any reference to the \"body of Christ\" in the words of administration to reinforce the teaching that Christ's presence in the Eucharist was a spiritual presence and, in the words of historian Peter Marshall, \"limited to the subjective experience of the communicant\". Instead of communion wafers, the prayer book instructs that ordinary bread is to be used \"to take away the superstition which any person hath, or might have\". To further emphasise there is no holiness in the bread and wine, any leftovers are to be taken home by the curate for ordinary consumption. This prevented eucharistic adoration of the reserved sacrament above the high altar.\nThe burial service was removed from the church. It was to now take place at the graveside. In 1549, there had been provision for a Requiem (not so called) and prayers of commendation and committal, the first addressed to the deceased. All that remained was a single reference to the deceased, giving thanks for their delivery from 'the myseryes of this sinneful world.' This new Order for the Burial of the Dead is a drastically stripped-down memorial service designed to undermine definitively the whole complex of traditional Catholic beliefs about Purgatory and intercessory prayer for the dead.\nThe Orders of Morning and Evening Prayer are extended by the inclusion of a penitential section at the beginning including a corporate confession of sin and a general absolution, although the text is printed only in Morning Prayer with rubrical directions to use it in the evening as well. The general pattern of Bible reading in the 1549 edition is retained (as it was in 1559) except that distinct Old and New Testament readings are now specified for Morning and Evening Prayer on certain feast days. A revised English Primer was published in 1553, adapting the Offices, Morning and Evening Prayer, and other prayers for lay domestic piety.\nThe 1552 book was used only for a short period, as Edward VI died in the summer of 1553 and, as soon as she could do so, Mary I restored union with Rome. The Latin Mass was reestablished, with altars, roods, and statues of saints reinstated in an attempt to restore the English Church to its Roman affiliation. Cranmer was punished for his work in the English Reformation by being burned at the stake on 21 March 1556. Nevertheless, the 1552 book survived. After Mary's death in 1558, it became the primary source for the Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer, with only subtle, if significant, changes.\nHundreds of English Protestants fled into exile, establishing an English church in Frankfurt am Main. A bitter and very public dispute ensued between those, such as Edmund Grindal and Richard Cox, who wished to preserve in exile the exact form of worship of the 1552 Prayer Book, and those, such as the minister of the congregation John Knox, who saw that book as still partially tainted by compromise. In 1555, the civil authorities expelled Knox and his supporters to Geneva, where they adopted a new prayer book, \"The Form of Prayers\", which principally derived from Calvin's French-language \"La Forme des Pri\u00e8res\". Consequently, when the accession of Elizabeth I reasserted the dominance of the Reformed Church of England, a significant body of more Protestant believers remained who were nevertheless hostile to the \"Book of Common Prayer.\" Knox took \"The Form of Prayers\" with him to Scotland, where it formed the basis of the Scottish \"Book of Common Order\".\n1559 prayer book.\nUnder Elizabeth I, a more permanent enforcement of the reformed Church of England was undertaken and the 1552 book was republished, scarcely altered, in 1559. The Prayer Book of 1552 \"was a masterpiece of theological engineering.\" The doctrines in the Prayer Book and the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion as set forth in 1559 would set the tone of Anglicanism, which preferred to steer a via media (\"middle way\") between Lutheranism and Calvinism. The conservative nature of these changes underlines the fact that Reformed principles were by no means universally popular\u00a0\u2013 a fact that the Queen recognised. Her revived Act of Supremacy, giving her the ambiguous title of supreme governor, passed without difficulty, but the Act of Uniformity 1558, giving statutory force to the Prayer Book, passed through the House of Lords by only three votes in 1559. It made constitutional history in being imposed by the laity alone, as all the bishops, except those imprisoned by the Queen and unable to attend, voted against it. Convocation had made its position clear by affirming the traditional doctrine of the Eucharist, the authority of the Pope, and the reservation by divine law to clergy \"of handling and defining concerning the things belonging to faith, sacraments, and discipline ecclesiastical.\" After these innovations and reversals, the new forms of Anglican worship took several decades to gain acceptance, but by the end of her reign in 1603, 70\u201375% of the English population were on board.\nThe alterations, though minor, were, however, to cast a long shadow over the development of the Church of England. It would be a long road back for the Church, with no clear indication that it would retreat from the 1559 Settlement except for minor official changes. In one of the first moves to undo Cranmer's liturgy, the Queen insisted that the Words of Administration of Communion from the 1549 Book be placed before the Words of Administration in the 1552 Book, thereby re-opening the issue of the Real Presence. At the administration of the Holy Communion, the words from the 1549 book, \"the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ \u2026,\" were combined with the words of Edward VI's second Prayer Book of 1552, \"Take, eat in remembrance \u2026,\" \"suggesting on the one hand a real presence to those who wished to find it and on the other, the communion as memorial only,\" i.e. an objective presence and subjective reception. The 1559 Prayer Book, however, retained the truncated Prayer of Consecration of the Communion elements, which omitted any notion of objective sacrifice. It was preceded by the Proper Preface and Prayer of Humble Access (placed there to remove any implication that the Communion was a sacrifice to God). The Prayer of Consecration was followed by Communion, the Lord's Prayer, and a Prayer of Thanksgiving or an optional Prayer of Oblation whose first line included a petition that God would \"...accepte this our Sacrifice of prayse and thankes geuing...\". The latter prayer was removed (a longer version followed the Words of the Institution in the 1549 Rite) \"to avoid any suggestion of the sacrifice of the Mass.\" The Marian Bishop Scot opposed the 1552 Book \"on the grounds it never makes any connection between the bread and the Body of Christ. Untrue though [his accusation] was, the restoration of the 1549 Words of Distribution emphasized its falsity.\"\nHowever, beginning in the 17th century, some prominent Anglican theologians tried to cast a more traditional Catholic interpretation onto the text as a Commemorative Sacrifice and Heavenly Offering even though the words of the Rite did not support such interpretations. Cranmer, a good liturgist, was aware that the Eucharist from the mid-second century on had been regarded as the Church's offering to God, but he removed the sacrificial language anyway, whether under pressure or conviction. It was not until the Anglican Oxford Movement of the mid-19th century and later 20th-century revisions that the Church of England would attempt to deal with the eucharistic doctrines of Cranmer by bringing the Church back to \"pre-Reformation doctrine.\" In the meantime, the Scottish and American Prayer Books not only reverted to the 1549 text, but even to the older Roman and Eastern Orthodox pattern by adding the Oblation and an Epiclesis \u2013 i.e. the congregation offers itself in union with Christ at the Consecration and receives Him in Communion \u2013 while retaining the Calvinist notions of \"may be for us\" rather than \"become\" and the emphasis on \"bless and sanctify us\" (the tension between the Catholic stress on objective Real Presence and Protestant subjective worthiness of the communicant). However, these Rites asserted a kind of Virtualism in regard to the Real Presence while making the Eucharist a material sacrifice because of the oblation, and the retention of \"may be for us the Body and Blood of thy Savior\" rather than \"become\" thus eschewing any suggestion of a change in the natural substance of bread and wine.\nAnother move, the \"Ornaments Rubric\", related to what clergy were to wear while conducting services. Instead of the banning of all vestments except the rochet for bishops and the surplice for parish clergy, it permitted \"such ornaments \u2026 as were in use \u2026 in the second year of King Edward VI.\" This allowed substantial leeway for more traditionalist clergy to retain the vestments which they felt were appropriate to liturgical celebration, namely Mass vestments such as albs, chasubles, dalmatics, copes, stoles, maniples, etc. (at least until the Queen gave further instructions, as per the text of the Act of Uniformity of 1559). The rubric also stated that the Communion service should be conducted in the 'accustomed place,' namely a Table against the wall with the priest facing it. The rubric was placed at the section regarding Morning and Evening Prayer in this Prayer Book and in the 1604 and 1662 Books. It was to be the basis of claims in the 19th century that vestments such as chasubles, albs and stoles were canonically permitted.\nThe instruction to the congregation to kneel when receiving communion was retained, but the Black Rubric (#29 in the Forty-Two Articles of Faith, which were later reduced to 39) which denied any \"real and essential presence\" of Christ's flesh and blood, was removed to \"conciliate traditionalists\" and aligned with the Queen's sensibilities. The removal of the Black Rubric complements the double set of Words of Administration at the time of communion and permits an action \u2013 kneeling to receive \u2013 which people were used to doing. Therefore, nothing at all was stated in the Prayer Book about a theory of the Presence or forbidding reverence or adoration of Christ via the bread and wine in the Sacrament. On this issue, however, the Prayer Book was at odds with the repudiation of transubstantiation and the forbidden carrying about of the Blessed Sacrament in the Thirty-Nine Articles. As long as one did not subscribe publicly to or assert the latter, one was left to hold whatever opinion one wanted on the former. The Queen herself was famous for saying she was not interested in \"looking in the windows of men's souls.\"\nAmong Cranmer's innovations, retained in the new Prayer Book, was the requirement of weekly Holy Communion services. In practice, as before the English Reformation, many received communion rarely, as little as once a year in some cases; George Herbert estimated it at no more than six times per year. Practice, however, varied from place to place. Very high attendance at festivals was the order of the day in many parishes and in some, regular communion was very popular; in other places families stayed away or sent \"a servant to be the liturgical representative of their household.\" Few parish clergy were initially licensed by the bishops to preach; in the absence of a licensed preacher, Sunday services were required to be accompanied by reading one of the homilies written by Cranmer. George Herbert was, however, not alone in his enthusiasm for preaching, which he regarded as one of the prime functions of a parish priest. Music was much simplified, and a radical distinction developed between, on the one hand, parish worship, where only the metrical psalms of Sternhold and Hopkins might be sung, and, on the other hand, worship in churches with organs and surviving choral foundations, where the music of John Marbeck and others was developed into a rich choral tradition. The whole act of parish worship might take well over two hours, and accordingly, churches were equipped with pews in which households could sit together (whereas in the medieval church, men and women had worshipped separately). Diarmaid MacCulloch describes the new act of worship as \"a morning marathon of prayer, scripture reading, and praise, consisting of mattins, litany, and ante-communion, preferably as the matrix for a sermon to proclaim the message of scripture anew week by week.\"\nMany ordinary churchgoers \u2013 that is, those who could afford one, as it was expensive \u2013 would own a copy of the Prayer Book. Judith Maltby cites a story of parishioners at Flixton in Suffolk who brought their own Prayer Books to church in order to shame their vicar into conforming with it. They eventually ousted him. Between 1549 and 1642, roughly 290 editions of the Prayer Book were produced. Before the end of the English Civil War (1642\u20131651) and the introduction of the 1662 prayer book, something like a half a million prayer books are estimated to have been in circulation.\nThe 1559 prayer book was also translated into other languages within the English sphere of influence. A translation into Latin was made in the form of Walter Haddon's \"Liber Precum Publicarum\" of 1560. Intended for use in the worship of the collegiate chapels of Oxford, Cambridge, Eton, and Winchester, it was resisted by some Protestants. The Welsh edition of the Book of Common Prayer for use in the Church in Wales was published in 1567. It was translated by William Salesbury assisted by Richard Davies.\nChanges in 1604.\nOn Elizabeth's death in 1603, the 1559 book, substantially that of 1552 which had been regarded as offensive by some, such as Bishop Stephen Gardiner, as being a break with the tradition of the Western Church, had come to be regarded in some quarters as unduly Catholic. On his accession and following the so-called \"Millenary Petition\", James I called the Hampton Court Conference in 1604\u2014the same meeting of bishops and Puritan divines that initiated the Authorized King James Version of the Bible. This was in effect a series of two conferences: (i) between James and the bishops; (ii) between James and the Puritans on the following day. The Puritans raised four areas of concern: purity of doctrine; the means of maintaining it; church government; and the \"Book of Common Prayer\". Confirmation, the cross in baptism, private baptism, the use of the surplice, kneeling for communion, reading the \"Apocrypha\"; and subscription to the BCP and Articles were all touched on. On the third day, after James had received a report back from the bishops and made final modifications, he announced his decisions to the Puritans and bishops.\nThe business of making the changes was then entrusted to a small committee of bishops and the Privy Council and, apart from tidying up details, this committee introduced into Morning and Evening Prayer a prayer for the royal family; added several thanksgivings to the Occasional Prayers at the end of the Litany; altered the rubrics of Private Baptism limiting it to the minister of the parish, or some other lawful minister, but still allowing it in private houses (the Puritans had wanted it only in the church); and added to the Catechism the section on the sacraments. The changes were put into effect by means of an explanation issued by James in the exercise of his prerogative under the terms of the 1559 Act of Uniformity and Act of Supremacy.\nThe accession of Charles I (1625\u20131649) brought about a complete change in the religious scene in that the new king used his supremacy over the established church \"to promote his own idiosyncratic style of sacramental Kingship\" which was \"a very weird aberration from the first hundred years of the early reformed Church of England\". He questioned \"the populist and parliamentary basis of the Reformation Church\" and unsettled to a great extent \"the consensual accommodation of Anglicanism\". These changes, along with a new edition of the Book of Common Prayer, led to the Bishops' Wars and later to the English Civil War.\nWith the defeat of Charles I (1625\u20131649) in the Civil War, the Puritan pressure, exercised through a much-changed Parliament, had increased. Puritan-inspired petitions for the removal of the prayer book and episcopacy \"root and branch\" resulted in local disquiet in many places and, eventually, the production of locally organised counter petitions. The parliamentary government had its way but it became clear that the division was not between Catholics and Protestants, but between Puritans and those who valued the Elizabethan settlement. The 1604 book was finally outlawed by Parliament in 1645 to be replaced by the Directory of Public Worship, which was more a set of instructions than a prayer book. How widely the Directory was used is not certain; there is some evidence of its having been purchased, in churchwardens' accounts, but not widely. The Prayer Book certainly was used clandestinely in some places, not least because the Directory made no provision at all for burial services. Following the execution of Charles I in 1649 and the establishment of the Commonwealth under Lord Protector Cromwell, the Prayer Book was not reinstated until shortly after the restoration of the monarchy to England.\nJohn Evelyn records, in \"Diary\", receiving communion according to the 1604 Prayer Book rite:\nChanges made in Scotland.\nIn 1557, the Scots Protestant lords had adopted the English Prayer Book of 1552, for reformed worship in Scotland. However, when John Knox returned to Scotland in 1559, he continued to use the \"Form of Prayer\" he had created for the English exiles in Geneva and, in 1564, this supplanted the \"Book of Common Prayer\" under the title of the \"Book of Common Order\".\nFollowing the accession of King James VI of Scotland to the throne of England his son, King Charles I, with the assistance of Archbishop Laud, sought to impose the prayer book on Scotland. The 1637 prayer book was not, however, the 1559 book but one much closer to that of 1549, the first book of Edward VI. First used in 1637, it was never accepted, having been violently rejected by the Scots. During one reading of the book at the Holy Communion in St Giles' Cathedral, the Bishop of Brechin was forced to protect himself while reading from the book by pointing loaded pistols at the congregation. Following the Wars of the Three Kingdoms (including the English Civil War), the Church of Scotland was re-established on a presbyterian basis but by the Act of Comprehension 1690, the rump of Episcopalians were allowed to hold onto their benefices. For liturgy, they looked to Laud's book and in 1724 the first of the \"wee bookies\" was published, containing, for the sake of economy, the central part of the Communion liturgy beginning with the offertory.\nBetween then and 1764, when a more formal revised version was published, a number of things happened which were to separate the Scottish Episcopal liturgy more firmly from either the English books of 1549 or 1559. First, informal changes were made to the order of the various parts of the service and inserting words indicating a sacrificial intent to the Eucharist clearly evident in the words, \"we thy humble servants do celebrate and make before thy Divine Majesty with these thy holy gifts which we now OFFER unto thee, the memorial thy Son has commandeth us to make;\" secondly, as a result of Bishop Rattray's researches into the liturgies of St James and St Clement, published in 1744, the form of the invocation was changed. These changes were incorporated into the 1764 book which was to be the liturgy of the Scottish Episcopal Church (until 1911 when it was revised) but it was to influence the liturgy of the Episcopal Church in the United States. A new revision was finished in 1929, the \"Scottish Prayer Book 1929\", and several alternative orders of the Communion service and other services have been prepared since then.\n1662.\nThe 1662 Prayer Book was printed two years after the restoration of the monarchy, following the Savoy Conference between representative Presbyterians and twelve bishops which was convened by royal warrant to \"advise upon and review the \"Book of Common Prayer\"\". Attempts by the Presbyterians, led by Richard Baxter, to gain approval for an alternative service book failed. Their major objections (exceptions) were: firstly, that it was improper for lay people to take any vocal part in prayer (as in the Litany or Lord's Prayer), other than to say \"amen\"; secondly, that no set prayer should exclude the option of an extempore alternative from the minister; thirdly, that the minister should have the option to omit part of the set liturgy at his discretion; fourthly, that short collects should be replaced by longer prayers and exhortations; and fifthly, that all surviving \"Catholic\" ceremonial should be removed. The intent behind these suggested changes was to achieve a greater correspondence between liturgy and Scripture. The bishops gave a frosty reply. They declared that liturgy could not be circumscribed by Scripture, but rightfully included those matters which were \"generally received in the Catholic church.\" They rejected extempore prayer as apt to be filled with \"idle, impertinent, ridiculous, sometimes seditious, impious and blasphemous expressions.\" The notion that the Prayer Book was defective because it dealt in generalisations brought the crisp response that such expressions were \"the perfection of the liturgy\".\nThe Savoy Conference ended in disagreement late in July 1661, but the initiative in prayer book revision had already passed to the Convocations and from there to Parliament. The Convocations made some 600 changes, mostly of details, which were \"far from partisan or extreme\". However, Edwards states that more of the changes suggested by high Anglicans were implemented (though by no means all) and Spurr comments that (except in the case of the Ordinal) the suggestions of the \"Laudians\" (Cosin and Matthew Wren) were not taken up possibly due to the influence of moderates such as Sanderson and Reynolds. For example, the inclusion in the intercessions of the Communion rite of prayer for the dead was proposed and rejected. The introduction of \"Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in earth\" remained unaltered and only a thanksgiving for those \"departed this life in thy faith and fear\" was inserted to introduce the petition that the congregation might be \"given grace so to follow their good examples that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom\". Griffith Thomas commented that the retention of the words \"militant here in earth\" defines the scope of this petition: we pray for ourselves, we thank God for them, and adduces collateral evidence to this end. Secondly, an attempt was made to restore the Offertory. This was achieved by the insertion of the words \"and oblations\" into the prayer for the Church and the revision of the rubric so as to require the monetary offerings to be brought to the table (instead of being put in the poor box) and the bread and wine placed upon the table. Previously it had not been clear when and how bread and wine got onto the altar. The so-called \"manual acts\", whereby the priest took the bread and the cup during the prayer of consecration, which had been deleted in 1552, were restored; and an \"amen\" was inserted after the words of institution and before communion, hence separating the connections between consecration and communion which Cranmer had tried to make. After communion, the unused but consecrated bread and wine were to be reverently consumed in church rather than being taken away for the priest's own use. By such subtle means were Cranmer's purposes further confused, leaving it for generations to argue over the precise theology of the rite. One change made that constituted a concession to the Presbyterian Exceptions, was the updating and re-insertion of the so-called \"Black Rubric\", which had been removed in 1559. This now declared that kneeling in order to receive communion did not imply adoration of the species of the Eucharist nor \"to any Corporal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood\"\u2014which, according to the rubric, were in heaven, not here.\nWhile intended to create unity, the division established under the Commonwealth and the licence given by the Directory for Public Worship were not easily passed by. Unable to accept the new book, 936 ministers were deprived. The actual language of the 1662 revision was little changed from that of Cranmer. With two exceptions, some words and phrases which had become archaic were modernised; secondly, the readings for the epistle and gospel at Holy Communion, which had been set out in full since 1549, were now set to the text of the 1611 Authorized King James Version of the Bible. The Psalter, which had not been printed in the 1549, 1552 or 1559 books\u2014was in 1662 provided in Miles Coverdale's translation from the Great Bible of 1538.\nIt was this edition which was to be the official \"Book of Common Prayer\" during the growth of the British Empire and, as a result, has been a great influence on the prayer books of Anglican churches worldwide, liturgies of other denominations in English, and of the English people and language as a whole.\nFurther attempts at revision.\n1662\u20131832.\nBetween 1662 and the 19th century, further attempts to revise the \"Book\" in England stalled. On the death of Charles II, his brother James, a Roman Catholic, became James II. James wished to achieve toleration for those of his own Roman Catholic faith, whose practices were still banned. This, however, drew the Presbyterians closer to the Church of England in their common desire to resist 'popery'; talk of reconciliation and liturgical compromise was thus in the air. But with the flight of James in 1688 and the arrival of the Calvinist William of Orange the position of the parties changed. The Presbyterians could achieve toleration of their practices without such a right being given to Roman Catholics and without, therefore, their having to submit to the Church of England, even with a liturgy more acceptable to them. They were now in a much stronger position to demand changes that were ever more radical. John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury pressed the king to set up a commission to produce such a revision. The so-called \"Liturgy of Comprehension\" of 1689, which was the result, conceded two thirds of the Presbyterian demands of 1661; but, when it came to convocation the members, now more fearful of William's perceived agenda, did not even discuss it and its contents were, for a long time, not even accessible. This work, however, did go on to influence the prayer books of many British colonies.\n1833\u20131906.\nBy the 19th century, pressures to revise the 1662 book were increasing. Adherents of the Oxford Movement, begun in 1833, raised questions about the relationship of the Church of England to the apostolic church and thus about its forms of worship. Known as Tractarians after their production of \"Tracts for the Times\" on theological issues, they advanced the case for the Church of England being essentially a part of the \"Western Church\", of which the Roman Catholic Church was the chief representative. The illegal use of elements of the Roman rite, the use of candles, vestments and incense \u2013\u00a0practices collectively known as Ritualism\u00a0\u2013 had become widespread and led to the establishment of a new system of discipline, intending to bring the \"Romanisers\" into conformity, through the Public Worship Regulation Act 1874. The Act had no effect on illegal practices: five clergy were imprisoned for contempt of court and after the trial of the much loved Bishop Edward King of Lincoln, it became clear that some revision of the liturgy had to be embarked upon.\nOne branch of the Ritualism movement argued that both \"Romanisers\" and their Evangelical opponents, by imitating, respectively, the Church of Rome and Reformed churches, transgressed the Ornaments Rubric of 1559 (\"\u2026 that such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, at all Times of their Ministration, shall be retained, and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the Authority of Parliament, in the Second Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth\"). These adherents of ritualism, among whom were Percy Dearmer and others, claimed that the Ornaments Rubric prescribed the ritual usages of the Sarum Rite with the exception of a few minor things already abolished by the early reformation.\nFollowing a royal commission report in 1906, work began on a new prayer book. It took twenty years to complete, prolonged partly due to the demands of the First World War and partly in the light of the 1920 constitution of the Church Assembly, which \"perhaps not unnaturally wished to do the work all over again for itself\".\n1906\u20132000.\nIn 1927, the work on a new version of the prayer book reached its final form. In order to reduce conflict with traditionalists, it was decided that the form of service to be used would be determined by each congregation. With these open guidelines, the book was granted approval by the Church of England Convocations and Church Assembly in July 1927. However, it was defeated by the House of Commons in 1928.\nThe effect of the failure of the 1928 book was salutary: no further attempts were made to revise the \"Book of Common Prayer\". Instead a different process, that of producing an alternative book, led to the publication of Series 1, 2 and 3 in the 1960s, the 1980 Alternative Service Book and subsequently to the 2000 \"Common Worship\" series of books. Both differ substantially from the \"Book of Common Prayer,\" though the latter includes in the Order Two form of the Holy Communion a very slight revision of the prayer book service, largely along the lines proposed for the 1928 Prayer Book. Order One follows the pattern of the modern Liturgical Movement.\nIn the Anglican Communion.\nWith British colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards, Anglicanism spread across the globe. The new Anglican churches used and revised the use of the \"Book of Common Prayer\", until they, like the English church, produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries which come under the general heading of the Liturgical Movement.\nAfrica.\nIn South Africa a \"Book of Common Prayer\" was \"Set Forth by Authority for Use in the Church of the Province of South Africa\" in 1954. The 1954 prayer book is still in use in some churches in southern Africa; however, it has been largely replaced by \"An Anglican Prayerbook 1989\" and versions of that translated to other languages in use in southern Africa.\nAsia.\nBangladesh.\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" of the Church of Bangladesh, translated literally as \"prayer book\" () was approved by synod in 1997. The book contains prayers translated from the traditional Book of Common Prayer as well as those from the Church of North India and the CWM's Prayer Letter, along with original compositions by the Church of Bangladesh.\nChina.\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" is translated literally as () in Chinese (Mandarin: \"G\u014dng d\u01ceo sh\u016b\"; Cantonese: \"G\u016bng t\u00f3u sy\u016b\"). The former dioceses in the now defunct Chung Hua Sheng Kung Hui had their own Book of Common Prayer. The General Synod and the College of Bishops of Chung Hwa Sheng Kung Hui planned to publish a unified version for the use of all Anglican churches in China in 1949, which was the 400th anniversary of the first publishing of the \"Book of Common Prayer\". After the communists took over mainland China, the Diocese of Hong Kong and Macao became independent of the Chung Hua Sheng Kung Hui, and continued to use the edition issued in Shanghai in 1938 with a revision in 1959. This edition, also called the \"Black-Cover Book of Common Prayer\" () for its cover, still remains in use after the establishment of the Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui (Anglican province in Hong Kong). The language style of \"Black-Cover Book of Common Prayer\" is closer to Classical Chinese than contemporary Chinese.\nIndia.\nThe Church of South India was the first modern Episcopal uniting church, consisting as it did, from its foundation in 1947, at the time of Indian independence, of Anglicans, Methodists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians and Reformed Christians. Its liturgy, from the first, combined the free use of Cranmer's language with an adherence to the principles of congregational participation and the centrality of the Eucharist, much in line with the Liturgical Movement. Because it was a minority church of widely differing traditions in a non-Christian culture (except in Kerala, where Christianity has a long history), practice varied wildly.\nJapan.\nThe BCP is called \"Kit\u014dsho\" () in Japanese. The initial effort to compile such a book in Japanese goes back to 1859, when the missionary societies of the Church of England and of the Episcopal Church of the United States started their work in Japan, later joined by the Anglican Church of Canada in 1888. In 1879, the \"Seik\u014dkai T\u014d Bun\" (, Anglican Prayer Texts) were prepared in Japanese As the Anglican Church in Japan was established in 1887, the Romanised \"Nippon Seik\u014dkai Kit\u014d Bun\" () were compiled in 1879. There was a major revision of these texts and the first \"Kit\u014dsho\" was born in 1895, which had the Eucharistic part in both English and American traditions. There were further revisions, and the Kit\u014dsho published in 1939 was the last revision that was done before World War II, still using the Historical kana orthography.\nAfter the end of the War, the \"Kit\u014dsho\" of 1959 became available, using post-war Japanese orthography, but still in traditional classical Japanese language and vertical writing. In the fifty years after World War II, there were several efforts to translate the Bible into modern colloquial Japanese, the most recent of which was the publication in 1990 of the Japanese New Interconfessional Translation Bible. The \"Kit\u014dsho\" using the colloquial Japanese language and horizontal writing was published in the same year. It also used the Revised Common Lectionary. This latest \"Kit\u014dsho\" since went through several minor revisions, such as employing the Lord's Prayer in Japanese common with the Catholic Church () in 2000.\nKorea.\nIn 1965, the Anglican Church of Korea first published a translation of the 1662 BCP into Korean and called it \"gong-dong-gi-do-mun (\uacf5\ub3d9\uae30\ub3c4\ubb38)\" meaning \"common prayers\". In 1994, the prayers announced \"allowed\" by the 1982 Bishops Council of the Anglican Church of Korea was published in a second version of the \"Book of Common Prayers\" In 2004, the National Anglican Council published the third and the current Book of Common Prayers known as \"seong-gong-hwe gi-do-seo (\uc131\uacf5\ud68c \uae30\ub3c4\uc11c)\" or the \"Anglican Prayers\", including the Calendar of the Church Year, Daily Offices, Collects, Proper Liturgies for Special Days, Baptism, Holy Eucharist, Pastoral Offices, Episcopal Services, Lectionary, Psalms and all of the other events the Anglican Church of Korea celebrates.\nThe Diction of the books has changed from the 1965 version to the 2004 version. For example, the word \"God\" has changed from classical Chinese term \"Cheon-ju (\ucc9c\uc8fc)\" to native Korean word \"ha-neu-nim (\ud558\ub290\ub2d8),\" in accordance with the Public Christian translation, and as used in 1977 Common Translation Bible (gong-dong beon-yeok-seong-seo, \uacf5\ub3d9\ubc88\uc5ed\uc131\uc11c) that the Anglican Church of Korea currently uses.\nPhilippines.\nAs the Philippines is connected to the worldwide Anglican Communion through the Episcopal Church in the Philippines, the main edition of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in use throughout the islands is the same as that of the United States.\nAside from the American version and the newly published Philippine Book of Common Prayer, Filipino-Chinese congregants of Saint Stephen's Pro-Cathedral in the Diocese of the Central Philippines uses the English-Chinese \"Diglot Book of Common Prayer\", published by the Episcopal Church of Southeast Asia.\nThe ECP has since published its own Book of Common Prayer upon gaining full autonomy on 1 May 1990. This version is notable for the inclusion of the \"Misa de Gallo\", a popular Christmastide devotion amongst Filipinos that is of Catholic origin.\nEurope.\nIreland.\nThe first printed book in Ireland was in English, the \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nWilliam Bedell had undertaken an Irish translation of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in 1606. An Irish translation of the revised prayer book of 1662 was effected by John Richardson (1664\u20131747) and published in 1712 as \"Leabhar na nornaightheadh ccomhchoitchionn\". \"Until the 1960s, the Book of Common Prayer, derived from 1662 with only mild tinkering, was quite simply \"the\" worship of the church of Ireland.\" The 1712 edition had parallel columns in English and Irish languages.\nAfter its independence and disestablishment in 1871, the Church of Ireland developed its own prayer book which was published in 1878. It has been revised several times, and the present edition has been used since 2004.\nIsle of Man.\nThe first Manx translation of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" was made by John Phillips (Bishop of Sodor and Man) in 1610. A more successful \"New Version\" by his successor Mark Hiddesley was in use until 1824 when English liturgy became universal on the island.\nPortugal.\nThe Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church formed in 1880. A Portuguese language Prayer Book is the basis of the Church's liturgy. In the early days of the church, a translation into Portuguese from 1849 of the 1662 edition of the Book of Common Prayer was used. In 1884 the church published its own prayer book based on the Anglican, Roman and Mozarabic liturgies. The intent was to emulate the customs of the primitive apostolic church. Newer editions of their prayer book are available in Portuguese and with an English translation.\nSpain.\nThe Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church (, IERE) is the church of the Anglican Communion in Spain. It was founded in 1880 and since 1980 has been an extra-provincial church under the metropolitan authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Previous to its organisation, there were several translations of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" into Spanish in 1623 and in 1707.\nIn 1881 the church combined a Spanish translation of the 1662 edition of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" with the Mozarabic Rite liturgy, which had recently been translated. This is apparently the first time the Spanish speaking Anglicans inserted their own \"historic, national tradition of liturgical worship within an Anglican prayer book.\" A second edition was released in 1889, and a revision in 1975. This attempt combined the Anglican structure of worship with indigenous prayer traditions.\nWales.\nAn Act of Parliament passed in 1563, entitled \"An Act for the Translating of the Bible and the Divine Service into the Welsh Tongue\", ordered that both the Old and New Testament be translated into Welsh, alongside the \"Book of Common Prayer\". This translation \u2013 completed by the then bishop of St David's, Richard Davies, and the scholar William Salesbury \u2013 was published in 1567 as \"Y Llyfr Gweddi Gyffredin\". A further revision, based on the 1662 English revision, was published in 1664.\nThe Church in Wales began a revision of the book of Common Prayer in the 1950s. Various sections of authorised material were published throughout the 1950s and 1960s; however, common usage of these revised versions only began with the introduction of a revised order for the Holy Eucharist. Revision continued throughout the 1960s and 1970s, with definitive orders being confirmed throughout the 70s for most orders. A finished, fully revised Book of Common Prayer for use in the Church in Wales was authorised in 1984, written in traditional English, after a suggestion for a modern language Eucharist received a lukewarm reception.\nIn the 1990s, new initiation services were authorised, followed by alternative orders for morning and evening prayer in 1994, alongside an alternative order for the Holy Eucharist, also in 1994. Revisions of various orders in the Book of Common Prayer continued throughout the 2000s and into the 2010s.\nOceania.\nAotearoa, New Zealand, Polynesia.\nAs for other parts of the British Empire, the 1662 Book of Common Prayer was initially the standard of worship for Anglicans in New Zealand. The 1662 Book was first translated into M\u0101ori in 1830, and has gone through several translations and a number of different editions since then. The translated 1662 BCP has commonly been called (\"the David\"), reflecting the prominence of the Psalter in the services of Morning and Evening Prayer, as the M\u0101ori often looked for words to be attributed to a person of authority. The M\u0101ori translation of the 1662 BCP is still used in New Zealand, particularly among older M\u0101ori living in rural areas.\nAfter earlier trial services in the mid-twentieth century, in 1988 the Anglican Church of Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia authorised through its general synod \"A New Zealand Prayer Book\" intended to serve the needs of New Zealand, Fiji, Tonga, Samoa and the Cook Island Anglicans. This book is unusual for its cultural diversity; it includes passages in the M\u0101ori, Fijian, Tongan and English languages. In other respects, it reflects the same ecumenical influence of the Liturgical Movement as in other new Anglican books of the period, and borrows freely from a variety of international sources. The book is not presented as a definitive or final liturgical authority, such as the use of the definite article in the title might have implied. While the preface is ambiguous regarding the status of older forms and books, the implication however is that this book is now the norm of worship for Anglicans in Aotearoa/New Zealand. The book has also been revised in a number of minor ways since the initial publication, such as by the inclusion of the Revised Common Lectionary and an online edition is offered freely as the standard for reference.\nAustralia.\nThe Anglican Church of Australia, known officially until 1981 as the Church of England in Australia and Tasmania, became self-governing in 1961. Its general synod agreed that the \"Book of Common Prayer\" was to \"be regarded as the authorised standard of worship and doctrine in this Church\". After a series of experimental services offered in many dioceses during the 1960s and 70s, in 1978 \"An Australian Prayer Book\" was produced, formally as a supplement to the book of 1662, although in fact it was widely taken up in place of the old book. The AAPB sought to adhere to the principle that, where the liturgical committee could not agree on a formulation, the words or expressions of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" were to be used, if in a modern idiom. The result was a conservative revision, including two forms of eucharistic rite: a First Order that was essentially the 1662 rite in more contemporary language, and a Second Order that reflected the Liturgical Movement norms, but without elements such as a eucharistic epiclesis or other features that would have represented a departure from the doctrine of the old book. \"An Australian Prayer Book\" has been formally accepted for usage in other churches, including the Reformed Episcopal Church in the United States.\n\"A Prayer Book for Australia\", produced in 1995 and again not technically a substitute for the 1662 prayer book, nevertheless departed from both the structure and wording of the \"Book of Common Prayer\", prompting conservative reaction. Numerous objections were made and the notably conservative evangelical Diocese of Sydney drew attention both to the loss of \"BCP\" wording and of an explicit \"biblical doctrine of substitutionary atonement\". Sydney delegates to the general synod sought and obtained various concessions but that diocese never adopted the book. The Diocese of Sydney has instead developed its own prayer book, called \"Sunday Services\", to \"supplement\" the 1662 prayer book, and preserve the original theology which the Sydney diocese asserts has been changed. In 2009 the diocese published \"Better Gatherings\" which includes the book \"Common Prayer\" (published 2012), an updated revision of \"Sunday Services\".\nNorth and Central America.\nCanada.\nThe Anglican Church of Canada, which until 1955 was known as the Church of England in the Dominion of Canada, or simply the Church of England in Canada, developed its first \"Book of Common Prayer\" separately from the English version in 1918, which received final authorisation from General Synod on 16 April 1922. The revision of 1959 was much more substantial, bearing a family relationship to that of the abortive 1928 book in England. The language was conservatively modernised, and additional seasonal material was added. As in England, while many prayers were retained though the structure of the Communion service was altered: a prayer of oblation was added to the eucharistic prayer after the \"words of institution\", thus reflecting the rejection of Cranmer's theology in liturgical developments across the Anglican Communion. More controversially, the Psalter omitted certain sections, including the entirety of Psalm 58. General Synod gave final authorisation to the revision in 1962, to coincide with the 300th anniversary of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. A French translation, \"Le Recueil des Pri\u00e8res de la Communaut\u00e9 Chr\u00e9tienne\", was published in 1967.\nAfter a period of experimentation with the publication of various supplements, the \"Book of Alternative Services\" was published in 1985.\nIndigenous languages.\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" has also been translated into these North American indigenous languages: Cowitchan, Cree, Haida, Ntlakyapamuk, Slavey, Eskimo-Aleut, Dakota, Delaware, Mohawk, Ojibwe.\nOjibwa.\nJoseph Gilfillan was the chief editor of the 1911 Ojibwa edition of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" entitled \"Iu Wejibuewisi Mamawi Anamiawini Mazinaigun\" (\"Iw Wejibwewizi Maamawi-anami'aawini Mazina'igan\").\nUnited States.\nThe Episcopal Church separated itself from the Church of England in 1789, the first church in the American colonies having been founded in 1607. The first Book of Common Prayer of the new body, approved in 1789, had as its main source the 1662 English book, with significant influence also from the 1764 Scottish Liturgy (see above) which Bishop Seabury of Connecticut brought to the US following his consecration in Aberdeen in 1784.\nThe preface to the 1789 Book of Common Prayer says, \"this Church is far from intending to depart from the Church of England in any essential point of doctrine, discipline, or worship \u2026 further than local circumstances require.\" There were some notable differences. For example, in the Communion service the prayer of consecration follows mainly the Scottish orders derived from 1549 and found in the 1764 Book of Common Prayer. The compilers also used other materials derived from ancient liturgies especially Eastern Orthodox ones such as the Liturgy of St. James. An epiclesis or invocation of the Holy Spirit in the eucharistic prayer was included, as in the Scottish book, though modified to meet reformist objections. Overall however, the book was modelled on the English Prayer Book, the Convention having resisted attempts at more radical deletion and revision.\nArticle X of the Canons of the Episcopal Church provides that \"[t]he Book of Common Prayer, as now established or hereafter amended by the authority of this Church, shall be in use in all the Dioceses of this Church,\" which is a reference to the 1979 Book of Common Prayer.\nThe Prayer Book Cross was erected in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park in 1894 as a gift from the Church of England. Created by Ernest Coxhead, it stands on one of the higher points in Golden Gate Park. It is located between John F. Kennedy Drive and Park Presidio Drive, near Cross Over Drive. This sandstone cross commemorates the first use of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in California by Sir Francis Drake's chaplain on 24 June 1579.\nIn 2019, the Anglican Church in North America released its own revised edition of the BCP. It included a modernised rendering of the Coverdale Psalter, \"renewed for contemporary use through efforts that included the labors of 20th century Anglicans T.S. Eliot and C.S. Lewis...\" According to Robert Duncan, the first archbishop of the ACNA, \"The 2019 edition takes what was good from the modern liturgical renewal movement and also recovers what had been lost from the tradition.\" \nThe 2019 edition does not contain a catechism, but is accompanied by an extensive ACNA catechism, in a separate publication, \"To Be a Christian: An Anglican Catechism\".\nModern Catholic adaptations.\nUnder Pope John Paul II's Pastoral Provision of the early 1980s, former Anglicans began to be admitted into new Anglican Use parishes in the US. \"The Book of Divine Worship\" was published in the United States in 2003 as a liturgical book for their use, composed of material drawn from the 1928 and 1979 \"Book of Common Prayer\" of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America and the Roman Missal. It was mandated for use in all personal ordinariates for former Anglicans in the US from Advent 2013. Following the adoption of the ordinariates' \"\" in Advent 2015, the \"Book of Divine Worship\" was suppressed.\nTo complement the forthcoming \"Divine Worship\" missal, the newly erected Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham in the UK authorised the usage of an interim Anglican Use Divine Office in 2012. \"The Customary of Our Lady of Walsingham\" followed from both the Church of England's Book of Common Prayer tradition and that of the Catholic Church's \"Liturgy of the Hours\", introducing hours\u2013Terce, Sext, and None\u2013not found in any standard \"Book of Common Prayer\". Unlike other contemporary forms of the Catholic Divine Office, the \"Customary\" contained the full 150 Psalm psalter.\nIn 2019, the \"St. Gregory's Prayer Book\" was published by Ignatius Press as a resource for all Catholic laity, combining selections from the \"Divine Worship\" missal with devotions drawn from various Anglican prayer books and other Anglican sources approved for Catholic use in a format that somewhat mimics the form and content of the \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nIn 2020, the first of two editions of \"\" was published. While the \"North American Edition\" was the first Divine Office introduced in the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter, the \"Commonwealth Edition\" succeeded the previous \"Customary\" for the Personal Ordinariates of Our Lady of Walsingham and Our Lady of the Southern Cross. The \"North American Edition\" more closely follows the American 1928, American 1979, and Canadian 1962 prayer books, while the \"Commonwealth Edition\" more closely follows the precedents set by the Church of England's 1549 and 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nReligious influence.\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" has had a great influence on a number of other denominations. While theologically different, the language and flow of the service of many other churches owe a great debt to the prayer book. In particular, many Christian prayer books have drawn on the Collects for the Sundays of the Church Year\u2014mostly freely translated or even \"rethought\" by Cranmer from a wide range of Christian traditions, but including a number of original compositions\u2014which are widely recognised as masterpieces of compressed liturgical construction.\nJohn Wesley, an Anglican priest whose revivalist preaching led to the creation of Methodism wrote in his preface to \"The Sunday Service of the Methodists in North America\" (1784), \"I believe there is no Liturgy in the world, either in ancient or modern language, which breathes more of a solid, scriptural, rational piety than the Common Prayer of the Church of England.\" Many Methodist churches in England and the United States continued to use a slightly revised version of the book for communion services well into the 20th century. In the United Methodist Church, the liturgy for eucharistic celebrations is almost identical to what is found in the \"Book of Common Prayer\", as are some of the other liturgies and services.\nA unique variant was developed in 1785 in Boston, Massachusetts when the historic King's Chapel (founded 1686) left the Episcopal Church and became an independent Unitarian church. To this day, King's Chapel uniquely uses \"The Book of Common Prayer According to the Use in King's Chapel\" in its worship; the book eliminates trinitarian references and statements.\nLiterary influence.\nAlong with the King James Version of the Bible and the works of Shakespeare, the \"Book of Common Prayer\" has been one of the major influences on modern English parlance. As it has been in regular use for centuries, many phrases from its services have passed into everyday English, either as deliberate quotations or as unconscious borrowings. They have often been used metaphorically in non-religious contexts, and authors have used phrases from the prayer book as titles for their books.\nSome examples of well-known phrases from the \"Book of Common Prayer\" are:\nReferences and allusions to Prayer Book services in the works of Shakespeare were tracked down and identified by Richmond Noble. Derision of the Prayer Book or its contents \"in any interludes, plays, songs, rhymes, or by other open words\" was a criminal offence under the 1559 Act of Uniformity, and consequently Shakespeare avoids too direct reference; but Noble particularly identifies the reading of the Psalter according to the Great Bible version specified in the Prayer Book, as the biblical book generating the largest number of Biblical references in Shakespeare's plays. Noble found a total of 157 allusions to the Psalms in the plays of the First Folio, relating to 62 separate Psalms\u2014all, save one, of which he linked to the version in the Psalter, rather than those in the Geneva Bible or Bishops' Bible. In addition, there are a small number of direct allusions to liturgical texts in the Prayer Book; e.g. \"Henry VIII\" 3:2 where Wolsey states \"Vain Pomp and Glory of this World, I hate ye!\", a clear reference to the rite of Public Baptism; where the Godparents are asked \"Doest thou forsake the vaine pompe and glory of the worlde..?\"\nAs novelist P. D. James observed, \"We can recognize the Prayer Book's cadences in the works of Isaac Walton and John Bunyan, in the majestic phrases of John Milton, Sir Thomas Browne and Edward Gibbon. We can see its echo in the works of such very different writers as Daniel Defoe, Thackeray, the Bront\u00ebs, Coleridge, T. S. Eliot and even Dorothy L. Sayers.\" James herself used phrases from the \"Book of Common Prayer\" and made them into best-selling titles \u2013 \"Devices and Desires\" and \"The Children of Men\" \u2013 while Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n's 2006 film \"Children of Men\" placed the phrase onto cinema marquees worldwide.\nCopyright status.\nIn England there are only three bodies entitled to print the \"Book of Common Prayer\": the two privileged presses (Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press), and The King's Printer. Cambridge University Press holds letters patent as The King's Printer and so two of these three bodies are the same. The Latin term \"\" (\"with privilege\") is printed on the title pages of Cambridge editions of the 1662 Book of Common Prayer (and the King James Version of the Bible) to denote the charter authority or privilege under which they are published.\nThe primary function for Cambridge University Press in its role as King's Printer is preserving the integrity of the text, continuing a long-standing tradition and reputation for textual scholarship and accuracy of printing. Cambridge University Press has stated that as a university press, a charitable enterprise devoted to the advancement of learning, it has no desire to restrict artificially that advancement, and that commercial restrictiveness through a partial monopoly is not part of its purpose. It therefore grants permission to use the text, and licence printing or the importation for sale within the UK, as long as it is assured of acceptable quality and accuracy.\nThe Church of England, supported by the Prayer Book Society, publishes an online edition of the Book of Common Prayer with permission of Cambridge University Press.\nIn accordance with Canon II.3.6(b)(2) of the Episcopal Church (United States), the church relinquishes any copyright for the version of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" currently adopted by the Convention of the church (although the text of proposed revisions remains copyrighted).\nSee also.\n16th century Protestant hymnals.\nAnabaptist\nAnglican\nLutheran\nPresbyterian\nReformed"}
{"id": "4954", "revid": "84472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4954", "title": "Battle of Schwetz", "text": ""}
{"id": "4955", "revid": "1261816029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4955", "title": "Bokken", "text": "A bokken (, , 'wood', and \"ken\", '(double-edged) sword') or bokut\u014d (, , 'wood', and \"t\u014d\", '(single-edged) sword') is a Japanese wooden sword used for training in kenjutsu. It is usually the size and shape of a \"katana\", but is sometimes shaped like other swords, such as the \"wakizashi\" and \"tant\u014d\". Some ornamental \"bokken\" are decorated with mother-of-pearl work and elaborate carvings. Sometimes, it is spelled \"boken\" in English.\n\"Bokken\" are traditionally composed of red oak or white oak, although any hardwood can be used. In comparison, practice swords made of flexible, soft wood such as bamboo are referred to as \"shinai\".\nHistory.\nIt is hard to determine precisely when the first \"bokken\" appeared due to secrecy in ancient martial arts training and loose record-keeping. While various mock weapons were surely used during the earlier periods of Japanese history, usage of \"bokken\" in their modern form first emerged during the Muromachi Period (1336\u20131600) for the training of samurai warriors in the various ry\u016b (schools of martial arts and swordsmanship) of the era. \nIf a steel katana is repeatedly used, it can easily become nicked and the edge flawed, potentially leading to a broken expensive sword. \"Bokken\" are safer than fighting with real swords, and are considerably more durable. A wielder can make contact with other trainee's swords with little fear of damage.\nWhile \"bokken\" are safer for sparring and practice than katana, they are still lethal weapons in the hands of trained users. A famous legend to this effect involves Miyamoto Musashi, a ronin known to fight fully armed foes with only one or two \"bokken\". According to the story, he agreed to a duel with Sasaki Kojiro, in the early morning on Ganry\u016bjima, a tiny sandbar between Kyushu and Honshu. Musashi overslept the morning of the duel, and made his way to the duel late. He carved a \"bokken\" from an oar with his knife while traveling on a boat to the duel. At the duel, Sasaki was armed with his large \"nodachi\", yet Musashi crushed Sasaki's skull with a single blow from his \"bokken\", killing him. While many elements of the story are likely apocryphal, the potential danger of a \"bokken\" from the legend is real.\nBefore the Meiji era, \"bokken\" were very likely manufactured by woodworkers not specialized in \"bokken\" manufacture. At the beginning of the 20th century, \"bokken\" manufacture started more formally, mainly in Miyakonoj\u014d, a city on Kyushu Island. The four remaining \"bokken\" workshops of Japan are located in Miyakonoj\u014d. \nAnother notable spot where \"bokken\" were manufactured and sold as tourist souvenirs was Aizuwakamatsu. The resulting \"bokken\" were frequently inscribed with the markings of the \"Byakkotai\", a youth battalion that committed mass suicide nearby during the 1868 Battle of Aizu. During the late Showa era in the 1970s and 1980s, these suicides were romanticized as a bold and heroic act, and \"bokken\" marked with their emblem sold well.\nThe \"standard \"bokken\"\", mostly used in kendo, iaido, and aikido, was created by master Aramaki Yasuo, in collaboration with the All Japan Kendo Federation in the 1950s and was the first standardized \"bokken\" ever created.\nUsage.\nThe \"bokken\" is used as an inexpensive and relatively safe substitute for a real sword in several martial arts such as \"aikido\", \"kendo\", \"iaido\", \"kenjutsu\", and \"jodo\". Its simple wooden construction demands less care and maintenance than a katana. Training with a \"bokken\" does not carry the same mortal risk associated with that of a sharp metal sword, both for the user and other practitioners nearby. \nWhile its use has several advantages over use of a live edged weapon, it can still be deadly, and any training with a \"bokken\" should be done with due care. Injuries occurring from \"bokken\" are very similar to those caused by clubs and similar battering weapons, and include compound fractures, ruptured organs, and other such blunt force injuries. In some ways, a \"bokken\" can be more dangerous, as the injuries caused are often unseen and inexperienced practitioners may underestimate the risk of harm. \nIt is not a sparring weapon, but is intended to be used in kata, and to acclimate the student to the feel of a real sword. For sparring, a bamboo shinai is typically used instead, for obvious safety reasons.\nIn 2003, the All Japan Kendo Federation (AJKF) introduced a set of basic exercises using a \"bokut\u014d\" called \"Bokut\u014d Ni Yoru Kend\u014d Kihon-waza Keiko-h\u014d\". This form of practice is intended primarily for kendo practitioners up to Nidan ranking, but can be beneficial for all kendo students.\n\"Suburit\u014d\" (\u7d20\u632f\u308a\u5200) are \"bokken\" designed for use in \"suburi\". \"Suburi\" (\u7d20\u632f\u308a), literally \"bare swinging,\" are solo cutting exercises. Suburit\u014d are thicker and heavier than normal \"bokken\" and users of suburit\u014d must therefore develop both strength and technique. Their weight makes them unsuitable for paired practice and solo forms. Miyamoto Musashi's \"bokken\" made of an oar in his legendary duel with Sasaki Kojiro was presumably a suburit\u014d-sized \"bokken\".\nAs late as 2015, \"bokken\" were issued to the Los Angeles Police Mounted Unit for use as batons.\nTypes.\n\"Bokken\" can be made to represent any style of weapon required such as nagamaki, nodachi, yari, naginata, kama, etc. The most widely used styles are:\nVarious koryu (traditional Japanese martial arts) have their own distinct styles of \"bokken\" which can vary slightly in length, tip shape, or in whether or not a tsuba (hilt guard) is added.\nThe All Japan Kendo Federation specify the dimensions of \"bokken\" for use in the modern kendo kata, called \"Nippon kendo kata\".\n\"Bokken\" are traditionally composed of red oak or white oak. White oak varieties are slightly more expensive and prestigious. Other common tree varieties used included ebony, biwa, and sunuke in Japan, and hickory, persimmon, ironwood, and walnut for trees native to the Americas. Biwa trees were used at least partially due to a folk superstition that wounds inflicted by biwa wood would never heal."}
{"id": "4957", "revid": "45433808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4957", "title": "BMI", "text": "BMI may refer to:"}
{"id": "4959", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4959", "title": "BSA", "text": "BSA may refer to:"}
{"id": "4960", "revid": "17724652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4960", "title": "Birmingham Small Arms Company", "text": "The Birmingham Small Arms Company Limited (BSA) was a major British industrial combine, a group of businesses manufacturing military and sporting firearms; bicycles; motorcycles; cars; buses and bodies; steel; iron castings; hand, power, and machine tools; coal cleaning and handling plants; sintered metals; and hard chrome process.\nAfter the Second World War, BSA did not manage its business well, and a government-organised rescue operation in 1973 led to a takeover of such operations as it still owned. Those few that survived this process disappeared into the ownership of other businesses.\nHistory of the BSA industrial group.\nMachine-made guns.\nBSA began in June 1861 in the Gun Quarter, Birmingham, England. It was formed by a group of fourteen gunsmith members of the Birmingham Small Arms Trade Association specifically to manufacture guns by machinery. They were encouraged to do this by the War Office which gave the BSA gunsmiths free access to technical drawings and to the War Office's Board of Ordnance's Royal Small Arms Factory at Enfield. New machinery developed in the USA installed at Enfield had greatly increased its output without needing more skilled craftsmen. This new machinery brought to Birmingham the principle of the interchangeability of parts and mass production.\nBSA bought of land at Small Heath, Birmingham, built a factory there and made a road on the site calling it Armoury Road. Their enterprise was rewarded in 1863 with an order for 20,000 Turkish infantry rifles.\nThe system of management of BSA was changed in 1863 when shareholders elected a Board of Directors: Joseph Wilson, Samuel Buckley, Isaac Hollis, Charles Playfair, Charles Pryse, Birmingham mayor Sir John Ratcliffe (c.1798-1864), Edward Gem, and J.F. Swinburn under the chairmanship of John Dent Goodman (1816\u20131900).\nErratic demand.\nThe first War Office contract was not agreed until 1868. In 1879, without work, the factory was shut for a year.\nNew ventures.\nBicycles.\nThe next year, 1880, BSA branched out into bicycle manufacture. The gun factory proved remarkably adaptable to the manufacture of cycle parts. What cycles needed was large quantities of standard parts accurately machined at low prices. In 1880, BSA manufactured the Otto Dicycle. In the 1880s, the company began to manufacture safety bicycles on their own account and not until 1905 was the company's first experimental motorcycle constructed. Bicycle production ceased in 1887 as the company concentrated on producing the Lee\u2013Metford magazine-loading rifle for the War Office which was re-equipping the British Army with it. The order was for 1,200 rifles per week. BSA recommenced manufacturing bicycles on their own behalf from 1908. BSA Cycles Ltd was set up in 1919 for the manufacture of both bicycles and motorcycles. BSA sold the bicycle business to Raleigh in 1957 after separating the bicycle and motorcycle business in 1953.\nBicycle components.\nIn 1893, BSA commenced making bicycle hubs and continued to supply the cycle trade with bicycle parts up to 1936. BSA bought The Eadie Manufacturing Company of Redditch in 1907 and so began to manufacture the Eadie two speed hub gear and the Eadie coaster brake hub. BSA also signed an agreement with the Three Speed Gear Syndicate in 1907 to manufacture a 3 speed hub under licence. This was later classified as the Sturmey Archer Type X. BSA introduced a 'Duo' hub in the late 1930s which was capable of one fixed gear and one gear with a freewheel. All BSA hub gear production temporarily ceased in 1939, until they recommenced making their 3 speed hub around 1945. The Eadie coaster hub made a brief return in 1953 on two BSA bicycle models. BSA forever ceased production of their hub gears in 1955.\nAmmunition.\nBSA sold its ammunition business in 1897 to Birmingham Metal and Munitions Company Limited part of the Nobel-Dynamite Trust, through Kynoch a forerunner of ICI.\nSparkbrook Royal Small Arms Factory.\nIn 1906, Frank Dudley Docker was appointed a director of the company. By the autumn of that year BSA was in some difficulty. They had purchased the Sparkbrook Royal Small Arms Factory from the War Office, and in return, the War Office undertook to give BSA a quarter of all orders for Lee\u2013Enfield rifles. But, the War Office did not honour their undertaking. The ensuing financial crisis did not prevent BSA from signing an agreement to purchase control of bicycle component manufacturer, the Eadie Manufacturing Company of Redditch, on 11 February 1907. That decision was ratified by the shareholders of both companies at separate Extraordinary General Meetings held in the Grand Hotel, Birmingham on 27 February 1907. Albert Eadie became a BSA director, a post he held until his death in 1931.\nSporting firearms.\nThe very variable military market was now supported by sales of target military rifles, sporting rifles, various patterns of miniature rifles and air rifles. Aperture sights were in demand for Bisley and other military rifle meetings.\nMotorcycles.\nMotor bicycles were added to bicycle products in 1910. The BSA hp was exhibited at the 1910 Olympia Show, London for the 1911 season. The entire BSA production sold out in 1911, 1912 and 1913.\nBSA cars.\nIn an effort to make use of the Sparkbrook factory BSA established a motorcar department there. An independent part of it was occupied by Lanchester Motor Company. The first prototype automobile was produced in 1907. The following year, marketed under BSA Cycles Ltd, the company sold 150 automobiles and again began producing complete bicycles on its own account. By 1909, it was clear the new motorcar department was unsuccessful; an investigation committee reported to the BSA Board on the many failures of its management and their poor organisation of production.\nDaimler cars and trucks.\nDudley Docker had joined the board in 1906 and was appointed deputy chairman of BSA in 1909. He had made a spectacular financial success of a merger of five large rolling-stock companies in 1902 and become the leader of the period's merger movement. Believing he could buy the missing management skills that could not be found within BSA, he started merger talks with The Daimler Company Limited of Coventry. Daimler and Rover were then the largest British car producers. Daimler was immensely profitable. After its capital reconstruction in 1904, Daimler's profits were 57 per cent and 150 per cent returns on invested capital in 1905 and 1906. The attraction for Daimler shareholders was the apparent stability of BSA.\nSo in 1910, BSA purchased Daimler with BSA shares but Docker who negotiated the arrangements either ignored or failed in his assessment of their consequences for the new combine. The combine was never adequately balanced or co-ordinated. One of the financial provisions obliged Daimler to pay BSA an annual dividend of \u00a3100,000 representing approximately 40 per cent of the actual cash BSA had put into Daimler. This financial burden deprived Daimler of badly needed cash to fund development, forcing the Daimler company to borrow money from the Midland Bank.\nBSA had still not recovered financially from the earlier purchase of Royal Small Arms factory at Sparkbrook and BSA were not in a position to finance Daimler, nor had either company ample liquid resources. BSA went ahead with motorcycle production in 1910, their first model available for the 1911 season. In 1913, the BSA group were compelled through pressure from the Midland Bank to make a capital issue of 300,000 preference shares. In the short term this was to solve the liquidity issue but further diluted the group's capitalisation.\nDudley Docker retired as a BSA director in 1912 and installed Lincoln Chandler on the BSA board as his replacement. Dudley Docker liked to draw a comparison between the BSA\u2013Daimler merger he engineered and that of his 1902 merger of Metropolitan Carriage Wagon &amp; Finance Company and Patent Shaft. However, there was not the integration of facilities in the BSA\u2013Daimler case, nor was there a reorganisation of either BSA or Daimler and in view of the earlier criticism contained in the 1909 report of the investigation committee, BSA continued to produce cars of their own using Daimler engines. In 1913, Daimler employed 5,000 workers to manufacture 1,000 vehicles, an indication that things were not well.\nSteel bodies.\nIn 1912, BSA would be one of two automobile manufacturers pioneering the use of all-steel bodies, joining Hupmobile in the US.\nLewis Automatic Machine Gun.\nIn 1913, BSA undertook to manufacture quick-firing machine guns for the Lewis Automatic Arms Company whose rights covered the world except for the American Continent.\nFirst World War.\nDuring the First World War, the company returned to arms manufacture and greatly expanded its operations. BSA produced rifles, Lewis guns, shells, bicycles, motorcycles and, through Daimler, aero engines, aircraft and other vehicles for the war effort as well as machine tools.\nFollowing the Armistice the BSA group was described by its chairman as:\nNew ventures.\nMotorcycles.\nIn November 1919, BSA launched their first 50-degree vee-twin, Model E, 770cc side valve (6-7\u00a0hp) motorcycle for the 1920 season. The machine had interchangeable valves, total loss oil system with mechanical pump and an emergency hand one. Retail price was \u00a3130. Other features were Amac carburettor, chain drive, choice of magneto or Magdyno, 7-plate clutch, 3 speed gear box with kickstarter and new type of cantilever fork\nAviation.\nDuring the war Daimler had built enormous numbers of aero engines and aircraft and by the end was building 80 Airco de Havilland bombers a month. In February 1920 BSA amalgamated with what was the world's largest aircraft manufacturer, Aircraft Manufacturing Company (Airco), Airco's main plant at Hendon had employed between 7,000 and 8,000 people. The Airco group of companies had turned out a new aircraft every 45 minutes.\nWithin days BSA discovered Airco was in a far more serious financial state than George Holt Thomas had revealed. Holt Thomas was immediately dropped from his new seat on the BSA board and all BSA's new acquisitions were placed in the hands of a liquidator. Some of the businesses were allowed to continue for some years, Aircraft Transport and Travel's assets being eventually rolled into Daimler Air Hire to make Daimler Airway Limited. BSA failed to pay a dividend for the following four years while it tried to recover from its losses. Some relief was achieved when in March 1924 Daimler Airway and its management became the major constituent of Imperial Airways.\nAs well as the Daimler car range, BSA Cycles Ltd re-entered the car market under the BSA name in 1921 with a V-twin engined light car followed by four-cylinder models up to 1926, when the name was temporarily dropped. In 1929 a new range of 3- and 4-wheel cars appeared and production of these continued until 1936.\nBy the end of 1924 difficult economic conditions left the bulk of BSA profits coming from cars and cycles. There were no sales of arms for military purposes in spite of large new facilities built at Government's request. The shares in Pennsylvania's Jessop Steel Co were disposed of without loss. During 1928 there was a drastic reorganisation of the business of some BSA subsidiaries.\nBy 1930 the BSA Group's primary activities were BSA cycles and Daimler vehicles.\nCar production under the BSA name ceased in the 1930s. BSA remained the largest manufacturer of motorcycles but the market was less than half the size of the late 1920s and production was unprofitable yet the value of BSA's motor cars and cycles was now more than half group turnover.\nLanchester.\nIn 1931 the Lanchester Motor Company at Sparkbrook was acquired and production of their cars transferred to Daimler's Coventry works. The first new product was a version of the Daimler Light Twenty or 16/20 and called Lanchester 15/18.\nEconomic conditions began to improve in the mid-1930s and BSA's activities and profits all grew sharply. International tensions added more activity. An aero engine shadow factory was built and entered production during 1938. Motor cycle sales shrank but BSA maintained its relative position. 1937's new British registrations fell from 57,000 to 46,500. Defence and military equipment including Daimler's Scout car were in heavy demand in Britain and in export markets.\nArmaments.\nIn the 1930s, the board of directors authorised expenditure on bringing their arms-making equipment back to use \u2013 it had been stored at company expense since the end of the Great War in the belief that BSA might again be called upon to perform its patriotic duty. In 1939, BSA acquired the blueprints for a submachine gun designed by Hungarian arms designer P\u00e1l Kir\u00e1ly and the rights to manufacture it. Examples were produced in 9mm Mauser Export calibre. It was estimated that it would only cost \u00a35 each to manufacture: by comparison, the Thompson submachine guns bought after the start of hostilities cost around \u00a350, while SMLE rifles and the later Sten submachine guns cost \u00a37. 15s and \u00a32. 10s respectively in 1943. However the trials did not lead to acceptance; referring to the complex trigger mechanism, Frank Hobart said \"no soldier could have coped with this watchmaker's dream\",\nSecond World War.\nBy the outbreak of the Second World War, BSA Guns Ltd at Small Heath, was the only factory producing rifles in the UK. The Royal Ordnance Factories did not begin production until 1941. BSA Guns Ltd was also producing .303 Browning machine guns for the Air Ministry (the main aircraft armament at the time) at the rate of 600 guns per week in March 1939 and Browning production was to peak at 16,390 per month by March 1942. The armed forces had chosen the 500 cc side-valve BSA M20 motorcycle as their preferred machine. On the outbreak of war the Government requisitioned the 690 machines BSA had in stock as well as placing an order for another 8,000 machines. South Africa, Ireland, India, Sweden and the Netherlands also wanted machines.\nThe Government passed the Emergency Powers (Defence) Act 1939 on 24 August allowing the drafting of defence regulations affecting food, travel, requisitioning of land and supplies, manpower and agricultural production. A second Emergency Powers (Defence) Act was passed on 22 May 1940 allowing the conscription of labour. The fall of France had not been anticipated in Government planning and the encirclement of a large part of the British Expeditionary Force into the Dunkirk pocket resulted in a hasty evacuation of that part of the B.E.F following the abandonment of their equipment. The parlous state of affairs \"no arms, no transport, no equipment\" in the face of the threat of imminent invasion of Britain by Nazi forces was recorded by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff Field Marshal Sir Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke in his diary entries of the 1/2 July 1940.\nThe creation of the Home Guard (initially as the Local Defence Volunteers) following Anthony Eden's broadcast appeal to the Nation on Tuesday 14 May 1940 also created further demand for arms production to equip this new force. BSA, as the only rifle producer in Britain, had to step up to the mark and the workforce voluntarily went onto a seven-day week. Motorcycle production was also stepped up from 500 to 1,000 machines per week which meant a finished machine coming off the production line every 5 minutes. The motorcycle department had been left intact in 1939 due to demand which was doubled following Dunkirk. At the same time BSA staff were providing lectures and demonstrations on motorcycle riding and maintenance to 250,000 officers and men in all parts of the UK.\nThe BSA factory at Small Heath was bombed by the Luftwaffe on 26 August 1940 resulting in one high explosive bomb and a shower of incendiaries hitting the main barrel mill which was the only one operating on service rifles in the country, causing the unaffordable loss of 750 machine tools but fortunately no loss of life. Two further Blitz air raids took place on 19 and 22 November 1940. The air raid of 19 November did the most damage, causing loss of production and trapping hundreds of workers. Since BSA was the sole producer of the main aircraft armament, the resulting delays in productions reportedly caused most worries to PM Churchill among all the industrial damage during the Blitz.\nTwo BSA night-shift electricians, Alf Stevens and Alf Goodwin, helped rescue their fellow workers. Alf Stevens was awarded the George Medal for his selfless acts of bravery in the rescue and Alf Goodwin was awarded the British Empire Medal. Workers involved in the works Civil Defence were brought in to help search for and clear bodies to get the plant back into production. The net effect of the November raids was to destroy machine shops in the four-storey 1915 building, the original 1863 gunsmiths' building and nearby buildings, 1,600 machine tools, kill 53 employees, injure 89, 30 of them seriously and halt rifle production for three months.\nThe Government Ministry of Supply and BSA immediately began a process of production dispersal throughout Britain, through the shadow factory scheme. Factories were set up at Tipton, Dudley, Smethwick, Blackheath, Lye, Kidderminster, Stourport, Tyseley, and Bromsgrove to manufacture Browning machine guns, Stoke, Corsham, and Newcastle-under-Lyme produced the Hispano cannon, Leicester and Studley Road produced the Besa machine gun, Ruislip produced the Oerlikon 20mm cannon, Stafford produced rocket projectiles, Tamworth produced two-pounder gun carriages, Mansfield produced the Boys Anti-tank gun and Shirley produced rifles. These were dispersal factories which were in addition to Small Heath and the other BSA factories opened in the two years following the 1940 blitz. At its peak Small Heath was running 67 factories engaged in war production. BSA operations were also dispersed to other companies under licence.\nIn 1941 BSA was approached to produce a new pedal cycle with a maximum weight allowance of only 22\u00a0lb especially for airborne use. This required a new concept in frame design which BSA found, producing a machine which weighed 21\u00a0lb, one pound less than the design specification and which also exceeded the design requirement for an effective life of 50 miles many times over. Over 60,000 folding bicycles were produced, a figure equal to half the total production of military bicycles during World War II. BSA also produced folding motorcycles for the Airborne Division. In late 1942 BSA examined the Special Operations Executive designed Welgun with a view to manufacture. BSA were willing to manufacture the gun in the quantities required starting April 1943 but the cheaper and less accurate Sten Mk IV was adopted for production by the Ministry of Supply. BSA bought the Sunbeam motorcycles and bicycle business from Associated Motor Cycles Ltd in 1943 and then Ariel Motors Ltd in 1944. During the course of the conflict BSA produced 1,250,000 Lee\u2013Enfield .303 service rifles, 404,383 Sten sub-machine guns, 468,098 Browning machine guns plus spares equivalent to another 100,000, 42,532 Hispano cannon, 32,971 Oerlikon cannon, 59,322 7.9\u00a0mm Besa machine guns, 3,218 15\u00a0mm Besa machine guns, 68,882 Boys Anti-tank guns, 126,334 motorcycles, 128,000 military bicycles (over 60,000 of which were folding paratrooper bicycles), 10,000,000 shell fuse cases, 3,485,335 magazines and 750,000 anti-aircraft rockets were supplied to the armed forces.\nAt the same time other parts of the Group were having similar problems. Before World War II Daimler had been linked with other Coventry motor manufacturers in a government-backed scheme for aero engine manufacture and had been allocated two shadow factories. Apart from this, BSA-owned Daimler was producing Scout Cars and Daimler Mk I Armoured Cars which had been designed by BSA at Small Heath not Coventry as well as gun turrets, gun parts, tank transmissions, rocket projectiles and other munitions. This activity had not gone unnoticed by the enemy, which made Radford Works a target in the Coventry air raids. Radford Works received direct hits in four separate air raids during 1940. None of these attacks were to seriously disrupt production, however two more serious air raids were carried out in April 1941 which destroyed half the factory. In all it is estimated that 170 bombs containing 52,000\u00a0lbs of explosive were dropped on Radford Works as well as the thousands of incendiaries. Like BSA, Daimler had to find dispersal units. A back-handed compliment was paid by Field Marshal Rommel to the workers at Radford Works when he used a captured Daimler Scout to escape following his defeat at El Alamein.\nPost-war.\nBSA cycles.\nBSA produced the first Sunbeam bicycle catalogue in 1949 and produced its own '4 Star' derailleur gear with an associated splined cassette hub and 4 sprocket cassette. This design was different from the 1930s Bayliss Wiley cassette hub which had a threaded sprocket carrier. BSA bought New Hudson motorcycle and bicycle business in 1950 and followed this up in 1951 with the purchase of Triumph Motorcycles which brought Jack Sangster onto the BSA board. The effect of this acquisition was to make BSA into the largest producer of motorcycles in the world at that time.\n1952 saw BSA establish a Professional Cycling Team. Bob Maitland a successful amateur cyclist and the highest placed British finisher in the 1948 Olympic Games road race and now an independent rider in the BSA team was a BSA employee working in the design office as a draughtsman. It was Bob Maitland who was responsible for the design of post war BSA range of lightweight sports bicycles based on his knowledge of cycling. Bob Maitland also made some of the components used on the bicycles of the professional team which were not standard production machines. In the 1952 Tour of Britain Road Race run between Friday 22 August and Saturday 6 September, involving 14 individual stages and covering a total race distance of 1,470 miles, the BSA team of Bob Maitland, \"Tiny\" Thomas, Pete Proctor, Alf Newman and Stan Jones won the overall team race and Pete Proctor \"King of the Mountains\" classification. The riders also enjoyed success on the individual stages of the race. The team competed in four further events, 14 September Tour of the Chilterns, 1st \"Tiny\" Thomas and Team Prize, 21 September Weston-Super-Mare Grand Prix, Team Prize, 28 September Staffordshire Grand Prix, 1st Bob Maitland and Team Prize, 5 October Tour Revenge Race, Dublin, 1st \"Tiny\" Thomas and Team prize.\nIn 1953 BSA withdrew motorcycle production from BSA Cycles Ltd, the company it had established in 1919, by creating BSA Motorcycles Ltd.\nIn 1953 the BSA Professional Cycling Team was managed by Syd Cozens. Successes were 5/6 April Bournemouth Two Day Road Race, 1st Bob Maitland, 12 April Dover to London 63 Miles Road Race, 1st Stan Jones, 31 May Langsett 90 Miles Road Race, 1st Bob Maitland and \"King of the Mountains\", 7 June Tour of the Wrekin, 1st Bob Maitland, 12 July Severn Valley 100 Miles Road Race, 1st \"Tiny\" Thomas, 19 July Jackson Trophy, Newcastle, Team Prize, 9 August Les Adams Memorial 80 Miles Road Race, 1st Alf Newman, Team Prize, \"King of the Mountains\" Arthur Ilsley, 30 August Weston-Super-Mare 100 Miles Grand Prix, 1st Bob Maitland, Team Prize. The team also competed in the 1,624-mile, 12 stage, 1953 Tour of Britain Road Race. The 1953 line up had changed as Arthur Ilsley replaced Pete Proctor in the team. \"Tiny\" Thomas won the overall individual classification, the Team were runners-up in the team competition and Arthur Ilsley was 3rd in the \"King of the Mountains\" competition. Bob Maitland also had notable success by winning the Independent National Championship.\n1954 saw the introduction of the BSA Quick Release 3 Speed hub gear. It was a split axle three speed gear intended for use with bicycles equipped with oil bath chainguards. The original BSA 3 speed hub gear had been made under licence from the Three-Speed Gear Syndicate since 1907. The design was later to be classified as the Sturmey-Archer 'Type X', but all BSA hub gear production ceased in 1955\nManagement.\nSir Bernard Docker remained chairman of BSA until 1956 when the BSA Board removed him. In an acrimonious dispute conducted in the media the matter was brought to the BSA shareholders at the Annual General Meeting where the decision of the Board was upheld. Another significant departure for the fortune of the BSA Group but less controversial was the retirement on ill health grounds of James Leek CBE, managing director from 1939 until his retirement. Sir Bernard Docker was replaced as Chairman of the BSA Board by Jack Sangster.\nDispersals.\nThe BSA bicycle division, BSA Cycles Ltd., including the BSA cycle dealer network was sold to Raleigh in 1957. Raleigh initially continued bicycle production in Birmingham at Coventry Road, Sheldon, Birmingham 26, into the early 1960s using up BSA parts but as time went on more stock Raleigh parts and fittings were used, some continuing to bear the 'piled arms' stamp. TI Group, owners of the British Cycle Corporation, bought Raleigh in 1960 thus gaining access to the BSA brand. Bicycles bearing the BSA name are currently manufactured and distributed within India by TI Cycles of India but have no direct connection to the original Birmingham BSA company.\nIn 1960, Daimler was sold to Jaguar.\n1961 was the centenary year of the BSA Group and, in recognition of this milestone, the company magazine produced an anniversary issue of \"BSA Group News\" in June called \"BSA Centenary 1861\u20131961\", in which many of the achievements of the Group were celebrated. This year also saw the end of military rifle production; however, BSA still continued to make sporting guns.\nProducts.\nBicycles.\nAccording to Charles Spencer, BSA was manufacturing the \"Delta\" bicycle . In 1880 the company was approached to manufacture the \"Otto Dicycle\". An initial contract was signed to produce 210 and a further contract followed for a further 200. In all it is believed that a total of 953 Otto machines were made. BSA then went into bicycle production on their own account, the first machines to their own specification being exhibited at the 1881 Stanley Show. BSA went on to design and manufacture a \"safety\" bicycle (patent:15,342 of 1884). BSA was also producing tricycles and a licence was obtained in 1885 to manufacture ball bearings. BSA ceased bicycle manufacture in 1887 because of the demand for arms. Bicycle component manufacture commenced in 1894 and BSA continued to supply the bicycle trade up to 1936. The company recommenced bicycle manufacture on their own account again in 1908 and these were exhibited at the Stanley Show in 1909. Bicycle manufacture was what led BSA into motorcycles. BSA produced bicycles for both the police and military and notably a folding bicycle for the British Army during World War I and the more well known folding Paratroopers bicycle during World War II. BSA supplied the Irish Army with bicycles after 1922.\nBSA manufactured a range of bicycles from utility roadsters through to racing bicycles. The BSA range of Sports bicycles expanded in the 1930s following the granting of a patent for a new lighter design of seat lug in 1929 and tandems were introduced into the BSA bicycle range as well. BSA had a reputation for quality and durability and their components were more expensive that either Chater-Lea or Brampton. BSA launched a high end club cyclists machine in the early 1930s initially branded as the \"Super-eeze\". Never slow to avail of publicity BSA sponsored the great Australian cyclist Hubert Opperman and re-branded the top of the range machine the \"Opperman\" model. A less expensive range of clubman lightweight machines was introduced from 1936 with the \"Cyclo\" 3 speed derailleur equipped \"Clubman\". Subtle changes were made to the range, most models being equipped with \"Russ\" patent forks and some models were made for only two seasons. This all stopped around September 1939 with the outbreak of war. A revised catalogue with a much reduced range was issued in March 1940 which also saw the launch of the BSA \"Streamlight\" model. A novel all white bicycle was produced for the blackout but had disappeared from a severely reduced bicycle range the details of which were circulated to dealers from December 1941. BSA had ceased production of their 3 speed hub gear in 1939 and production appears to have started again by 1945 although with a black finish instead of chromium plating. BSA bought Sunbeam in 1943 and produced Sunbeam bicycles using up existing frames and parts and using BSA components for the missing bits. The first BSA produced Sunbeam catalogue was published in 1949\nPost war BSA expanded their bicycle range but faced problems of shortages of raw materials such as steel and was required to export a lot of their manufactured output in order to get a Government licence to purchase the necessary raw materials. The company moved bicycle production to the new Waverley Works after World War II. BSA continued to innovate introducing the 4 Star derailleur gear in 1949 along with an associated 4-speed 'unit' or cassette hub. The derailleur design was altered from 1950 and was certainly available up to 1953 but was not a great success. BSA bought New Hudson in 1950 and started to manufacture and sell New Hudson branded machines as well as Sunbeam. It appears that the top of the range BSA lightweight club cyclist machine was the \"Gold Column\" and this appears to have been changed into the BSA \"Tour of Britain\" model following the success of the BSA Professional Cycling Team in the 1952 Tour of Britain race. The \"Tour of Britain\" model was heavily promoted in the BSA 1953 sales literature. The factory made \"Tour of Britain\" model was not the same as those ridden by the professional team. Only eight machines were crafted for the professional team and none of the components appear to have been standard BSA parts. 1953 saw BSA separate the bicycle / motorcar and motorcycle business into different holdings.\nThe good times were coming to an end and demand for bicycles fell with the end of rationing in 1954. James Leek, managing director of BSA Cycles Ltd was suffering ill health and he retired in 1956, the same year the BSA Chairman, Sir Bernard Docker, was removed from the BSA Board. Jack Sangster who had joined the BSA Board in 1951 following the purchase of his company Triumph Motorcycles became chairman. The bicycle manufacturing business BSA Cycles Ltd was sold to Raleigh Industries in 1957.\nMotorcycles.\nBSA Motorcycles were made by BSA Cycles Ltd, under the BSA parent, until 1953 when the motorcycle business was moved into holding \"BSA Motorcycles Ltd\". The first instance of intention to produce motorcycles was reported in The Motor Cycle, a British motorcycling journal, in July 1906. The first wholly BSA motorcycle, the H.P. was built in 1910 and displayed at the first Olympia Show, London on 21 November in that year. Sir Hallewell Rogers, BSA Chairman, had informed the shareholders at the company's 1910 AGM in Birmingham \"We have decided to put a motor-bicycle on the market for the coming season\u00a0... These machines will be on exhibit at the Cycle and Motor Show on November 21st, after which date we look forward to commencing delivery\". The machines were available for the 1911 season and entire production sold out. BSA had previously acquired a commercially available engine in 1905 and fitted it to one of their bicycle frames and discovered at first hand the problems that needed to be overcome. BSA Cycles Ltd was set up as a subsidiary company in 1919 under Managing Director Charles Hyde to manufacture both bicycles and motorcycles.\nTrademarks.\nRights to the motorcycle brand went to Norton Villiers Triumph and on its liquidation were purchased by BSA Company. Rights to the guns brand were acquired by Gamo for its new subsidiary, BSA Guns (UK) Limited.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA) plays a prominent role in the inaugural season of the British crime drama series \"Peaky Blinders\", as well as in subsequent seasons, where it serves as a focal point for armaments production, and as the day-to-day workplace of a number of characters."}
{"id": "4961", "revid": "39151475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4961", "title": "Bovril", "text": "Bovril is a thick and salty meat extract paste, similar to a yeast extract, developed in the 1870s by John Lawson Johnston. It is sold in a distinctive bulbous jar and as cubes and granules. Its appearance is similar to the British Marmite and its Australian equivalent Vegemite. Bovril is owned and distributed by Unilever UK.\nBovril can be made into a drink by diluting with hot water or, less commonly, with milk. It can be used as a flavouring for soups, broth, stews or porridge, or as a spread, especially on toast. In 2004 Unilever removed beef ingredients from the Bovril formula, rendering it vegetarian, but in 2006, reversed that decision and reintroduced beef ingredients to the formula.\nEtymology.\nThe first part of the product's name comes from Latin , meaning \"pertaining to an ox\". Johnston took the \"-vril\" suffix from Edward Bulwer-Lytton's then-popular novel, \"The Coming Race\" (1871), the plot of which revolves around a superior race of people, the Vril-ya, who derive their powers from an electromagnetic substance named \"Vril\". Therefore, Bovril indicates great strength obtained from an ox.\nHistory.\nIn 1870, in the Franco-Prussian War, Napoleon III ordered one million cans of beef to feed his troops. The task of providing this went to John Lawson Johnston, a Scottish butcher living in Canada. Large quantities of beef were available across the British Dominions and South America, but transport and storage were problematic. Therefore, Johnston created a product known as 'Johnston's Fluid Beef', later called Bovril, to meet Napoleon's needs. By 1888, over 3,000 UK public houses, grocers and dispensing chemists were selling Bovril. In 1889, Bovril Ltd was formed to develop Johnston's business further.\nDuring the 1900 Siege of Ladysmith in the Second Boer War, a Bovril-like paste was produced from horsemeat within the garrison. Nicknamed \"Chevril\" (a portmanteau of \"cheval\", French for \"horse\", and Bovril) it was made by boiling down horse or mule meat to a jelly and serving it as a tea-like mixture. Bovril also produced concentrated, pemmican-like dried beef as part of the British Army emergency field ration during the war. The ration came in the form of a pocket-sized tin can that contained the beef on one half alongside a dried cocoa drink on another half. The dried beef could be eaten alone, or mixed with water to create a beef tea. \nBovril continued to function as a \"war food\" in World War I and was frequently mentioned in the 1930 account \"\" by Helen Zenna Smith. It describes the drink being prepared for the casualties at Mons where \"the orderlies were just beginning to make Bovril for the wounded, when the bearers and ambulance wagons were shelled as they were bringing the wounded into the hospital\".\nWhen John Lawson Johnston died, his son George Lawson Johnston inherited and took over the Bovril business. In 1929, George Lawson Johnston was made Baron Luke, of Pavenham, in the county of Bedford.\nBovril's instant beef stock was launched in 1966 and its \"King of Beef\" range of instant flavours for stews, casseroles and gravy in 1971. In 1971, James Goldsmith's Cavenham Foods acquired the Bovril Company but then sold most of its dairies and South American operations to finance further takeovers. The brand is now owned by the Anglo-Dutch multinational Unilever, which bought Bovril in 2001.\nIn 2004, Unilever removed beef ingredients from the Bovril formula, rendering it vegetarian. This was mainly due to concerns about decreasing sales, particularly from exports due to an export ban on British beef, as a result of the growing popularity of vegetarianism, religious dietary requirements, and public concerns about bovine spongiform encephalopathy. In 2006, Unilever reversed that decision and reintroduced beef ingredients to their Bovril formula once sales increased and the beef export bans were lifted. Unilever now produces Bovril using beef extract and a chicken variety using chicken extract.\nIn November 2020, Forest Green Rovers Football Club announced a collaboration with the makers of Bovril to create a beet-based version of Bovril to be sold at their New Lawn stadium, where meat-based products had been removed from sale some years prior.\nLicensed production.\nIn South Africa Bovril is produced by the Bokomo division of Pioneer Foods.\nCultural significance.\nBovril was promoted as a superfood in the early 20th century. Advertisements recommended people to dilute it into a tea or spread it on their morning toast. Some adverts even claimed that Bovril could protect one from influenza.\nBovril jars are commonly excavated as part of archaeological assemblages, such as at Knowles Mill in Worcestershire. \nSince its invention, Bovril has become an icon of British culture. It is associated with football culture. During the winter, British football fans in stadium terraces drink it as a tea from Thermos flasks \u2013 or from disposable cups in Scotland, where thermoses are from football stadiums.Bovril holds the unusual distinction of having been advertised with a Pope. An advertising campaign of the early 20th century in Britain depicted Pope Leo XIII seated on his throne, bearing a mug of Bovril. The campaign slogan read: \"The Two Infallible Powers \u2013 The Pope &amp; Bovril.\"\nBovril beef tea was the only hot drink that Ernest Shackleton's team had when they were marooned on Elephant Island during the 1914\u20131917 Endurance Expedition.\nIn the film \"In Which We Serve\", the officers on the bridge are served \"Bovril rather heavily laced with sherry\" to warm them up, after being rescued during the Dunkirk evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force.\nBritish mountaineer Chris Bonington appeared in TV commercials for Bovril in the 1970s and 1980s in which he recalled melting snow and ice on the first ascent of Baintha Brakk (known as \"The Ogre\") to make hot drinks."}
{"id": "4962", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4962", "title": "Baseball statistics/BA", "text": ""}
{"id": "4963", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4963", "title": "Benjamin D. Santer", "text": "Benjamin David Santer (born June 3, 1955) was a climate researcher at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and former researcher at the University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit. He retired from the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in 2021 and is now a Distinguished Scholar in Residence at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. He also worked at the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology from 1987 to 1992. He specializes mainly in statistical analysis of climate data sets, and detection/attribution of climate change forcings.\nSince 2012, Santer has been listed on the board of directors of the National Center for Science Education.\nHonors.\nSanter received a B.Sc. in Environmental Sciences and a 1987 Ph.D. in climatology from the Climatic Research Unit of the University of East Anglia.\nIn 1998 Santer was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship for research supporting the finding that human activity contributes to global warming. He has also received the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award and a Distinguished Scientist Fellowship from the U.S. Department of Energy and the Norbert Gerbier/MUMM award from the World Meteorological Organization. He ranked twelfth amongst climate scientists in a 2002 assessment of most cited scientists in the field of global warming. In 2024 he received the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Research Medal of the American Meteorological Society.\nIn 2011, Santer was elected as a fellow of the American Geophysical Union and as a member of the National Academy of Sciences.\n1995 AR2 Chapter 8.\nSanter was the convening Lead Author of Chapter 8 of 1995 IPCC Working Group I Report (AR2 WGI), which addressed the global warming issue.\nIn a June 12, 1996 editorial-page piece in \"The Wall Street Journal\", Frederick Seitz, chair of the George C. Marshall Institute and Science and Environmental Policy Project, claimed that alterations made to Chapter 8 of the 1995 IPCC report were made to \"deceive policy makers and the public into believing that the scientific evidence shows human activities are causing global warming.\" Similar charges were made by the Global Climate Coalition (GCC), a consortium of industry interests; specifically, they accused Santer of \"scientific cleansing.\"\nSanter and 40 other scientists responded to \"The Wall Street Journal\" that all IPCC procedural rules were followed, and that IPCC procedures required changes to the draft in response to comments from governments, individual scientists, and non-governmental organizations. They stated that the pre- and post-Madrid versions of Chapter 8 were equally cautious in their statements; that roughly 20% of Chapter 8 is devoted to the discussion of uncertainties in estimates of natural climate variability and the expected signal due to human activities; and that both versions of the chapter reached the same conclusion: \"Taken together, these results point towards a human influence on climate.\"\nGold Standard Paper.\nOn February 25, 2019, Santer et al. published the paper \"Celebrating the anniversary of three key events in climate change science\" in \"Nature Climate Change\", claiming to have reached the 5-sigma \"gold standard level\" of statistical proof of human influence in global climate change using three sets of satellite data."}
{"id": "4964", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4964", "title": "Bernoulli number", "text": "In mathematics, the Bernoulli numbers are a sequence of rational numbers which occur frequently in analysis. The Bernoulli numbers appear in (and can be defined by) the Taylor series expansions of the tangent and hyperbolic tangent functions, in Faulhaber's formula for the sum of \"m\"-th powers of the first \"n\" positive integers, in the Euler\u2013Maclaurin formula, and in expressions for certain values of the Riemann zeta function.\nThe values of the first 20 Bernoulli numbers are given in the adjacent table. Two conventions are used in the literature, denoted here by formula_1 and formula_2; they differ only for , where formula_3 and formula_4. For every odd , . For every even , is negative if is divisible by 4 and positive otherwise. The Bernoulli numbers are special values of the Bernoulli polynomials formula_5, with formula_6 and formula_7.\nThe Bernoulli numbers were discovered around the same time by the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli, after whom they are named, and independently by Japanese mathematician Seki Takakazu. Seki's discovery was posthumously published in 1712 in his work \"Katsuy\u014d Sanp\u014d\"; Bernoulli's, also posthumously, in his \"Ars Conjectandi\" of 1713. Ada Lovelace's note G on the Analytical Engine from 1842 describes an algorithm for generating Bernoulli numbers with Babbage's machine; it is disputed whether Lovelace or Babbage developed the algorithm. As a result, the Bernoulli numbers have the distinction of being the subject of the first published complex computer program.\nNotation.\nThe superscript used in this article distinguishes the two sign conventions for Bernoulli numbers. Only the term is affected: \nIn the formulas below, one can switch from one sign convention to the other with the relation formula_8, or for integer = 2 or greater, simply ignore it.\nSince for all odd , and many formulas only involve even-index Bernoulli numbers, a few authors write \"\" instead of . This article does not follow that notation.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Bernoulli numbers are rooted in the early history of the computation of sums of integer powers, which have been of interest to mathematicians since antiquity.\nMethods to calculate the sum of the first positive integers, the sum of the squares and of the cubes of the first positive integers were known, but there were no real 'formulas', only descriptions given entirely in words. Among the great mathematicians of antiquity to consider this problem were Pythagoras (c. 572\u2013497\u00a0BCE, Greece), Archimedes (287\u2013212\u00a0BCE, Italy), Aryabhata (b. 476, India), Abu Bakr al-Karaji (d. 1019, Persia) and Abu Ali al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Haytham (965\u20131039, Iraq).\nDuring the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries mathematicians made significant progress. In the West Thomas Harriot (1560\u20131621) of England, Johann Faulhaber (1580\u20131635) of Germany, Pierre de Fermat (1601\u20131665) and fellow French mathematician Blaise Pascal (1623\u20131662) all played important roles.\nThomas Harriot seems to have been the first to derive and write formulas for sums of powers using symbolic notation, but even he calculated only up to the sum of the fourth powers. Johann Faulhaber gave formulas for sums of powers up to the 17th power in his 1631 \"Academia Algebrae\", far higher than anyone before him, but he did not give a general formula.\nBlaise Pascal in 1654 proved \"Pascal's identity\" relating to the sums of the th powers of the first positive integers for .\nThe Swiss mathematician Jakob Bernoulli (1654\u20131705) was the first to realize the existence of a single sequence of constants which provide a uniform formula for all sums of powers.\nThe joy Bernoulli experienced when he hit upon the pattern needed to compute quickly and easily the coefficients of his formula for the sum of the th powers for any positive integer can be seen from his comment. He wrote:\nBernoulli's result was published posthumously in \"Ars Conjectandi\" in 1713. Seki Takakazu independently discovered the Bernoulli numbers and his result was published a year earlier, also posthumously, in 1712. However, Seki did not present his method as a formula based on a sequence of constants.\nBernoulli's formula for sums of powers is the most useful and generalizable formulation to date. The coefficients in Bernoulli's formula are now called Bernoulli numbers, following a suggestion of Abraham de Moivre.\nBernoulli's formula is sometimes called Faulhaber's formula after Johann Faulhaber who found remarkable ways to calculate sum of powers but never stated Bernoulli's formula. According to Knuth a rigorous proof of Faulhaber's formula was first published by Carl Jacobi in 1834. Knuth's in-depth study of Faulhaber's formula concludes (the nonstandard notation on the LHS is explained further on):\nIn the above Knuth meant formula_10; instead using formula_11 the formula avoids subtraction:\nReconstruction of \"Summae Potestatum\".\nThe Bernoulli numbers (n)/(n) were introduced by Jakob Bernoulli in the book \"Ars Conjectandi\" published posthumously in 1713 page 97. The main formula can be seen in the second half of the corresponding facsimile. The constant coefficients denoted , , and by Bernoulli are mapped to the notation which is now prevalent as , , , . The expression means \u2013 the small dots are used as grouping symbols. Using today's terminology these expressions are falling factorial powers . The factorial notation as a shortcut for was not introduced until 100 years later. The integral symbol on the left hand side goes back to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1675 who used it as a long letter for \"summa\" (sum). The letter on the left hand side is not an index of summation but gives the upper limit of the range of summation which is to be understood as . Putting things together, for positive , today a mathematician is likely to write Bernoulli's formula as:\nThis formula suggests setting when switching from the so-called 'archaic' enumeration which uses only the even indices 2, 4, 6... to the modern form (more on different conventions in the next paragraph). Most striking in this context is the fact that the falling factorial has for the value . Thus Bernoulli's formula can be written\nif , recapturing the value Bernoulli gave to the coefficient at that position.\nThe formula for formula_15 in the first half of the quotation by Bernoulli above contains an error at the last term; it should be formula_16 instead of formula_17.\nDefinitions.\nMany characterizations of the Bernoulli numbers have been found in the last 300 years, and each could be used to introduce these numbers. Here only four of the most useful ones are mentioned:\nFor the proof of the equivalence of the four approaches.\nRecursive definition.\nThe Bernoulli numbers obey the sum formulas\nwhere formula_19 and denotes the Kronecker delta. \nThe first of these is sometimes written as the formula (for m &gt; 1)\nformula_20\nwhere the power is expanded formally using the binomial theorem and formula_21 is replaced by formula_22.\nSolving for formula_23 gives the recursive formulas\nExplicit definition.\nIn 1893 Louis Saalsch\u00fctz listed a total of 38 explicit formulas for the Bernoulli numbers, usually giving some reference in the older literature. One of them is (for formula_25):\nGenerating function.\nThe exponential generating functions are\nwhere the substitution is formula_28. The two generating functions only differ by \"t\".\nIf we let formula_29 and formula_30 then\nThen formula_32 and for formula_33 the m term in the series for formula_34 is:\nIf\nthen we find that\nshowing that the values of formula_39 obey the recursive formula for the Bernoulli numbers formula_40.\nThe (ordinary) generating function\nis an asymptotic series. It contains the trigamma function .\nIntegral Expression.\nFrom the generating functions above, one can obtain the following integral formula for the even Bernoulli numbers: \nBernoulli numbers and the Riemann zeta function.\nThe Bernoulli numbers can be expressed in terms of the Riemann zeta function:\nHere the argument of the zeta function is \"0 \"or negative. As formula_43 is zero for negative even integers (the trivial zeroes), if \"n&gt;1\" is odd, formula_44 is zero.\nBy means of the zeta functional equation and the gamma reflection formula the following relation can be obtained:\nNow the argument of the zeta function is positive.\nIt then follows from () and Stirling's formula that\nEfficient computation of Bernoulli numbers.\nIn some applications it is useful to be able to compute the Bernoulli numbers through modulo , where is a prime; for example to test whether Vandiver's conjecture holds for , or even just to determine whether is an irregular prime. It is not feasible to carry out such a computation using the above recursive formulae, since at least (a constant multiple of) arithmetic operations would be required. Fortunately, faster methods have been developed which require only operations (see big notation).\nDavid Harvey describes an algorithm for computing Bernoulli numbers by computing modulo for many small primes , and then reconstructing via the Chinese remainder theorem. Harvey writes that the asymptotic time complexity of this algorithm is and claims that this implementation is significantly faster than implementations based on other methods. Using this implementation Harvey computed for . Harvey's implementation has been included in SageMath since version 3.1. Prior to that, Bernd Kellner computed to full precision for in December 2002 and Oleksandr Pavlyk for with Mathematica in April 2008.\nApplications of the Bernoulli numbers.\nAsymptotic analysis.\nArguably the most important application of the Bernoulli numbers in mathematics is their use in the Euler\u2013Maclaurin formula. Assuming that is a sufficiently often differentiable function the Euler\u2013Maclaurin formula can be written as\nThis formulation assumes the convention . Using the convention the formula becomes\nHere formula_49 (i.e. the zeroth-order derivative of formula_50 is just formula_50). Moreover, let formula_52 denote an antiderivative of formula_50. By the fundamental theorem of calculus,\nThus the last formula can be further simplified to the following succinct form of the Euler\u2013Maclaurin formula\nThis form is for example the source for the important Euler\u2013Maclaurin expansion of the zeta function\nHere denotes the rising factorial power.\nBernoulli numbers are also frequently used in other kinds of asymptotic expansions. The following example is the classical Poincar\u00e9-type asymptotic expansion of the digamma function .\nSum of powers.\nBernoulli numbers feature prominently in the closed form expression of the sum of the th powers of the first positive integers. For define\nThis expression can always be rewritten as a polynomial in of degree . The coefficients of these polynomials are related to the Bernoulli numbers by Bernoulli's formula:\nwhere denotes the binomial coefficient.\nFor example, taking to be 1 gives the triangular numbers .\nTaking to be 2 gives the square pyramidal numbers .\nSome authors use the alternate convention for Bernoulli numbers and state Bernoulli's formula in this way:\nBernoulli's formula is sometimes called Faulhaber's formula after Johann Faulhaber who also found remarkable ways to calculate sums of powers.\nFaulhaber's formula was generalized by V. Guo and J. Zeng to a -analog.\nTaylor series.\nThe Bernoulli numbers appear in the Taylor series expansion of many trigonometric functions and hyperbolic functions.\nformula_63\nLaurent series.\nThe Bernoulli numbers appear in the following Laurent series:\nDigamma function: formula_64\nUse in topology.\nThe Kervaire\u2013Milnor formula for the order of the cyclic group of diffeomorphism classes of exotic -spheres which bound parallelizable manifolds involves Bernoulli numbers. Let be the number of such exotic spheres for , then\nThe Hirzebruch signature theorem for the genus of a smooth oriented closed manifold of dimension 4\"n\" also involves Bernoulli numbers.\nConnections with combinatorial numbers.\nThe connection of the Bernoulli number to various kinds of combinatorial numbers is based on the classical theory of finite differences and on the combinatorial interpretation of the Bernoulli numbers as an instance of a fundamental combinatorial principle, the inclusion\u2013exclusion principle.\nConnection with Worpitzky numbers.\nThe definition to proceed with was developed by Julius Worpitzky in 1883. Besides elementary arithmetic only the factorial function and the power function is employed. The signless Worpitzky numbers are defined as\nThey can also be expressed through the Stirling numbers of the second kind\nA Bernoulli number is then introduced as an inclusion\u2013exclusion sum of Worpitzky numbers weighted by the harmonic sequence 1,\u00a0,\u00a0,\u00a0...\nThis representation has .\nConsider the sequence , . From Worpitzky's numbers , applied to is identical to the Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa transform applied to (see Connection with Stirling numbers of the first kind). This can be seen via the table:\nThe first row represents .\nHence for the second fractional Euler numbers () / ():\nA second formula representing the Bernoulli numbers by the Worpitzky numbers is for \nThe simplified second Worpitzky's representation of the second Bernoulli numbers is:\nwhich links the second Bernoulli numbers to the second fractional Euler numbers. The beginning is:\nThe numerators of the first parentheses are (see Connection with Stirling numbers of the first kind).\nConnection with Stirling numbers of the second kind.\nIf one defines the Bernoulli polynomials as:\nwhere for are the Bernoulli numbers,\nand is a Stirling number of the second kind.\nOne also has the following for Bernoulli polynomials,\nThe coefficient of in is .\nComparing the coefficient of in the two expressions of Bernoulli polynomials, one has:\n(resulting in ) which is an explicit formula for Bernoulli numbers and can be used to prove Von-Staudt Clausen theorem.\nConnection with Stirling numbers of the first kind.\nThe two main formulas relating the unsigned Stirling numbers of the first kind to the Bernoulli numbers (with ) are\nand the inversion of this sum (for , )\nHere the number are the rational Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa numbers, the first few of which are displayed in the following table.\nThe Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa numbers satisfy a simple recurrence relation which can be exploited to iteratively compute the Bernoulli numbers. This leads to the algorithm shown in the section 'algorithmic description' above. See /.\nAn \"autosequence\" is a sequence which has its inverse binomial transform equal to the signed sequence. If the main diagonal is zeroes = , the autosequence is of the first kind. Example: , the Fibonacci numbers. If the main diagonal is the first upper diagonal multiplied by 2, it is of the second kind. Example: /, the second Bernoulli numbers (see ). The Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa transform applied to = 1/ leads to (\"n\") / (\"n\" + 1). Hence:\nSee and . () / () are the second (fractional) Euler numbers and an autosequence of the second kind.\nAlso valuable for / (see Connection with Worpitzky numbers).\nConnection with Pascal's triangle.\nThere are formulas connecting Pascal's triangle to Bernoulli numbers\nwhere formula_76 is the determinant of a n-by-n Hessenberg matrix part of Pascal's triangle whose elements are: formula_77\nExample:\nConnection with Eulerian numbers.\nThere are formulas connecting Eulerian numbers to Bernoulli numbers:\nBoth formulae are valid for if is set to . If is set to \u2212 they are valid only for and respectively.\nA binary tree representation.\nThe Stirling polynomials are related to the Bernoulli numbers by . S. C. Woon described an algorithm to compute as a binary tree:\nWoon's recursive algorithm (for ) starts by assigning to the root node . Given a node of the tree, the left child of the node is and the right child . A node is written as in the initial part of the tree represented above with \u00b1 denoting the sign of .\nGiven a node the factorial of is defined as\nRestricted to the nodes of a fixed tree-level the sum of is , thus\nFor example:\nIntegral representation and continuation.\nThe integral\nhas as special values for .\nFor example, and . Here, is the Riemann zeta function, and is the imaginary unit. Leonhard Euler (\"Opera Omnia\", Ser. 1, Vol. 10, p.\u00a0351) considered these numbers and calculated\nAnother similar integral representation is\nThe relation to the Euler numbers and.\nThe Euler numbers are a sequence of integers intimately connected with the Bernoulli numbers. Comparing the\nasymptotic expansions of the Bernoulli and the Euler numbers shows that the Euler numbers are in magnitude approximately times larger than the Bernoulli numbers . In consequence:\nThis asymptotic equation reveals that lies in the common root of both the Bernoulli and the Euler numbers. In fact could be computed from these rational approximations.\nBernoulli numbers can be expressed through the Euler numbers and vice versa. Since, for odd , (with the exception ), it suffices to consider the case when is even.\nThese conversion formulas express a connection between the Bernoulli and the Euler numbers. But more important, there is a deep arithmetic root common to both kinds of numbers, which can be expressed through a more fundamental sequence of numbers, also closely tied to . These numbers are defined for as\nThe magic of these numbers lies in the fact that they turn out to be rational numbers. This was first proved by Leonhard Euler in a landmark paper \"De summis serierum reciprocarum\" (On the sums of series of reciprocals) and has fascinated mathematicians ever since. The first few of these numbers are\nThese are the coefficients in the expansion of .\nThe Bernoulli numbers and Euler numbers can be understood as \"special views\" of these numbers, selected from the sequence and scaled for use in special applications.\nThe expression [ even] has the value 1 if is even and 0 otherwise (Iverson bracket).\nThese identities show that the quotient of Bernoulli and Euler numbers at the beginning of this section is just the special case of when is even. The are rational approximations to and two successive terms always enclose the true value of . Beginning with the sequence starts ( / ):\nThese rational numbers also appear in the last paragraph of Euler's paper cited above.\nConsider the Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa transform for the sequence () / ():\nFrom the second, the numerators of the first column are the denominators of Euler's formula. The first column is \u2212 \u00d7 .\nAn algorithmic view: the Seidel triangle.\nThe sequence \"S\"\"n\" has another unexpected yet important property: The denominators of \"S\"\"n\"+1 divide the factorial . In other words: the numbers , sometimes called Euler zigzag numbers, are integers.\nTheir exponential generating function is the sum of the secant and tangent functions.\nThus the above representations of the Bernoulli and Euler numbers can be rewritten in terms of this sequence as\nThese identities make it easy to compute the Bernoulli and Euler numbers: the Euler numbers are given immediately by and the Bernoulli numbers are fractions obtained from by some easy shifting, avoiding rational arithmetic.\nWhat remains is to find a convenient way to compute the numbers . However, already in 1877 Philipp Ludwig von Seidel published an ingenious algorithm, which makes it simple to calculate .\nSeidel's algorithm is in fact much more general (see the exposition of Dominique Dumont ) and was rediscovered several times thereafter.\nSimilar to Seidel's approach D. E. Knuth and T. J. Buckholtz gave a recurrence equation for the numbers and recommended this method for computing and 'on electronic computers using only simple operations on integers'.\nV. I. Arnold rediscovered Seidel's algorithm and later Millar, Sloane and Young popularized Seidel's algorithm under the name boustrophedon transform.\nTriangular form:\nOnly , with one 1, and , with two 1s, are in the OEIS.\nDistribution with a supplementary 1 and one 0 in the following rows:\nThis is , a signed version of . The main andiagonal is . The main diagonal is . The central column is . Row sums: 1, 1, \u22122, \u22125, 16, 61... See . See the array beginning with 1, 1, 0, \u22122, 0, 16, 0 below.\nThe Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa algorithm applied to () / () yields:\n1. The first column is . Its binomial transform leads to:\nThe first row of this array is . The absolute values of the increasing antidiagonals are . The sum of the antidiagonals is \n2. The second column is . Its binomial transform yields:\nThe first row of this array is . The absolute values of the second bisection are the double of the absolute values of the first bisection.\nConsider the Akiyama-Tanigawa algorithm applied to () / ( () =\u00a0abs( ()) + 1 = .\nThe first column whose the absolute values are could be the numerator of a trigonometric function.\n is an autosequence of the first kind (the main diagonal is ). The corresponding array is:\nThe first two upper diagonals are = \u00a0\u00d7\u00a0. The sum of the antidiagonals is = 2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0(\"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01).\n\u2212 is an autosequence of the second kind, like for instance / . Hence the array:\nThe main diagonal, here , is the double of the first upper one, here . The sum of the antidiagonals is = 2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0(1). \u00a0\u2212\u00a0 =\u00a02\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0.\nA combinatorial view: alternating permutations.\nAround 1880, three years after the publication of Seidel's algorithm, D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Andr\u00e9 proved a now classic result of combinatorial analysis. Looking at the first terms of the Taylor expansion of the trigonometric functions\n and Andr\u00e9 made a startling discovery.\nThe coefficients are the Euler numbers of odd and even index, respectively. In consequence the ordinary expansion of has as coefficients the rational numbers .\nAndr\u00e9 then succeeded by means of a recurrence argument to show that the alternating permutations of odd size are enumerated by the Euler numbers of odd index (also called tangent numbers) and the alternating permutations of even size by the Euler numbers of even index (also called secant numbers).\nRelated sequences.\nThe arithmetic mean of the first and the second Bernoulli numbers are the associate Bernoulli numbers: \n, , , , , / . Via the second row of its inverse Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa transform , they lead to Balmer series / .\nThe Akiyama\u2013Tanigawa algorithm applied to () / () leads to the Bernoulli numbers / , / , or without , named intrinsic Bernoulli numbers .\nHence another link between the intrinsic Bernoulli numbers and the Balmer series via ().\n () = 0, 2, 1, 6... is a permutation of the non-negative numbers.\nThe terms of the first row are f(n) = . 2, f(n) is an autosequence of the second kind. 3/2, f(n) leads by its inverse binomial transform to 3/2 \u22121/2 1/3 \u22121/4 1/5 ... = 1/2 + log 2.\nConsider g(n) = 1/2 \u2013 1 / (n+2) = 0, 1/6, 1/4, 3/10, 1/3. The Akiyama-Tanagiwa transforms gives:\n0, g(n), is an autosequence of the second kind.\nEuler () / () without the second term () are the fractional intrinsic Euler numbers The corresponding Akiyama transform is:\nThe first line is . preceded by a zero is an autosequence of the first kind. It is linked to the Oresme numbers. The numerators of the second line are preceded by 0. The difference table is:\nArithmetical properties of the Bernoulli numbers.\nThe Bernoulli numbers can be expressed in terms of the Riemann zeta function as for integers provided for the expression is understood as the limiting value and the convention is used. This intimately relates them to the values of the zeta function at negative integers. As such, they could be expected to have and do have deep arithmetical properties. For example, the Agoh\u2013Giuga conjecture postulates that is a prime number if and only if is congruent to \u22121 modulo . Divisibility properties of the Bernoulli numbers are related to the ideal class groups of cyclotomic fields by a theorem of Kummer and its strengthening in the Herbrand-Ribet theorem, and to class numbers of real quadratic fields by Ankeny\u2013Artin\u2013Chowla.\nThe Kummer theorems.\nThe Bernoulli numbers are related to Fermat's Last Theorem (FLT) by Kummer's theorem, which says:\nPrime numbers with this property are called regular primes. Another classical result of Kummer are the following congruences.\nA generalization of these congruences goes by the name of -adic continuity.\n-adic continuity.\nIf , and are positive integers such that and are not divisible by and , then\nSince , this can also be written\nwhere and , so that and are nonpositive and not congruent to 1 modulo . This tells us that the Riemann zeta function, with taken out of the Euler product formula, is continuous in the -adic numbers on odd negative integers congruent modulo to a particular , and so can be extended to a continuous function for all -adic integers formula_99 the -adic zeta function.\nRamanujan's congruences.\nThe following relations, due to Ramanujan, provide a method for calculating Bernoulli numbers that is more efficient than the one given by their original recursive definition:\nVon Staudt\u2013Clausen theorem.\nThe von Staudt\u2013Clausen theorem was given by Karl Georg Christian von Staudt and Thomas Clausen independently in 1840. The theorem states that for every ,\nis an integer. The sum extends over all primes for which divides .\nA consequence of this is that the denominator of is given by the product of all primes for which divides . In particular, these denominators are square-free and divisible by\u00a06.\nWhy do the odd Bernoulli numbers vanish?\nThe sum\ncan be evaluated for negative values of the index . Doing so will show that it is an odd function for even values of , which implies that the sum has only terms of odd index. This and the formula for the Bernoulli sum imply that is 0 for even and ; and that the term for is cancelled by the subtraction. The von Staudt\u2013Clausen theorem combined with Worpitzky's representation also gives a combinatorial answer to this question (valid for \"n\" &gt; 1).\nFrom the von Staudt\u2013Clausen theorem it is known that for odd the number is an integer. This seems trivial if one knows beforehand that the integer in question is zero. However, by applying Worpitzky's representation one gets\n denotes the rising factorial power in the notation of D. E. Knuth. The numbers occur frequently in the study of the zeta function and are significant because is a -integer for primes where does not divide . The are called \"divided Bernoulli numbers\".\nGeneralized Bernoulli numbers.\nThe generalized Bernoulli numbers are certain algebraic numbers, defined similarly to the Bernoulli numbers, that are related to special values of Dirichlet -functions in the same way that Bernoulli numbers are related to special values of the Riemann zeta function.\nLet be a Dirichlet character modulo . The generalized Bernoulli numbers attached to are defined by\nApart from the exceptional , we have, for any Dirichlet character , that if .\nGeneralizing the relation between Bernoulli numbers and values of the Riemann zeta function at non-positive integers, one has the for all integers :\nwhere is the Dirichlet -function of .\nEisenstein\u2013Kronecker number.\nEisenstein\u2013Kronecker numbers are an analogue of the generalized Bernoulli numbers for imaginary quadratic fields. They are related to critical \"L\"-values of Hecke characters.\nAppendix.\nAssorted identities.\nChoosing or results in the Bernoulli number identity in one or another convention.\nand"}
{"id": "4965", "revid": "47015620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4965", "title": "Bubble Bobble (video game)", "text": " is a 1986 platform game developed and published by Taito for arcades. It was distributed in the United States by Romstar, and in Europe by Electrocoin. Players control Bub and Bob, two dragons that set out to save their girlfriends from a world known as the Cave of Monsters. In each level, Bub and Bob must defeat each enemy present by trapping them in bubbles and popping, who turn into bonus items when they hit the ground. There are 100 levels total, each becoming progressively more difficult.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" was designed by Fukio \"MTJ\" Mitsuji. When he joined Taito in 1986, he felt that Taito's game output was of mediocre quality. In response, he decided to make a game that was fun to play and could rejuvenate the company's presence in the industry. Mitsuji hoped his game would appeal to women, specifically couples that visited arcades. As such, he decided to make \"Bubble Bobble\" focus largely on its two player co-operative mode. He made bubbles the core mechanic as he thought they would be a fun element that girls would enjoy.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" became one of Taito's biggest arcade successes, and is credited with inspiring the creation of many similar screen-clear platform games that followed. It was acclaimed by critics for its character design, memorable soundtrack, gameplay, and multiplayer, and is often listed among the greatest games of all time. \"Bubble Bobble\" was followed by a long list of sequels and successors for multiple platforms; one of these, \"Puzzle Bobble\", has become successful in its own right and spawned its own line of sequels.\nPlot.\nBrothers Bub and Bob are two happy go lucky dragons [sic] living in a magical forest. \"Baron Von Blubba\" has kidnapped the brothers' girlfriends. Bub and Bob have to finish 100 levels in the Cave of Monsters in order to rescue them. At the end of the game after fighting Super Drunk on level 100 in cooperative mode, it is revealed that Bub, Bob, and their girlfriends are humans transformed by magic and that Bub and Bob's parents were kidnapped as well. \nGameplay.\nIn the game, each player controls one of the two dragons. Players can move along platforms, fall to lower ones, and jump to higher ones and over gaps. Each level is limited to a single screen, with no left/right scrolling; however, if a screen has gaps in its bottom edge, players can fall through these and reappear at the top. Each level has a certain number of enemies that must be defeated in order to advance. The players must blow bubbles to trap the enemies, then burst these bubbles by colliding with them. Each enemy defeated in this manner turns into a food item that can be picked up for extra points. Defeating multiple enemies at once awards higher scores and causes more valuable food items to appear. All bubbles will float for a certain length of time before bursting on their own; players can jump on these and ride them to otherwise inaccessible areas. Magic items appear from time to time and grant special abilities and advantages when picked up. Special bubbles occasionally appear that can be burst to attack enemies with fire, water, or lightning. Furthermore, if a player collects letter bubbles to spell the word EXTEND, a bonus life is earned and both players immediately advance to the next level.\nA player loses one life upon touching any free enemies or their projectiles (rocks, fireballs, lasers, bottles). Enemies turn \"angry\"\u2014turning pink in color and moving faster\u2014if they escape from a bubble after being left too long or the players spend a certain amount of time on the current level. They return to normal if either player loses a life. After a further time limit expires, an additional invincible enemy appears for each player, actively chasing them using only vertical and horizontal movements. These disappear once the level is cleared, or when a player loses a life. When there is only one enemy left, it immediately becomes angry and remains in this state until defeated.\nIn the 100th and final level, players face a boss. This is one of the first games to feature multiple endings. Completing Level 100 in single-player mode reveals a message stating that the game has not truly ended and a hint to the player: \"Come here with your friend\". If two players complete the game, they see a \"happy end\", in which the brothers are transformed to their human selves and reunited with their girlfriends. This ending also includes a code that, when deciphered, allows the game to be played in the faster and more difficult \"super\" mode. If this mode is completed with two players, a second \"happy end\" is displayed in which Super Drunk (the defeated boss) is revealed to be the brothers' parents under the control of some outside influence. The brothers return to normal and are reunited with their parents and girlfriends.\nAlso, if the player(s) reach levels 20, 30, or 40 without losing a life, a doorway will appear in each of those levels, transporting the player to a secret room and displaying a coded message that, once decoded, gives the player a major hint / spoiler on how to beat the game.\nDevelopment and release.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" was designed by Fukio Mitsuji, a Japanese game designer at Taito. A fan of arcade games by Namco, specifically \"Xevious\", Mitsuji felt that Taito's output by comparison were lackluster and of poor quality, hoping that he could help push the company to produce higher-quality arcade titles. His first game was the four-screen racer \"Super Dead Heat\" in 1985, followed by the shoot'em up \"Halley's Comet\" the same year. After work on these two games was completed, Mitsuji set out to make his next project a platform game, featuring cute characters and a more comical setting compared to his previous works.\nMitsuji wanted the game to be exhilarating and to appeal towards a female audience. Thinking about what kind of things women like to draw or sketch, Mitsuji created an extensive list of over 100 ideas, and after a process of elimination selected bubbles as the core game mechanic. He liked the idea of the screen being filled with bubbles, and thought that popping them all at once would provide a thrilling sensation to the player. His initial idea was to have the player control a robot with a spike on its head to pop bubbles\u2014Mitsuji disliked it for not being \"cool\", instead preferring dinosaurs with ridges along their back. He liked to write down ideas on paper as soon as he thought of them, often flooding his office with stacks of paper filled with potential ideas for game mechanics.\nMitsuji constantly tried to think of new ways to make the game better than it was before, saying to have lost sleep while trying to figure out how he could improve it. He often worked on holidays and late at night to come up with new ideas for the game and to perfect it. Several of the enemies were taken from \"Chack'n Pop\" (1984), an older Taito game that is often considered a precursor to \"Bubble Bobble\". Mitsuji intended the game to be played by couples, leading to the creation of the multiple endings, which differ based on player performance.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" was first published in Japan on June 16, 1986, followed by a wide release in Japan in September and internationally in October of the same year. Alongside \"Arkanoid\", Taito licensed the game to Romstar for distribution in the United States, and to Electrocoin Automatics for Europe.\nPorts.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" was ported to many home video game consoles and computers, including the Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, MS-DOS, Apple II, Amiga, Famicom Disk System, Nintendo Entertainment System, MSX2, and Master System\u2014the last of these has two hundred levels as opposed to the arcade version's 100 levels, and was released in Japan as \"Final Bubble Bobble\". A version for the X68000 was developed by Dempa and released in 1994, which includes a gamemode paying homage to Mitsuji's later arcade game \"Syvalion\", titled \"Sybubblun\". Conversions for the Game Boy and Game Boy Color were respectively released in 1991 and 1996, the GBC port being named \"Classic Bubble Bobble\". A version of \"Bubble Bobble\" was also produced for the unreleased Taito WOWOW console. In 1996, Taito announced that the source code for \"Bubble Bobble\" had been lost, leading to all subsequent home conversions to be reverse-engineered from an original arcade board.\nReception.\nIn Japan, \"Game Machine\" listed \"Bubble Bobble\" on their November 1, 1986, issue as the second-most-successful table arcade cabinet of the month, after Taito's \"Arkanoid\". It went on to be the fifth-highest-grossing table arcade game of 1987 in Japan. In the United Kingdom, \"Bubble Bobble\" was the top-grossing arcade game for three months in 1987, from April to June. The home conversions were also successful in the United Kingdom, where the game appeared on the sales charts for several years. The ZX Spectrum budget re-release topped the UK charts in July 1991.\nThe arcade game received positive reviews from \"Computer and Video Games\" and \"Crash\". \"Mean Machines\" gave the Game Boy port of the game a score of 91%, noting that, while some changes had been made, the game played identical to the original arcade port and \"provides much addiction and challenge\". The four reviewers of \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" stated that the Game Gear version is a faithful conversion of the original which works well in portable form. They particularly praised the simplicity of the gameplay concept and the graphics, and the two-player link option.\n\"Bubble Bobble\" has been listed by numerous publications among the greatest video games of all time. \"Your Sinclair\" magazine ranked the ZX Spectrum version at #58 in their \"Top 100 Games of All Time\" in 1993 based on reader vote. In 1996, GamesMaster rated the game 19th on its \"Top 100 Games of All Time\". \"Yahoo!\" ranked it at #71 in their \"100 Greatest Computer Games Of All Time\" in 2005 for its charming premise and cute character designs. \"Stuff\" magazine listed it as part of their \"100 Greatest Games\" in 2008, while \"GamesTM\" magazine listed it in their \"Top 100 Games\" in 2010. \"Stuff.tv\" ranked it at #47 in their \"Top 100 Games\" in 2009, saying \"Today's kids might laugh, but this was gold in 1986\". \"GamesRadar+\" ranked it at #95 in their \"100 Best Games Of All Time\" list in 2011, praising its multiplayer and secrets. \"GamesRadar+\" also labeled it the 24th greatest Nintendo Entertainment System of all time in 2012 for its advancements over other games of its genre and its usage of multiple endings. IGN named it the 23rd best NES game. \"Hardcore Gaming 101\" listed it in their book \"The 200 Best Video Games of All Time\" in 2015. \"Game Informer\" placed it in their \"Top 300 Games of All Time\" in 2018 for its long-lasting appeal and multiplayer.\nLegacy.\nRe-releases.\nThe game has had at least 30 official ports to a large array of computers and consoles throughout the decades.\nA remastered version named \"Bubble Bobble Old &amp; New\" was made for Game Boy Advance, which also included the original arcade version.\nIn October 2005, a version was released for the Xbox, PlayStation 2, and Microsoft Windows as part of the \"Taito Legends\" compilation.\nIn December 2007, the NES version of \"Bubble Bobble\" was released in North America on Nintendo's Virtual Console service for the Wii. The Famicom Disk System version of \"Bubble Bobble\" was also released for the Nintendo eShop on October 16, 2013, for the Nintendo 3DS and on January 29, 2014, for the Wii U.\nThe game was included in the NES Classic Edition in November 2016."}
{"id": "4967", "revid": "218586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4967", "title": "Blackwood convention", "text": "In the partnership card game contract bridge, the Blackwood convention is a bidding convention developed by Easley Blackwood in 1933 and still widely used in the modern game. Its purpose is to enable the partnership to explore its possession of aces, kings and in some variants, the queen of trumps to judge whether a slam would be a feasible contract. The essence of the convention is the use of an artificial 4NT bid made under certain conditions to ask partner how many aces he has; responses by partner are made in step-wise fashion to indicate the number held.\nBlackwood's original summary.\nAfter developing the concept in 1933, Easley Blackwood submitted an article proposing his slam-seeking convention to \"The Bridge World\" magazine but it was rejected. Nevertheless, it gained awareness and use amongst players and was written about by several authors. In his own first publication on the convention in 1949, Easley Blackwood comments on the entries in books by others and noted that \"...in every one of these books, they have it wrong!\" He pointed out several misconceptions and concluded with a fifteen-point summary of the \"complete and official\" Blackwood Slam Convention. A synopsis of that summary follows:\nVariations based on 4NT as asking.\nSeveral versions of Blackwood are available: Standard Blackwood, Roman Blackwood and Roman Key Card Blackwood (RKC or RKCB). All versions are initiated by a bid of four notrump (4NT), and the entire family of conventions may be called \"Blackwood 4NT\" in both versions, or \"Key Card 4NT\" in the key card variation.\nThere are other 4NT conventions, such as Culbertson 4-5 Notrump, Norman Four Notrump and San Francisco, but almost all bridge partnerships employ some member of the Blackwood family (which includes Byzantine Blackwood) as part of their slam-investigation methods.\nIf the partnership's preceding call is a natural bid in notrump, then 4NT is usually played as natural. Over an opposing pass it is simply a raise and a invitation to six notrump, a small slam. Over an intervening four of a suit by opponents it is usually played as a competitive raise, expecting to play four notrump. Those natural interpretations may hold in other auctions where the partnership has previously bid notrump naturally or shown a balanced hand conventionally. In some situations where 4NT is a quantitative invitation, especially where 4 is a jump, many partnerships use the Gerber convention instead of the Blackwood family: 4 asks for the number of aces or key cards.\nWhere both sides are bidding, 4NT is often played as a conventional takeout asking partner to help choose one of two or three suits, similar to a lower-level takeout double or reply to such a double.\nStandard Blackwood.\nWhere standard Blackwood 4NT is in force, a four notrump bid (4NT) asks partner to disclose the number of aces in his hand. With no aces or four, partner replies 5; with one, two, or three aces, 5, 5, or 5, respectively. The difference between no aces and four is clear to the Blackwood bidder (unless the partnership lacks all four) so one member of the partnership knows the combined number of aces. That is often sufficient to set the final contract. (A common agreement is that when spades is not the trump suit, 5 asks responder to bid 5NT. That is useful when the reply to 4NT bypasses the intended trump suit but also shows that slam is likely to be a poor contract because two aces are missing.)\nThe continuation bid of 5NT asks for the number of kings according to the same code of replies at the six-level: 6 shows no kings or four, etc. Asking for the number of kings confirms that the partnership holds all four aces, so partner may reply at the seven level with expectation of taking thirteen tricks.\nA void may be as good as an ace in some situations but it should not be counted as an ace. Some experts (Kantar for one) recommend the 5NT reply to 4NT \u2013 the cheapest with no standard assigned meaning \u2013 to show a void plus two aces and six of a suit to show a void in the bid suit plus one ace.\nRoman Blackwood.\nA variation of the standard Blackwood convention, known as \"Roman Blackwood\", was popularized by the Italian Blue Team in the 1960s. In Roman Blackwood, the responses are more ambiguous, but more space-conserving. The basic outline of responses is:\nIn practice, the ambiguity is unlikely to occur, as a strength difference between hands with 0 or 1 and 3 or 4 aces is big enough that it can be established in previous rounds of bidding. In other words, a partner who has previously shown, for example, 12-15 range of high points is unlikely to hold 3 aces for his bid, etc.\nEven Roman Blackwood convention has several variations, revolving around 5 and 5 responses. In all variants, they denote 2 aces. One variation is that 5 shows extra values, while 5 does not. In other variations, responses 5 - 5NT denote specific combinations of aces (same color, same rank, or \"mixed\").\nIf the querying partner ascertains that all aces are present, he can continue as follows:\nRoman Key Card Blackwood (RKCB).\nRoman Key Card Blackwood (RKCB) has largely replaced the standard version among tournament players. It developed from the \"Roman Blackwood\" variant (see above). According to RKCB there are five equivalent key cards rather than just the four aces: the trump king is counted as the fifth key card. The key card replies to 4NT are more compressed than standard ones and they also begin to locate the queen of trumps.\nAlthough the replies to 4NT are more compressed, it is almost always possible to infer which number of keycards is correct: 0 or 3, 1 or 4, 2 or 5. Evidence for that inference includes the entire auction as well as the number of key cards that the 4NT bidder holds.\nThe 5 and 5 replies with 2 or 5 key cards also deny and show the trump queen, respectively. (Responder may also show the queen with extra length in trumps, where the ace and king will probably draw all outstanding cards in the suit.)\nThe 5 and 5 replies tell nothing about the queen or extra length, but the 4NT bidder may ask about that using the cheapest bid other than five of the trump suit. The code for replies to that \"queen ask\" vary; a common rule is that the cheapest bid in the trump suit denies the queen or extra length and any other call shows it. An option is for the positive calls to show a feature, such as a king in that suit, and 6 of the trump suit can show the queen of trumps with no outside kings.\nRoman Key Card Blackwood is predicated on existence of a trump suit, which determines which of the four kings and queens responder should show as key cards. Trump agreement is not necessary, however. One common rule is that the last suit bid before 4NT bid is the key suit, lacking trump agreement.\nSome partnerships use the club response to show 1 or 4 and the diamond response to show 3 or none, dubbed \"1430\" (coincidentally the score for making a vulnerable small slam in a major suit), with the original version being dubbed \"3014\" when distinction is necessary. In order to facilitate the Queen Ask, an experts' version has been developed, where \"1430\" is used by the strong hand and \"3014\" is used by the weak hand. There are specific rules which determine when the asker hand is the weak one and when it is the strong one.\nKey Card Blackwood (KCB).\nA half-way house between standard Blackwood and RKCB is Keycard Blackwood. Again there are five key cards, including the trump king, but unlike RKCB, the queen of trumps is not considered.\n5\u2663 \u2013 0 or 4 key cards\n5 \u2013 1 or 5 key cards \n5 \u2013 2 key cards\n5\u2660 \u2013 3 key cards\nThis is advocated by Bernard Magee as being simpler for club players, as with RKCB players are sometimes unsure whether partner holds 0 or 3 key cards, or 1 or 4.\nVariations not based on 4NT.\nKickback.\n\"Kickback\" is the variant of RKCB devised by Jeff Rubens in accordance with the Useful Space Principle. The step responses are the same as in RKCB, but the ask is not necessarily 4NT. Instead it is the 4-level bid immediately above the agreed trump suit; i.e.:\nKickback has the advantage that it saves bidding space and, especially for minor-suit fits, provides safety at the 5-level if the required key cards are missing. Because the Kickback bid would otherwise be a control bid, 4NT is usually substituted as the control bid in that suit (e.g., 4NT is a control bid in hearts if the agreed trump suit is diamonds). The drawback is that in unpracticed partnerships there can be confusion as to whether a bid is Kickback, a control bid or preference for a different strain:\nEast intended 4 as Kickback, but West thought it was secondary support for hearts, and decided to pass with minimum values. As result, a reasonable grand slam in diamonds was missed.\nAn established partnership might have agreed that as hearts were not supported after opener's rebid, 4 cannot possibly show support, and must be ace asking in diamonds.\nRedwood.\n\"Redwood\" is a variation of Kickback that is only used when a minor suit is trumps. A 4 level bid in the suit above the agreed trump suit is the ace / key card ask and the name comes from the fact that this bid will always be a red suit:\n4\u2013 RKCB for clubs\n4\u2013 RKCB for diamonds\nOnce key cards have been identified the next step bid (other than trumps) can be used to ask for Kings.\nOne advantage of this approach is that it avoids the potential for misunderstanding that can occur when using Minorwood but one disadvantage is that it uses up one more bid (than Minorwood) and might constrain the bidding later when asking for Kings or Queens.\nUsing \"Redwood,\" the ace/key card ask of 4NT is still used when the trump suit is a major (hearts or spades).\nMinorwood.\n\"Minorwood\" is a variation of Blackwood, in which the minor suit which the partners agree will be trumps is itself used as the ace/key card ask. The ask will be at the four level. Hence:\n4\u2013 RKCB for clubs\n4\u2013 RKCB for diamonds\nOne disadvantage to this convention is that either the partnership must agree to lose the natural 4 level bid in trumps or have clear agreement on which sequences are slam seeking and which are natural bids. The advantage of this approach is that it conserves bidding space. For example, the use of Redwood reduces the risk of a misunderstanding but uses up one more bid and might constrain the bidding later when asking for Kings or Queens.\nExclusion Blackwood.\nExclusion Blackwood or Voidwood. was devised by Bobby Goldman as an attempt to resolve the situation when the Blackwood-asker has a void. In that case, he is not interested in the partner's ace in the void suit, as he already has the first-round control; partner's ace would present a duplicated value in that case. Many players, even experts, refuse to play Exclusion Blackwood because of the potential disaster of forgetting the agreement.\nIt is usually played as the Roman Key Card Blackwood, with only four key cards: the three Aces outside the void suit and the King of trumps. However, the asking bid is not 4NT, but the void suit \u2014 Voidwood is made by jumping on level 4 or 5 in the void suit after a fit has been found, for example:\nBids of 5, 5 and 5 present a Voidwood, denoting the void in the suit bid and asking for other key cards. The responses are, as in RKCB:"}
{"id": "4969", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4969", "title": "Bill Bixby", "text": "Wilfred Bailey Everett Bixby III (January 22, 1934 \u2013 November 21, 1993) was an American actor and television director. His career spanned more than three decades, including appearances on stage, in films, and on television series. He is known for his roles in the CBS sitcom \"My Favorite Martian\" as Tim O'Hara, in the ABC sitcom \"The Courtship of Eddie's Father\" as Tom Corbett, in the NBC crime drama series \"The Magician\" as stage Illusionist Anthony Blake, in the ABC mini-series \"Rich Man, Poor Man\" as Willie Abbott, and the CBS science-fiction drama series \"The Incredible Hulk\" as Dr. David Bruce Banner.\nEarly life.\nA fourth-generation Californian of English descent and an only child, Wilfred Bailey Everett Bixby III was born on January 22, 1934, in San Francisco, California. His father, Wilfred Bailey Everett Bixby II, was a store clerk. His mother, Jane (n\u00e9e McFarland) Bixby, was a senior manager at I. Magnin &amp; Co. In 1942, when Bixby was eight years old, his father enlisted in the Navy during World War II and traveled to the South Pacific. While in the seventh grade, Bixby attended Grace Cathedral and sang in the church's choir. In one notable incident, he shot the bishop using a slingshot during a service and was kicked out of the choir. In 1946, his mother encouraged him to take ballroom dance lessons and from there he started dancing all around the city. While dancing, he attended Lowell High School, where he perfected his oratory and dramatic skills as a member of the Lowell Forensic Society. Though he received average grades, he also competed in high-school speech tournaments regionally.\nAfter graduation from high school in 1952, he majored in drama at City College of San Francisco, against his parents' wishes.\nDuring the Korean War, Bixby was drafted shortly after his 18th birthday. Rather than report to the United States Army, Bixby joined the United States Marine Corps Reserve. He served primarily in personnel management with Marine Attack Squadron 141 (VMA-141) at Naval Air Station Oakland, and attained the rank of private first class before his 1956 discharge.\nLater, he attended the University of California, Berkeley, his parents' alma mater, and left just a few credits short of earning a degree. He then moved to Hollywood, California, where he had a string of odd jobs that included bellhop and lifeguard. He organized shows at a resort in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, and in 1959 was hired to work as a model and to do commercial work for General Motors and Chrysler.\nCareer.\nBeginning acting.\nIn 1961, Bixby was in the musical \"The Boy Friend\" at the Detroit Civic Theater, returning to Hollywood to make his television debut on an episode of \"The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis\". He became a highly regarded character actor and guest-starred in many television series, including \"Ben Casey\", \"The Twilight Zone\", \"The Andy Griffith Show\", \"Dr. Kildare\", \"Straightaway\", and \"Hennesey\". He also joined the cast of \"The Joey Bishop Show\" in 1962. In 1963, he played a sailor with a Napoleon tattoo in the movie \"Irma La Douce\", a romantic comedy starring Jack Lemmon and Shirley MacLaine, directed by Billy Wilder based on the 1956 French musical. During the 1970s, he made guest appearances on television series such as \"Ironside\", \"Insight\", \"Barbary Coast\", \"The Love Boat\", \"Medical Center\", four episodes of \"Love, American Style\", \"Fantasy Island\", and two episodes each of \"The Streets of San Francisco\" and Rod Serling's \"Night Gallery\".\n\"My Favorite Martian\" and other early roles.\nBixby took the role of young reporter Tim O'Hara in the 1963 CBS sitcom \"My Favorite Martian\", in which he co-starred with Ray Walston. By 1966, though, high production costs forced the series to come to an end after 107 episodes. After its cancellation, Bixby starred in four movies: \"Ride Beyond Vengeance\", \"Doctor, You've Got to Be Kidding!\", and two of Elvis Presley's movies, \"Clambake\" and \"Speedway\". He turned down the role as Marlo Thomas's boyfriend in the successful \"That Girl\", though he later guest-starred in the show, and starred in two failed pilots.\n\"The Courtship of Eddie's Father\".\nIn 1969, Bixby starred in his second high-profile television role, as Tom Corbett in \"The Courtship of Eddie's Father\", a comedy drama on ABC. The series concerned a widowed father raising a young son, managing a major syndicated magazine, and at the same time trying to re-enter the dating scene. This series was in the vein of other 1960s and 1970s sitcoms that dealt with widowerhood, such as \"The Andy Griffith Show\" and \"My Three Sons\". Eddie was played by novice actor Brandon Cruz. The pair developed a close rapport that translated to an off-camera friendship, as well. The core cast was rounded out by Academy Award-winning actress Miyoshi Umeki, who played the role of Tom's housekeeper, Mrs. Livingston, James Komack (one of the series' producers) as Norman Tinker, Tom's pseudo-hippie, quirky photographer, and actress Kristina Holland as Tom's secretary, Tina. One episode of the series co-starred Bixby's future wife, Brenda Benet, as one of Tom's girlfriends.\nBixby was nominated for the Emmy Award for Lead Actor in a Comedy Series in 1971. The following year, he won the Parents Without Partners Exemplary Service Award for 1972.\nBixby made his directorial debut on the sitcom in 1970, directing eight episodes. ABC cancelled the sitcom in 1972 at the end of season three.\nAfter the show was cancelled, Bixby and Cruz remained in contact, with Cruz making a guest appearance on Bixby's later series \"The Incredible Hulk\". The death of Bixby's only child, in 1981, drew Bixby and Cruz closer still. The two remained in contact until Bixby's death in 1993. In 1995, Cruz named his own son Lincoln Bixby Cruz.\nBrandon Cruz said of the show that developed a professional father-son relationship, compared to that of \"The Andy Griffith Show\", \"We dealt with issues that were talked about, but were never brought up on television. Bill wasn't the first actor to portray a single widowed father, but he became one of the popular ones, because of his easy-going way of this crazy little kid.\" Prior to Bixby's promotion to director, Brandon said, \"He was looking for the best dolly grip, along with the boom operator that if something was called specifically and failed, Bill could be easily angry.\" On the kind of relationship Bill had wanted with his co-star, Brandon also said, \"Bill would never speak down to me. Bill treated me as an equal. He made sure that we had a lot of time together, just so he could kinda crawl inside my head and see what actually made a kid tick.\" Upon the death of Bill's real-life father in 1971, Cruz stated, \"He had that type of mentality that the show must go on, thinking it was just a great TV show, after he broke down weeping.\"\nIn a 2011 interview with Marilyn Beck and Stacy Jenel Smith about how Bill Bixby's fame was supposed to posthumously honor him for a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, Cruz said, \"When I found out they were putting this out, I thought, 'It's about time.' Bill Bixby had an amazing body of work, not only \"Courtship of Eddie's Father,\" but \"My Favorite Martian,\" \"The Magician,\" \"The Incredible Hulk\", and so many other things, as an actor, as a director \u2014 and he never got an Emmy. He's never been recognized posthumously by the Academy. And he doesn't have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. That is criminal... There are people who have stars that, not to be blunt, but I wouldn't bother spitting on their stars. Bill's talent would take a couple of blocks of stars compared to them. It really demeans the whole thing that Bill is not included.\"\n1973 to 1977.\nIn 1973, Bixby starred in \"The Magician\". The series was well liked, but lasted for only one season. An accomplished amateur magician himself, he hosted several TV specials in the mid-1970s which featured other amateur magicians, and was a respected member of the Hollywood magic community, belonging to The Magic Castle, an exclusive club for magicians. During the show's popular, although short-lived, production, Bixby invited a few old friends along to co-star such as Pamela Britton (in her final role), Kristina Holland, and Ralph O'Hara.\nAlso in 1973, he starred in \"Steambath\", a play by author Bruce Jay Friedman, on PBS with Valerie Perrine and Jose Perez.\nBixby became a popular game-show panelist, appearing mostly on \"Password\" and \"The Hollywood Squares\". He was also a panelist on the 1974 revival of \"Masquerade Party\", which was hosted by Richard Dawson. He had also appeared with Dawson on \"Cop-Out\", an unsold 1972 pilot produced by Chuck Barris, and on the 1972 revival of \"I've Got a Secret\". In 1974\u20131975, he directed four episodes of the eighth season of \"Mannix\", guest-starring as Mannix's friend-turned-villain in one of the episodes.\nIn 1975, he co-starred with Tim Conway and Don Knotts in the Disney movie \"The Apple Dumpling Gang\", which was well received by the public.\nReturning to television, Bixby worked with Susan Blakely on \"Rich Man, Poor Man\", a highly successful television miniseries in 1976. He played a daredevil stunt pilot in an episode of the short-lived 1976 CBS adventure series \"Spencer's Pilots\", starring Gene Evans. In 1977, he co-starred in the pilot for the television series \"Fantasy Island\"; starred in \"No Way Out\", the final episode of the NBC anthology series \"Quinn Martin's Tales of the Unexpected\" (known in the United Kingdom as \"Twist in the Tale\"); and appeared with Donna Mills, Richard Jaeckel, and William Shatner in the last episode, \"The Scarlet Ribbon\", of NBC's Western series \"The Oregon Trail\", starring Rod Taylor and Andrew Stevens. Bixby directed two episodes of \"The Oregon Trail\".\nIn 1976, he was honored with two Emmy Award nominations, one for Outstanding Lead Actor for a Single Appearance in Drama or Comedy for \"The Streets of San Francisco\" and the other for Outstanding Single Performance by a Supporting Actor in Comedy or Drama Series for \"Rich Man, Poor Man\".\nBixby hosted \"Once Upon a Classic\" on PBS from 1976 to 1980.\n\"The Incredible Hulk\".\nBixby starred in the role of Dr. Robert Bruce Banner in the pilot movie \"The Incredible Hulk\", based on the Stan Lee and Jack Kirby Marvel characters. Kenneth Johnson, the creator, director, and writer, said that Bixby was his only choice to play the part. When Bixby was offered the role, he declined it \u2013 until he read the script and discussed it with Johnson. The success of the pilot (coupled with some theatrical releases of the film in Europe) convinced CBS to turn it into a weekly series, which began airing in the spring of 1978. The pilot also starred Susan Sullivan as Dr. Elaina Marks, who tries to help the conflicted and widowed Dr. Banner overcome his \"problem\" and falls in love with him in the process. In a retrospective on \"The Incredible Hulk\", Glenn Greenberg declared Bixby's performance to be the series' \"foremost\" strength, elaborating that he \"masterfully conveyed the profound loneliness and tragedy of Dr. Banner while also bringing to the role an abundance of warmth, intelligence, humor, nobility, likability, and above all else, humanity.\"\nDuring the series' run, Bixby invited two of his longtime friends, Ray Walston and Brandon Cruz, to guest-star with him in different episodes of the series. He also worked on the series with his friend, movie actress Mariette Hartley, who later starred with Bixby in his final series, \"Goodnight, Beantown\", in 1983. Hartley appears in the well-regarded double-length episode \"Married\", and subsequently won an Emmy Award for her guest appearance. Future star Loni Anderson also guest-starred with Bixby during the first season. Bixby directed one episode of the series, \"Bring Me the Head of the Hulk\", in 1980 (original airdate: January 9, 1981). The series was cancelled after the following season, but leftover episodes aired as late as the next June. Bixby later executive-produced and reprised the role in three television movies \u2013 \"The Incredible Hulk Returns\", \"The Trial of the Incredible Hulk\", and \"The Death of the Incredible Hulk\" \u2013 the last two of which he also directed, and the first of which he has been said to have unofficially co-directed.\nLater work.\nBixby was executive producer and co-star of the short-lived sitcom \"Goodnight, Beantown\" (1983\u201384). He also directed three episodes of the series. During the same time, Bixby directed several episodes of another short-lived television series, \"Wizards and Warriors\", which aired in 1983. From 1982 to 1984, he hosted a documentary series for Nickelodeon entitled \"Against the Odds\". The series, which was cancelled after only two seasons, consists of short biographies of famous people throughout history. From 1986 to 1987, he hosted the syndicated weekday anthology series \"True Confessions\". In 1987, he directed eight episodes of the satirical police sitcom \"Sledge Hammer!\", including the episode \"Hammer Hits the Rock\" in season two, where he made an uncredited appearance as Zeke.\nBixby hosted two specials regarding Elvis conspiracy theories and his alleged sightings: \"The Elvis Files\" (1991) and \"The Elvis Conspiracy\" (1992).\nBixby made his last acting appearance in 1992, guest-starring in the television movie \"\".\nHe finished his career by directing 30 episodes (in seasons two and three) of the NBC sitcom \"Blossom\".\nPersonal life and death.\nBixby's first marriage was to actress Brenda Benet. They were married in 1971, and she gave birth to their son, Christopher, in September 1974. They divorced in 1980. A few months later, in March 1981, six-year-old Christopher died while on a skiing vacation at Mammoth Lakes with Benet. He went into cardiac arrest after doctors inserted a breathing tube when he suffered acute epiglottitis. Benet committed suicide the following year.\nBixby met Laura Michaels, who had worked on the set of one of his \"Hulk\" movies, in 1989. They married a year later in Hawaii. In early 1991, he was diagnosed with prostate cancer and underwent treatment. He was divorced in the same year.\nIn late 1992, friends introduced Bixby to the artist Judith Kliban, widow of the cartoonist B. Kliban. He married her in October 1993.\nIn early 1993, after rumors began circulating about his health, Bixby went public with his illness, making several appearances on shows such as \"Entertainment Tonight\", \"Today\", and \"Good Morning America\", among others.\nOn November 21, 1993, six days after his final assignment on \"Blossom\", Bixby died of complications from prostate cancer in Century City, Los Angeles, California. He was 59 years old."}
{"id": "4971", "revid": "1270236175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4971", "title": "Boers", "text": "Boers ( ; ; ) are the descendants of the proto Afrikaans-speaking Free Burghers of the eastern Cape frontier in Southern Africa during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. From 1652 to 1795, the Dutch East India Company controlled the Dutch Cape Colony, which the United Kingdom incorporated into the British Empire in 1806. The name of the group is derived from Trekboer then later \"boer\", which means \"farmer\" in Dutch and Afrikaans.\nIn addition, the term also applied to those who left the Cape Colony during the 19th century to colonise the Orange Free State, and the Transvaal (together known as the Boer Republics), and to a lesser extent Natal. They emigrated from the Cape to live beyond the reach of the British colonial administration, with their reasons for doing so primarily being the new Anglophone common law system being introduced into the Cape and the British abolition of slavery in 1833.\nThe term \"Afrikaners\" or \"Afrikaans people\" is generally used in modern-day South Africa for the white Afrikaans-speaking population of South Africa (the largest group of White South Africans) encompassing the descendants of both the Boers, and the Cape Dutch who did not embark on the Great Trek.\nOrigin.\nEuropean colonists.\nThe Dutch East India Company (; VOC) was formed in the Dutch Republic in 1602, and at this time the Dutch had entered the competition for the colonial and imperial trade of commerce in Southeast Asia. The end of the Thirty Years' War in 1648 saw European soldiers and refugees widely dispersed across Europe. Immigrants from Germany, Scandinavia, and Switzerland traveled to the Netherlands in the hope of finding employment with the VOC. During the same year, one of their ships was stranded in Table Bay near what would eventually become Cape Town, and the shipwrecked crew had to forage for themselves on shore for several months. They were so impressed with the natural resources of the country that on their return to the Dutch Republic, they represented to the VOC directors the advantages to be had for the Dutch Eastern trade from a properly provided and fortified station at the Cape. As a result, the VOC sent a Dutch expedition in 1652 led by Jan van Riebeek, who constructed a fort and laid out vegetable gardens at Table Bay and took control over Cape Town, which he governed for a decade.\nFree Burghers.\nVOC favoured the idea of freemen at the Cape and many workers of VOC requested to be discharged in order to become free burghers (citizens). As a result, Jan van Riebeek approved the notion on favourable conditions and earmarked two areas near the Liesbeek River for farming purposes in 1657. The two areas which were allocated to the freemen, for agricultural purposes, were named Groeneveld and Dutch Garden. These areas were separated by the Amstel River (Liesbeek River). Nine of the best applicants were selected to use the land for agricultural purposes. The freemen or free burghers as they were afterwards termed, thus became subjects of VOC and were no longer its servants.\nIn 1671, the Dutch first purchased land from the indigenous Khoikhoi beyond the limits of the fort built by Van Riebeek; this marked the development of the Colony proper. As the result of the investigations of a 1685 commissioner, the government worked to recruit a greater variety of immigrants to develop a stable community. They formed part of the class of , also known as ('free citizens'), former VOC employees who remained at the Cape after serving their contracts. A large number of became independent farmers and applied for grants of land, as well as loans of seed and tools, from VOC administration.\nDutch free immigrants.\nVOC authorities had been endeavouring to induce gardeners and small farmers to emigrate from Europe to South Africa, but with little success. They were only able to attract a few families through tales of wealth, but the Cape had little charm in comparison. In October 1670, however, the Chamber of Amsterdam announced that a few families were willing to leave for the Cape and Mauritius during the following December. Among the new names of burghers at this time are Jacob and Dirk van Niekerk, Johannes van As, Francois Villion, Jacob Brouwer, Jan van Eden, Hermanus Potgieter, Albertus Gildenhuis, and Jacobus van den Berg.\nFrench Huguenots.\nDuring 1688\u20131689, the colony was greatly strengthened by the arrival of nearly two hundred French Huguenots, who were political refugees from the religious wars in France following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. They joined colonies at Stellenbosch, Drakenstein, Franschhoek and Paarl. The influence of the Huguenots on the character of the colonists was marked, leading to the VOC directing in 1701 that only Dutch should be taught in schools. This resulted in the Huguenots assimilating by the middle of the 18th century, with a loss in the use and knowledge of French. The colony gradually spread eastwards, and in 1754 land as far as Algoa Bay was included in the colony.\nAt this time the European colonists numbered eight to ten thousand. They possessed numerous slaves, grew wheat in sufficient quantity to make it a commodity crop for export, and were famed for the good quality of their wines. But their chief wealth was in cattle. They enjoyed considerable prosperity.\nThrough the latter half of the 17th and the whole of the 18th century, troubles arose between the colonists and the government as the VOC administration was despotic. Its policies were not directed at development of the colony, but to profit the VOC. The VOC closed the colony against free immigration, kept the whole of the trade in its own hands, combined the administrative, legislative and judicial powers in one body, prescribed to the farmers the nature of the crops they were to grow, demanded a large part of their produce as a kind of tax, and made other exactions.\nTrekboers.\nFrom time to time, indentured VOC servants were endowed with the right of \"freeburghers\" but the VOC retained the power to compel them to return into its service whenever they deemed it necessary. This right to force into servitude those who might incur the displeasure of the governor or other high officers was not only exercised with reference to the individuals themselves; it was claimed by the government to be applicable to their children as well.\nThe tyranny caused many to feel desperate and to flee from oppression, even before the 1700 trekking began. In 1780, Joachim van Plettenberg, the governor, proclaimed the Sneeuberge to be the northern boundary of the colony, expressing \"the anxious hope that no more extension should take place, and with heavy penalties forbidding the rambling peasants to wander beyond\". In 1789, so strong had feelings amongst the burghers become that delegates were sent from the Cape to interview the authorities at Amsterdam. After this deputation, some nominal reforms were granted.\nIt was largely to escape oppression that the farmers trekked farther and farther from the seat of government. VOC, to control the emigrants, established a magistracy at Swellendam in 1745 and another at Graaff Reinet in 1786. The Gamtoos River had been declared, , the eastern frontier of the colony but it was soon passed. In 1780, however, the Dutch, to avoid collision with the Bantu peoples, agreed with them to make the Great Fish River the common boundary. In 1795 the heavily taxed burghers of the frontier districts, who were afforded no protection against the Bantus, expelled the VOC officials, and set up independent governments at Swellendam and Graaff Reinet.\nThe trekboers of the 19th century were the lineal descendants of the trekboers of the 18th century. The end of the 19th century saw a revival of the same tyrannical monopolist policy as that in the VOC government in the Transvaal. If the formula, \"In all things political, purely despotic; in all things commercial, purely monopolist\", was true of the VOC government in the 18th century, it was equally true of Kruger's government in the latter part of the 19th.\nThe underlying fact which made the trek possible is that the Dutch-descended colonists in the eastern and northeastern parts of the colony were not cultivators of the soil, but of purely pastoral and nomadic habits, ever ready to seek new pastures for their flocks and herds, possessing no special affection for any particular locality. These people, thinly scattered over a wide territory, had lived for so long with little restraint from the law that when, in 1815, by the institution of \"Commissions of Circuit\", justice was brought nearer to their homes, various offences were brought to light, the remedying of which caused much resentment.\nThe Dutch-descended colonists in the eastern and northeastern parts of the colony, as a result of the Great Trek, had removed themselves from governmental rule and become widely spread out. However, the institution of \"Commissions of Circuit\" in 1815 allowed the prosecution of crimes, with offences committed by the trekboers\u2014notably including many against people they had enslaved\u2014seeing justice. These prosecutions were very unpopular amongst the trekkers and were seen as interfering with their rights over the enslaved people they viewed as their property.\nInvasion of the Cape Colony.\nThe Invasion of the Cape Colony was a British military expedition launched in 1795 against the Dutch Cape Colony at the Cape of Good Hope. The Netherlands had fallen under the revolutionary government of France and a British force under General Sir James Henry Craig was sent to Cape Town to secure the colony from the French for the Prince of Orange, a refugee in England. The governor of Cape Town at first refused to obey the instructions from the Prince, but when the British proceeded to land troops to take possession anyway, he capitulated. His action was hastened by the fact that the Khoikhoi, escaping from their former enslavers, flocked to the British standard. The burghers of Graaff Reinet did not surrender until a force had been sent against them; in 1799 and again in 1801 they rose in revolt. In February 1803, as a result of the peace of Amiens (February 1803), the colony was handed over to the Batavian Republic which introduced many reforms, as had the British during their eight years' rule. One of the first acts of General Craig had been to abolish torture in the administration of justice. The country still remained essentially Dutch, and few British citizens were attracted to it. Its cost to the British exchequer during this period was \u00a316,000,000. The Batavian Republic entertained very liberal views as to the administration of the country, but had little opportunity to enact them.\nWhen the War of the Third Coalition broke out in 1803, a British force was once again sent to the Cape. After an engagement (January 1806) on the shores of Table Bay, the Dutch garrison of Castle of Good Hope surrendered to the British under Sir David Baird, and in the 1814 Anglo-Dutch treaty the colony was ceded outright by The Netherlands to the British crown. At that time the colony extended to the line of mountains guarding the vast central plateau, then called Bushmansland (after a name for the San people), and had an area of about \u00a0sq\u00a0km and a population of some , of whom were whites, free Khoikhoi and the rest enslaved people, mostly non-indigenous blacks and Malays.\nDislike of British rule.\nAlthough the colony was fairly prosperous, many of the Dutch farmers were as dissatisfied with British rule as they had been with that of the VOC, though their grounds for complaint were not the same. In 1792, Moravian missions had been established which targeted the Khoikhoi, and in 1799 the London Missionary Society began work among both Khoikhoi and the Bantu peoples. The missionaries' championing of Khoikhoi grievances caused much dissatisfaction among the majority of the Dutch colonists, whose views temporarily prevailed, for in 1812 an ordinance was issued which empowered magistrates to bind Khoikhoi children as apprentices under conditions which differed little from slavery. Simultaneously, the movement for the abolition of slavery was gaining strength in England, and the missionaries appealed from the colonists to the mother country.\nSlachter's Nek.\nA farmer named Frederick Bezuidenhout refused to obey a summons issued on the complaint of a Khoikhoi, and, firing on the party sent to arrest him, was killed by the return fire. This caused a small rebellion in 1815, known as Slachters Nek, described as \"the most insane attempt ever made by a set of men to wage war against their sovereign\" by Henry Cloete. Upon its suppression, five ringleaders were publicly hanged at the spot where they had sworn to expel \"the English tyrants\". The feeling caused by the hanging of these men was deepened by the circumstances of the execution, as the scaffold on which the rebels were simultaneously hanged broke down from their united weight and the men were afterwards hanged one by one. An ordinance was passed in 1827, abolishing the old Dutch courts of and (resident magistrates being substituted) and establishing that henceforth all legal proceedings should be conducted in English. The granting in 1828, as a result of the representations of the missionaries, of equal rights with whites to the Khoikhoi and other free coloured people, the imposition (1830) of heavy penalties for harsh treatment of enslaved people, and finally the emancipation of the enslaved people in 1834, were measures which combined to aggravate the farmers' dislike of government. Moreover, what the Boers viewed as the inadequate compensation for the freeing of the slaves, and the suspicions engendered by the method of payment, caused much resentment; and in 1835 the farmers again removed themselves to unknown country to escape the government. While emigration beyond the colonial border had been continuous for 150 years, it now took on larger proportions.\nCape Frontier Wars (1779\u20131879).\nThe migration of the trekboers from the Cape Colony into the Eastern Cape parts of South Africa, where the native Xhosa people had established settlements, gave rise to a series of conflicts between the Boers and the Xhosas. In 1775 the Cape government established a boundary between the trekboers and the Xhosas at the Bushmans and Upper Fish Rivers. The Boers and Xhosas ignored the boundary, with both groups establishing homes on either side of the frontier. Governor van Plettenberg attempted to persuade both groups to respect the boundary line without success. The Xhosas were accused of stealing cattle and in 1779 a series of skirmishes erupted along the border which initiated the 1st Frontier War.\nThe frontier remained unstable, resulting in the outbreak of the 2nd Frontier War in 1789. Raids carried out by Boers and Xhosas on both sides of the boundary caused much friction in the area which resulted in several groups being drawn into the conflict. In 1795, the British invasion of the Cape Colony resulted in a change of government. After the government takeover the British began to draw up policies with regards to the frontier resulting in a Boer rebellion in Graaff-Reinet. The policies caused the Khoisan tribes to join some Xhosa chiefs in attacks against British forces during the 3rd Frontier War (1799\u20131803).\nPeace was restored to the area when the British, under the Treaty of Amiens, returned the Cape Colony to the Dutch Batavian Republic in 1803. In January 1806 during a second invasion, the British reoccupied the colony after the Battle of Blaauwberg. Tensions in the Zuurveld led the colonial administration and Boer colonists to expel many of the Xhosa tribes from the area, initiating the 4th Frontier War in 1811. Conflicts between the Xhosas on the frontier led to the 5th Frontier War in 1819.\nThe Xhosas, due to dissatisfaction with vacillating government policies regarding where they were permitted to live, undertook large-scale cattle thefts on the frontier. The Cape government responded with several military expeditions. In 1834 a large Xhosa force moved into the Cape territory, which began the 6th Frontier War. Additional fortifications were built by the government and mounted patrols were not well received by the Xhosas, who continued with raids on farms during the 7th Frontier War (1846\u20131847). The 8th (1850\u20131853) and 9th Frontier Wars (1877\u20131878) continued at the same pace as their predecessors. Eventually the Xhosas were defeated and the territories were brought under British control.\nGreat Trek.\nThe Great Trek occurred between 1835 and the early 1840s. During that period some 12,000 to 14,000 Boers (including women and children), impatient with British rule, emigrated from Cape Colony into the great plains beyond the Orange River, and across them again into Natal and the vastness of the Zoutspansberg, in the northern part of the Transvaal. Those Trekboers who occupied the eastern Cape were semi-nomadic. A significant number in the eastern Cape frontier later became ('border farmers') who were the direct ancestors of the Voortrekkers.\nThe Boers addressed several correspondence to the British Colonial Government before leaving the Cape Colony as reasons for their departure. Piet Retief, one of the leaders of the Boers during the time, addressed a letter to the government on 22 January 1837 in Grahamstown stating that the Boers did not see any prospect for peace or happiness for their children in a country with such internal commotions. Retief further complained about the severe financial losses which they felt had resulted from the laws of the British administration. While there was financial compensation for the freeing of the people they had enslaved, the Boers found it to be inadequate. They also felt that the English church system was incompatible with the Dutch Reformed Church. By this time the Boers had already formed a separate code of laws in preparation for the great trek and were aware of the dangerous territory they were about to enter. Retief concluded his letter with \"We quit this colony under the full assurance that the English Government has nothing more to require of us, and will allow us to govern ourselves without its interference in future\".\nBoer states and republics.\nAs the Voortrekkers progressed further inland, they continued to establish Boer colonies on the interior of South Africa.\nAnglo-Boer wars.\nFollowing the British annexation of the Transvaal in 1877, Paul Kruger was a key figure in organizing a Boer resistance which led to expulsion of the British from the Transvaal. The Boers then fought the Second Boer War in the late 19th and early 20th century against the British in order to ensure the republics of the Transvaal (the ) and the Orange Free State, remaining independent, ultimately capitulating in 1902.\nBoer War diaspora.\nAfter the Second Boer War, a Boer diaspora occurred. Starting in 1903, the largest group emigrated to the Patagonia region of Argentina and to Brazil. Another group emigrated to the British colony of Kenya, from where most returned to South Africa during the 1930s, while a third group under the leadership of General Ben Viljoen emigrated to Mexico and to New Mexico and Texas in the southwestern United States.\n1914 Boer Revolt.\nThe Maritz Rebellion (also known as the Boer Revolt, the Five Shilling Rebellion or the Third Boer War) occurred in 1914 at the start of World War I, in which men who supported the re-creation of the Boer republics rose up against the government of the Union of South Africa because they did not want to side with the British against the German Empire so soon after the war with the British.\nMany Boers had German ancestry and many members of the government were themselves former Boer military leaders who had fought with the Maritz rebels against the British in the Second Boer War. The rebellion was put down by Louis Botha and Jan Smuts, and the ringleaders received heavy fines and terms of imprisonment. One, Jopie Fourie, an officer in the Union Defence Force, was convicted for treason when he refused to take up arms alongside the British, and was executed by the South African government in 1914.\nCharacteristics.\nLanguage.\nAfrikaans is a West Germanic language spoken widely in South Africa and Namibia, and to a lesser extent in Botswana and Zimbabwe. It evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland (Hollandic dialect) spoken by the mainly Dutch colonists of what is now South Africa, where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the course of the 18th century. Hence, it is a daughter language of Dutch, and was previously referred to as \"Cape Dutch\" (also used to refer collectively to the early Cape colonists) or \"kitchen Dutch\" (a derogatory term used in its earlier days). However, it is also variously (although incorrectly) described as a creole or as a partially creolised language. The term is ultimately derived from Dutch meaning \"African Dutch\".\nCulture.\nThe desire to wander, known as , was a notable characteristic of the Boers. It figured prominently in the late 17th century when the Trekboers began to inhabit the northern and eastern Cape frontiers, again during the Great Trek when the Voortrekkers left the eastern Cape \"en masse\", and after the major republics were established during the Thirstland (\") Trek. One such trekker described the impetus for emigrating as, \"a drifting spirit was in our hearts, and we ourselves could not understand it. We just sold our farms and set out northwestwards to find a new home\".\nA rustic characteristic and tradition was developed quite early on as Boer society was born on the frontiers of white colonisation and on the outskirts of Western civilisation.\nThe Boer quest for independence manifested in a tradition of declaring republics, which predates the arrival of the British; when the British arrived, Boer republics had already been declared and were in rebellion from the VOC.\nBeliefs.\nThe Boers of the frontier were known for their independent spirit, resourcefulness, hardiness, and self-sufficiency, whose political notions verged on anarchy but had begun to be influenced by republicanism.\nThe Boers had cut their ties to Europe as they emerged from the Trekboer group.\nThe Boers possessed a distinct Protestant culture, and the majority of Boers and their descendants were members of a Reformed Church. The ('Dutch Reformed Church') was the national Church of the South African Republic (1852\u20131902). The Orange Free State (1854\u20131902) was named after the Protestant House of Orange in the Netherlands.\nThe Calvinist influence, in such fundamental Calvinist doctrines such as unconditional predestination and divine providence, remains present in a minority of Boer culture, who see their role in society as abiding by the national laws and accepting calamity and hardship as part of their Christian duty. Many Boers have since converted denominations and are now members of Baptist, Charismatic, Pentecostal or Lutheran Churches.\nModern usage.\nDuring recent times, mainly during the apartheid reform and post-1994 eras, some white Afrikaans-speaking people, mainly with conservative political views, and of Trekboer and Voortrekker descent, have chosen to be called , rather than \"Afrikaners\", to distinguish their identity. They believe that many people of Voortrekker descent were not assimilated into what they see as the Cape-based Afrikaner identity. They suggest that this developed after the Second Anglo-Boer War and the subsequent establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910. Some Boer nationalists have asserted that they do not identify as a right-wing element of the political spectrum.\nThey contend that the Boers of the South African Republic and Orange Free State republics were recognised as a separate people or cultural group under international law by the Sand River Convention (which created the South African Republic in 1852), the Bloemfontein Convention (which created the Orange Free State Republic in 1854), the Pretoria Convention (which re-established the independence of the South African Republic 1881), the London Convention (which granted the full independence to the South African Republic in 1884), and the Vereeniging Peace Treaty, which formally ended the Second Anglo-Boer War on 31 May 1902. Others contend, however, that these treaties dealt only with agreements between governmental entities and do not imply the recognition of a Boer cultural identity \"per se\".\nThe supporters of these views feel that the Afrikaner label was used from the 1930s onwards as a means of politically unifying the white Afrikaans speakers of the Western Cape with those of Trekboer and Voortrekker descent in the north of South Africa, where the Boer Republics were established.\nSince the Anglo-Boer war, the term ('farmer people') was rarely used in the 20th century by the various regimes because of the effort to assimilate the with the Afrikaners. A portion of those who are the descendants of the have reasserted use of this designation.\nThe supporters of the \"Boer\" designation view the term \"Afrikaner\" as an artificial political label which usurped their history and culture, turning Boer achievements into Afrikaner achievements. They feel that the Western-Cape based Afrikaners \u2013 whose ancestors did not trek eastwards or northwards \u2013 took advantage of the republican Boers' destitution following the Anglo-Boer War. At that time, the Afrikaners attempted to assimilate the Boers into the new politically based cultural label.\nIn contemporary South Africa, \"Boer\" and \"Afrikaner\" have often been used interchangeably. directly translated means \"African\", and thus refers to all Afrikaans-speaking people in Africa who have their origins in the Cape Colony founded by Jan Van Riebeeck. \"Boer\" is a specific group within the larger Afrikaans-speaking population.\nDuring apartheid, \"Boer\" was used by opponents of apartheid in various contexts, referring to institutional structures such as the National Party, or to specific groups of people, such as members of the Police Force (colloquially known as \"Boere\") and Army, Afrikaners, or white South Africans generally. This usage is often viewed as pejorative in contemporary South Africa.\nEducation.\nThe Movement for Christian-National Education is a federation of 47 Calvinist private schools, primarily in the Free State and the Transvaal, committed to educating Boer children from grade 0 through to 12.\nMedia.\nSome local radio stations promote the ideals of those who identify with the Boer people, like Radio Rosestad 100.6 FM (in Bloemfontein), Overvaal Stereo and Radio Pretoria. An internet-based radio station, \"Boerevolk Radio\", promotes Boer separatism.\nTerritories.\nTerritorial areas in the form of a ('Boer State') are being developed as colonies exclusively for Boers/Afrikaners, notably Orania in the Northern Cape and Kleinfontein near Pretoria.\nNotable Boers.\nVoortrekker leaders\nGreat trek\nParticipants in the Second Anglo-Boer War\nPoliticians\nSpies\nPersecution.\nSince the early 2000s, South African farmers, including many Boers, have faced a wave of violent attacks in rural areas, often involving extreme brutality such as torture and murder. These incidents, which have drawn international attention, have led many within the Boer community to fear for their safety. Some have emigrated to countries like Australia, while others have invested in private security measures to protect their families and property. The ongoing attacks remain a significant concern for South Africa's rural communities.\nIn modern fiction.\nThe history of the Cape Colony and the Boers in South Africa is covered at length in the 1980 novel \"The Covenant\" by American author James A. Michener.\nThe Boers appear as a civilization in the 'Scramble to Africa' scenario in \"\". Paul Kruger leads the civilization during the scenario. The Boers' unique unit is the foreign volunteer."}
{"id": "4972", "revid": "49069036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4972", "title": "Bronze Star Medal", "text": "The Bronze Star Medal (BSM) is a United States Armed Forces decoration awarded to members of the United States Armed Forces for either heroic achievement, heroic service, meritorious achievement, or meritorious service in a combat zone.\nWhen the medal is awarded by the Army, Air Force, or Space Force for acts of valor in combat, the \"V\" device is authorized for wear on the medal. When the medal is awarded by the Navy, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard for acts of valor or meritorious service in combat, the Combat \"V\" is authorized for wear on the medal.\nOfficers from the other Uniformed Services of the United States are eligible to receive this award, as are foreign soldiers who have served with or alongside a service branch of the United States Armed Forces.\nCivilians serving with U.S. military forces in combat are also eligible for the award. For example, UPI reporter Joe Galloway was awarded the Bronze Star with \"V\" device for actions during the Vietnam War, specifically rescuing a badly wounded soldier under fire in the Battle of Ia Drang Valley, in 1965. Another civilian recipient was writer Ernest Hemingway.\nGeneral information.\nThe Bronze Star Medal was established by Executive Order 9419, 4 February 1944 (superseded by Executive Order 11046, 24 August 1962, as amended by Executive Order 13286, 28 February 2003).\nThe Bronze Star Medal may be awarded by the Secretary of a military department or the Secretary of Homeland Security with regard to the Coast Guard when not operating as a service in the Department of the Navy, or by such military commanders, or other appropriate officers as the Secretary concerned may designate, to any person who, while serving in any capacity in or with the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Coast Guard, or Space Force of the United States, after 6 December 1941, distinguishes, or has distinguished, herself or himself by heroic or meritorious achievement or service, not involving participation in aerial flight\u2014\nThe acts of heroism are of a lesser degree than required for the award of the Silver Star. The acts of merit or acts of valor must be less than that required for the Legion of Merit but must nevertheless have been meritorious and accomplished with distinction.\nThe Bronze Star Medal (without the \"V\" device) may be awarded to each member of the Armed Forces of the United States who, after 6 December 1941, was cited in orders or awarded a certificate for exemplary conduct in ground combat against an armed enemy between 7 December 1941 and 2 September 1945. For this purpose, the US Army's Combat Infantryman Badge or Combat Medical Badge award is considered as a citation in orders. Documents executed since 4 August 1944 in connection with recommendations for the award of decorations of higher degree than the Bronze Star Medal cannot be used as the basis for an award under this paragraph.\nEffective 11 September 2001, the Meritorious Service Medal may also be bestowed in lieu of the Bronze Star Medal (without Combat \"V\" device) for meritorious achievement in a designated combat theater.\nAppearance.\nThe Bronze Star Medal was designed by Rudolf Freund (1878\u20131960) of the jewelry firm Bailey, Banks &amp; Biddle. (Freund also designed the Silver Star.)\nThe medal is a bronze star in circumscribing diameter. In the center is a diameter superimposed bronze star, the center line of all rays of both stars coinciding. The reverse bears the inscription with a space for the name of the recipient to be engraved. The star hangs from its ribbon by a rectangular metal loop with rounded corners. The suspension ribbon is wide and consists of the following stripes: white 67101; scarlet 67111; white; center stripe ultramarine blue 67118; white; scarlet; and white.\nAuthorized devices.\nThe Bronze Star Medal with the \"V\" device to denote heroism is the fourth highest military decoration for valor. Although a service member may be cited for heroism in combat and be awarded more than one Bronze Star authorizing the \"V\" device, only one \"V\" may be worn on each suspension and service ribbon of the medal. The following ribbon devices must be specifically authorized in the award citation in order to be worn on the Bronze Star Medal, the criteria for and wear of the devices vary between the services:\nHistory.\nColonel Russell P. \"Red\" Reeder conceived the idea of the Bronze Star Medal in 1943; he believed it would aid morale if captains of companies or of batteries could award a medal to deserving people serving under them. Reeder felt another medal was needed as a ground equivalent of the Air Medal, and suggested calling the proposed new award the \"Ground Medal\". The idea eventually rose through the military bureaucracy and gained supporters. General George C. Marshall, in a memorandum to President Franklin D. Roosevelt dated 3 February 1944, wrote \nThe Air Medal had been adopted two years earlier to raise airmen's morale. President Roosevelt authorized the Bronze Star Medal by Executive Order 9419 dated 4 February 1944, retroactive to 7 December 1941. This authorization was announced in War Department Bulletin No. 3, dated 10 February 1944.\nPresident John F. Kennedy amended Executive Order 9419 per Executive Order 11046 dated 24 August 1962 to expand the authorization to include those serving with friendly forces. This allowed for awards where US service members become involved in an armed conflict where the United States was not a belligerent. At the time of the Executive Order, for example, the US was not a belligerent in Vietnam, so US advisers serving with the Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces would not have been eligible for the award.\nSince the award criteria state that the Bronze Star Medal may be awarded to \"any person ... while serving in any capacity in or with\" the US Armed Forces, awards to members of foreign armed services serving with the United States are permitted. Thus, a number of Allied soldiers received the Bronze Star Medal in World War II, as well as UN soldiers in the Korean War, Vietnamese and allied forces in the Vietnam War, and coalition forces in recent military operations such as the Persian Gulf War, War in Afghanistan, and the Iraq War. A number of Bronze Star Medals with the \"V\" device were awarded to veterans of the Battle of Mogadishu.\nWorld War II infantry award.\nAs a result of a study conducted in 1947, a policy was implemented that authorized the retroactive award of the Bronze Star Medal (without the \"V\" device) to all soldiers who had received the Combat Infantryman Badge or the Combat Medical Badge during World War II. The basis for this decision was that these badges were awarded only to soldiers who had borne the hardships which resulted in General Marshall's support of the establishment of the Bronze Star Medal. Both badges required a recommendation by the commander and a citation in orders.\nU.S. Air Force criteria controversy.\nIn 2012, two U.S. airmen were allegedly subjected to cyber-bullying after receiving Bronze Star Medals for meritorious non-combat service. The two airmen, who had received the medals in March 2012, had been finance NCOICs in medical units deployed to the War in Afghanistan. The awards sparked a debate as to whether or not the Air Force was awarding too many medals to its members, and whether the Bronze Star should be awarded for non-combat service. This prompted the Air Force to take down stories of the two posted to the internet, and to clarify its criteria for awarding medals. The Air Force contended that meritorious service awards of the Bronze Star outnumber valor awards, and that it views awards on a case-by-case basis to maintain the integrity of the award.\nThis is not the first time that the USAF has been criticized for offering this award. The Department of Defense investigated the award of the Bronze Star Medal (BSM) by the USAF to some 246 individuals after operations in Kosovo in 1999. All but 60 were awarded to officers, and only 16 of those awarded were actually in the combat zone. At least five were awarded to officers who never left Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri. During this campaign, the Navy had awarded 69 BSMs, and the Army with 5,000 troops in neighboring Albania (considered part of the combat zone) awarded none. In the end, there was a Pentagon review and decision by Congress in 2001 to stop the awarding of Bronze Stars to personnel outside the combat zone."}
{"id": "4973", "revid": "39818606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4973", "title": "Ballarat", "text": "Ballarat ( ) () is a city in the Central Highlands of Victoria, Australia. At the 2021 census, Ballarat had a population of 111,973, making it the third-largest urban inland city in Australia and the third-largest city in Victoria.\nWithin months of Victoria separating from the colony of New South Wales in 1851, gold was discovered near Ballarat, sparking the Victorian gold rush. Ballarat subsequently became a thriving boomtown that for a time rivalled Melbourne, the capital of Victoria, in terms of wealth and cultural influence. In 1854, following a period of civil disobedience in Ballarat over gold licenses, local miners launched an armed uprising against government forces. Known as the Eureka Rebellion, it led to the introduction of white male suffrage in Australia, and as such is interpreted as the origin of Australian democracy. The rebellion's symbol, the Eureka Flag, has become a national symbol.\nProclaimed a city on 9 September 1870, Ballarat's prosperity, unlike that of many other gold boomtowns, continued until the late 19th century, as the city's fields experienced sustained high gold yields for many decades. By the turn of the century, Ballarat's importance relative to Melbourne rapidly faded with the slowing of gold extraction. It has endured as a major regional centre and is the commercial capital and largest city of the Central Highlands, as well as a significant tourist destination. Ballarat is known for its history, culture and well-preserved colonial-era heritage, with much of the city subject to heritage overlays.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and European settlement.\nThe Ballarat region was first populated by the Wadawurrung people, an Indigenous Australian people. The first Europeans to sight the area were an August 1837 party of six men, including Thomas Livingstone Learmonth and Henry Anderson, who scaled Mount Buninyong. Some of this party set off again in January 1838, this time with others including Thomas' brother Somerville Learmonth and William Cross Yuille and his cousin Archibald Buchanan Yuille.\nThe Yuille cousins arrived in 1838 and took up a sheep run at Ballarat. The first houses were built near Woolshed Creek (Sebastopol) by Henry Anderson and taken over by the Yuilles. William Yuille established a hut on the northern edge of the swamp which would be called Yuille's Swamp, later Lake Wendouree. Archibald Yuille named his property \"Ballaarat\", from the local Wathaurong Aboriginal words, \"balla\" and \"arat\", meaning a camping or 'resting place', with the word 'balla' meaning bent elbow. Both 'Ballaarat' and 'Ballarat' were used interchangeably until the present spelling was officially adopted by the City of Ballarat in 1994, when the city amalgamated with surrounding local government areas.\nGold rush era.\nThe first publicised discovery of gold in the region was by Thomas Hiscock on 2 August 1851, in Buninyong to the south. The find brought other prospectors to the area and on 19 August 1851, more gold was found at Poverty Point. Within days, a gold rush began, bringing thousands of prospectors to the Yarrowee Valley, which became known as the Ballarat diggings. Yields were particularly high, with the first prospectors in the area extracting between half an ounce (which was more than the average wage of the time) and up to five ounces of alluvial gold per day. As news of the Victorian gold rush reached the world, Ballarat gained an international reputation as a particularly rich goldfield. As a result, a huge influx of immigrants occurred, including many from Ireland and China, gathering in a collection of prospecting shanty towns around the creeks and hills. Within a few months, numerous alluvial runs were established, several deep mining leads began, and the population had swelled to over 1,000 people.\nThe first post office opened on 1 November 1851, the first to open in a Victorian gold-mining settlement. Parts of the district were first surveyed by William Urquhart as early as October 1851. By 1852 his grid plan and wide streets for land sales in the new township of West Ballarat, built upon a plateau of basalt, contrasted markedly with the existing narrow unplanned streets, tents, and gullies of the original East Ballarat settlement. The new town's main streets of the time were named in honour of police commissioners and gold commissioners of the time, with the main street, Sturt Street, named after Evelyn Pitfield Shirley Sturt; Dana Street named after Henry Dana; Lydiard Street after his assistant; Doveton Street after Francis Crossman Doveton, Ballarat's first gold commissioner; Armstrong after David Armstrong; and Mair Street after William Mair. These officials were based at the government encampment (after which nearby Camp Street was named), which was strategically positioned on an escarpment with an optimal view over the district's diggings.\nThe first newspaper, \"The Banner\", published on 11 September 1853, was one of many to be distributed during the gold-rush period. Print media played a large role in the early history of the settlement. Ballarat attracted a sizable number of miners from the Californian 1848 gold rush, and some were known as Ballafornians.\nCivil disobedience in Ballarat led to an armed civil uprising, the Eureka Rebellion (colloquially referred to as the \"Eureka Stockade\") which took place in Ballarat on 3 December 1854. The event, in which 22 miners were killed, is considered to be a defining moment in Australian history.\nThe city earned the nickname \"The Golden City\" in the 1850s. The gold rush population peaked at almost 60,000, mostly male diggers, by 1858. However the early population was largely itinerant. As quickly as the alluvial deposits drew prospectors to Ballarat, the rate of gold extraction fluctuated and, as they were rapidly worked dry, many quickly moved to rush other fields as new findings were announced, particularly Mount Alexander in 1852, Fiery Creek in 1855, and Ararat in 1857. By 1859, a smaller number of permanent settlers numbering around 23,000, many of whom had built personal wealth in gold, established a prosperous economy based around a shift to deep underground gold mining.\nConfidence of the city's early citizens in the enduring future of their city is evident in the sheer scale of many of the early public buildings, generous public recreational spaces, and opulence of many of its commercial establishments and private housing. A local steam locomotive industry developed from 1854 with the Phoenix Foundry operating until 1906. The railway came to the town with the opening of the Geelong\u2013Ballarat line in 1862 and Ballarat developed as a major railway town. As the city grew the region's original indigenous inhabitants were quickly expelled to the fringe and by 1867 few remained.\nPost gold rush.\nFrom the late 1860s to the early 20th century, Ballarat made a successful transition from a gold rush town to an industrial-age city. The ramshackle tents and timber buildings gradually made way for permanent buildings, many impressive structures of solid stone and brick mainly built from wealth generated by early mining.\nPrince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh visited between 9 and 13 December 1867 and as the first royal visit, the occasion was met with great fanfare. The Prince Room was prepared at Craigs Royal Hotel for his stay. The city's first civic centre\u2014Prince Alfred Hall\u2014erected over the Yarrowee between the two municipalities, was named in his honour during his visit. The later attempt by Ballaratian Henry James O'Farrell to assassinate the Prince was met with shock and great horror from locals.\nBallarat was proclaimed a city in 1871. Gong Gong dam was built in 1877 to alleviate flooding and to provide a permanent water supply. A direct railway to Melbourne was completed in December 1889. Many industries and workshops had been established as a result of manufacturing and servicing for the deep lead mining industry.\n20th century.\nLocal boosters at the start of the 20th century adopted the nickname \"Athens of Australia\", first used to describe Ballarat by the jurist and politician Sir John Madden. The first electricity supply was completed in 1901, and that year a bluestone power station was built at the corner of Ripon Street and Wendouree Parade with the main aim of electrifying the city's tramway network. Despite such advancements, mining activity slowed at this time and Ballarat's growth all but stopped, leading to a decades-long period of decline. The Sunshine rail disaster in 1908 resulted in the death of dozens of Ballarat residents, and in August 1909, a great storm lashed the city, resulting in the death of one person and the injury of seven others, as well as the destruction of numerous homes.\nBallarat's significant representation in World War I resulted in heavy human loss. Around this time, it was overtaken in population by the port city of Geelong, further diminishing its provincial status. In response, local lobbyists continually pushed the Victorian government for decentralisation, the greatest success being the Victorian Railways opening the Ballarat North Workshops in April 1917. The Great Depression proved a further setback for Ballarat, with the closure of many institutions and causing the worst unemployment in the city's history, with over a thousand people in the dole queue.\nThe city's two municipalities, Ballarat East and West Town Councils, finally amalgamated in 1921 to form the City of Ballarat.\nWhile deep, the depression was also brief. The interwar period proved a period of recovery for Ballarat with a number of major infrastructure projects well underway including a new sewerage system. In 1930, Ballarat Airport was established. By 1931, Ballarat's economy and population was recovering strongly with further diversification of industry, although in 1936 Geelong displaced it as the state's second largest city. During World War II an expanded Ballarat airport was the base of the RAAF Wireless Air Gunners' School as well as the base for USAAF Liberator bomber squadrons. In 1942, Ballarat became connected to the state electricity grid by a 66,000 kV line. Prior to this, power supply was generated locally.\nDuring World War II, Ballarat was the location of RAAF No.1 Inland Aircraft Fuel Depot (IAFD), completed in 1942 in the defence of Australia against a Japanese invasion and decommissioned on 29 August 1944. Usually consisting of four tanks, 31 fuel depots were built across Australia for the storage and supply of aircraft fuel for the RAAF and the US Army Air Forces at a total cost of \u00a3900,000 ($1,800,000).\nIn the post-war era, Ballarat's growth continued. In response to an acute housing shortage, significant suburban expansion occurred. An extensive Housing Commission of Victoria estate was built on the former Ballarat Common (today known as Wendouree West). The estate was originally planned to contain over 750 prefabricated houses. While planning for the estate began in 1949, main construction occurred between 1951 and 1962.\nThe 1950s brought a new optimism to the city. On 17 April 1952 it was announced that Lake Wendouree was to be the venue for rowing events of the 1956 Summer Olympics, and work soon began on an Olympic village in Gillies Street. A new prefabricted power terminal substation at Norman Street Ballarat North was constructed between 1951 and 1953 by the State Electricity Commission. The first Begonia Festival, a highly successful community celebration, was held in 1953. Elizabeth II visited on 8 March 1954. The Civic Centre, Prince Alfred Hall had burned down suspiciously that year; however a new Civic Hall was constructed and opened in March 1955. On 23 November 1956, the Olympic torch was carried through the city, and the following day the rowing events were held at the lake. On 2 March 1958 the Queen Mother visited Ballarat.\nDuring the following decades, the city saw increased threats to its heritage. In 1964, the Ballarat City Council passed laws banning pillar-supported verandahs in the CBD, which threatened the removal of historic cast iron verandahs in the city. The by-law was met by staunch opposition from the National Trust, which had begun campaigning to protect some of the city's most historic buildings. By the 1970s, Ballarat began to officially recognise its substantial heritage, and the first heritage controls were recommended to ensure its preservation. With the opening of Sovereign Hill, the city made a rapid shift to become a major cultural tourist destination, visited by thousands each year.\nDuring the 1970s, a further 300 houses were constructed at Wendouree West. Private housing in the adjacent suburb of Wendouree closely matched and eventually eclipsed this by the mid-1960s. The suburb of greater Wendouree and Wendouree West had evolved as the suburban middle-class heart of the city. Charles, Prince of Wales visited Ballarat on 28 October 1974 during which he toured Sovereign Hill, the Ballarat College of Advanced Education's new Mt Helen Campus and the White Swan Reservoir and spoke at Civic Hall.\nBallarat played an important role in the Stolen Generation throughout the 20th century, where the Ballarat Orphanage saw Aboriginal children who had been taken from their families. The Ballarat and District Aboriginal Co-operative (BADAC) was established by members of the Ballarat and district Aboriginal community in 1979. It became a co-operative to deliver health, social, welfare and community development programs to local Aboriginal people. In 2017, local Aboriginal community elder Ted Lovett was awarded the Order of Australia Medal for services to the indigenous community and for his works in eliminating racism in sports in south-west Victoria. Karen Heap and Ted Lovett were listed on the Victoria's Aboriginal Honour Role both in part for their work at BADAC.\n21st century.\nThe city continued to grow at the national average throughout the late 20th century and early 21st century. In 2008 the City of Ballarat released a plan directing that growth of the city over the next 30 years is to be concentrated to the west of the city centre. The Ballarat West Growth Area Plan was approved by the city and state government in 2010, planning an extensive fringe development consisting of 14,000 new homes and up to 40,000 new residents including new activity centres and employment zones.\nThe Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse final report, published on 15 December 2017, found that 139 people made a claim of child sexual abuse to the Diocese of Ballarat between 1980 and 2015, and 21 alleged perpetrators were identified in these claims. Seventeen of the 21 alleged and convicted perpetrators were priests, which is 8.7% of the priests who ministered during this period. About 45 victims are estimated to have committed suicide.\nGeography.\nBallarat lies at the foothills of the Great Dividing Range in Central Western Victoria. Also known as the Central Highlands, it is named so because of its elevated position and moderate hills and terrain with a lack of any alpine mountains that are situated a few hundred kilometres NE. The city lies within a mostly gently undulating section of the midland volcanic plains which stretch from Creswick in the north, to Rokewood in the south, and from Lal Lal in the south-east to Pittong in the west.\nGeologically, the area consists of alluvial sediment and volcanic flows originating from now-extinct volcanoes such as nearby Buninyong (750m, 2460\u00a0ft) and Warrenheip (746m, 2446\u00a0ft), which are the area's tallest peaks. As a result, the basin contains large areas of fertile agricultural soil. Ballarat itself is situated on an alluvial basin of the Yarrowee catchment and its tributary creeks, penetrated by sub-ranges of schists composed of granites and quartz. Along with the visible river and creeks, the catchment basin has numerous active and inactive aquifers and natural wetlands, which are used for urban water supply, agriculture and recreation.\nThere are numerous densely forested areas around Ballarat; however due to historic wood milling and land clearing there remain no old-growth forests. The major natural bodies of water are in the west and include the former shallow swamps of Lake Wendouree which is central to the city's western suburbs and beyond Winter's Swamp and the large Lake Burrumbeet wetland complex. Almost all of the other numerous bodies of water have been created artificially and include several reservoirs, the largest being the White Swan Reservoir and smaller suburban lakes such as Lake Esmond.\nThe contiguous urban area of Ballarat covers approximately of the local government area's . Approximately 90% of the urban area's land use is residential and suburban. From the city centre this area extends approximately north to the hills around Invermay, approximately east to Leigh Creek in the foothills of Mount Warrenheip, approximately west along the plains to Lucas and approximately south along the Yarrowee River and Canadian Creek valley to the fringe of Buninyong. The central city is situated low in the valley of the Yarrowee River and surrounded by hills such that the city skyline is visible only from the hills and the lower lying inner eastern suburbs. The reach of the Yarrowee River toward Ballarat Central becomes a stormwater drain and is completely covered over as it flows under the CBD.\nUrban structure.\nThe city is home to nationally significant heritage structures. These include the Ballarat Botanical Gardens (established 1857), with the greatest concentration of public statuary, the official Prime Ministers Avenue, the longest running lyric theatre building (Her Majesty's Theatre, established 1875), the first municipal observatory, established 1886, and the earliest and longest war memorial avenue (the Avenue of Honour, established between 1917 and 1919).\nBallarat is a primarily low-rise city. The City of Ballarat defines two Major Activity Centres within the urban area \u2013 the Central Business District (CBD) and Wendouree with a high concentration of business, retail and community function based primarily on the Melbourne 2030 planning model and a further 11 neighbourhood activity centres. The tallest building in urban Ballarat is the seven-storey Henry Bolte wing of the Ballarat Base Hospital (1994). Beyond the central area, urban Ballarat extends into several suburban areas with a mixture of housing styles. Predominant styles are 19th-century villas, Victorian terraces, Federation homes and Georgian red brick homes. Settlement patterns around Ballarat consist of small villages and country towns, some with less than a few thousand people.\nThe central business district (located in Ballarat Central) is a large mixed-use office and retail district bounded to the north by railway lines, to the west by Drummond Street, to the south to Grant Street and to the east by Princes Street and spanning the floodplain of the Yarrowee River. Lydiard, Sturt Streets, Armstrong, Doveton, Dana Street and Bridge Street (known as Bridge Mall) along with the historic centre of East Ballarat\u2014Main Street and Bakery Hill have retained stands of commercial and civic buildings of state and national heritage significance.\nThe inner established suburbs were initially laid out around the key mining areas and include Ballarat East, Bakery Hill, Golden Point, Soldiers Hill, Black Hill, Brown Hill, Eureka, Canadian, Mount Pleasant, Redan, Sebastopol and Newington.\nThe post gold rush era has seen a boom in expansion, extending the conurbation north, south and west. To the west, Ballarat has expanded West to Lucas, Alfredton, Delacombe To The North West Wendouree, Wendouree West and Miners Rest To the north it has expanded to Ballarat North, Invermay Park, Invermay, Victoria Invermay and Nerrina; to the east to Warrenheip and south to Sebastopol, Mount Clear and Mount Helen with the urban area encroaching the large town of Buninyong.\nWendouree is currently the only major suburban activity centre with a large indoor shopping mall\u2014Stockland Shopping Centre (expanded in 2007) and also has a number of surrounding retail parks including a strip shopping centre along Howitt Street including the large retail chain Harvey Norman. Elsewhere are small suburban hubs with supermarkets such as IGA (supermarkets) and small stretches of shopfronts.\nUnlike Melbourne, Ballarat does not have a defined urban growth boundary. This has put continuing pressure on the city council to approve development applications for subdivisions outside of the city fringe. In response to lobbying by landholders, the Ballarat West Growth Area Plan, a major greenfield land development plan, was prepared and has approved by the city and state government to allow for planned fringe communities consisting of 14,000 new homes and up to 40,000 new residents, effectively doubling the city's urban area by extending the urban sprawl from Sebastopol, Delacombe and Alfredton west toward Bonshaw, Smythes Creek and Cardigan with a new suburb to be known as Lucas to be created. New activity centres have been developed at Delacombe and Alfredton.\nArchitecture.\nBallarat is renowned for its Victorian architectural heritage. In 2003 Ballarat was the first of two Australian cities to be registered as a member of the International League of Historical Cities and in 2006 hosted the 10th World League of Historical Cities Congress. The city's history is a major focus of the Collaborative Research Centre in Australian History, part of Federation University Australia, and is located at old Ballarat Gaol.\nThe legacy of the wealth generated during Ballarat's gold boom is still visible in a large number of fine stone buildings in and around the city, especially in the Lydiard Street area. This precinct contains some of Victoria's finest examples of Victorian era buildings, many of which are on the Victorian Heritage Register or classified by the National Trust of Australia. Notable civic buildings include the Town Hall (1870\u201372), the former Post Office (1864), the Ballarat Fine Art Gallery (1887), the Mechanics' Institute (1860, 1869), the Queen Victoria Wards of the Ballarat Base Hospital (1890s) and the Ballarat railway station (1862, 1877, 1888). Other historic buildings include the Provincial Hotel (1909), Reid's Coffee Palace (1886), Craig's Royal Hotel (1862\u20131890) and Her Majesty's Theatre (1875), the oldest intact and operating lyric theatre in Australia and Ballarat Fire Station (1864, 1911) one of Victoria's oldest fire fighting structures and the Jewish synagogue (1861) the oldest surviving synagogue on the Australian mainland.\nRestoration of historic buildings is encouraged including a low interest council Heritage Loans Scheme. and the prevention of demolition by neglect discouraged by council policies. Since the 1970s, the local council has become increasingly aware of the economic and social value of heritage preservation. This is in stark contrast to the 1950s and 60s when Ballarat followed Melbourne in encouraging the removal of Victorian buildings, verandahs in particular. Recent restoration projects funded by the Ballarat include the reconstruction of significant cast iron lace verandahs including the Mining Exchange, Art Gallery (2007), Mechanics institute (2005\u2013) on Lydiard Street and in 2010 the restoration of the Town Hall and the long neglected Unicorn Hotel fa\u00e7ade on Sturt Street.\nBallarat Citizens for Thoughtful Development formed in 1998 and was incorporated as Ballarat Heritage Watch in 2005 to ensure that the city's architectural heritage is given due consideration in the planning process.\nThe Ballarat Botanical Gardens (established in 1858) are recognised as the finest example of a regional botanical gardens in Australia and are home to many heritage listed exotic tree species and feature a modern glasshouse and horticultural centre and the Prime Ministers Avenue which features bronze busts of every past Australian Prime Minister.\nBallarat is notable for its very wide boulevards. The main street is Sturt Street with over of central gardens known as the Sturt Street Gardens featuring bandstands, fountains, statues, monuments, memorials and lampposts. Ballarat is home to the largest of a collection of Avenues of Honour in Victoria. The Ballarat Avenue of Honour consists of a total of approximately 4,000 trees, mostly deciduous which in many parts arch completely over the road. Each tree has a bronze plaque dedicated to a soldier from the Ballarat region who enlisted during World War I. The Avenue of Honour and the Arch of Victory are on the Victorian Heritage Register and are seen by approximately 20,000 visitors each year.\nThe city also has the greatest concentration of public statuary in any Australian city with many parks and streets featuring sculptures and statues dating from the 1860s to the present. Some of the other notable memorials located in the Sturt Street Gardens in the middle of Ballarat's main boulevard include a bandstand situated in the heart of the city that was funded and built by the City of Ballarat Band in 1913 as a tribute to the bandsmen of the , a fountain dedicated to the early explorers Burke and Wills, and those dedicated to monarchs and those who have played pivotal roles in the development of the city and its rich social fabric. These include, Robert Burns, Peter Lalor, Sir Albert Coates, Harold \"Pompey\" Elliott, William Dunstan, King George V, Queen Victoria and more.\nBallarat has an extensive array of significant war memorials, the most recent of which is the Australian Ex Prisoner of War Memorial. The most prominent memorial in the city is the Ballarat Victory Arch that spans the old Western Highway on the Western approaches of the city. The archway serves as the focal point for the Avenue of Honour. Other significant individual monuments located along Sturt Street include those dedicated to the Boer War (1899\u20131901), the World War II (1939\u20131945) cenotaph, and Vietnam (1962\u20131972) (located adjacent to the Arch of Victory).\nClimate.\nBallarat has a moderate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\") with four distinct seasons. Its elevation, ranging between above sea level, causes its mean monthly temperatures to tend to be on average below those of Melbourne, especially in winter. The mean daily maximum temperature for January is , while the mean minimum is . In July, the mean maximum is ; average July minimum is . Ballarat has 55.2 clear days annually, with the grand majority in summer and early autumn. Ballarat has very rainy winters.\nThe city has a reputation for unpredictable and extreme weather, ranging from snowfall to intense heatwaves. Perhaps the most infamous feature of Ballarat's climate is the chilly winter, often accentuated by driving winds. In 2023, a journalist for ABC Ballarat wrote that Ballarat \"is notorious for its frosty winters and the near year-round puffer jacket uniform of its residents\". When measured by mean temperatures, Ballarat is the coldest city in Victoria.\nTemperatures can dip below freezing from May to September, however, a low of 0-2\u00a0\u00b0C is more common - widespread frosts and fog are a regular sight. Snowfall typically falls on nearby Mount Buninyong and Mount Warrenheip several times a year, but in the urban area only once or twice, particularly during heavy winters. Snow has been known to fall heavily with several centimetres accumulating even in the CBD. Heavy snow seasons occurred in 1900\u20131902 and 1905\u20131907 (with record falls in 1906), and moderate snow seasons were recorded during the 1940s and 1980s. Snowfalls in the urban area have occurred in recent years: November 2006 (light), July 2007 (heavy), June 2008 (light), August 2008 (light), August 2014 (moderate) and June 2016 (light), July 2017 (light), June 2018 (moderate), May 2019 (light), and August and September 2020 (light and heavy).The mean annual rainfall is , with August being the wettest month (). There are an average of 198 rain-free days per year. Like much of Australia, Ballarat experiences cyclical drought and heavy rainfall. Flooding of the Yarrowee catchment occurs occasionally. In 1869 a serious flood of the Yarrowee River put most of the lower section of the business district including Bridge and Grenville streets under water and caused the loss of two lives. Prolonged drought (an average annual rainfall with falls averaging as low as per year since 2001) caused Lake Wendouree to dry up completely for the first time in its history between 2006 and 2007. More recently higher rainfall levels have been recorded including in the 24 hours to 9\u00a0am on 14 January 2011, ending a four-day period of flooding rains across much of Victoria and Tasmania, and contributing to the wettest January on record, with a total of of rain for the month.\nThe city's mean daily wind run is 470\u00a0km, almost twice that of Melbourne, making it one of the windiest cities in Australia. This in turn causes warm summers to feel substantially cooler and near-freezing winter days to have a far below zero wind chill.\nBallarat's highest maximum recorded temperature was on 7 February 2009 during the 2009 southeastern Australia heat wave. The lowest recorded minimum was on 21 July 1982.\nEnvironment.\nNatural reserves and commons.\nWhile there are no national parks in Ballarat's proximity, Ballarat is bordered by extensive bushland to the north, south and south west and sensitive wetlands to the east. The most central park to the city is the 130 ha Victoria Park, with a plethora of ovals and fields, playgrounds, walking tracks and quiet roads. There are a number of nearby state parks and large reserves including the Enfield State Park, Creswick Regional Park, Mount Warrenheip Flora Reserve, Mount Buninyong Reserve and Lake Burrumbeet park. There are also smaller parks, like Black Hill, Victoria Park, Pioneer Park and Yarowee Reserve, located within walking distance of the city centre.\nBallarat is unique in Australia\u2014and internationally\u2014for having retained much of its commons land, which can be used by any resident of Ballarat. Ballarat Town Common, Ballarat West Town Common and Ballarat Common are located to the west of the city. Ballarat Town Common can be accessed via Howe Street in Miners Rest and is used by dog walkers and ramblers, especially because of its open grass fields and native wetland. Ballarat West Town Common is presently farmed on by licensed farmers. The commons were reduced in size during the 20th century for property development.\nThe region is home to a large koala population with protected areas established in the city's outer southern and eastern settlements.\nPollution.\nAir quality in Ballarat is generally good, however dust is sometimes an issue in the summer months and woodsmoke from fireplaces contributes to reductions in visibility in the winter months. Ballarat's waterways have historically been affected by heavy pollution from both mining and industry.\nThe Ballarat Environment Network formed in 1993 to provide a voice for environmental and nature conservation issues in Ballarat and its surroundings. Another large lobby group for sustainability in the city is the Ballarat Renewable Energy And Zero Emissions (BREAZE) formed in 2006. The City of Ballarat released an Environment Sustainability Strategy for the city in 2007.\nMany parts of urban Ballarat have been affected by the introduction of exotic species, particularly introduced flora. Common gorse is one such problem which has prompted the formation of an official Ballarat Region Gorse Task Force in 1999 to control. European rabbits and red foxes cause significant environmental damage in the region's agriculture areas.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Ballarat is driven by all three economic sectors, though contemporary Ballarat has emerged as a primarily service economy with its main industry being the service industry and its key areas of business including tourism, hospitality, retail, professional services, government administration and education. Secondary sector including manufacturing, which had grown in the 20th century remains an important sector. The city's historic primary sector roots including mining and agriculture continue to play a role, though one that has declined since the 20th century. Industries emerging this century include information technology service sector and renewable energy.\nService industries.\nAs a major service centre for the populous goldfields region, Ballarat has large sectors of employment in business including retail, professional services and trades as well as state and federal government branch offices for public services and health care and non-government service organisations. Collectively these industries employ more than half of the city's workforce and generate the bulk of the city's economic activity.\nBallarat is the main retail economy in the region. The city has several key retail districts including a pedestrian mall known as Bridge Mall comprising over 100 traders. There are also indoor shopping malls including Central Square Shopping Centre and Stockland Wendouree. better known as Wendouree Village, with a large number of specialty stores. Major department stores include Myer, Target, Big W, Kmart, Harvey Norman and Harris Scarfe. Additionally each of the major supermarkets (Coles, Woolworths, IGA and Aldi) are represented. Servicing the financial sector are branches of the big four Australian retail banks (National Australia Bank, ANZ, Commonwealth Bank and Westpac) along with Bendigo &amp; Adelaide Bank and St George Bank and a number of smaller independent financial services firms.\nFederation University Australia exports education through a large international students program and throughout Australia through distance education programs.\nIn recent years, a large technology park, the Ballarat Technology Park with communications centre has been established, with tenants including IBM and employing over 1,400 people.\nBallarat West Employment Zone (BWEZ) is located on the north-west fringe of Ballarat, adjacent to the Ballarat Airport, existing rail infrastructure and the Ballarat Western Link Road. Ballarat West Employment Zone (BWEZ) will become the engine room for jobs and economic growth in Ballarat over the next 20 years. The project involves the development of surplus Crown Land for industrial, wholesale, logistics, construction, commercial and residential uses, encouraging employment growth in Ballarat and the surrounding region. BWEZ will also include a freight hub, secure infrastructure and access to road, rail and ports. Businesses located un BWEZ include CHS Broadbent, Westlab Pty Ltd, Agrimac, Milestone Benchtops, Kane Transport and Office Vision.\nTourism and hospitality.\nBallarat attracts 2.2\u00a0million visitors a year and the tourism and hospitality industry is a A$480\u00a0million a year sector which accounts for around 15% of Ballarat's economy and employs around 2,870 people. Tourism in Ballarat is promoted by Ballarat Regional Tourism.\nA significant heritage tourism industry has grown substantially in Ballarat since the 1960s. Ballarat is most notable for the award-winning open-air museum known as Sovereign Hill, a recreated 1850s gold mining settlement opened in 1970. Sovereign Hill is Ballarat's biggest tourism drawcard and is consistently rated among the best outdoor museums in the world and continues to expand. Sovereign Hill accounts for over half a million of Ballarat's visitors and $40\u00a0million in tourism revenue.\nSeveral businesses and attractions have capitalised on Ballarat's gold mining history. They include Kryal Castle (1972), \"Gold Rush Mini Golf\" (2002) featuring the \"Big Miner\" (2006) one of Australia's big things (although the original proposal appeared larger and for the miner to hold the Eureka Flag) at Ballarat's eastern entrance.\nOther tourist attractions include the Eureka Centre; The Gold Museum, Ballarat; Ballarat Botanic gardens and Lake Wendouree; the Ballarat Tramway Museum and Ballarat Wildlife Park. A large number of Ballarat hotels, motels and restaurants service the tourism industry. The Ballarat Tourist Association is an industry based non-profit, membership organisation representing the city's tourism industry.\nBallarat hosts a number of annual festivals with historical and cultural focus including the Ballarat Begonia Festival, Ballarat Heritage Weekend and Ballarat Beat Rockabilly Festival.\nManufacturing.\nAccording to the 2021 Australian Census, manufacturing is Ballarat's sixth largest employment sector, accounting for 7% of all workers.\nBallarat attracts investment from several international manufacturers. The Australian headquarters of Mars, Incorporated was established in Ballarat in 1979 with the main Ballarat factory producing popular confectionery including Mars bars, Snickers and M&amp;M's for the Australian market as well as expanding in 2013 to produce Maltesers. McCain Foods Limited Australian headquarters was established in Ballarat in 1970 and the company continues to expand its operations. The Ballarat North Workshops is a major manufacturer of public transportation products with current investment from Alstom.\nBallarat also has a large number of home-grown companies producing textiles, general industrial engineering, food products, brick and tiles, building components, prefabricated housing components and automotive components. Brewing was once a large-scale operation, with many large businesses including the public company Phoenix Brewery, and although large-scale brewing has ceased, the city retains a substantial microbrewery industry.\nPrimary sector.\nThough historically an important sector, the production of Ballarat's primary sector declined for many decades, recovering only marginally since 2006. Where historically the mining industry supported tens of thousands of workers or the majority of the population, today agriculture dominates the sector, though collectively both industries employ less than thousand people or just over 2% of the City of Ballarat's total workforce.\nBallarat rose to prominence as a goldrush boomtown, though gold no longer plays a pivotal role in the economy of the city. Nevertheless, deep underground mining continues to the present date with a single main mine operating. There are still thought to be large, undiscovered gold reserves in the Ballarat region, with investigations being made by local and national companies. Lihir Gold invested in Ballarat Goldfields in 2006, however it downscaled its operations in 2009 due to the expense of extraction before selling its stake in 2010 to Castlemaine Goldfields. Along with gold, lignite (coal), kaolin (clay) and iron ore have also been mined in the Ballarat region and nearby Lal Lal however many of the resource deposits have since been exhausted. An active quarrying industry with large enterprises including Boral Limited extracts and manufactures building materials from the Ballarat region, including clays, aggregates, cements, asphalts.\nApproximately half () of the municipality's area is rural with optimal conditions for agriculture including rich volcanic soils and climate. This area is used primarily for agriculture and animal husbandry and generates more than $37\u00a0million in commodities. The region supports an active potato growing industry that has supplied local food manufacturers including McCain, though more recently has been threatened by cheaper imports. Other large crops include grains, vegetables, grapes and berries. Cattle and poultry stocks, including sheep, cows and pigs, support an active local meat and dairy industry. The Ballarat Livestock Selling Centre is the largest cattle exchange in regional Victoria. The Ballarat Agricultural and Pastoral Society formed in 1856 and has run the Ballarat Show annually since 1859.\nA$7.5\u00a0million forestry industry is active in nearby state forests as well as on a small scale in the urban area along the Canadian Valley around the suburbs of Mt Clear and Mt Helen areas with pine plantations and sawmill operations.\nRenewable energy.\nThe Ballarat region has a rapidly growing renewable energy industry, in particular due to its abundant wind energy, attracting significant investment and generating revenue for local landholders and local councils. The region is also a source of bountiful geothermal energy, solar power and biomass although to date, only its wind, solar and hydroelectricity has been harvested commercially. All local commercially produced electricity is sent to the National Electricity Market.\nWind energy is generated by local wind farms. The largest, Waubra Wind Farm, completed in 2009, is capable of producing enough electricity to power a city 3 to 4 times the size of Ballarat. Other significant nearby wind farms include Mount Mercer, completed 2014, which produces enough energy to power 100,000 homes, equivalent to Ballarat's population. The first community-owned wind farm in Australia, the Hepburn Wind Project at Leonards Hill, completed in 2011, produces the equivalent amount of electricity used by the town of Daylesford.\nHydroelectricity is generated at White Swan reservoir micro hydro plant established in 2008 and producing the equivalent electricity needs of around 370 homes. Ballarat Solar Park, opened in 2009 at the Airport site in Mitchell Park, is Victoria's first ground-mounted, flat-plate and grid-connected photovoltaic farm. Built by Sharp Corporation for Origin Energy, it is and generates the equivalent electricity needs of around 150 homes.\nDemographics.\nBallarat is the 4th largest inland city in Australia, and the 3rd largest Victorian city behind Melbourne and Geelong. According to the 2021 census, there were 111,973 people in Ballarat, a moderate increase from 105,471 in June 2018. This follows annual growth of 1.78% since June 2013 (slightly faster than the national rate of 1.56% during the same period).\nThe recently accelerated growth rate has been attributed by demographers to increased commuter activity arising from surging house and land prices in Melbourne coupled with public transport improvements between Ballarat and Melbourne.\nWhile most of the city's population can trace their ancestry to Anglo-Celtic descent, 16.3% of the population are born overseas. These include people from England (2.1%), India (1.6%), New Zealand (0.9%), China (0.6%), and the Philippines (0.6%). 8.2% speak a language other than English. 18.8% of the population is over the age of 65. The median age in Ballarat is 38 years.\nBallarat's ethnic make up is partly the result of the mid 19th Century gold rush, where people of Celtic, Anglo-Saxon and East Asian descent emigrated here in the hope of landing a fortune.\nThe median income of the local government area of Ballarat in 2019-2010 was $A50,767. According to the 2021 Census, Ballarat's working population include Professionals (22.8%), Community and Personal Service Workers (13.8%), Technicians and Trades Workers (13.8%), Clerical and Administrative Workers (12.3%), and Managers (11.2%). The unemployment rate in 2021 was 4.8%.\n21.9% of the population have completed further education after high school.\nChristianity is the most common religion in Ballarat. Catholics (21.3%), Anglicans (7.9%) and the Uniting Church (4.7%) were the largest Christian denominations. 47.6% stated they had no religion and a further 5.9% did not answer the question. .\nAccording to the 2017 Victorian Population Health Survey, Ballarat is home to the fifth largest community of LGBTIQA+ people by LGA in the State.\nGovernance.\nCouncil Chamber in Ballarat Town Hall, Sturt Street, is the seat of local government for the City of Ballarat. The council was created in 1994 as an amalgamation of a number of other municipalities in the region. The city is made up of 3 wards, each represented by three councillors elected once every four years by postal voting. The Mayor of Ballarat, currently Des Hudson, is elected from these councillors by their colleagues for a one-year term. The Town Hall and annexe contains some council offices, however the council's administrative headquarters are located at the council owned Phoenix Building and the leased Gordon Buildings on the opposite side of Bath Lane.\nIn state politics, Ballarat is located in the Legislative Assembly districts of Eureka and Wendouree, with both of these seats currently held by the Australian Labor Party. In federal politics, Ballarat is located in a single House of Representatives division\u2014the Division of Ballarat. The Division of Ballarat has been a safe Australian Labor Party seat since 2001, and was the seat of the second Prime Minister of Australia, Alfred Deakin.\nLaw enforcement is overseen from regional police headquarters at the law complex in Dana Street with a single local police station operating in Buninyong. Due to an increase in crime rates and population, two additional local police stations were proposed in 2011 one each for the suburbs of North Ballarat and Sebastopol. Justice is conducted locally overseen through branches of the Supreme, County, Magistrates and Children's Court of Victoria which operate out of the Ballarat courts Complex adjacent police headquarters in Dana Street. Corrections, at least in the longer term are no longer handled locally since the closure of the Ballarat Gaol in 1965. Offenders can be detained in 25 available cells at the police complex though are commonly transferred to nearby Corrections Victoria facilities such as the Hopkins Correctional Centre in Ararat.\nPublic safety and emergency services are provided by several state funded organisations including local volunteer based organisations. Storms and flooding are handled by the State Emergency Service (SES) Mid West Region Headquarters at Wendouree. Bushfires are handled by the Country Fire Authority District 15 Headquarters and Grampians Region Headquarters at Wendouree and urban structure fires are handled by multiple urban fire brigades operating at fire stations including the Ballarat Fire Brigade at Barkly Street Ballarat East, Ballarat City Fire Brigade at Sturt Street Ballarat Central and suburban stations including Wendouree and Sebastopol. Medical emergency and paramedic services are provided through Ambulance Victoria and include the Rural Ambulance Victoria, St. John Ambulance and Ballarat Base Hospital ambulance services. City of Ballarat is responsible for coordinating the Municipal Emergency Management Planning Committee (MEMPC) which prepares the Municipal Emergency Management Plan which is actioned in conjunction with local police.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nBallarat has two local newspapers, one owned by Australian Community Media and one a private equity. \"The Courier\" is a daily and \"The Ballarat Times News Group\" is a free weekly. The latter is distributed across most of the city on Thursday and contains news of community events, advertisements for local businesses, and a classifieds section. Ballarat was the hub of Australian Community Media's Victoria production and manufacturing with all printed material for the state coming from the Wendouree print site until it closed in September 2020.\nRadio stations.\nLocal radio stations include 3BA, Power FM and several community radio stations. There is also a Ballarat branch of ABC Local Radio's national network.\nTelevision.\nTelevision station BTV Channel 6 Ballarat commenced transmission of test patterns on 17 March 1962. Today Ballarat is serviced by numerous \"free to air\" High Definition and Standard Definition Digital television services. Two television broadcasting stations are located in the city, including WIN, WIN HD, 9Life, 9Go! and 9Gem (sub-licensees of the Nine Network) and Seven, 7HD, 7two, 7mate, 7Bravo and 7flix (Seven Network owned and operated). These two stations broadcast relayed services throughout regional Victoria. The city also receives 10, 10 HD, 10 Peach Comedy, 10 Bold Drama, Nickelodeon and Sky News Regional (Network 10 owned and operated) which is based in Bendigo but operates a local office.\nBallarat television maintains a similar schedule to the national television network but maintains local commercials and regional news programming. \nIn addition to commercial television services, Ballarat receives Government funded ABC (ABC TV, ABC Family, ABC Kids, ABC Entertains, ABC News) and SBS (SBS TV, SBS Viceland, SBS World Movies, SBS WorldWatch, SBS Food and NITV) television services.\nOn 5 May 2011, analog television transmissions ceased in most areas of regional Victoria and some border regions including Ballarat and surrounding areas. All local free-to-air television services are now broadcasting in digital transmission only. This was done as part of the federal government's plan for digital terrestrial television in Australia, where all analogue transmission systems are gradually turned off and replaced with modern DVB-T transmission systems.\nSubscription television services are provided by Neighbourhood Cable, Foxtel and SelecTV.\nEducation.\nBallarat has two universities, Federation University and a campus of the Australian Catholic University.\nFormerly the University of Ballarat, Federation University Australia was opened in 2014. It originated as the Ballarat School of Mines, founded in 1870, and was once affiliated with the University of Melbourne. The main campus is located in Mount Helen, approximately southeast of the city. The university also has campuses in the Ballarat CBD, Horsham, Berwick, Brisbane, Churchill, Ararat and Stawell.\nThe Australian Catholic University's Ballarat campus is located on Mair Street. It was formerly the Aquinas Training College, run by the Ballarat East Sisters of Mercy in 1909. It is ACU's only campus located outside of a capital city.\nBallarat has five State Government-operated secondary schools of which Ballarat High School (established in 1907) is the oldest. Ballarat High School and Mount Clear College are the only state school members of the Ballarat Associated Schools. The three remaining schools are Phoenix College and the two newly formed schools Mount Rowan Secondary College and Woodmans Hill Secondary College which emerged from the old Ballarat Secondary College. Phoenix College was formed in 2012 as an amalgamation of Sebastopol College and Redan Primary School.\nThe city is well serviced by Catholic schools, with eight primary schools and three secondary colleges which include the all-boys St Patrick's College, the all-girls Loreto College and the co-educational Damascus College, which was formed by the amalgamation of St Martin's in the Pines, St Paul's College and Sacred Heart College in 1995.\nBallarat has three other non-government secondary schools: Ballarat Christian College, Ballarat Clarendon College and Ballarat Grammar School.\nThe later two schools are day and boarding schools who provide education from Preschool to Year 12. Both of these co-educational schools are classified as academically excellent as the only Ballarat schools to be ranked on the tables of the top 100 Victorian schools based on median VCE scores and percentage of scores of 40 and above. In 2015, Clarendon was placed at 9th best VCE results in the State, above Melbourne Grammar, Geelong College, Scotch College, Trinity Grammar School (Victoria), Xavier College, and Haileybury College. Ballarat Grammar was placed at 82nd, above Wesley College, Geelong Grammar and Tintern.\nThe City of Ballarat has three public libraries, the largest and most extensive of which is the Ballarat Library, run by the City of Ballarat and located on Doveton Street North. Another library service is provided by the Ballarat Mechanics' Institute in Sturt Street, which is the oldest library in the city and a significant heritage site; it contains a collection of historic, archival and rare reference material as well as more general books. \nThe Xin Jin Shan Chinese Library opened in 2022. It contains over 240,000 Chinese-language books, reportedly the largest collection in the Southern Hemisphere.\nArts and culture.\nGalleries.\nThe Art Gallery of Ballarat houses one of Australia's oldest and most extensive collections of early Australian works. It is the oldest and largest regional gallery in Australia.\nFederation University Australia operates the Post Office Gallery in the Wardell-designed former Post Office on the corner of Sturt and Lydiard Streets.\nPerforming arts.\nBallarat has a lively and well-established theatrical community, with several local ensembles as well as a number of large performing arts venues. Major performing arts venues include the 900-capacity Her Majesty's Theatre, the Wendouree Centre for Performing Arts, Mary's Mount Theatre, and the Post Office Box Theatre.\nSome notable theatre organisations in Ballarat include Ballarat National Theatre (since 1938); BLOC (Ballarat Light Opera Company; since 1959); the amateur theatre troupe Creswick Theatre Company (since 1981); and the female-led boutique company, Salty Theatre (established 2018).\nThe Ballarat Civic Hall is a large public building constructed in 1956 as a general purpose venue. Its stripped classical design was heavily criticised during its planning, however it has gained some cultural significance to the city with its cavernous spaces holding many significant events over the years. Civic Hall was closed in 2002 and public pressure forced the council to redevelop it in 2018 as a modern performing arts and exposition centre. The refurbished building is a modern interpretation of its original 1950s built form and features a 1000 capacity main hall capable of use for concerts, meetings and civic events.\nThe Regent Cinemas, which opened in the heart of the city in 1928, was once the largest picture palace in regional Victoria, with nearly 2,000 seats in stalls and balcony. It was designed by noted Melbourne theatre architect Cedric Heise Ballantyne, and who was also responsible designing the Regent Theatre on Collins Street, Melbourne. After the interiors were damaged by fire in 1943 (although the front facade survived), the architectural firm Cowper, Murphy &amp; Appleford redesigned the building. Hoyts ran the cinema from its inception until it closed the venue in 1964 or 1970. It was acquired and renovated by the Anderson family, who reopened it in 1976. It was completely refurbished and the interiors redesigned to create a multiplex containing three separate theatres in 1986, and a further three screens were added in the early 2000s. The facade remained intact, and the sign at its entrance showed the words \"The Regent Multiplex\", while the vertical sign simply said \"Regent\". On 24 June, 2024, the owners announced the closure of the cinema, effective immediately, to the dismay of many patrons and the mayor of Ballarat. \nBallarat has its own symphony orchestra, the Ballarat Symphony Orchestra, which was formed in 1987.\nThe city has several dance clubs as well as a highly active live music and jazz scene.\nEvents and festivals.\nBallarat is home to many annual festivals and events that attract thousands of visitors. The oldest large annual event is the Ballarat Agricultural Show (since 1859), currently held at the Ballarat Showgrounds and has attracted attendances of up to 30,000 and is an official public holiday for residents of the city.\nBallarat is home to Australia's oldest and largest annual performing arts eisteddfod. The Royal South Street Eisteddfod is an all-encompassing performing arts festival and competition event that is conducted over twelve weeks annually. \nFrom the late 1880s, there were annual competitions run by the South Street Society, later revived as the Royal South Street Eisteddfod (in recess in 2020 due to COVID-19 restrictions).\nLake Wendouree is featured in many including the biggest and most prominent is the Begonia Festival (held annually since 1953). SpringFest (held annually since 2001) attracts more than 15,000 people from around Victoria and features market stalls and activities around the lake.\nThe Ballarat Swap Meet (formerly the Super Southern Swap Meet and held annually since 1989) attracts 30,000 visitors a year. Ballarat Heritage Weekend (held annually since 2006) celebrates the city's heritage with activities such as historic vehicles and displays in and around the CBD and has attracted as many as 14,500 visitors a year from around Victoria. The Ballarat Beer Festival at the City Oval (since 2012) has attracted more than 4,000 visitors. The Ballarat Airport Open Day (Ballarat's unofficial air show, held annually since 2009) also attracts thousands.\nOther minor cultural festivals include the Ballarat Writers Festival, Ballarat International Foto Biennale and the Goldfields Music Festival.\nOther entertainment.\nIn the 1970s the Ballarat urban area contained around 60 hotels. The introduction of gaming machines in the early 1990s has brought about significant change in the city entertainment precincts. By 2006 at least 20 hotels had closed and some of the remaining ones had been redeveloped as dining and/or gaming venues. Gaming machines brought significant revenue to the remaining hotels, sports and social clubs, enabling expansion and modernisation. The city has many restaurants and wine bars. \nCultural depictions.\nBallarat has inspired many visual artists. Eugene von Guerard documented the city's establishment as a gold digging settlement, while Albert Henry Fullwood and Knut Bull depicted the city's boom era streetscapes. Ballarat features prominently in literature and fiction, including \"The Boscombe Valley Mystery\", a short story from Arthur Conan Doyle's \"The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes\" (1891); \"King Billy of Ballarat and Other Stories\" (1892) by Morley Roberts; \"The Fortunes of Richard Mahony\" (1917) by Henry Handel Richardson; \"Murder on the Ballarat Train\" (1993) by Kerry Greenwood; and \"Illywhacker\" (1985) by Peter Carey.\nBallarat is also a popular filming location. Australia's second oldest feature film, \"Eureka Stockade\" (1907), is the first in a line of films about the historic Ballarat event. The city makes cameos in \"Dogs in Space\" (1986), \"My Brother Jack\" (2001), \"Ned Kelly\" (2003) and \"The Writer\" (2005). The television series \"The Doctor Blake Mysteries\" (2012\u20132017) is set in Ballarat and also mostly shot there. The series was picked by the Seven Network, which proposes to make several telemovies without the Blake character, picking up the story line after his death, leaving his widow Jean.\nTwo ships of the Royal Australian Navy have been named HMAS Ballarat after the city, the corvette HMAS Ballarat (J184) and the frigate HMAS Ballarat (FFH 155).\nSport and recreation.\nBallarat Highlanders Rugby Football Club (est. 1976) is based at Doug Dean Reserve, Delecombe. They play in the statewide Victoria Rugby Championship, which they last won in 2016. They also host the Ballarat Charity 7s (est 2022), a short form version of Rugby Union and all proceeds from the event get donated to a local charity (2022 \u2013 Ballarat Men's Mental Health, 2023 \u2013 GROW Group Ballarat). Current notable players include ex-Fiji 7s star Jone Qorovarua and 2016 Ballarat Championship winner Josh Pyalanda being the current highest capped player (130+).\n Australian rules football is the most popular spectator and participation sports in Ballarat. It has its own dedicated stadium, Eureka Stadium, which serves as a venue of the Australian Football League (AFL), as well as the home ground of the semi-professional North Ballarat Roosters, which formerly competed in the Victorian Football League (VFL). The Ballarat Football League, established in 1893, features six local teams, including the Ballarat Football Club, which was founded in 1860 and remains one of the world's oldest football clubs. Other Ballarat-based teams compete in the regional Central Highlands Football League.\nCricket is Ballarat's second most-popular sport. It has three international standard cricket ovals, including Eastern Oval, which was one of the host venues of the 1992 Cricket World Cup. The Ballarat Cricket Association is the city's principle cricket competition. Soccer is also popular in Ballarat. Based at Morshead Park Stadium, the semi-professional Ballarat City FC competes in the National Premier League, the third tier competition of Australian soccer. Melbourne's Western United FC plays four A-League matches per year at Eureka Stadium. Basketball is played in Ballarat with the Ballarat Sports Events Centre hosting South East Australian Basketball League matches involving the Ballarat Miners and Ballarat Rush. Netball is similarly popular, with many netball clubs affiliated with local Australian rules clubs.\nAthletics is and has historically been very popular with 4 local clubs competing at the BRAC (Ballarat Regional Athletics Centre) located at the Llanberis Athletics Track in Golden Point, 5 minutes from the CBD. The city features a rich and decorated athletics history with Australia's most successful track and field athlete (Jared Tallent - Racewalker), and many other Olympians (Steve Moneghetti, Greg Smith (Paralympian)) having been born in Ballarat.\nRowing and kayaking are centred on Lake Wendouree, which hosts the Victorian Schools Rowing Championships as well as the annual \"Head of the Lake\" rowing regatta. The city hosted rowing events for the 1956 Summer Olympic Games. Horse racing and greyhound racing are also popular, with dedicated facilities. The Ballarat Turf Club schedules around 28 race meetings a year including the Ballarat Cup meeting in mid-November. Athletics facilities include an international standard athletics track at Golden Point. Swimming and water sport is facilitated at two Olympic-sized pools as well as an indoor competition short course pool. The main facility is the Ballarat Aquatic Centre located in Lake Gardens. Baseball was first organised in Australia at Ballarat in 1857, and three local teams compete in the Geelong Baseball Association.\nGolf is played at four main venues which include the Ballarat Golf Course in Alfredton, home to the Ballarat Golf Club. The Ballarat Roller Derby League was formed in 2008, and held their first match in 2009. They have two teams who compete in local events, and a combined travelling team, the Rat Pack, who compete in interleague roller derby competitions.\nThe World Athletics-Certified Ballarat Marathon Road Running Festival, inaugurated in 2024, is now an annual event. It features a variety of road running events, including a full marathon, half marathon, 10km run, and family-friendly fun runs, attracting participants from across the region and beyond. The 2024 Marathon Event was a qualifying race for the Abbott World Marathon Majors 2025 Age Group Championships. The festival promotes community participation, and showcases Ballarat's scenic landmarks.\nUntil they were cancelled in July 2023, Ballarat, along with other cities in regional Victoria, was scheduled to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games with Eureka Stadium flagged to host athletics, the Eastern Oval T20 cricket, and Selkirk Stadium to host boxing.\nInfrastructure.\nHealth.\nBallarat has two major hospitals. The public health services are managed by Grampians Health Ballarat including the Ballarat Base which services the entire region and the Queen Elizabeth Centre for aged care on Ascot Street Sth. The St John of God Health Care centre also on Drummond Street Nth, established in 1915 is currently the largest private hospital in regional Victoria.\nThe Ballarat Regional Integrated Cancer Centre (BRICC) on the corner of Drummond and Sturt Street includes a number of facilities focused on cancer treatment.\nThe Heart Foundation did a study in 2014 that Ballarat had the highest level of physical inactivity (85.3 per cent) in Australia and that 32.9 per cent of residents were deemed obese.\nUtilities.\nBallarat's residents are serviced by a wide range of public utilities including water, gas and electricity, telephony and data communications supplied, overseen and regulated by state based authorities and private enterprise and local council.\nWater supply as well as sewage collection and disposal are provided by Central Highlands Water. Drinking water is sourced from a network reservoirs all located in the highlands to the east, however the majority is sourced from two main reservoirs\u2014Lal Lal and White Swan. The Lal Lal Reservoir (built in 1970 with a capacity of ) is Ballarat's largest water catchment accounting for approximately two-thirds of the city's water usage. The White Swan reservoir (built in 1952 with a capacity) supplies most of the remainder. Since May 2008, the White Swan has been topped up by water from Bendigo's Sandhurst Reservoir through the Goldfields Superpipe with water originally sourced from the Goulburn River system. Kirks Reservoir (built between 1860 and 1862 with a capacity of ) and Gong Gong Reservoir (built in 1877 at Gong Gong, Victoria with a capacity of ) are historic main water supplies now maintained for emergency use. Other reservoirs supplying Ballarat include Moorabool reservoir (located in Bolwarrah, Victoria with a capacity of ), Wilson's Reservoir (located in the Wombat State Forest with a capacity of ), Beales reservoir (built 1863 located at Wallace with a capacity of ) and Pincotts reservoir (built 1867 located at Leigh Creek, Victoria with a capacity of ). Sewage is managed by two plants\u2014the Ballarat North Wastewater Treatment Plant and the Ballarat South Waste Water Treatment Plant.\nResidential electricity is supplied by Victorian electricity distributor Powercor, while residential natural gas is supplied by AGL Energy.\nTelephone services are provided via the Doveton Street (BRAT) telephone exchange which was originally built by the Australian Telecommunications Commission (now known as Telstra) who remains its owner, though Optus now also operates services from this facility. The city's cellular network currently uses Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS). Telstra has provided mobile telecommunications to Ballarat since 2003 (initially as CDMA). Optus provided competition with its entrance to the market in 2003 along with significant service upgrades in 2004 followed by Vodafone in mid-2009.\nData communications are provided by several companies. Telstra was the first company to provide dial-up Internet access via the Ballarat exchange, however the first network for broadband Internet access available in the city was a hybrid optical fiber cable and coaxial cable built by Neighbourhood Cable in 2001. Since then, Telstra and Optus have entered the Ballarat market, providing Asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) services for residential Internet access from four main exchanges\u2014Ballarat, Wendouree (Howitt Street), Sebastopol (Skipton Street) and Alfredton (Cuthberts Road). These companies also provide mobile data access Evolved HSPA and since late 2011 3GPP Long Term Evolution (4G). Ballarat's rollout of the National Broadband Network (NBN) is seen as vital for the city's growing IT industry. During Ballarat's first stage NBN rollout in 2012, 17,800 homes will be directly connected to the network via optical fibre cable.\nSuburbs.\nBallarat has the following suburbs:\nAddington, Alfredton, Ascot, Bakery Hill, Ballarat Central, Ballarat East, Ballarat North, Black Hill, Blowhard, Bonshaw, Brown Hill, Bunkers Hill, Canadian, Cardigan, Cardigan Village, Chapel Flat, Coghills Creek, Delacombe, Eureka, Glendaurel, Glendonald, Golden Point, Gong Gong, Invermay Park, Lake Gardens, Lake Wendouree, Learmonth, Lucas, Magpie, Miners Rest, Mitchell Park, Mount Bolton, Mount Clear, Mount Helen, Mount Pleasant, Mount Rowan, Nerrina, Newington, Redan, Scotchmans Lead, Sebastopol, Soldiers Hill, Tourello, Weatherboard, Wendouree, Windermere and Winter Valley.\nTransportation.\nThe motor vehicle is the main form of transport in Ballarat. A network of state highways radiate from Ballarat and the Western Freeway (A8) dual carriageway bypasses the central city to the north of the urban area, providing a direct road connection to Melbourne (approximately 90\u00a0minutes), westward to Ararat (approximately 75\u00a0minutes) and Horsham. Five freeway interchanges service the urban area, East Ballarat (half diamond) interchange at Victoria Street (C805); Brown Hill interchange (full diamond) at Daylesford-Ballarat Road (C292), Creswick Road interchange (full diamond) at Wendouree (A300); the Mount Rowan interchange (half diamond) at Gillies Road, Wendouree (C307) and the Mitchell Park interchange (full diamond) at Howe Street (C287). The Midland Highway is a dual carriageway which runs north along Creswick Road to the Western Freeway interchange but becomes a single carriageway north of Ballarat to Creswick (approximately 25\u00a0minutes) and runs south as the dual carriageway of Skipton Road to Magpie before becoming a single carriageway to Geelong (approximately 87\u00a0minutes). The Glenelg Highway connects directly to Mount Gambier and the Sunraysia Highway west of Ballarat which connects directly to Mildura. Sturt Street and Victoria Street, both dual carriageways carry the bulk of the east-west CBD traffic, while Mair Street is planned to become a four lane dual carriageway to relieve pressure on these main streets. Other dual carriageway main roads in the west include Howitt Street and Gillies Street. The busiest roads by far are located in the west and south at Albert Street in Redan, Sturt Street in Newington and Gillies Street in Lake Gardens which carry 22,400, 22,000 and 21,500 vehicles per day respectively and all have 4 traffic lanes.\nRail.\nBallarat is a major rail transport hub in Victoria. Situated at the junction of the Ballarat line, Ararat line and Mildura lines, it currently has several connections for both passenger rail services and freight rail. The city has two passenger railway stations, the hub of Ballarat railway station and suburban Wendouree railway station. From Ballarat station, V/Line operates VLocity trains to Melbourne, west to Ararat and north to Maryborough. Since the controversial removal of \"flagship\" express services in 2011, successive timetable changes have slowed peak hour services to Southern Cross, with the current journey taking a minimum of 73 minutes. Patronage however has continued to grow. The Regional Rail Link project was built in 2015 to separate Ballarat trains from Melbourne's suburban rail network. Interurban services (Ballarat-Melbourne) now run half-hourly during weekday peak and hourly during weekday non-peak and on weekends from Ballarat station. A twice daily (thrice daily on weekdays) (57\u00a0minute) service connects Ballarat to Ararat (stopping at Beaufort) while there is a (53\u00a0minute) service to and from Maryborough (stopping at Creswick, Clunes, and Talbot) once a day (twice a day on weekdays) each way. Victoria's electronic ticketing system, Myki, was implemented on rail services between Wendouree and Melbourne on 24 July 2013. Ballarat is connected to Geelong by rail via the Geelong-Ballarat railway line, which currently operates only for freight.\nBus.\nCDC Ballarat operates the bus network covering the city centre, Ballarat and Wendouree stations, and most surrounding suburbs, contracted by Public Transport Victoria.\nTram.\nThe once extensive Ballarat tramway network operated between 1887 and 1971 with a small section of remaining track being utilised as a tourist and museum tramway. There have been proposals to extend the network, particularly as a major tourist facility but also to connect it to the railways and return it as a viable component of the Ballarat public transport system, including a strong lobby in 2001\u20132002, 2010\u201311 and 2014, however Ballarat City Council and federal member of parliament have dismissed recent proposals.\nAirport.\nBallarat Airport located north-west of the CBD consists of two sealed runways (each approximately long and wide) as well as extensive sealed aprons, night lighting and NDB navaid. Master Plans for the Airport were completed in 2005 and subsequently 2013. The report made a series of recommendations and forecasts that included lengthening, widening and strengthening of the existing main runway, consideration for expansion of the passenger terminal, recommendations for future use of aprons, and development of future structures supporting larger aircraft that would result from the forecast increased frequent usage. In 2020, initial Federal funding was provided to enable the re-building and re-instatement of the main north\u2013south runway to 1900m (6233 feet).\nCycling and walking.\nBallarat has a long history of cycling as a form of transport and recreation. The current cycling network continues to grow and consists of several marked on-road routes and of segregated bicycle facilities including several main routes: the Ballarat\u2013Skipton Rail Trail and the Yarrowee River Trail with connections to the Gong Gong Reservoir. Buningyong Trail, Sebastopol Trail, and the Lake Wendouree shared path. The Ballarat Bicycle Users Group provides advocacy for the growing number of cyclists in the city. The popularity of cycling in Ballarat is also demonstrated by the large number of spectators and participants drawn to cycling sporting events held in the city.\nCrime.\nIn 2014, the city was one of a number of Australian regional centres examined by an ABC \"Four Corners\" report on the use of methamphetamine, along with Devonport, Burnie, Castlemaine and St Arnaud.\nBibliography.\nHistory books"}
{"id": "4975", "revid": "14345259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4975", "title": "Battle of Abritus", "text": "The Battle of Abritus also known as the Battle of Forum Terebronii occurred near Abritus (modern Razgrad) in the Roman province of Moesia Inferior in the summer of 251. It was fought between the Romans and a federation of Gothic and Scythian tribesmen under the Gothic king Cniva. The Roman army was soundly defeated, and Roman emperors Decius and Herennius Etruscus, his son, were both killed in battle. It was one of the worst defeats suffered by the Roman Empire against the Germanic tribes, rated by the Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus as on par with the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9, the Marcomannic invasion of Roman Italy in 170, and the Battle of Adrianople in 378.\nThe defeat was a disaster for Rome. The emperors' deaths led to more political instability at home; and the loss of the army allowed repeated barbarian incursions in the region for the next two decades.\nThe new Roman emperor Trebonianus Gallus was forced to allow the Goths to return home with their loot and prisoners. The barbarians would not be expelled from Roman territory until 271.\nLocation.\nThe long-debated location of Abritus was thought to be east of the city of Razgrad after excavations by T. Ivanov in 1969 and 1971. However recent work has shown it took place about northwest of Abritus, in the valley of the river Beli Lom, to the south of the village of Dryanovets near the site known locally as \"Poleto\" (the Field).\nThis is evidenced by the large number of Roman coins and arms including swords, shields, spears, armour, greaves, and even military tentpoles found by archaeologists and local residents on the site which must be the last Roman camp. For example, in 1952 a pottery vessel was found at \u2018Poleto\u2019 containing about 30 aurei in mint condition dating from Gordian III to Trajan Decius.\nBackground.\nSoon after Decius ascended to the throne in 249, barbarian tribes invaded the Roman provinces of Dacia, Moesia Superior, and Moesia Inferior. Two factors had contributed to growing unrest in the area north of the Danube. First, Decius' predecessor Philip the Arab had refused to continue payments, initiated by Emperor Maximinus Thrax in 238, of annual subsidies to the aggressive tribes of the region. Second and more important, there were continuous movements of new peoples since the time of Emperor Severus Alexander. Decius may also have taken with him troops from the Danube frontier, in order to depose Philip in 249. He probably had with him three legions: legio XIV Gemina from Carnuntum, legio IV Flavia Felix from Singidunum, and legio VII Claudia from Viminacium and/or their vexillationes.\nThe resultant military vacuum would inevitably attract invaders.\nIn 250 a tribal coalition under Cniva crossed the Roman Danube frontier, probably advancing in two columns. Whether these were consisted only of Goths is rather unlikely so the name \"Scythians\" by which the Greek sources called them (a geographical definition) seems more appropriate. It is quite possible that other people of Germanic and Sarmatian origin (like Bastarnae, Taifals, and Hasdingian Vandals), perhaps Roman deserters as well, had joined the invaders. However, the name of the king is indeed Gothic and probably genuine. Meanwhile, the Carpi invaded Dacia, eastern Moesia Superior, and western Moesia Inferior.\nThe first column of Cniva's army, a detachment of about 20,000 or so likely led by the chieftains Argaith and Gunteric, besieged Marcianopolis, without success it seems. Then they probably headed south to besiege Philippopolis (now Plovdiv in Bulgaria). Cniva's main column of 70,000 under the King himself crossed the Danube at Oescus then headed eastwards to Novae, where he was repelled by the provincial governor (and future emperor) Trebonianus Gallus. Then the invaders headed south to plunder Nicopolis ad Istrum where Decius defeated them but not decisively.\nAfter these initial setbacks, the barbarians moved southwards through Haemus mountain and Decius pursued them (likely through the Shipka Pass) to save Philippopolis. This time Decius' army was taken by surprise while resting at Beroe/Augusta Traiana. The Romans were heavily defeated in the ensuing Battle of Beroe. Decius was forced to withdraw his army to the north at Oescus, leaving Cniva ample time to ravage Moesia and finally capture Philippopolis in the summer of 251, in part with the help of its commander, a certain Titus Julius Priscus who had proclaimed himself Emperor. It seems that Priscus, after receiving the news of the defeat at Beroe, thought that the Goths would spare him and the city. He was wrong and was probably killed when the city fell. Then some of Cniva's forces began returning to their homeland, laden with booty and captives, among them many of senatorial rank.\nIn the meantime, Decius had returned with his re-organized army, consisting of 80,000 men according to Dexippus, accompanied by his son Herennius Etruscus and the general Trebonianus Gallus, intending to defeat the invaders and recover the booty. Decius had lost a force of auxiliary soldiers due to their \"wrongdoing\", according to Dexippus. Archaeology has revealed the presence of three legions at the battle.\nBattle.\nIn either June, July, or August of 251, the Roman army engaged the forces under Cniva near Abritus. The strengths of the belligerent forces are unknown, but we know that Cniva divided his forces into three units, with one of these parts concealed behind a swamp. It seems that Cniva was a skilled tactician and that he was very familiar with the surrounding terrain. Jordanes and Aurelius Victor claim that Herennius Etruscus was killed by an arrow during a skirmish before the battle but his father addressed his soldiers as if the loss of his son did not matter. He allegedly said, \"Let no one mourn. The death of one soldier is not a great loss to the Republic\". However, other sources state that Herennius died with his father.\nDecius' forces initially defeated their opponents in the front line, but made the fatal mistake of pursuing their fleeing enemy into the swamp, where they were ambushed and completely routed under a barrage of Gothic missiles. The immense slaughter that ensued marked one of the most catastrophic defeats in the history of the Roman Empire. Decius died in the midst of the chaos and slaughter, buried under the mud. The bodies of Decius and Herennius were never found.\nThe Goths captured Decius' treasury of tons of gold coins and many weapons which have since been discovered in many locations across Gothic territories.\nZonaras vividly narrates how: \nHe and his son and a large number of Romans fell into the marshland; all of them perished there, none of their bodies to be found, as they were covered by the mud.\nA 6th-century Byzantine scholar, Zosimus, also described the total massacre of Decius' troops and the fall of the pagan emperor: \"Proceeding therefore incautiously in an unknown place, he and his army became entangled in the mire, and under that disadvantage were so assailed by the missiles of the Barbarians, that not one of them escaped with life. Thus ended the life of the excellent emperor Decius.\"\nLactantius, a 4th-century early Christian and advisor to Roman Emperor Constantine the Great, described the emperor's demise as following:\nHe was suddenly surrounded by the barbarians, and slain, together with great part of his army; nor could he be honoured with the rites of sepulture, but, stripped and naked, he lay to be devoured by wild beasts and birds, a fit end for the enemy of God.\nD. S. Potter rejects the story of Zosimus about Treboniannus Gallus who supposedly conspired with the enemies of Romans for delivering Decius' army into the Gothic trap since it seems impossible that, afterwards, the shattered Roman legions proclaimed emperor a traitor who was responsible for the loss of so many soldiers from their ranks. Another strong point against Gallus' treason is the fact that he adopted Hostilian, the younger son of Decius, after returning to Rome.\nAftermath.\nGallus, who became emperor upon Decius' death, negotiated a treaty with the Goths under duress, which allowed them to keep their booty and return to their homes on the other side of the Danube. It is also possible that he agreed to pay an annual tribute in return for the Goths' promise to respect Roman territory. This humiliating treaty, the contemporary spread of the Plague of Cyprian with its devastating effects, and the chaotic situation in the East with the Sassanian invasions left Gallus with a very bad reputation amongst the later Roman historians. However, D. S. Potter suggests that, before the defeat at Abritus, the situation was not so serious that the available Roman forces would not be able to manage the invasions. Therefore, it is Decius' bad conduct which was responsible for the disastrous turn of the events. In any case, Gallus had no choice but to get rid of the Goths as soon as possible.\nIn 271, the Emperor Aurelian conclusively defeated the Goths and killed their king Cannabaudes in battle. Based on the similarity of the names, that king might coincide with the King Cniva who defeated Decius in Abritus."}
{"id": "4977", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4977", "title": "Battle of Adrianopolis", "text": ""}
{"id": "4978", "revid": "47865387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4978", "title": "Battle of Berestechko", "text": "The Battle of Berestechko (Ukrainian: \"\u0411\u0438\u0442\u0432\u0430 \u043f\u0456\u0434 \u0411\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0435\u0447\u043a\u043e\u043c\", Polish: \"Bitwa pod Beresteczkiem;\" 28 June \u2013 10 July 1651) was fought between the Cossack Hetmanate and Crimean Khanate against the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth as a part of the Khmelnytsky Uprising. Near the site of the present-day city of Berestechko in Ukraine, a forces of the Zaporozhian Cossacks and Crimean Tatars under the command of Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky, Otaman Tymofiy Khmelnytsky, Colonels Ivan Bohun and Fylon Dzhalaliy with Khan \u0130sl\u00e2m III Giray and Tugay Bey, who was killed in the battle, was defeated by the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth's forces under the command of the Polish King John II Casimir, Prince Jeremi Wi\u015bniowiecki, Hetmans Marcin Kalinowski and Stanis\u0142aw Lanckoro\u0144ski. The battle took place in the Volhynian Voivodeship on the hilly plain south of the Styr River. The Polish\u2013Lithuanian camp was on the Styr River opposite Berestechko and faced south, towards the Zaporozhian Cossacks about two kilometers away, whose right flank was against the Pliashivka (Pliashova) River and the Crimean Tatars on their left flank. It is considered to have been among the largest European land battles of the 17th century.\nArmies.\nThe number of Polish troops is uncertain. One of the senior Polish commanders, Duke Bogus\u0142aw Radziwi\u0142\u0142, wrote that the Crown Army had 80,000 soldiers, which included \"40,000 regulars and 40,000 nobles of the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\", accompanied by roughly the same number of various servants, footmen, and such.\" Some modern historians, such as Zbigniew W\u00f3jcik, J\u00f3zef Gierowski, and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Czapli\u0144ski, have reduced this figure to 60,000\u201363,000 soldiers.\nThere is no reliable source on the number of Zaporozhian Cossack and Crimean Tatar troops. The possible estimates range from 90,000 men to 130,000 men. The core of Cossack forces at Berestechko consisted of 12 Registered Cossack regiments named after towns they were stationed in (list numbers provided according to the Treaty of Zboriv (1649):\nA total of 33,313 from the above. Additional 5 Cossack regiments (of Kyiv, Kaniv, Chernihiv, Nizhyn, Pavoloch) didn't participate in the battle being deployed mostly against the Lithuanian forces of Janusz Radziwi\u0142\u0142 advancing on Kyiv. The Registered Cossack force was supported by a large number of Ukrainian peasants armed with scythes, flails and the likes which were rather undisciplined and organised poorly. The Crimean Tatar force is estimated to 25,000\u201330,000 men, though might be lower. There were also 2,000 Don Cossacks and a few thousand of Turks and Vlachs.\nOn 19 June 1651, the Crown Army numbered 14,844 Polish cavalry, 2,250 German-style cavalry, 11,900 German-style infantry and dragoons, 2,950 Hungarian-style infantry (\"haiduks\"), 1,550 Lithuanian volunteers, and 960 Lipka Tatars. A number of registered Cossacks remained loyal and participated in the battle on the Polish side. Many magnates brought in their large private armies. In addition, there was a huge militia force, of limited value, numbering 30,000 noblemen of the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\".\nThe Polish commanders were hoping to break the Cossack ranks with a charge of the Polish Winged Hussars, a tactic that had proven effective in many previous battles, including at Kircholm, and K\u0142uszyn (and which would later prove successful at the 1683 Battle of Vienna against the Turks).\nThe Cossack Army was well acquainted with this Polish style of war, having had much experience fighting against the Poles and alongside them. Their preferred tactic was to avoid an open field battle, and to fight from the cover of a huge fortified camp.\nFirst day of the battle.\n2,000 Polish cavalry (one regiment under the command of Aleksander Koniecpolski, supported by Jerzy Lubomirski, six pancern cavalry companies of Jeremi Wi\u015bniowiecki and Winged Hussars under the command of Stefan Czarniecki) repulsed the Crimean Tatars, who suffered heavy losses. During the first day of \"skirmishes by the Tatar and Cossack vanguard regiments\", the Poles were victorious \"since their army sustained that first attack cheerfully and in high spirits\".\nSecond day of the battle.\nThe Poles, encouraged by their success on the first day, deployed all their available cavalry against the \"main Tatar horde\" and \"Cossack vanguard regiments\". The Polish infantry and artillery remained in camp and did not support the cavalry. This time, Tatar cavalry gained the upper hand, pushing the Poles back to their camp but were then \"barely repelled\" by heavy fire from the Polish infantry and artillery. The Poles lost 300 szlachta, including many officers of \"caliber\", and the \"escort troop of Hetman Miko\u0142aj Potocki\". During the second day of the battle, the rebels were victorious, although \"the Tatars, too, were unpleasantly surprised by the determination and endurance of the Polish army in both battles and, having suffered rather painful losses of their own, they lost heart\". Tugay Bey and \u0130sl\u00e2m III Giray's brother-in-law Mehmet Giray were killed.\nThird day of the battle.\nThe \"king insisted, at a night council, on engaging the enemy in a decisive battle the next day, Friday, 30 June\". The Crown Army appeared out of the \"morning mist in full strength\" but only the Tatars engaged in skirmishes which was met by the Polish artillery. The Cossack defences consisted of two fortified camps, a larger for the registered Cossacks and a smaller for the peasant militia, both protected by 10 lines of chained wagons. At 3 p.m. Duke Jeremi Wi\u015bniowiecki led a successful charge of 18 cavalry companies against the right wing of the Cossack-Tatar armies and \"the zealous cavalry attack was a success: it broke up the rows of Cossack infantry and the wagons moving in corral formation\". However the Cossacks regrouped, pushed the Polish cavalry out of the camp and advanced further with the help of the Tatars. The left flank of the Polish army started to retreat when the King reinforced it with all German mercenaries under command of Colonel Houwaldt who repulsed the attack and \"drove the Tatars from the field\". During the fighting, a Polish nobleman called Otwinowski noticed the Tatar Khan's standard, and Polish artillery was directed to fire at it. The Khan's brother Amurat was wounded mortally. With the battle already turning against them, the Tatar forces panicked, \"abandoning the Khan's camp as it stood\", and fled the battlefield leaving most of their belongings behind. Khmelnytsky and Vyhovsky with a few Cossacks chased Khan attempting to bring him with his force back, but were taken hostage to be released when the battle was over. A heavy rain started which complicated cavalry operations. With the Tatar cavalry gone, the Cossacks moved their wagons in the night to a better defensive position closer to the river, dug trenches and constructed walls to Polish surprise in the morning.\nSiege of the Cossack\u2013Tatar camp.\nThe Crown Army and Cossack camp exchanged artillery fire for ten days while both sides built fortifications. The Poles tried to blockade the camp. Leaderless without Bohdan Khmelnytsky, the Cossacks were commanded by Colonel Fylon Dzhalaliy who was replaced by Ivan Bohun on 9 July. Other accounts state the commander was Matviy Hladky. The Cossack morale was decreasing and desertions started to the other river side, though they maintained a high rate of artillery fire and made occasional sorties. When the offered terms for surrender were rejected, the Poles prepared to dam the Pliashivka River so as to flood the Cossack camp. Stanis\u0142aw Lanckoro\u0144ski with a cavalry force of 2,000 moved across the river on 9 July to complete the encirclement of the Cossacks. When they found out about the Polish advance, Bohun called for a council with other leaders of the registered Cossacks on further actions. However, none of the peasant militia was invited to the council. The Cossacks built three bridges and Bohun led 2,000 cavalry with two cannons to the other river side by the morning of 10 July to attack Lanckoro\u0144ski. The uninformed peasants thought they were abandoned, started to panic and flee across the river. Lanckoro\u0144ski didn't expect a large movement in his direction and retreated. Bohun returned to the camp and tried to restore order, but in vain. The main Polish force observed the disorder, but didn't launch an attack on the Cossack camp immediately thinking of a trap. They assaulted eventually, breached the defences and made their way to the river crossing. A few Cossack regiments managed to retreat in order though. Some Cossacks drowned, but archaeological excavations on the river crossing site revealed about a hundred Cossack human remains all showing damage from melee weapons which suggested heavy fighting. A rearguard of 200 to 300 Cossacks heroic protected the river crossing; all of them were killed in battle rejecting surrender offers. \"Khmelnytsky's tent was captured intact, with all his belongings\", which included two banners, one he received from John II Casimir's 1649 commission and one from Wladyslaw IV in 1646. Although it was difficult to estimate how many Cossacks and peasants were killed in the retreat, Piasecki and Brzostowski, who participated in the battle, mentioned 3,000 killed. Tsar's ambassador podyachy Bogdanov in his report to Moscow mentioned 4,000 killed. Most Cossack artillery pieces were either lost to the Poles or drowned in the marshes. Many spoils were collected in the Cossack camp including the army treasury of 30,000 talers.\nAftermath.\nAs the battle ended, King John Casimir made the error of not pressing even harder the pursuit of the fleeing Cossacks, \"the first several days following ... defeat of the enemy were so blatantly wasted\" but there \"was the unwillingness of the nobility's lev\u00e9e en masse to proceed into Ukraine\" plus \"rainy weather and a lack of food and fodder, coupled with epidemics and diseases that were becoming active in the army, were generally undercutting any energy for war\". The \"king left the whole army to Potocki\" on 17 July 1651, and returned \"to Warsaw to celebrate his victories over the Cossacks\". After making promises of a pecuniary nature, Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky was soon released by the Tatar Khan \u0130sl\u00e2m III Giray He was then able to reassemble the Zaporozhian Host, which was able to present a substantial army to confront the Poles at the Battle of Bila Tserkva (1651). Poland and \"the bulk of the rebels make peace in the Treaty of Bila Tserkva\" on 28 September 1651, which \"reduces the number of registered Cossacks from 40,000 to 20,000 and deprives them of the right to settle in or control various provinces of Ukraine previously allowed to them under the Treaty of Zboriv\". The Ukrainian revolt, far from ending, would continue for several more years under Khmelnytsky.\nLegacy.\nSamuel Twardowski's narrative poem, \"The Civil War\", describes the setting for the battle along the Styr River:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nThere is a little town on it,\nIn the middle of Volhynia, called Berestechko,\nBelonging to the Leszczynski family, that was not as famous in the past\nAs it has now become \u2013 both ancient Cannae\nAnd Khotyn are far outshone by it, because as many heads here\nOur eyes have seen as at Thermopylae\nOr Marathon they counted, although there the whole strength\nOf Europe and Asia had come together.\nSince our arrival \u2013 hilly roads\nAnd steep slopes, until open\nMeadows unfold near the Styr's\nLow banks. It was pleasant to look from the south\nAt the pyramid of the Pronskis and the groves that are green\nIn winter always. And to th east there lies as if a natural\nField for a camp \u2013 and there it was indeed placed\nLater, but first \u2013 this was pondered for a long time.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe Battle of Berestechko is commemorated on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, Warsaw, with the inscription \"BERESTECZKO 28-30 VI 1651\"."}
{"id": "4980", "revid": "48939602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4980", "title": "Bohdan Khmelnytsky", "text": "Bohdan Zynoviy Mykhailovych Khmelnytsky (Ruthenian: \u0405\u0463\u043d\u043e\u0432\u0456 \u0411\u043e\u0433\u0434\u0430\u043d\u044a \u0425\u043c\u0435\u043b\u043di\u0446\u043ai\u0438; modern , Polish: ; 15956 August 1657) was a Ruthenian nobleman and military commander of Zaporozhian Cossacks as Hetman of the Zaporozhian Host, which was then under the suzerainty of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. He led an uprising against the Commonwealth and its magnates (1648\u20131654) that resulted in the creation of an independent Cossack state in Ukraine. In 1654, he concluded the Treaty of Pereiaslav with the Russian Tsar and allied the Cossack Hetmanate with Tsardom of Russia, thus placing central Ukraine under Russian protection. During the uprising, the Cossacks under his leadership massacred tens of thousands of Poles and Jews, making it one of the most traumatic events in Jewish history.\nEarly life.\nAlthough there is no definite proof of the date of Khmelnytsky's birth, Ukrainian-born historian Mykhailo Maksymovych suggests that it is likely 27 December 1595 Julian (St. Theodore's day). As was the custom in the Orthodox Church, he was baptized with one of his middle names, Theodore, translated into Ukrainian as Bohdan. A biography of Khmelnytsky by Smoliy and Stepankov, however, suggests that it is more likely he was born on 9 November (feast day of St Zenoby, 30 October in Julian calendar) and was baptized on 11 November (feast day of St. Theodore in the Catholic Church). In the work of Paul of Aleppo, \"the Travels of Macarius: Patriarch of Antioch\", Khmelnytsky is called as the Khatman Zenobius Akhmil.\nKhmelnytsky was probably born in the village of Subotiv, near Chyhyryn in the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland at the estate of his father Mykhailo Khmelnytsky. He was born into Ukrainian lesser nobility. His father was a courtier of Great Crown Hetman Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski, but later joined the court of his son-in-law Jan Dani\u0142owicz, who in 1597 became starosta of Korsu\u0144 and Chyhyryn and appointed Mykhailo as his deputy in Chyhyryn (pidstarosta). For his service, he was granted a strip of land near the town, where Mykhailo set up a khutor Subotiv.\nThere has been controversy as to whether Bohdan and his father belonged to the Szlachta (Polish term for noblemen). Some sources state that in 1590 his father Mykhailo was appointed as a sotnyk for the Korsun-Chyhyryn starosta Jan Dani\u0142owicz, who continued to colonize the new Ukrainian lands near the Dnieper river.\nKhmelnytsky attended a Jesuit college, possibly in Jaros\u0142aw, but more likely in Lviv in the school founded by hetman \u017b\u00f3\u0142kiewski. He completed his schooling by 1617, acquiring a broad knowledge of world history and learning Polish and Latin. Later he learned Turkish, Tatar, and French. Unlike many of the other Jesuit students, he did not embrace Roman Catholicism but remained Orthodox.\nMarriage and family.\nKhmelnytsky married Hanna Somkivna, a sister of a rich Pereyaslav Cossack; the couple settled in Subotiv. By the second half of the 1620s, they had three daughters: Stepanyda, Olena, and Kateryna. His first son Tymish (Tymofiy) was born in 1632, and another son Yuriy was born in 1640.\nRegistered Cossack.\nUpon completion of his studies in 1617, Khmelnytsky entered into service with the Cossacks. As early as 1619, he was sent together with his father to Moldavia, when the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth entered into war against the Ottoman Empire. During the battle of Cecora (\u021au\u021bora) on 17 September 1620, his father was killed, and young Khmelnytsky, among many others including future hetman Stanis\u0142aw Koniecpolski, was captured by the Turks. He spent the next two years in captivity in Constantinople as a prisoner of an Ottoman Kapudan Pasha (presumably Parlak Mustafa Pasha). Other sources claim that he spent his slavery in Ottoman Navy on galleys as an oarsman, where he picked up a knowledge of Turkic languages.\nWhile there is no concrete evidence as to his return to Ukraine, most historians believe Khmelnytsky either escaped or was ransomed. Sources vary as to his benefactor \u2013 his mother, friends, the Polish king \u2013 but perhaps by Krzysztof Zbaraski, ambassador of the Commonwealth to the Ottomans. In 1622 he paid 30,000 thalers in ransom for all prisoners of war captured at the Battle of Cecora. Upon return to Subotiv, Khmelnytsky took over operating his father's estate and became a registered Cossack in the Chyhyryn Regiment.\nHe most likely did not take part in any of the Cossack uprisings that broke out in Ukraine at that time. His loyal service achieved him the rank of military clerk (\"pisarz wojskowy\") of the registered Cossacks in 1637. It happened after the capitulation of the Pavlyuk uprising in the town Borowica on 24 December 1637, when field hetman Miko\u0142aj Potocki appointed new Cossack eldership. He had to do it because some of the elders either joined Pavlyuk or were killed by him (like former military clerk, Teodor Onuszkowicz). Because of his new position Khmelnytsky was the one who prepared and signed an act of capitulation. Fighting didn't stop in Borowica, rebel Cossacks rose up again under the new command of Ostryanyn and Hunia in the spring next year. Miko\u0142aj Potocki was successful again and after a six week long siege, the rebel Cossacks were forced to capitulate on 3 August 1638. Like the year before, some registered Cossacks joined the rebels, while some of them remained loyal. Unlike the last time, Potocki decided not to punish the rebel Cossacks, but forced all of them to swear loyalty to the king and the state and swear not to seek revenge against each other. The Hetman also agreed to their request to send emissaries to the king to seek royal grace and preserve Cossack rights. They were elected on a council on 9 September 1638 in Kiev. Bohdan Khmelnytsky was one of them; the other three were Iwan Bojaryn, colonel of Kani\u00f3w, Roman Po\u0142owiec and Jan Wo\u0142czenko. The emissaries didn't achieve much, mostly because all decisions were already made by the Sejm earlier this year, when deputies accepted the project presented by the grand Hetman Stanis\u0142aw Koniecpolski. Cossacks were forced to accept harsh new terms at the next council in Mas\u0142owy Staw, at the Ros river. According to one of the articles of the \"Ordynacya Woyska Zaporowskiego\" (\"Ordinance of the Zaporozhian Army\") registered Cossacks lost the right to elect their own officers and a commander, called elder (\"starszy\") or commissar. From now on, the elder was to be nominated by the Sejm, from the Grand Hetman's recommendation. The Grand Hetman also got the right to appoint all officers. Commissars, colonels and osauls had to be a noblemen, while sotniks and atamans had to be Cossacks, who were \"distinguished in a service for Us and the Commonwealth\". Khmelnytsky became one of the sotniks of Chyhryn regiment.\nIn 1663 in Paris Pierre Chevalier published a book about Cossack uprising called \"Histoire de la guerre des Cosaques contre la Pologne\", which he dedicated to Nicolas L\u00e9onor de Flesselles, count de Br\u00e9gy, who was an ambassador to Poland in 1645. In the dedication he described the meeting de Br\u00e9gy had with Khmelnytsky in France, and group of Cossacks he brought to France to fight against Spain in Flanders. Chevalier also claimed that he himself commanded Cossacks in Flanders. Although in distant parts of the book Chevalier doesn't mention either Cossacks or Khmelnytsky even once. In his other writing, \"Relation des Cosaques (avec la vie de Kmielniski, tir\u00e9e d'un Manuscrit)\", published the same year, which also contains a biography of Khmelnytsky, there is no mention about his or any other Cossacks stay in France or Flanders. Moreover, first Chevalier book is the only source that mention such an event, there is not trace of it even in correspondence of count de Br\u00e8gy. Although it is true that he was conducting a recruitment of soldiers in Poland for French army in years 1646\u20131648. In fact he succeeded and about 3000 of them travelled via Gda\u0144sk to Flanders and took part in fights around Dunkirk. French sources describes them as \"infanterie tout Poulonnois qu'Allemand\". They were commanded by colonels Krzysztof Przyjemski, Andrzej Przyjemski and Georges Cabray. Second recruitment that shipped off in 1647 were commanded by Jan Pleitner, Dutch military engineer in service of W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV and Jan Denhoff, colonel of Royal Guard. 17th century French historian Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Saras\u0456n in his \"Histoire de si\u00e8ge de Dunkerque\" when describing participation of Polish mercenaries in fights over Dunkirk, notes that they were commanded by some \"Sirot\". Some historians identify him as Ivan Sirko, Cossack Otaman.\nClaims that Khmelnytsky and Cossacks were actually in France are supported by some Ukrainian historians, while other and most Polish scholarship finds it unlikely.\nCzapli\u0144ski Affair.\nUpon the death of magnate Stanis\u0142aw Koniecpolski (March 1646) his successor, Aleksander, redrew the maps of his possessions. He laid claim to Khmelnytsky's estate, claiming it as his. Trying to find protection from this grab by the powerful magnate, Khmelnytsky wrote numerous appeals and letters to different representatives of the Polish crown but to no avail. At the end of 1645 the Chyhyryn starosta Daniel Czapli\u0144ski officially received authority from Koniecpolski to seize Khmelnytsky's Subotiv estate.\nIn the summer of 1646, Khmelnytsky arranged an audience with King W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV to plead his case, as he had favourable standing at the court. W\u0142adys\u0142aw, who wanted Cossacks on his side in the wars he planned, gave Khmelnytsky a royal charter, protecting his rights to the Subotiv estate. But, because of the structure of the Commonwealth at that time and the lawlessness of Ukraine, even the King was not able to prevent a confrontation with local magnates. In the beginning of 1647, Daniel Czapli\u0144ski started to harass Khmelnytsky in order to force him off the land. On two occasions the magnate had Subotiv raided: considerable property damage was done and Khmelnytsky's son Yuriy was badly beaten. Finally, in April 1647, Czapli\u0144ski succeeded in evicting Khmelnytsky from the land, and he was forced to move with his large family to a relative's house in Chyhyryn.\nIn May 1647, Khmelnytsky arranged a second audience with the king to plead his case but found him unwilling to confront a powerful magnate. In addition to losing the estate, Khmelnytsky suffered the loss of his wife Hanna, and he was left alone with their children. He promptly remarried, to Motrona (Helena Czapli\u0144ska), by that time wife of Daniel Czapli\u0144ski, the so-called \"Helen of the steppe\". He was less successful in real estate, and was unable to regain the land and property of his estate or financial compensation for it. During this time, he met several higher Polish officials to discuss the Cossacks' war with the Tatars, and used this occasion again to plead his case with Czapli\u0144ski, still unsuccessfully.\nWhile Khmelnytsky found no support from the Polish officials, he found it in his Cossack friends and subordinates. His Chyhyryn regiment and others were on his side. All through the autumn of 1647 Khmelnytsky travelled from one regiment to another, and had numerous consultations with Cossack leaders throughout Ukraine. His activity raised suspicion among the local Polish authorities already used to Cossack revolts; he was promptly arrested. Koniecpolski issued an order for his execution, but the Chyhyryn Cossack polkovnyk, who held Khmelnytsky, was persuaded to release him. Not willing to tempt fate any further, Khmelnytsky headed for the Zaporozhian Sich with a group of his supporters.\nUprising.\nWhile the Czapli\u0144ski Affair is generally regarded as the immediate cause of the uprising, it was primarily a catalyst for actions representing rising popular discontent. Religion, ethnicity, and economics factored into this discontent. While the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth remained a union of nations, a sizable population of Orthodox Ruthenians were ignored. Oppressed by the Polish magnates, they took their wrath out on Poles, as well as the Jews, who often managed the estates of Polish nobles. The advent of the Counter-Reformation worsened relations between the Orthodox and Catholic Churches. Many Orthodox Ukrainians considered the Union of Brest as a threat to their Orthodox faith.\nInitial successes.\nAt the end of 1647 Khmelnytsky reached the estuary of the Dnieper river. On 7 December, his small detachment (300\u2013500 men), with the help of registered Cossacks who went over to his side, disarmed the small Polish detachment guarding the area and took over the Zaporozhian Sich. The Poles attempted to retake the Sich but were decisively defeated as more registered Cossacks joined the forces. At the end of January 1648, a Cossack Rada was called and Khmelnytsky was unanimously elected a hetman. A period of feverish activity followed. Cossacks were sent with hetman's letters to many regions of Ukraine calling on Cossacks and Orthodox peasants to join the rebellion, Khortytsia was fortified, efforts were made to acquire and make weapons and ammunition, and emissaries were sent to the Khan of Crimea, \u0130sl\u00e2m III Giray.\nInitially, Polish authorities took the news of Khmelnytsky's arrival at the Sich and reports about the rebellion lightly. The two sides exchanged lists of demands: the Poles asked the Cossacks to surrender the mutinous leader and disband, while Khmelnytsky and the Rada demanded that the Commonwealth restore the Cossacks' ancient rights, stop the advance of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, yield the right to appoint Orthodox leaders of the Sich and of the Registered Cossack regiments, and to remove Commonwealth troops from Ukraine. The Polish magnates considered the demands an affront, and an army headed by Stefan Potocki moved in the direction of the Sich.\nHad the Cossacks stayed at Khortytsia, they might have been defeated, as in many other rebellions. However, Khmelnytsky marched against the Poles. The two armies met on 16 May 1648 at Zhovti Vody, where, aided by the Tatars of Tugay Bey, the Cossacks inflicted their first crushing defeat on the Commonwealth. It was repeated soon afterwards, with the same success, at the Battle of Korsu\u0144 on 26 May 1648. Khmelnytsky used his diplomatic and military skills: under his leadership, the Cossack army moved to battle positions following his plans, Cossacks were proactive and decisive in their manoeuvrers and attacks, and most importantly, he gained the support of both large contingents of registered Cossacks and the Crimean Khan, his crucial ally for the many battles to come.\nEstablishment of Cossack Hetmanate.\nThe Patriarch of Jerusalem Paiseus, who was visiting Kiev at this time, referred to Khmelnytsky as the Prince of Rus. In February 1649, during negotiations in Pereiaslav with a Polish delegation headed by Senator Adam Kysil, Khmelnytsky declared that he was \"the sole autocrat of Rus\" and that he had \"enough power in Ukraine, Podilia, and Volhynia... in his land and principality stretching as far as Lviv, Kholm (modern Che\u0142m), and Halych.\"\nAfter the period of initial military successes, the state-building process began. His leadership was demonstrated in all areas of state-building: military, administration, finance, economics and culture. Khmelnytsky made the Zaporozhian Host the supreme power in the new Ukrainian state and unified all the spheres of Ukrainian society under his authority. Khmelnytsky built a new government system and developed military and civilian administration.\nA new generation of statesmen and military leaders came to the forefront: Ivan Vyhovsky, Pavlo Teteria, Danylo Nechai and Ivan Nechai, Ivan Bohun, Hryhoriy Hulyanytsky. From Cossack polkovnyks, officers, and military commanders, a new elite within the Cossack Hetman state was born. Throughout the years, the elite preserved and maintained the autonomy of the Cossack Hetmanate in the face of Russia's attempt to curb it. It was also instrumental in the onset of the period of Ruin that followed, eventually destroying most of the achievements of the Khmelnytsky era.\nComplications.\nKhmelnytsky's initial successes were followed by a series of setbacks as neither Khmelnytsky nor the Commonwealth had enough strength to stabilise the situation or to inflict a defeat on the enemy. What followed was a period of intermittent warfare and several peace treaties, which were seldom upheld. From spring 1649 onward, the situation turned for the worse for the Cossacks; as Polish attacks increased in frequency, they became more successful. The resulting Treaty of Zboriv on 18 August 1649 was unfavourable for the Cossacks. It was followed by another defeat at the battle of Berestechko on 18 June 1651 in which the Tatars betrayed Khmelnytsky and held the hetman captive. The Cossacks suffered a crushing defeat, with an estimated 30,000 casualties. They were forced to sign the Treaty of Bila Tserkva, which favoured the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Warfare broke open again and, in the years that followed, the two sides were almost perpetually at war. Now, the Crimean Tatars played a decisive role and did not allow either side to prevail. It was in their interests to keep both Ukraine and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth from getting too strong and becoming an effective power in the region.\nKhmelnytsky started looking for another foreign ally. Although the Cossacks had established their \"de facto\" independence from Poland, the new state needed legitimacy, which could be provided by a foreign monarch. In search of a protectorate, Khmelnytsky approached the Ottoman sultan in 1651, and formal embassies were exchanged. The Turks offered vassalship, like their other arrangements with contemporary Crimea, Moldavia and Wallachia. However, the idea of a union with the Muslim monarch was not acceptable to the general populace and most Cossacks.\nThe other possible ally was the Tsardom of Russia. However, despite appeals for help from Khmelnytsky in the name of the shared Orthodox faith, the tsar preferred to wait, until the threat of a Cossack-Ottoman union in 1653 finally forced him to action. The idea that the tsar might be favourable to taking Ukraine under his hand was communicated to the hetman and so diplomatic activity intensified.\nTreaty with the tsar.\nAfter a series of negotiations, it was agreed that the Cossacks would accept overlordship by the Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich. To finalize the treaty, a Russian embassy led by boyar Vasily Buturlin came to Pereiaslav, where, on 18 January 1654, the Cossack Rada was called and the treaty concluded. Historians have not come to consensus in interpreting the intentions of the tsar and Khmelnytsky in signing this agreement. The treaty legitimized Russian claims to the capital of Kievan Rus' and strengthened the tsar's influence in the region. Khmelnytsky needed the treaty to gain a legitimate monarch's protection and support from a friendly Orthodox power.\nHistorians have differed in their reading of Khmelnytsky's goal with the union: whether it was to be a military union, a suzerainty, or a complete incorporation of Ukraine into the Tsardom of Russia.\nThe differences were expressed during the ceremony of the oath of allegiance to the tsar: the Russian envoy refused to reciprocate with an oath from the ruler to his subjects, as the Cossacks and Ruthenians expected since it was the custom of the Polish king.\nKhmelnytsky stormed out of the church and threatened to cancel the entire treaty. The Cossacks decided to rescind the demand and abide by the treaty.\nFinal years.\nAs a result of the 1654 Treaty of Pereiaslav, the geopolitical map of the region changed. Russia entered the scene, and the Cossacks' former allies, the Tatars, had switched sides and gone over to the Polish side, initiating warfare against Khmelnytsky and his forces. Tatar raids depopulated whole areas of Sich. Cossacks, aided by the Tsar's army, took revenge on Polish possessions in Belarus, and in the spring of 1654, the Cossacks drove the Poles from much of the country. Sweden entered the m\u00eal\u00e9e. Old adversaries of both Poland and Russia, they occupied a share of Lithuania before the Russians could get there.\nThe occupation displeased Russia because the tsar sought to take over the Swedish Baltic provinces. In 1656, with the Commonwealth increasingly war-torn but also increasingly hostile and successful against the Swedes, the ruler of Transylvania, George II R\u00e1k\u00f3czi, also joined in. Charles X of Sweden had solicited his help because of the massive Polish popular opposition and resistance against the Swedes. Under blows from all sides, the Commonwealth barely survived.\nRussia attacked Sweden in July 1656, while its forces were deeply involved in Poland. That war ended in status quo two years later, but it complicated matters for Khmelnytsky, as his ally was now fighting his overlord. In addition to diplomatic tensions between the tsar and Khmelnytsky, a number of other disagreements between the two surfaced. In particular, they concerned Russian officials' interference in the finances of the Cossack Hetmanate and in the newly captured Belarus. The tsar concluded a separate treaty with the Poles in Vilnius in 1656. The Hetman's emissaries were not even allowed to attend the negotiations.\nKhmelnytsky wrote an irate letter to the tsar accusing him of breaking the Pereiaslav agreement. He compared the Swedes to the tsar and said that the former were more honourable and trustworthy than the Russians.\nIn Poland, the Cossack army and Transylvanian allies suffered a number of setbacks. As a result, Khmelnytsky had to deal with a Cossack rebellion on the home front. Troubling news also came from Crimea, as Tatars, in alliance with Poland, were preparing for a new invasion of Ukraine. Though already ill, Khmelnytsky continued to conduct diplomatic activity, at one point even receiving the tsar's envoys from his bed.\nOn 22 July, he suffered a cerebral hemorrhage and became paralysed after his audience with the Kiev Colonel Zhdanovich. His expedition to Halychyna had failed because of mutiny within his army. Less than a week later, Bohdan Khmelnytsky died at 5 a.m. on 27 July 1657. His funeral was held on 23 August, and his body was taken from his capital, Chyhyryn, to his estate, at Subotiv, for burial in his ancestral church. In 1664 a Polish hetman Stefan Czarniecki recaptured Subotiv and, according to some Ukrainian historians, ordered the bodies of the hetman and his son, Tymish, to be exhumed and desecrated, while others claim that is not the case.\nInfluences.\nKhmelnytsky had a crucial influence on the history of Ukraine. He not only shaped the future of Ukraine but affected the balance of power in Europe, as the weakening of Poland-Lithuania was exploited by Austria, Saxony, Prussia, and Russia. His actions and role in events were viewed differently by different contemporaries, and even now there are greatly differing perspectives on his legacy.\nUkrainian assessment.\nIn Ukraine, Khmelnytsky is generally regarded as a national hero. A city and a region of the country bear his name. His image is prominently displayed on Ukrainian banknotes and his monument in the centre of Kyiv is a focal point of the Ukrainian capital. There have also been several issues of the Order of Bohdan Khmelnytsky \u2013 one of the highest decorations in Ukraine and in the former Soviet Union.\nHowever, with all this positive appreciation of his legacy, even in Ukraine it is far from being unanimous. He is criticised for his union with Russia, which in the view of some, proved to be disastrous for the future of the country. Prominent Ukrainian poet, Taras Shevchenko, was one of Khmelnytsky's very vocal and harsh critics. Others criticize him for his alliance with the Crimean Tatars, which permitted the latter to take a large number of Ukrainian peasants as slaves, as the Cossacks as a military caste did not protect the \"kholopy\", the lowest stratum of the Ukrainian people. Folk songs capture this. On the balance, the view of his legacy in present-day Ukraine is more positive than negative, with some critics acknowledging that the union with Russia was dictated by necessity and an attempt to survive in those difficult times.\nIn a 2018 Ukraine's Rating Sociological Group poll, 73% of Ukrainian respondents had a positive attitude to Khmelnytsky.\nPolish assessment.\nKhmelnytsky's role in the history of the Polish State has been viewed mostly in a negative light. The rebellion of 1648 proved to be the end of the Golden Age of the Commonwealth and the beginning of its demise. Although it survived the rebellion and the following war, within less than two hundred years it was divided amongst Russia, Prussia, and Austria in the partitions of Poland. Many Poles blamed Khmelnytsky for the decline of the Commonwealth.\nKhmelnytsky has been a subject to several works of fiction in the 19th century Polish literature, but the most notable treatment of him in Polish literature is found in Henryk Sienkiewicz's \"With Fire and Sword\". The rather critical portrayal of him by Sienkiewicz has been moderated in the 1999 movie adaptation by Jerzy Hoffman.\nRussian and Soviet history.\nThe official Russian historiography stressed the fact that Khmelnytsky entered into union with Moscow's Tsar Alexei Mikhailovich with an expressed desire to \"re-unify\" Ukraine with Russia. This view corresponded with the official theory of Moscow as an heir of the Kievan Rus', which appropriately gathered its former territories.\nKhmelnytsky was viewed as a national hero of Russia for bringing Ukraine into the \"eternal union\" of all the Russias \u2013 Great (Russia), Little (Ukraine) and White (Belarus) Russia. As such, he was much respected and venerated during the existence of the Russian Empire. His role was presented as a model for all Ukrainians to follow: to aspire for closer ties with Great Russia. This view was expressed in a monument commissioned by the Russian nationalist Mikhail Yuzefovich, which was installed in the centre of Kiev in 1888.\nRussian authorities decided the original version of the monument (created by Russian sculptor Mikhail Mikeshin) was too xenophobic; it was to depict a vanquished Pole noble, Jewish landlord, and a Catholic priest under the hooves of the horse. The inscription on the monument reads \"To Bohdan Khmelnytsky from one and indivisible Russia.\" Mikeshin also created the Monument to the Millennium of Russia in Novgorod, which has Khmelnytsky shown as one of Russia's prominent figures.\nSoviet historiography followed in many ways the Imperial Russian theory of re-unification while adding the class struggle dimension to the story. Khmelnytsky was praised not only for re-unifying Ukraine with Russia, but also for organizing the class struggle of oppressed Ukrainian peasants against Polish exploiters.\nJewish history.\nThe assessment of Khmelnytsky in Jewish history is overwhelmingly negative because he used Jews as scapegoats and sought to eradicate Jews from Ukraine. The Khmelnytsky Uprising led to the deaths of an estimated 18,000\u2013100,000 Jews. These estimates include deaths from starvation and disease. Atrocity stories about massacre victims who had been buried alive, cut to pieces or forced to kill one another spread throughout Europe and beyond. The pogroms contributed to a revival of the ideas of Isaac Luria, who revered the Kabbalah, and the identification of Sabbatai Zevi as the Messiah. Orest Subtelny writes:\nBetween 1648 and 1656, tens of thousands of Jews\u2014given the lack of reliable data, it is impossible to establish more accurate figures\u2014were killed by the rebels, and to this day the Khmelnytsky uprising is considered by Jews to be one of the most traumatic events in their history.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "4982", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4982", "title": "Ben Bova", "text": "Benjamin William Bova (November 8, 1932November 29, 2020) was an American writer and editor. During a writing career of 60 years, he was the author of more than 120 works of science fact and fiction, an editor of \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\", for which he won a Hugo Award six times, and an editorial director of \"Omni\"; he was also president of both the National Space Society and the Science Fiction Writers of America.\nPersonal life and education.\nBen Bova was born on November 8, 1932, in Philadelphia. He graduated from South Philadelphia High School in 1949. In 1953, while attending Temple University in Philadelphia, he married Rosa Cucinotta; they had a son and a daughter. The couple divorced in 1974. That year he married Barbara Berson Rose. Barbara Bova died on September 23, 2009. Bova dedicated his 2011 novel \"Power Play\" to Barbara. In March 2013, he announced on his website that he had remarried, to Rashida Loya.\nBova was an atheist and was critical of what he saw as the unquestioning nature of religion. He wrote an op-ed piece in 2012, in which he argued that atheists can be just as moral as religious believers.\nHe went back to school in the 1980s, earning a Master of Arts degree in communications in 1987 from the State University of New York at Albany and a Doctor of Education degree from California Coast University in 1996.\nBova died from COVID-19 related pneumonia and a stroke on November 29, 2020, at the age of 88.\nCareer.\nBova worked as a technical writer for Project Vanguard in the 1950s and later for the Avco Everett Research Laboratory\nIn 1972, Bova became editor of \"Analog Science Fact &amp; Fiction\", after John W. Campbell's death in 1971. At \"Analog\", Bova won six Hugo Awards for Best Professional Editor.\nBova served as the science advisor for the television series \"The Starlost\" (1973)\",\" resigning as he lacked the \"contractual right to remove his name from the credits.\" His novel \"The Starcrossed\", loosely based on his experiences, featured a characterization of his friend and colleague Harlan Ellison as \"Ron Gabriel\". In 1974, he co-wrote the screenplay for an episode of the children's science-fiction television series \"Land of the Lost\", titled \"The Search\". After leaving \"Analog\" in 1978, Bova went on to edit \"Omni\", from 1978 to 1982.\nBova held the position of President Emeritus of the National Space Society and served as President of Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA).\nIn 2000, he attended the 58th World Science Fiction Convention (Chicon 2000) as the Author Guest of Honor. In 2007, Stuber/Parent Productions hired him as a consultant to provide insight into what the world may look like in the near future, for their film \"Repo Men\" (2010) starring Jude Law and Forest Whitaker. Also in 2007 he provided consulting services to Silver Pictures on the film adaptation of Richard K. Morgan's hardboiled cyberpunk science-fiction novel \"Altered Carbon\" (2002). He was awarded the Robert A. Heinlein Award in 2008 for his work in science fiction.\nBibliography.\n, Bova had written over 124 books in various genres. He edited several works, including \"The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two\" (1973) and \"Nebula Awards Showcase 2008\". He wrote the \"Grand Tour\" novel series about exploration and colonization of the Solar System by humans. Reviewing a collection of 12 of the series published in 2004, Gerald Jonas in \"The New York Times\" described Bova as \"the last of the great pulp writers\"."}
{"id": "4984", "revid": "135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4984", "title": "Battle of Ardrianople", "text": ""}
{"id": "4985", "revid": "35965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4985", "title": "Battle of Ardennes", "text": ""}
